
1. J Diabetes. 2016 Mar 31. doi: 10.1111/1753-0407.12400. [Epub ahead of print]

Efficient Generation of Functional Pancreatic ß Cells from Human iPS Cells.

Yabe SG(1), Fukuda S(1), Takeda F(1), Nashiro K(1), Shimoda M(2), Okochi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine, Research Institute, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan, 162-8655.
(2)Pancreatic Islet Transplantation Project, Department of Diabetes Research
Center, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-21-1 Toyama,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, Japan, 162-8655.

BACKGROUND: Many groups have generated insulin-secreting cells from hESCs/iPSCs
in multiple differentiation stages by mimicking the developmental processes.
However, these cells do not always secrete glucose responsive insulin, one of the
most important characteristics of pancreatic ß cells. We focused on the
importance of endodermal differentiation from human iPSCs in order to obtain
functional pancreatic ß cells.
METHODS: We established a 6-stage protocol for the differentiation process from
hiPSCs to pancreatic ß cells using defined culture media without feeders or
serum. We examined the effect of CHIR99021, the selective inhibitor of GSK-3ß, in
the presence of Activin, FGF2, and BMP4 during definitive endodermal induction by
immunostaining for SOX17 and FOXA2. We also compared the insulin secretion at the
last stage between monolayer culture and spheroid culture conditions. Cultured
cells were transplanted under the kidney capsules of STZ-induced diabetic
NOD-SCID mice, and blood glucose levels were measured. Immunohistochemical
analysis was performed 4<U+2009>weeks and 12<U+2009>weeks after transplantation.
RESULTS: Addition of CHIR99021 in the presence of Activin, FGF2, and BMP4 for
2<U+2009>days improved the viability of the endodermal cells, keeping the high positive 
rate of SOX17. Spheroid formation after the endocrine progenitor stage showed
more efficient insulin secretion than monolayer culture did. After cell
transplantation, diabetic mice showed lowered blood glucose levels, and we
detected islet-like structures in vivo.
CONCLUSION: We generated functional pancreatic ß cells from human iPS cells.
Induction of definitive endoderm and spheroid formation might be key steps for
producing them.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27038181  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Vis Exp. 2016 Mar 3;(109). doi: 10.3791/53655.

A Quick and Efficient Method for the Purification of Endoderm Cells Generated
from Human Embryonic Stem Cells.

Davenport C(1), Diekmann U(1), Naujok O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School. (2)Institute of
Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School; naujok.ortwin@mh-hannover.de.

The differentiation capabilities of pluripotent stem cells such as embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) allow a potential therapeutic application for cell replacement
therapies. Terminally differentiated cell types could be used for the treatment
of various degenerative diseases. In vitro differentiation of these cells towards
tissues of the lung, liver and pancreas requires as a first step the generation
of definitive endodermal cells. This step is rate-limiting for further
differentiation towards terminally matured cell types such as insulin-producing
beta cells, hepatocytes or other endoderm-derived cell types. Cells that are
committed towards the endoderm lineage highly express a multitude of
transcription factors such as FOXA2, SOX17, HNF1B, members of the GATA family,
and the surface receptor CXCR4. However, differentiation protocols are rarely
100% efficient. Here, we describe a method for the purification of a CXCR4+ cell 
population after differentiation into the DE by using magnetic microbeads. This
purification additionally removes cells of unwanted lineages. The gentle
purification method is quick and reliable and might be used to improve downstream
applications and differentiations.

PMID: 26966833  [PubMed - in process]


3. Stem Cells. 2016 Mar 6. doi: 10.1002/stem.2352. [Epub ahead of print]

Lineage-Specific Early Differentiation of Human Embryonic Stem Cells Requires a
G2 Cell Cycle Pause.

VanOudenhove JJ(1), Grandy RA(1), Ghule PN(1), Del Rio R(2), Lian JB(1), Stein
JL(1), Zaidi SK(1), Stein GS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and University of Vermont Cancer Center.
(2)Department of Surgery and Flow Cytometry & Cell Sorting Facility, University
of Vermont College of Medicine, Burlington, VT, 05405, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have an abbreviated G1 phase of the cell cycle
that allows rapid proliferation and maintenance of pluripotency. Lengthening of
G1 corresponds to loss of pluripotency during differentiation. However, precise
mechanisms that link alterations in the cell cycle and early differentiation
remain to be defined. We investigated initial stages of mesendodermal lineage
commitment in hESCs, and observed a cell cycle pause. Transcriptome profiling
identified several genes with known roles in regulation of the G2/M transition
that were differentially expressed early during lineage commitment. WEE1 kinase, 
which blocks entry into mitosis by phosphorylating CDK1 at Y15, was the most
highly expressed of these genes. Inhibition of CDK1 phosphorylation by a specific
inhibitor of WEE1 restored cell cycle progression by preventing the G2 pause.
Directed differentiation of hESCs revealed that cells paused during commitment to
the endo- and mesodermal, but not ectodermal, lineages. Functionally, WEE1
inhibition during meso- and endodermal differentiation selectively decreased
expression of definitive endodermal markers SOX17 and FOXA2. Our findings
identify a novel G2 cell cycle pause that is required for endodermal
differentiation and provide important new mechanistic insights into early events 
of lineage commitment. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26946228  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Cell Adh Migr. 2016 Feb 26:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Small cell lung cancer: circulating tumor cells of extended stage patients
express a mesenchymal-epithelial transition phenotype.

Hamilton G(1), Hochmair M(2), Rath B(3), Klameth L(3,)(4), Zeillinger R(5).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Surgery , Medical University of Vienna , A-1090 , Vienna ,
Austria. (2)b Respiratory Oncology Unit, Otto Wagner Hospital , A-1140 , Vienna ,
Austria. (3)c Ludwig Boltzmann Cluster of Translational Oncology , A-1090 ,
Vienna , Austria. (4)d Center for Pathophysiology, Infectiology and Immunology,
Medical University of Vienna , A-1090 , Vienna , Austria. (5)e Molecular Oncology
Group, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology , Medical University of Vienna ,
A-1090 , Austria.

Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) is distinguished by aggressive growth, early
dissemination and a poor prognosis at advanced stage. The remarkably high count
of circulating tumor cells (CTCs) of SCLC allowed for the establishment of
permanent CTC cultures at our institution for the first time. CTCs are assumed to
have characteristics of cancer stem cells (CSCs) and an epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) phenotype, but extravasation of tumors at distal sites is marked
by epithelial features. Two SCLC CTC cell lines, namely BHGc7 and BHGc10, as well
as SCLC cell lines derived from primary tumors and metastases were analyzed for
the expression of pluripotent stem cell markers and growth factors. Expression of
E-cadherin and ß-Catenin were determined by flow cytometry. Stem cell-associated 
markers SOX17, a -fetoprotein, OCT-3/4, KDR, Otx2, GATA-4, Nanog, HCG, TP63 and
Goosecoid were not expressed in the two CTC lines. In contrast, high expression
was found for HNF-3ß/FOXA2, SOX2, PDX-1/IPF1 and E-cadherin. E-cadherin
expression was restricted to the two CTCs and two cell lines derived from pleural
effusion (SCLC26A) and bone metastases (NCI-H526), respectively. Thus, these SCLC
CTCs established from extended disease SCLC patients lack expression of stem cell
markers which suppress the epithelial phenotype. Instead they express high levels
of E-cadherin consistent with a mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET or EMrT)
and form large tumorospheres possibly in response to the selection pressure of
first-line chemotherapy. HNF-3ß/FOXA2 and PDX-1/IPF1 expression seem to be
related to growth factor dependence on insulin/IGF-1 receptors and IGF-binding
proteins.

PMID: 26919626  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Nature. 2016 Mar 3;531(7592):47-52. doi: 10.1038/nature16965. Epub 2016 Feb 24.

Genomic analyses identify molecular subtypes of pancreatic cancer.

Bailey P, Chang DK, Nones K, Johns AL, Patch AM, Gingras MC, Miller DK, Christ
AN, Bruxner TJ, Quinn MC, Nourse C, Murtaugh LC, Harliwong I, Idrisoglu S,
Manning S, Nourbakhsh E, Wani S, Fink L, Holmes O, Chin V, Anderson MJ, Kazakoff 
S, Leonard C, Newell F, Waddell N, Wood S, Xu Q, Wilson PJ, Cloonan N, Kassahn
KS, Taylor D, Quek K, Robertson A, Pantano L, Mincarelli L, Sanchez LN, Evers L, 
Wu J, Pinese M, Cowley MJ, Jones MD, Colvin EK, Nagrial AM, Humphrey ES,
Chantrill LA, Mawson A, Humphris J, Chou A, Pajic M, Scarlett CJ, Pinho AV,
Giry-Laterriere M, Rooman I, Samra JS, Kench JG, Lovell JA, Merrett ND, Toon CW, 
Epari K, Nguyen NQ, Barbour A, Zeps N, Moran-Jones K, Jamieson NB, Graham JS,
Duthie F, Oien K, Hair J, Grützmann R, Maitra A, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA, Wolfgang
CL, Morgan RA, Lawlor RT, Corbo V, Bassi C, Rusev B, Capelli P, Salvia R, Tortora
G, Mukhopadhyay D, Petersen GM; Australian Pancreatic Cancer Genome Initiative,
Munzy DM, Fisher WE, Karim SA, Eshleman JR, Hruban RH, Pilarsky C, Morton JP,
Sansom OJ, Scarpa A, Musgrove EA, Bailey UM, Hofmann O, Sutherland RL, Wheeler
DA, Gill AJ, Gibbs RA, Pearson JV, Waddell N, Biankin AV, Grimmond SM.

Collaborators: Biankin AV, Johns AL, Axford CJ, Mawson A, Chang DK, Scarlett CJ, 
Brancato MA, Simpson SH, Martyn-Smith M, Chantrill LA, Chin VT, Chou A, Cowley
MJ, Humphris JL, Mead R, Nagrial AM, Pajic M, Pettit J, Pinese M, Rooman I, Wu J,
Watson C, Steinmann A, Lee HC, Wong R, Pinho AV, Giry-Laterriere M, Daly RJ,
Musgrove EA, Sutherland RL, Grimmond SM, Waddell N, Kassahn KS, Miller DK, Wilson
PJ, Patch AM, Song S, Harliwong I, Idrisoglu S, Nourse C, Nourbakhsh E, Manning
S, Wani S, Gongora M, Anderson M, Holmes O, Leonard C, Taylor D, Wood S, Xu C,
Nones K, Fink J, Christ A, Bruxner T, Cloonan N, Newell F, Pearson JV, Bailey P, 
Quinn M, Nagaraj S, Kazakoff S, Waddell N, Krisnan K, Quek K, Wood D, Samra JS,
Gill AJ, Pavlakis N, Guminski A, Toon C, Asghari R, Merrett ND, Pavey D, Das A,
Cosman PH, Ismail K, O'Connnor C, Lam VW, McLeod D, Pleass HC, Richardson A,
James V, Kench JG, Cooper CL, Joseph D, Sandroussi C, Crawford M, Gallagher J,
Texler M, Forest C, Laycock A, Epari KP, Ballal M, Fletcher DR, Mukhedkar S,
Gairdner C, Spry NA, DeBoer B, Chai M, Zeps N, Beilin M, Feeney K, Nguyen NQ,
Ruszkiewicz AR, Worthley C, Tan CP, Chen J, Brooke-Smith ME, Papangelis V, Tang
H, Barbour AP, Clouston AD, Martin P, O'Rourke TJ, Fawcett JW, Slater K, Yeung S,
Hatzifotis M, Hodgkinson P, Christophi C, Nikfarjam M, Mountain A, Scarpa A,
Lawlor RT, Sperandio N, Bonizzato G, Grimaldi S, Cantù C, Merlini P, Turri G, Pea
A, Pedrazzani C, Ruzzenente A, Gobbo S, Martignoni G, Girelli R, Biankin AV,
Grimmond SM, Chang DK, Musgrove EA, Jones MD, Nourse C, Jamieson NB, Graham JS,
Biankin AV, Chang DK, Jones MD, Jamieson NB, Graham JS.

Integrated genomic analysis of 456 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas identified
32 recurrently mutated genes that aggregate into 10 pathways: KRAS, TGF-ß, WNT,
NOTCH, ROBO/SLIT signalling, G1/S transition, SWI-SNF, chromatin modification,
DNA repair and RNA processing. Expression analysis defined 4 subtypes: (1)
squamous; (2) pancreatic progenitor; (3) immunogenic; and (4) aberrantly
differentiated endocrine exocrine (ADEX) that correlate with histopathological
characteristics. Squamous tumours are enriched for TP53 and KDM6A mutations,
upregulation of the TP63<U+2206>N transcriptional network, hypermethylation of
pancreatic endodermal cell-fate determining genes and have a poor prognosis.
Pancreatic progenitor tumours preferentially express genes involved in early
pancreatic development (FOXA2/3, PDX1 and MNX1). ADEX tumours displayed
upregulation of genes that regulate networks involved in KRAS activation,
exocrine (NR5A2 and RBPJL), and endocrine differentiation (NEUROD1 and NKX2-2).
Immunogenic tumours contained upregulated immune networks including pathways
involved in acquired immune suppression. These data infer differences in the
molecular evolution of pancreatic cancer subtypes and identify opportunities for 
therapeutic development.

PMID: 26909576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Alzheimers Dis. 2016 Feb 5;50(4):1065-82. doi: 10.3233/JAD-150733.

Meta-Analysis of Transcriptome Data Related to Hippocampus Biopsies and
iPSC-Derived Neuronal Cells from Alzheimer's Disease Patients Reveals an
Association with FOXA1 and FOXA2 Gene Regulatory Networks.

Wruck W, Schröter F, Adjaye J.

Although the incidence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is continuously increasing in 
the aging population worldwide, effective therapies are not available. The
interplay between causative genetic and environmental factors is partially
understood. Meta-analyses have been performed on aspects such as polymorphisms,
cytokines, and cognitive training. Here, we propose a meta-analysis approach
based on hierarchical clustering analysis of a reliable training set of
hippocampus biopsies, which is condensed to a gene expression signature. This
gene expression signature was applied to various test sets of brain biopsies and 
iPSC-derived neuronal cell models to demonstrate its ability to distinguish AD
samples from control. Thus, our identified AD-gene signature may form the basis
for determination of biomarkers that are urgently needed to overcome current
diagnostic shortfalls. Intriguingly, the well-described AD-related genes APP and 
APOE are not within the signature because their gene expression profiles show a
lower correlation to the disease phenotype than genes from the signature. This is
in line with the differing characteristics of the disease as early-/late-onset or
with/without genetic predisposition. To investigate the gene signature's systemic
role(s), signaling pathways, gene ontologies, and transcription factors were
analyzed which revealed over-representation of response to stress, regulation of 
cellular metabolic processes, and reactive oxygen species. Additionally, our
results clearly point to an important role of FOXA1 and FOXA2 gene regulatory
networks in the etiology of AD. This finding is in corroboration with the
recently reported major role of the dopaminergic system in the development of AD 
and its regulation by FOXA1 and FOXA2.

PMID: 26890743  [PubMed - in process]


7. Am J Ther. 2016 Jan 6. [Epub ahead of print]

Conditional Tissue-Specific Foxa2 Ablation in Mouse Pancreas Causes
Hyperinsulinemic Hypoglycemia.

Wu Z(1), Fei A, Liu Y, Pan S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of 1Emergency and2General Surgery, Xinhua Hospital Affiliated to
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

The forkhead/winged helix transcription factor Foxa2 is a major upstream
regulator of Pdx1, a transcription factor necessary for pancreatic development.
In the present study, we conditionally knocked out Foxa2 in Pdx1-expressing
domain and further analyzed the contribution of Foxa2 to a- and ß-cell
development and the effect of Foxa2 deletion on plasma insulin, glucagon, and
glucose levels. Homozygous pdx1 Foxa2 mice and heterozygous pdx1 Foxa2 mice were 
generated by homologous recombination using a Foxa2 gene-targeting vector. a- and
ß-cell mass was examined by immunofluorescence microscopy. Plasma glucose,
insulin, and plasma were measured at postnatal day 10. For pdx1 lineage tracing
studies, heterozygous pdx1 Foxa2 EYFP and homozygous pdx1 Foxa2 EYFP mice were
used. Our immunofluorescence analysis revealed that in the pancreas sections of
the homozygous mutant mice, Foxa2 was virtually absent from non-ß cells and its
expression almost exclusively coincided with remnant ß cells. The density of both
a and ß cells apparently decreased in the pancreas of the heterozygous mutant
mice and in the pancreas of the homozygous mutant mice, a cells lost its
predominance and ß cells increased proportionally. Direct Pdx1 cell lineage
tracing revealed that, on embryonic day 18.5, in the homozygous mutant mice, Pdx1
expression coincided almost exclusively with that of insulin-secreting ß cells.
Chemiluminescence assays revealed that heterozygous pdx1 Foxa2 mice had
significantly lower insulin levels than control mice (P < 0.01). However, no
apparent difference was observed between homozygous pdx1 Foxa2 mice and control
mice (P > 0.05). Chemiluminescence assays also showed that Foxa2 deletion
significantly depressed plasma glucagon levels in both homozygous pdx1 Foxa2 mice
and heterozygous pdx1 Foxa2 mice (P < 0.01 vs. controls). Plasma glucose on
postnatal day 10 was significantly lower in homozygous pdx1 Foxa2 mice compared
with control mice (P < 0.01). Our study demonstrates that homozygous Foxa2
ablation leads to an imbalance in ß/a ratio, profound hypoglucagonemia,
inappropriate hyperinsulinemia, and hypoglycemia in mice. Our conditional
tissue-specific Foxa2 ablation mouse model will be useful in elucidating
regulation of normal and abnormal a- and ß-cell differentiation and pinpointing
novel targets for diabetes control.

PMID: 26882312  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. EMBO Mol Med. 2016 Jan 31;8(2):171. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201506162.

Combined Nurr1 and Foxa2 roles in the therapy of Parkinson's disease.

Oh SM, Chang MY, Song JJ, Rhee YH, Joe EH, Lee HS, Yi SH, Lee SH.

Erratum for
    EMBO Mol Med. 2015 May;7(5):510-25.

PMCID: PMC4734846
PMID: 26882244  [PubMed - in process]


9. Cell Biol Int. 2016 Feb 10. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10590. [Epub ahead of print]

Biphasic Modulation of Wnt Signaling Supports Efficient Foregut Endoderm
Formation from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Hoepfner J(1,)(2), Kleinsorge M(1,)(2), Papp O(1,)(2), Ackermann M(3), Alfken
S(1,)(2), Rinas U(4), Solodenko W(1), Kirschning A(5), Sgodda M(1,)(2), Cantz
T(1,)(2,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Hepatology and Stem Cell Biology, REBIRTH Cluster of Excellence,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (2)Dept. Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
(3)iPSC based Gene Therapy, REBIRTH Cluster of Excellence, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany. (4)Institute of Technical Chemistry, Leibniz
University Hannover, Germany. (5)Institute of Organic Chemistry, Leibniz
University Hannover, Germany. (6)Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Münster, Germany.

Pluripotent stem cells (embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells) 
are of great promise in regenerative medicine, including molecular studies of
disease mechanisms, if the affected cell type can be authentically generated
during in vitro differentiation. Most existing protocols aim to mimic embryonic
development steps by the supplementation of specific cytokines and small
molecules, but the involved signaling pathways need further exploration. In this 
study, we investigated enhanced initial activation of Wnt signaling for
definitive endoderm formation and subsequent rapid shutdown of Wnt signaling for 
proper foregut endoderm specification using 3 µM CHIR99021 and 0.5 µg/mL of
secreted frizzled-related protein 5 (sFRP-5) for biphasic modulation of the Wnt
pathway. The definitive endoderm and foregut endoderm differentiation
capabilities of Wnt pathway-modulated cells were determined based on the
expression levels of the endodermal transcription factors SOX17 and FOXA2 and
those of the transcription activator GATA4 and the a-fetoprotein (AFP) gene,
respectively. Furthermore, the resulting biphasic Wnt pathway modulation was
investigated at the protein level by analyzing phosphorylation of glycogen
synthase kinase 3 beta (GSK3ß) and ß-catenin. Finally, Wnt target gene expression
was determined using an improved lentiviral reporter construct that enabled
robust T-cell transcription factor 4 (TCF4)/lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1
(LEF1)-mediated luciferase expression in differentiating pluripotent stem cells. 
In conclusion, we demonstrated robust, homogeneous, and efficient derivation of
foregut endodermal cells by inducing a biphasic modulation of the Wnt signaling
pathway.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26861571  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Avicenna J Med Biotechnol. 2016 Jan-Mar;8(1):2-8.

Differentiation of Definitive Endoderm from Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells 
on hMSCs Feeder in a Defined Medium.

Jaafarpour Z(1), Soleimani M(2), Hosseinkhani S(3), Karimi MH(4), Yaghmaei P(1), 
Mobarra N(5), Geramizadeh B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of Hematology, Faculty of Medical Science, Tarbiat
Modares University, Tehran, Iran. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of
Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. (4)Transplant
Research Center, Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Shiraz, Iran.
(5)Metabolic Disorders Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Golestan University 
of Medical Sciences, Gorgan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: The Definitive Endoderm (DE) differentiation using the undefined
media and non-human feeders can cause contaminations in the generated cells for
therapeutic applications. Therefore, generating safer and more appropriate DE
cells is needed. This study compared five different methods to establish an
appropriate method for inducing an efficient DE differentiation from Human
Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (hiPSCs) on an appropriate feeder in a more
defined medium.
METHODS: Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells (hiPSCs) were cultured on
inactivated feeders. Passaged hiPSCs, without feeder, were incubated for three
days with Activin-A and different endodermal differentiation media including
1-FBS, 2-B27, 3-ITS and albumin fraction-V, 4-B27 and ITS and 5-like the third
medium. The feeder cells in the first four methods were Mouse Embryonic
Fibroblasts (MEFs) and in the fifth method were human adult bone marrow
Mesenchymal Stem Cells (hMSCs). DE markers FOXA2, SOX17 and CXCR4 and also
pluripotency marker OCT4 were evaluated using qRT-PCR, as well as FOXA2 by the
immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: QRT-PCR analysis showed that after three days, the expression levels of 
DE and pluripotency markers in the differentiated hiPSCs among all five groups
did not have any significant differences. Similarly, the immunocytochemistry
analysis demonstrated that the differentiated hiPSCs expressed FOXA2, with no
significant differences.
CONCLUSION: Despite this similarity in the results, the third differentiation
medium has more defined and cost effective components. Furthermore, hMSC, a human
feeder, is safer than MEF. Therefore, the fifth method is preferable among other 
DE differentiation methods and can serve as a fundamental method helping the
development of regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC4717462
PMID: 26855729  [PubMed]


11. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2016 Apr;1859(4):591-598. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2016.02.005. Epub 2016 Feb 6.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 coordinates multiple processes in a model of
intestinal epithelial cell function.

Yang R(1), Kerschner JL(1), Harris A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, Chicago,
IL 60614, USA; Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School 
of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. (2)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie
Children's Research Center, Chicago, IL 60614, USA; Department of Pediatrics,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA;
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address:
ann-harris@northwestern.edu.

Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 transcription factors (HNF1a/ß) are
associated with diabetes. These factors are well studied in the liver, pancreas
and kidney, where they direct tissue-specific gene regulation. However, they also
have an important role in the biology of many other tissues, including the
intestine. We investigated the transcriptional network governed by HNF1 in an
intestinal epithelial cell line (Caco2). We used chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by direct sequencing (ChIP-seq) to identify HNF1 binding sites
genome-wide. Direct targets of HNF1 were validated using conventional ChIP assays
and confirmed by siRNA-mediated depletion of HNF1, followed by RT-qPCR. Gene
ontology process enrichment analysis of the HNF1 targets identified multiple
processes with a role in intestinal epithelial cell function, including
properties of the cell membrane, cellular response to hormones, and regulation of
biosynthetic processes. Approximately 50% of HNF1 binding sites were also
occupied by other members of the intestinal transcriptional network, including
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A (HNF4A), caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2), and forkhead
box A2 (FOXA2). Depletion of HNF1 in Caco2 cells increases FOXA2 abundance and
decreases levels of CDX2, illustrating the coordinated activities of the network.
These data suggest that HNF1 plays an important role in regulating intestinal
epithelial cell function, both directly and through interactions with other
intestinal transcription factors.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26855178  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Curr Pharm Des. 2016;22(5):616-38.

Cadherins: The Superfamily Critically Involved in Breast Cancer.

Ashaie MA, Chowdhury EH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University,
Australia. md.ezharul.hoque@monash.edu.

Breast cancer, one of the leading causes of mortality and morbidity among
females, is regulated in part by diverse classes of adhesion molecules one of
which is known as cadherins. Located at adherens junctions, the members of this
superfamily are responsible for upholding proper cell-cell adhesion. Cadherins
possess diverse structures and functions and any alteration in their structures
or functions causes impeding of normal mammary cells development and maintenance,
thus leading to breast malignancy. E-, N-, P-, VE-, Proto-, desmosomal and FAT
cadherins have been found to regulate breast cancer in positive as well as
negative fashion, whereby both Ecadherin (CDH1) and N-cadherin (CDH2) contribute 
significantly towards transitioning from epithelial state to mesenchymal state
(EMT) and enacting the abnormal cells to invade and metastasize nearby and
distant tissues. Aberration in gene expression of cadherins can be either due to 
somatic or epigenetic silencing or via transcriptional factors. Besides other
cadherins, E-cadherin which serves as hallmark of EMT is associated with several 
regulatory factors such as Snail, Slug, Twist, Zeb, KLF4, NFI, TBX2, SIX, b-Myb, 
COX-2, Arf6, FOXA2, GATA3 and SMAR1, which modulate E-cadherin gene transcription
to promote or represses tumor invasion and colonization. Signaling molecules such
as Notch, TGF-ß, estrogen receptors, EGF and Wnt initiate numerous signaling
cascades via these vital factors of cell programming, controlling expression of
E-cadherin at transcriptional (mRNA) and protein level. Thus, interactions of
cadherins with their roles in tumor suppression and oncogenic transformation can 
be beneficial in providing valuable insights for breast cancer diagnosis and
therapeutics development.

PMID: 26825466  [PubMed - in process]


13. Cytotechnology. 2016 Jan 21. [Epub ahead of print]

Overexpression of transcription factor Foxa2 and Hnf1a induced rat bone
mesenchymal stem cells into hepatocytes.

Ding Y(1,)(2,)(3), Chang C(1,)(2,)(3), Niu Z(1,)(2,)(3), Dai K(1,)(2,)(3), Geng
X(1,)(3), Li D(1,)(2,)(3), Guo J(1,)(2,)(3), Xu C(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang, 453007, Henan
Province, China. (2)State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base for Cell
Differentiation Regulation and Henan Bioengineering Key Laboratory, Henan Normal 
University, Xinxiang, 453007, Henan Province, China. (3)Henan Engineering
Laboratory for Bioengineering and Drug Development, Xinxiang, China. (4)College
of Life Science, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang, 453007, Henan Province,
China. cellkeylab@126.com. (5)State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base for Cell
Differentiation Regulation and Henan Bioengineering Key Laboratory, Henan Normal 
University, Xinxiang, 453007, Henan Province, China. cellkeylab@126.com. (6)Henan
Engineering Laboratory for Bioengineering and Drug Development, Xinxiang, China. 
cellkeylab@126.com.

Hepatocytes differentiated from induced pluripotent stem cells and adult stem
cells could be utilized as a tool for the study of liver diseases, screening for 
drug metabolism and hepatotoxicity. Thus further investigation of the method to
efficiently generate hepatocytes is in great need. Bone Mesenchymal Stem Cells
(BMSCs) were collected from rat femurs and tibias. FOXA2 and HNF1a genes were
constructed into a lentiviral vector and introduced into BMSCs by a
lentivirus-mediated overexpression system. Three weeks after the induction, the
expressions of FOXA2 and HNF1a, and liver specific genes were analyzed, and
hepatocyte-function related assays were performed. Overexpression of both FOXA2
and HNF1a induced the BMSCs to differentiate into hepatocyte-like cells (HLCs).
Hepatocyte-specific gene and protein were detected by RT-PCR, Western Blot and
Immunofluorescence. These HLCs also exerted some typical hepatocyte functions
such as glycogen storage, indocyanine green absorption and lipid accumulation.
The combination of FOXA2 and HNF1a can effectively induce BMSCs to differentiate 
into HLCs. This is a novel and efficient method to prepare HLCs within a short
timeline.

PMID: 26797779  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. PLoS One. 2016 Jan 19;11(1):e0146806. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0146806.
eCollection 2016.

Hhex Is Necessary for the Hepatic Differentiation of Mouse ES Cells and Acts via 
Vegf Signaling.

Arterbery AS(1), Bogue CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Critical Care Medicine, Yale School of
Medicine, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, United States of
America.

Elucidating the molecular mechanisms involved in the differentiation of stem
cells to hepatic cells is critical for both understanding normal developmental
processes as well as for optimizing the generation of functional hepatic cells
for therapy. We performed in vitro differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells 
(mESCs) with a null mutation in the homeobox gene Hhex and show that Hhex-/-
mESCs fail to differentiate from definitive endoderm (Sox17+/Foxa2+) to hepatic
endoderm (Alb+/Dlk+). In addition, hepatic culture elicited a >7-fold increase in
Vegfa mRNA expression in Hhex-/- cells compared to Hhex+/+ cells. Furthermore, we
identified VEGFR2+/ALB+/CD34- in early Hhex+/+ hepatic cultures. These cells were
absent in Hhex-/- cultures. Finally, through manipulation of Hhex and Vegfa
expression, gain and loss of expression experiments revealed that Hhex shares an 
inverse relationship with the activity of the Vegf signaling pathway in
supporting hepatic differentiation. In summary, our results suggest that Hhex
represses Vegf signaling during hepatic differentiation of mouse ESCs allowing
for cell-type autonomous regulation of Vegfr2 activity independent of endothelial
cells.

PMCID: PMC4718667
PMID: 26784346  [PubMed - in process]


15. Acta Biomater. 2016 Apr 1;34:125-32. doi: 10.1016/j.actbio.2016.01.012. Epub 2016
Jan 13.

Microfluidic fabrication of bioactive microgels for rapid formation and enhanced 
differentiation of stem cell spheroids.

Siltanen C(1), Yaghoobi M(2), Haque A(3), You J(4), Lowen J(5), Soleimani M(6),
Revzin A(7).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Davis, 451 Health Sciences Dr., Davis, CA, USA.
Electronic address: csiltanen@ucdavis.edu. (2)University of California, Davis,
451 Health Sciences Dr., Davis, CA, USA. Electronic address:
myaghoobi@modares.ac.ir. (3)University of California, Davis, 451 Health Sciences 
Dr., Davis, CA, USA. Electronic address: ahaque@ucdavis.edu. (4)University of
California, Davis, 451 Health Sciences Dr., Davis, CA, USA. Electronic address:
jmyou@khu.ac.kr. (5)University of California, Davis, 451 Health Sciences Dr.,
Davis, CA, USA. Electronic address: jlowen@ucdavis.edu. (6)University of
California, Davis, 451 Health Sciences Dr., Davis, CA, USA. Electronic address:
soleim_m@modares.ac.ir. (7)University of California, Davis, 451 Health Sciences
Dr., Davis, CA, USA. Electronic address: arevzin@ucdavis.edu.

A major challenge in tissue engineering is to develop robust protocols for
differentiating ES and iPS cells to functional adult tissues at a clinically
relevant scale. The goal of this study is to develop a high throughput platform
for generating bioactive, stem cell-laden microgels to direct differentiation in 
a well-defined microenvironment. We describe a droplet microfluidics system for
fabricating microgels composed of polyethylene glycol and heparin, with tunable
geometric, mechanical, and chemical properties, at kHz rates. Heparin-containing 
hydrogel particles sequestered growth factors Nodal and FGF-2, which are
implicated in specifying pluripotent cells to definitive endoderm. Mouse ESCs
were encapsulated into heparin microgels with a single dose of Nodal and FGF-2,
and expressed high levels of endoderm markers Sox17 and FoxA2 after 5days. These 
results highlight the use of microencapsulation for tailoring the stem cell
microenvironment to promote directed differentiation, and may provide a
straightforward path to large scale bioprocessing in the future.STATEMENT OF
SIGNIFICANCE: Multicellular spheroids and microtissues are valuable for tissue
engineering, but fabrication approaches typically sacrifice either precision or
throughput. Microfluidic encapsulation in polymeric biomaterials is a promising
technique for rapidly generating cell aggregates with excellent control of
microenvironmental parameters. Here we describe the microfluidic fabrication of
bioactive, heparin-based microgels, and demonstrate the adsorption of
heparin-binding growth factors for enhancing directed differentiation of
embryonic stem cells toward endoderm. This approach also facilitated a ~90-fold
decrease in consumption of exogenous growth factors compared to conventional
differentiation protocols.

Copyright © 2016 Acta Materialia Inc. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4811722 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26774761  [PubMed - in process]


16. Br Poult Sci. 2016 Jan 5. [Epub ahead of print]

The characterisation and functional ß-cell differentiation of duck pancreas
derived mesenchymal cells.

Zhang S(1,)(2), Bai C(1), Ma Y(1), Li X(1), Gao Y(1,)(2), Fan Y(1,)(2), Guan
W(1), Zheng D(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Institute of Animal Science, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences ,
Beijing , P. R. China. (2)b College of Wildlife Resources , Northeast Forestry
University , Harbin , P. R. China.

1. The generation of insulin-producing pancreatic ß-cells from stem cells in
vitro would provide an unprecedented cell source for drug discovery and cell
transplantation therapy in diabetes research. 2. The fractionation, expansion and
conversion of primary duck PSCs into functional ß-cells is described in this
study. The cell surface antigens of PSCs, FOXA2, SOX9, NKX6.1 and INS were
detected by immunofluorescent stain and flow cytometry for determining the
biological characteristics of PSCs. The genes CD44, ki67, Vimentin, C-myc,
glucagon, PDX1 and insulin were detected by reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction techniques. The growth curves of different passages were all
typically sigmoidal. Karyotype analysis was conducted to estimate the stability
of PSCs. 3. A simple protocol was developed to assess functional differentiation 
by assessing the expression of pancreas ß-cell markers, the staining of dithizone
and confirmation of insulin secretion. Insulin and pdx-1 were all increased in
differentiated cells compared to controls. 4. Differentiated cells secreted
insulin in a glucose responsive manner.

PMID: 26727993  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2015 Dec 1;56(13):8258-67. doi: 10.1167/iovs.15-17073.

Generating iPSC-Derived Choroidal Endothelial Cells to Study Age-Related Macular 
Degeneration.

Songstad AE(1), Wiley LA(1), Duong K(2), Kaalberg E(1), Flamme-Wiese MJ(1),
Cranston CM(1), Riker MJ(1), Levasseur D(2), Stone EM(3), Mullins RF(1), Tucker
BA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stephen A. Wynn Institute for Vision Research Department of Ophthalmology and 
Visual Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United
States. (3)Stephen A. Wynn Institute for Vision Research Department of
Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United
States 3Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa,
United States.

PURPOSE: Age-related macular degeneration (AMD), the most common cause of
incurable blindness in the western world, is characterized by the dysfunction and
eventual death of choroidal endothelial (CECs), RPE, and photoreceptor cells.
Stem cell-based treatment strategies designed to replace photoreceptor and RPE
cells currently are a major scientific focus. However, the success of these
approaches likely also will require replacement of the underlying, supportive
choroidal vasculature. The purpose of this study was to generate stem
cell-derived CECs to develop efficient differentiation and transplantation
protocols.
METHODS: Dermal fibroblasts from the Tie2-GFP mouse were isolated and
reprogrammed into two independent induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines via 
viral transduction of the transcription factors Oct4, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc.
Tie2-GFP iPSCs were differentiated into CECs using a coculture method with either
the RF6A CEC line or primary mouse CECs. Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived
CECs were characterized via RT-PCR and immunocytochemistry for EC- and
CEC-specific markers.
RESULTS: Induced pluripotent stem cells generated from mice expressing green
fluorescent protein (GFP) under control of the endothelial Tie2 promoter display 
classic pluripotency markers and stem cell morphology. Induced pluripotent stem
cell-derived CECs express carbonic anhydrase IV, eNOS, FOXA2, PLVAP, CD31, CD34, 
ICAM-1, Tie2, TTR, VE-cadherin, and vWF.
CONCLUSIONS: Induced pluripotent stem cell-derived CECs will be a valuable tool
for modeling of choriocapillaris-specific insults in AMD and for use in future
choroidal endothelial cell replacement approaches.

PMID: 26720480  [PubMed - in process]


18. World J Methodol. 2015 Dec 26;5(4):223-9. doi: 10.5662/wjm.v5.i4.223. eCollection
2015.

Forkhead box protein A2 and T helper type 2-mediated pulmonary inflammation.

Sun L(1), Tang XJ(1), Luo FM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ling Sun, Xiao-Ju Tang, Laboratory of Cardiovascular Diseases Research Center 
of Regeneration Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, Sichuan Province, China.

The transcription factor forkhead box protein A2 (FOXA2, also known as hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3ß or transcription factor 3ß), has been found to play pivotal
roles in multiple phases of mammalian life, from the early development to the
organofaction, and subsequently in homeostasis and metabolism in the adult. In
the embryonic development period, FOXA2 is require d for the formation of the
primitive node and notochord, and its absence results in embryonic lethality.
Moreover, FOXA2 plays an important role not only in lung development, but also in
T helper type 2 (Th2)-mediated pulmonary inflammation and goblet cell
hyperplasia. In this article, the role of FOXA2 in lung development and
Th2-mediated pulmonary inflammation, as well as in goblet cell hyperplasia, is
reviewed. FOXA2 deletion in airway epithelium results into Th2-mediated pulmonary
inflammation and goblet cell hyperplasia in developing lung. Leukotriene pathway 
and signal transducers and activators of transcription 6 pathway may mediate this
inflammation through recruitment and activation of denditric cell during lung
developments. FOXA2 is a potential treatment target for lung diseases with Th2
inflammation and goblet cell hyperplasia, such as asthma and chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease.

PMCID: PMC4686420
PMID: 26713283  [PubMed]


19. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2016 Apr;158:149-56. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2015.12.014. Epub 2015 Dec 15.

Genome-wide association study of 25(OH) Vitamin D concentrations in Punjabi
Sikhs: Results of the Asian Indian diabetic heart study.

Sapkota BR(1), Hopkins R(1), Bjonnes A(2), Ralhan S(3), Wander GS(3), Mehra
NK(4), Singh JR(5), Blackett PR(6), Saxena R(2), Sanghera DK(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Genetics, College of Medicine, University
of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (2)Broad Institute of
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Harvard, Massachusetts General
Hospital, Cambridge, MA, USA. (3)Hero DMC Heart Institute, Ludhiana, India.
(4)All India Institute of Medical Sciences and Research, New Delhi, India.
(5)Central University of Punjab, Bathinda, Punjab, India. (6)Department of
Pediatrics, Section of Endocrinology, College of Medicine, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. (7)Department of Pediatrics,
Section of Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences 
Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA; Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of
Pharmacy, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA; 
Oklahoma Center for Neuroscience, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, 
Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Electronic address: Dharambir-sanghera@ouhsc.edu.

Vitamin D deficiency is implicated in multiple disease conditions and
accumulating evidence supports that the variation in serum vitamin D (25(OH)D)
levels, including deficiency, is under strong genetic control. However, the
underlying genetic mechanism associated with vitamin 25(OH)D concentrations is
poorly understood. We earlier reported a very high prevalence of vitamin D
deficiency associated with an increased risk for type 2 diabetes and obesity in a
Punjabi Sikh diabetic cohort as part of the Asian Indian diabetic heart study
(AIDHS). Here we have performed the first genome-wide association study (GWAS) of
serum 25(OH)D on 3538 individuals from this Punjabi Sikh population. Our
discovery GWAS comprised of 1387 subjects followed by validation of 24 putative
SNPs (P<10(-4)) using an independent replication sample (n=2151) from the same
population by direct genotyping. A novel locus at chromosome 20p11.21 represented
by rs2207173 with minor allele frequency (MAF) 0.29, [ß=-0.13, p=4.47×10(-9)]
between FOXA2 and SSTR4 was identified to be associated with 25(OH)D levels.
Another suggestive association signal at rs11586313 (MAF 0.54) [ß=0.90;
p=1.36×10(-6)] was found within the regulatory region of the IVL gene on
chromosome 1q21.3. Additionally, our study replicated 3 of 5 known GWAS genes
associated with 25(OH)D concentrations including GC (p=0.007) and CYP2R1
(p=0.019) reported in Europeans and the DAB1 (p=0.003), reported in Hispanics.
Identification of novel association signals in biologically plausible regions
with 25(OH)D metabolism will provide new molecular insights on genetic drivers of
vitamin D status and its implications in health disparities.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4769937 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26704534  [PubMed - in process]


20. PLoS Genet. 2015 Dec 18;11(12):e1005730. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005730.
eCollection 2015.

Brachyury, Foxa2 and the cis-Regulatory Origins of the Notochord.

José-Edwards DS(1), Oda-Ishii I(1), Kugler JE(1), Passamaneck YJ(1), Katikala
L(1), Nibu Y(1), Di Gregorio A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York, United States of America.

A main challenge of modern biology is to understand how specific constellations
of genes are activated to differentiate cells and give rise to distinct tissues. 
This study focuses on elucidating how gene expression is initiated in the
notochord, an axial structure that provides support and patterning signals to
embryos of humans and all other chordates. Although numerous notochord genes have
been identified, the regulatory DNAs that orchestrate development and propel
evolution of this structure by eliciting notochord gene expression remain mostly 
uncharted, and the information on their configuration and recurrence is still
quite fragmentary. Here we used the simple chordate Ciona for a systematic
analysis of notochord cis-regulatory modules (CRMs), and investigated their
composition, architectural constraints, predictive ability and evolutionary
conservation. We found that most Ciona notochord CRMs relied upon variable
combinations of binding sites for the transcription factors Brachyury and/or
Foxa2, which can act either synergistically or independently from one another.
Notably, one of these CRMs contains a Brachyury binding site juxtaposed to an
(AC) microsatellite, an unusual arrangement also found in Brachyury-bound
regulatory regions in mouse. In contrast, different subsets of CRMs relied upon
binding sites for transcription factors of widely diverse families. Surprisingly,
we found that neither intra-genomic nor interspecific conservation of binding
sites were reliably predictive hallmarks of notochord CRMs. We propose that
rather than obeying a rigid sequence-based cis-regulatory code, most notochord
CRMs are rather unique. Yet, this study uncovered essential elements recurrently 
used by divergent chordates as basic building blocks for notochord CRMs.

PMCID: PMC4684326
PMID: 26684323  [PubMed - in process]


21. Neurotox Res. 2015 Dec 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Role of Nurr1 in the Generation and Differentiation of Dopaminergic Neurons from 
Stem Cells.

Rodríguez-Traver E(1,)(2), Solís O(1,)(2), Díaz-Guerra E(1,)(2), Ortiz Ó(1),
Vergaño-Vera E(1,)(2), Méndez-Gómez HR(1,)(2), García-Sanz P(1,)(2), Moratalla
R(1,)(2), Vicario-Abejón C(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC),
Avenida Doctor Arce 37, 28002, Madrid, Spain. (2)Centro de Investigación
Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain.
(3)Instituto Cajal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC),
Avenida Doctor Arce 37, 28002, Madrid, Spain. cvicario@cajal.csic.es. (4)Centro
de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas
(CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain. cvicario@cajal.csic.es.

NURR1 is an essential transcription factor for the differentiation, maturation,
and maintenance of midbrain dopaminergic neurons (DA neurons) as it has been
demonstrated using knock-out mice. DA neurons of the substantia nigra pars
compacta degenerate in Parkinson's disease (PD) and mutations in the Nurr1 gene
have been associated with this human disease. Thus, the study of NURR1 actions in
vivo is fundamental to understand the mechanisms of neuron generation and
degeneration in the dopaminergic system. Here, we present and discuss findings
indicating that NURR1 is a valuable molecular tool for the in vitro generation of
DA neurons which could be used for modeling and studying PD in cell culture and
in transplantation approaches. Transduction of Nurr1 alone or in combination with
other transcription factors such as Foxa2, Ngn2, Ascl1, and Pitx3, induces the
generation of DA neurons, which upon transplantation have the capacity to survive
and restore motor behavior in animal models of PD. We show that the survival of
transplanted neurons is increased when the Nurr1-transduced olfactory bulb stem
cells are treated with GDNF. The use of these and other factors with the induced 
pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-based technology or the direct reprogramming of
astrocytes or fibroblasts into human DA neurons has produced encouraging results 
for the study of the cellular and molecular mechanisms of neurodegeneration in PD
and for the search of new treatments for this disease.

PMID: 26678495  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. EMBO J. 2016 Jan 1;35(3):356-68. doi: 10.15252/embj.201592116. Epub 2015 Dec 16.

Convergence of cMyc and ß-catenin on Tcf7l1 enables endoderm specification.

Morrison G(1), Scognamiglio R(2), Trumpp A(2), Smith A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK gillian.morrison@ed.ac.uk
austin.smith@cscr.cam.ac.uk. (2)Division of Stem Cells and Cancer, Deutsches
Krebsforschungszentrum (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany Heidelberg Institute for Stem 
Cell Technology and Experimental Medicine (HI-STEM gGmbH), Heidelberg, Germany.
(3)Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Cambridge Stem Cell Institute,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK gillian.morrison@ed.ac.uk austin.smith@cscr.cam.ac.uk.

The molecular machinery that directs formation of definitive endoderm from
pluripotent stem cells is not well understood. Wnt/ß-catenin and Nodal signalling
have been implicated, but the requirements for lineage specification remain
incompletely defined. Here, we demonstrate a potent effect of inhibiting glycogen
synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) on definitive endoderm production. We find that
downstream of GSK3 inhibition, elevated cMyc and ß-catenin act in parallel to
reduce transcription and DNA binding, respectively, of the transcriptional
repressor Tcf7l1. Tcf7l1 represses FoxA2, a pioneer factor for endoderm
specification. Deletion of Tcf7l1 is sufficient to allow upregulation of FoxA2 in
the presence of Activin. In wild-type cells, cMyc contributes by reducing Tcf7l1 
mRNA, while ß-catenin acts on Tcf7l1 protein. GSK3 inhibition is further required
for consolidation of endodermal fate via upregulation of Sox17, highlighting
sequential roles for Wnt signalling. The identification of a
cMyc/ß-catenin-Tcf7l1-FoxA2 axis reveals a de-repression mechanism underlying
endoderm induction that may be recapitulated in other developmental and
patho-logical contexts.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4741304 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26675138  [PubMed - in process]


23. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 11;5:17826. doi: 10.1038/srep17826.

The ratio of FoxA1 to FoxA2 in lung adenocarcinoma is regulated by LncRNA HOTAIR 
and chromatin remodeling factor LSH.

Wang R(1), Shi Y(2,)(3,)(4), Chen L(2,)(3,)(4), Jiang Y(2,)(3,)(4), Mao
C(2,)(3,)(4), Yan B(2,)(3,)(4), Liu S(5), Shan B(6), Tao Y(2,)(3,)(4), Wang
X(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Second Xiangya Hospital of 
Central South University, Changsha, China. (2)Cancer Research Institute, Central 
South University, Changsha, Hunan, 410078 China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Hunan, 410078 China.
(4)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, Ministry of Health, Hunan, 410078 China.
(5)Center for Medicine Research, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, 410078 China. (6)College of Medical Sciences, Washington State
University Spokane, 412 E. Spokane Falls Boulevard, Spokane, WA 99202, USA.

The lncRNA HOTAIR is a critical regulator of cancer progression. Chromatin
remodeling factor LSH is critical for normal development of plants and mammals.
However, the underlying mechanisms causing this in cancer are not entirely clear.
The functional diversification of the FOXA1 and FOXA2 contributes to the target
genes during evolution and carcinogenesis. Little is known about the ratio of
FOXA1 to FOXA2 in cancer. We here found that both HOTAIR and LSH overexpression
was significantly correlated with poor survival in patients with lung
adenocarcinoma cancer (ADC). Also, the ratio of FOXA1 and FOXA2 is linked with
poor survival in patients with lung ADC. HOTAIR regulates the ratio of FOXA1 to
FOXA2 and migration and invasion. HOTAIR and the ratio of FOXA1 to FOXA2 are
negatively correlated. HOTAIR knockdown inhibits migration and invasion. HOTAIR
is associated with LSH, and this association linked with the binding of LSH in
the promoter of FOXA1, not FOXA2. Targeted inhibition of HOTAIR suppresses the
migratory and invasive properties. These data suggest that HOTAIR is an important
mediator of the ratio of FOXA1 and FOXA2 and LSH involves in, and suggest that
HOTAIR inhibition may represent a promising therapeutic option for suppressing
lung ADC progression.

PMCID: PMC4675985
PMID: 26658322  [PubMed - in process]


24. Life Sci. 2016 Jan 1;144:194-201. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2015.12.001. Epub 2015 Dec
2.

Forkhead box transcription factors in embryonic heart development and congenital 
heart disease.

Zhu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Biology, Hunan University, 1 
Denggao Road, Yuelu District, Changsha, Hunan 410082, PR China. Electronic
address: zhuh6477@126.com.

Embryonic heart development is a very complicated process regulated precisely by 
a network composed of many genes and signaling pathways in time and space.
Forkhead box (Fox, FOX) proteins are a family of transcription factors
characterized by the presence of an evolutionary conserved "forkhead"or
"winged-helix" DNA-binding domain and able to organize temporal and spatial gene 
expression during development. They are involved in a wide variety of cellular
processes, such as cell cycle progression, proliferation, differentiation,
migration, metabolism and DNA damage response. An abundance of studies in model
organisms and systems has established that Foxa2, Foxc1/c2, Foxh1 and Foxm1,
Foxos and Foxps are important components of the signaling pathways that instruct 
cardiogenesis and embryonic heart development, playing paramount roles in heart
development. The previous studies also have demonstrated that mutations in some
of the forkhead box genes and the aberrant expression of forkhead box gene are
heavily implicated in the congenital heart disease (CHD) of humans. This review
primarily focuses on the current understanding of heart development regulated by 
forkhead box transcription factors and molecular genetic mechanisms by which
forkhead box factors modulate heart development during embryogenesis and
organogenesis. This review also summarizes human CHD related mutations in
forkhead box genes as well as the abnormal expression of forkhead box gene, and
discusses additional possible regulatory mechanisms of the forkhead box genes
during embryonic heart development that warrant further investigation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26656470  [PubMed - in process]


25. Mech Dev. 2016 Feb;139:51-64. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2015.11.004. Epub 2015 Nov 28.

The global gene expression profile of the secondary transition during pancreatic 
development.

Willmann SJ(1), Mueller NS(2), Engert S(3), Sterr M(3), Burtscher I(3), Raducanu 
A(3), Irmler M(4), Beckers J(5), Sass S(2), Theis FJ(6), Lickert H(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration Research, Institute of Stem Cell
Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Business Campus Garching, Parkring 11, 85748
Garching, Germany; German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Ingolstädter
Landstraße 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. (2)Institute of Computational Biology,
Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstraße 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. 
(3)Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration Research, Institute of Stem Cell
Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Business Campus Garching, Parkring 11, 85748
Garching, Germany. (4)Institute of Experimental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Ingolstädter Landstraße 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. (5)Institute of
Experimental Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Ingolstädter Landstraße 1,
85764 Neuherberg, Germany; Chair of Experimental Genetics, Center of Life and
Food Sciences Weihenstephan, Technische Universität München, Germany; German
Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Ingolstädter Landstraße 1, 85764 Neuherberg, 
Germany. (6)Institute of Computational Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum München,
Ingolstädter Landstraße 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany; Department of Mathematics, 
Technische Universität München, Boltzmannstraße 3, 85748 Garching, Germany.
(7)Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration Research, Institute of Stem Cell
Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Business Campus Garching, Parkring 11, 85748
Garching, Germany; German Center for Diabetes Research (DZD), Ingolstädter
Landstraße 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany; Faculty of Medicine, Technische
Universität München, Ismaninger Str. 22, 81675 München, Germany. Electronic
address: heiko.lickert@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

PMID: 26643664  [PubMed - in process]


26. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Dec 4. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10567. [Epub ahead of print]

Induction of pancreatic ß cell gene expression in mesenchymal stem cells.

Mehrfarjam Z(1), Esmaeili F(2,)(3), Shabani L(3), Ebrahimie E(4,)(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Razi Herbal Medicines Research Center, Lorestan University of Medical
Sciences, P.O. Box 681499468, Khorramabad, Iran. (2)Department of Biology,
Faculty of Basic Sciences, University of Isfahan, P.O. Box 8174673441, Isfahan,
Iran. (3)Research Institute of Biotechnology, Shahrekord University, P.O. Box
115, Shahrekord, Iran. (4)Institute of Biotechnology, Shiraz University, Shiraz, 
Iran. (5)School of Information Technology and Mathematical Sciences, Division of 
Information Technology Engineering & Environment, University of South Australia, 
Aselaide, Australia. (6)Department of Genetics and Evolution, School of
Biological Sciences, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia. (7)School
of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Science and Engineering, Flinders University, 
Adelaide, Australia.

Transdifferentiation potential of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) into
insulin-producing cells (IPCs) has been suggested recently. In our recent works, 
we demonstrated the high performance of mouse neonate pancreas extract (MPE) in
production of functional IPCs from carcinoma stem cells. In this study, MPE was
used to generate IPCs from MSCs without any genetic manipulation. To this end,
bone marrow MSCs were isolated and characterized. In order to differentiate, MSCs
were induced by selection of nestin-expressing cells and treatment with 100<U+2009>µg/ml
MPE. Morphological features of the differentiated cells were confirmed by
dithizone staining. Immunoreactivity to insulin receptor beta, proinsulin,
insulin and C-peptide was observed by immunoflourescence. We also quantified
glucose-dependent insulin production and secretion by ELISA. Real-time PCR
indicated the expressions of ß cell related genes, PDX-1, INS1, INS2, EP300 and
CREB1 in IPC cells. Possible pathways governed by CREB1, EP300, and PDX-1
transcription factors in differentiation of MSCs to IPCs were determined based on
Gene Set Enrichment (GSE) approach at p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.05. Pathway discovery highlighted the
negative regulatory effects of MIR124-2, HDAC5 protein, REST and NR0B2
transcription factors on expression of CREB1, EP300, and PDX-1 and inhabitation
of IPC differentiations. In contrast, a crosstalk between FOXA2 and TCF7L2
transcription factors, DNA-PK complex, KAT2B protein positively interacting with 
PDX-1, CREB1, EP300 resulted in the induction of IPC and following insulin
production. In conclusion, we report an efficient, simple, and easy method for
production of functional IPCs from MSCs by MPE treatment.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26634639  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Cell Tissue Res. 2015 Nov 21. [Epub ahead of print]

Generation of airway epithelial cells with native characteristics from mouse
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Yoshie S(1), Imaizumi M(1), Nakamura R(1), Otsuki K(1), Ikeda M(1), Nomoto Y(1), 
Wada I(2), Omori K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical
University, Fukushima, Japan, 1 Hikarigaoka, Fukushima City, 960-1295, Japan.
(2)Departments of Cell Science, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University,
Fukushima, Japan, 1 Hikarigaoka, Fukushima City, 960-1295, Japan. (3)Department
of Otolaryngology, School of Medicine, Fukushima Medical University, Fukushima,
Japan, 1 Hikarigaoka, Fukushima City, 960-1295, Japan. omori@fmu.ac.jp.

Airway epithelial cells derived from induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells are
expected to be a useful source for the regeneration of airway epithelium. Our
preliminary study of embryoid body (EB) formation and the air-liquid interface
(ALI) method suggested that mouse iPS cells can differentiate into airway
epithelial cells. However, whether the cells generated from mouse iPS cells had
the character and phenotype of native airway epithelial cells remained
uninvestigated. In this study, we generated airway epithelial cells from EBs by
culturing them under serum-free conditions supplemented with Activin and bFGF and
by the ALI method and characterized the iPS cell-derived airway epithelial cells 
in terms of their gene expression, immunoreactivity, morphology, and function.
Analysis by quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction(RT-PCR) revealed that the expression of the undifferentiated cell marker
Nanog decreased time-dependently after the induction of differentiation, whereas 
definitive endoderm markers Foxa2 and Cxcr4 were transiently up-regulated.
Thereafter, the expression of airway epithelium markers such as Tubb4a, Muc5ac,
and Krt5 was detected by RT-PCR and immunostaining. The formation of tight
junctions was also confirmed by immunostaining and permeability assay. Analysis
by hematoxylin and eosin staining and scanning electron microscopy indicated that
the cells generated from mouse iPS cells formed airway-epithelium-like tissue and
had cilia, the movement of which was visualized and observed to be synchronized. 
These results demonstrate that the airway epithelial cells generated by our
method have native characteristics and open new perspectives for the regeneration
of injured airway epithelium.

PMID: 26590823  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


28. Diabetologia. 2016 Feb;59(2):316-24. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3805-3. Epub 2015
Nov 12.

Transcription factor Ets-1 links glucotoxicity to pancreatic beta cell
dysfunction through inhibiting PDX-1 expression in rodent models.

Chen F(1), Sha M(1), Wang Y(1), Wu T(1), Shan W(1), Liu J(1), Zhou W(1), Zhu
Y(1), Sun Y(1), Shi Y(2), Bleich D(3), Han X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing
Medical University, 140 Hanzhong Road, Nanjing, 210029, People's Republic of
China. (2)Barshop Institute for Longevity and Aging Studies, University of Texas 
Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. (3)Rutgers New Jersey Medical
School, Newark, NJ, USA. (4)Key Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of
Jiangsu Province, Nanjing Medical University, 140 Hanzhong Road, Nanjing, 210029,
People's Republic of China. hanxiao@njmu.edu.cn.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: 'Glucotoxicity' is a term used to convey the negative effect of 
hyperglycaemia on beta cell function; however, the underlying molecular
mechanisms that impair insulin secretion and gene expression are poorly defined. 
Our objective was to define the role of transcription factor v-ets avian
erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homologue 1 (Ets-1) in beta cell
glucotoxicity.
METHODS: Primary islets and Min6 cells were exposed to high glucose and Ets-1
expression was measured. Recombinant adenovirus and transgenic mice were used to 
upregulate Ets-1 expression in beta cells in vitro and in vivo, and insulin
secretion was assessed. The binding activity of H3/H4 histone on the Ets-1
promoter, and that of forkhead box (FOX)A2, FOXO1 and Ets-1 on the Pdx-1 promoter
was measured by chromatin immunoprecipitation and quantitative real-time PCR
assay.
RESULTS: High glucose induced upregulation of Ets-1 expression and
hyperacetylation of histone H3 and H4 at the Ets-1 gene promoter in beta cells.
Ets-1 overexpression dramatically suppressed insulin secretion and biosynthesis
both in vivo and in vitro. Besides, Ets-1 overexpression increased the activity
of FOXO1 but decreased that of FOXA2 binding to the pancreatic and duodenal
homeobox 1 (PDX-1) homology region 2 (PH2), resulting in inhibition of Pdx-1
promoter activity and downregulation of PDX-1 expression and activity. In
addition, high glucose promoted the interaction of Ets-1 and FOXO1, and the
activity of Ets-1 binding to the Pdx-1 promoter. Importantly, PDX-1
overexpression reversed the defect in pancreatic beta cells induced by Ets-1
excess, while knockdown of Ets-1 prevented hyperglycaemia-induced dysfunction of 
pancreatic beta cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our observations suggest that Ets-1 links
glucotoxicity to pancreatic beta cell dysfunction through inhibiting PDX-1
expression in type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 26564177  [PubMed - in process]


29. Nat Genet. 2015 Dec;47(12):1415-25. doi: 10.1038/ng.3437. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Genetic fine mapping and genomic annotation defines causal mechanisms at type 2
diabetes susceptibility loci.

Gaulton KJ, Ferreira T, Lee Y, Raimondo A, Mägi R, Reschen ME, Mahajan A, Locke
A, Rayner NW, Robertson N, Scott RA, Prokopenko I, Scott LJ, Green T, Sparso T,
Thuillier D, Yengo L, Grallert H, Wahl S, Frånberg M, Strawbridge RJ, Kestler H, 
Chheda H, Eisele L, Gustafsson S, Steinthorsdottir V, Thorleifsson G, Qi L,
Karssen LC, van Leeuwen EM, Willems SM, Li M, Chen H, Fuchsberger C, Kwan P, Ma
C, Linderman M, Lu Y, Thomsen SK, Rundle JK, Beer NL, van de Bunt M, Chalisey A, 
Kang HM, Voight BF, Abecasis GR, Almgren P, Baldassarre D, Balkau B, Benediktsson
R, Blüher M, Boeing H, Bonnycastle LL, Bottinger EP, Burtt NP, Carey J,
Charpentier G, Chines PS, Cornelis MC, Couper DJ, Crenshaw AT, van Dam RM, Doney 
AS, Dorkhan M, Edkins S, Eriksson JG, Esko T, Eury E, Fadista J, Flannick J,
Fontanillas P, Fox C, Franks PW, Gertow K, Gieger C, Gigante B, Gottesman O,
Grant GB, Grarup N, Groves CJ, Hassinen M, Have CT, Herder C, Holmen OL,
Hreidarsson AB, Humphries SE, Hunter DJ, Jackson AU, Jonsson A, Jørgensen ME,
Jørgensen T, Kao WH, Kerrison ND, Kinnunen L, Klopp N, Kong A, Kovacs P, Kraft P,
Kravic J, Langford C, Leander K, Liang L, Lichtner P, Lindgren CM, Lindholm E,
Linneberg A, Liu CT, Lobbens S, Luan J, Lyssenko V, Männistö S, McLeod O, Meyer
J, Mihailov E, Mirza G, Mühleisen TW, Müller-Nurasyid M, Navarro C, Nöthen MM,
Oskolkov NN, Owen KR, Palli D, Pechlivanis S, Peltonen L, Perry JR, Platou CG,
Roden M, Ruderfer D, Rybin D, van der Schouw YT, Sennblad B, Sigurðsson G,
Stancáková A, Steinbach G, Storm P, Strauch K, Stringham HM, Sun Q, Thorand B,
Tikkanen E, Tonjes A, Trakalo J, Tremoli E, Tuomi T, Wennauer R, Wiltshire S,
Wood AR, Zeggini E, Dunham I, Birney E, Pasquali L, Ferrer J, Loos RJ, Dupuis J, 
Florez JC, Boerwinkle E, Pankow JS, van Duijn C, Sijbrands E, Meigs JB, Hu FB,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K, Lakka TA, Rauramaa R, Stumvoll M, Pedersen NL, 
Lind L, Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi SM, Korpi-Hyövälti E, Saaristo TE, Saltevo J,
Kuusisto J, Laakso M, Metspalu A, Erbel R, Jöcke KH, Moebus S, Ripatti S, Salomaa
V, Ingelsson E, Boehm BO, Bergman RN, Collins FS, Mohlke KL, Koistinen H,
Tuomilehto J, Hveem K, Njølstad I, Deloukas P, Donnelly PJ, Frayling TM,
Hattersley AT, de Faire U, Hamsten A, Illig T, Peters A, Cauchi S, Sladek R,
Froguel P, Hansen T, Pedersen O, Morris AD, Palmer CN, Kathiresan S, Melander O, 
Nilsson PM, Groop LC, Barroso I, Langenberg C, Wareham NJ, O'Callaghan CA, Gloyn 
AL, Altshuler D, Boehnke M, Teslovich TM, McCarthy MI, Morris AP; DIAbetes
Genetics Replication And Meta-analysis (DIAGRAM) Consortium.

Collaborators: Abecasis GR, Almgren P, Atalay M, Baldassarre D, Balkau B, Barroso
I, Beer NL, Beilby J, Benediktsson R, Bergman RN, Birney E, Blüher M, Boehm BO,
Boeing H, Boerwinkle E, Bonnycastle LL, Borringer EP, van de Bunt M, Burtt NP,
Campbell H, Carey J, Cauchi S, Charpentier G, Chen H, Chheda H, Chines PS,
Collins FS, Cornelis MC, Couper DJ, Crenshaw AT, van Dam RM, Danesh J, de Faire
U, Dedoussis G, Deloukas P, Dimas AS, Dina C, Doney AS, Donnelly PJ, Dorkhan M,
van Duijn C, Dunham I, Dupuis J, Edkins S, Eisele L, Emilsson V, Erbel R,
Eriksson JG, Esko T, Eury E, Fadista J, Ferreira T, Ferrer J, Flannick J, Florez 
JC, Fontanillas P, Forouhi NG, Fox C, Frånberg M, Franks PW, Frayling TM, Froguel
P, Fuchsberger C, Gaulton KJ, Gertow K, Gieger C, Gigante B, Gloyn AL, Gottesman 
O, Grallert H, Grant GB, Grarup N, Green T, Groop LC, Groves CJ, Gustafsson S,
Hamsten A, Hansen T, Hassinen M, Hattersley AT, Have CT, Hayward C, Herder C,
Hofman A, Holmen OL, Horikoshi M, Hovingh K, Hreidarsson AB, Hu FB, Hui J,
Humphries SE, Hunt SE, Hunter DJ, Hveem K, Illig T, Ingelsson E, Jackson AU,
James A, Jockel KH, Johnson AD, Jonsson A, Jørgensen ME, Jørgensen T, Kang HM,
Kanoni S, Kao WH, Karssen LC, Kathiresan S, Keinanen-Kiukaanniemi SM, Kerrison
ND, Kestler H, Khan H, Khaw KT, Kinnunen L, Klopp N, Koistinen H, Komulainen P,
Kong A, Korpi-Hyöv<U+04D3>lti E, Kovacs P, Kraft P, Kravic J, Kumar A, Kuusisto J, Kwan 
P, Laakso M, Lagou V, Lakka TA, Langenberg C, Langford C, Leander K, Lee Y, van
Leeuwen EM, Li M, Liang L, Lichtner P, Lind L, Linderman M, Lindgren CM, Lindholm
E, Linneberg A, Liu CT, Lobbens S, Locke A, Loos RJ, Lu Y, Luan J, Lyssenko V, Ma
C, Mägi R, Mahajan A, McLeod O, Meigs JB, Melander O, Metspalu A, Meyer J,
Mihailov E, Mirza G, Moebus S, Mohlke KL, Morris AD, Morris AP, Mühleisen TW,
Müller-Nurasyid M, Musk B, M<U+04D3>nnistö S, Navarro C, Navarro P, Nilsson PM, Njølstad
I, Nöthen MM, O'Callaghan CA, Oskolkov NN, Owen KR, Palli D, Palmer CN, Pankow
JS, Pasquali L, Pechlivanis S, Pedersen NL, Pedersen O, Peltonen L, Perry JR,
Peters A, Platou CG, Potter S, Price JF, Prokopenko I, Qi L, Raimondo A, Rallidis
L, Rathmann W, Rauramaa R, Raychaudhuri S, Rayner NW, Rehnberg E, Reschen ME,
Ripatti S, Robertson N, Roden M, Rossin EJ, Rudan I, Ruderfer D, Rundle JK, Rybin
D, Saaristo TE, Salehen D, Salomaa V, Saltevo J, Saramies J, van der Schouw YT,
Scott LJ, Scott RA, Segre AV, Sennblad B, Shah S, Shuldiner AR, Sigurðsson G,
Sijbrands E, Silveira A, Sivapalaratnam S, Sladek R, Sparso T, Stancáková A,
Stefansson K, Steinbach G, Steinthorsdottir V, Stirrups K, Storm P, Strauch K,
Strawbridge RJ, Stringham HM, Stumvoll M, Sun Q, Syvanen AC, Teslovich TM,
Thomsen SK, Thorand B, Thorleifsson G, Thorsteinsdottir U, Thuillier D, Tikkanen 
E, Tonjes A, Trakalo J, Tremoli E, Trip MD, Tuomi T, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden
AG, Vedantam S, Veglia F, Voight BF, Wahl S, Wareham NJ, Wennauer R, Willems SM, 
Wilsgaard T, Wilson JF, Wiltshire S, Wood AR, Yengo L, Zabaneh D, Zeggini E,
Altshuler D, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2015 Dec;47(12):1373-4.

We performed fine mapping of 39 established type 2 diabetes (T2D) loci in 27,206 
cases and 57,574 controls of European ancestry. We identified 49 distinct
association signals at these loci, including five mapping in or near KCNQ1.
'Credible sets' of the variants most likely to drive each distinct signal mapped 
predominantly to noncoding sequence, implying that association with T2D is
mediated through gene regulation. Credible set variants were enriched for overlap
with FOXA2 chromatin immunoprecipitation binding sites in human islet and liver
cells, including at MTNR1B, where fine mapping implicated rs10830963 as driving
T2D association. We confirmed that the T2D risk allele for this SNP increases
FOXA2-bound enhancer activity in islet- and liver-derived cells. We observed
allele-specific differences in NEUROD1 binding in islet-derived cells, consistent
with evidence that the T2D risk allele increases islet MTNR1B expression. Our
study demonstrates how integration of genetic and genomic information can define 
molecular mechanisms through which variants underlying association signals exert 
their effects on disease.

PMCID: PMC4666734 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26551672  [PubMed - in process]


30. Mamm Genome. 2016 Feb;27(1-2):70-80. doi: 10.1007/s00335-015-9609-4. Epub 2015
Nov 7.

Exploring multiple quantitative trait loci models of hepatic fibrosis in a mouse 
intercross.

Hall RA(1), Hillebrandt S(1), Lammert F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine II, Saarland University Medical Center, Saarland
University, 66421, Homburg, Germany. (2)Department of Medicine II, Saarland
University Medical Center, Saarland University, 66421, Homburg, Germany.
frank.lammert@uks.eu.

Most common diseases are attributed to multiple genetic variants, and the
feasibility of identifying inherited risk factors is often restricted to the
identification of alleles with high or intermediate effect sizes. In our previous
studies, we identified single loci associated with hepatic fibrosis
(Hfib1-Hfib4). Recent advances in analysis tools allowed us to model loci
interactions for liver fibrosis. We analysed 322 F2 progeny from an intercross of
the fibrosis-susceptible strain BALB/cJ and the resistant strain FVB/NJ. The mice
were challenged with carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) for 6 weeks to induce chronic
hepatic injury and fibrosis. Fibrosis progression was quantified by determining
histological fibrosis stages and hepatic collagen contents. Phenotypic data were 
correlated to genome-wide markers to identify quantitative trait loci (QTL).
Thirteen susceptibility loci were identified by single and composite interval
mapping, and were included in the subsequent multiple QTL model (MQM) testing.
Models provided evidence for susceptibility loci with strongest association to
collagen contents (chromosomes 1, 2, 8 and 13) or fibrosis stages (chromosomes 1,
2, 12 and 14). These loci contained the known fibrosis risk genes Hc, Fasl and
Foxa2 and were incorporated in a fibrosis network. Interestingly the hepatic
fibrosis locus on chromosome 1 (Hfib5) connects both phenotype networks,
strengthening its role as a potential modifier locus. Including multiple QTL
mapping to association studies adds valuable information on gene-gene
interactions in experimental crosses and human cohorts. This study presents an
initial step towards a refined understanding of profibrogenic gene networks.

PMID: 26547557  [PubMed - in process]


31. Gene. 2016 Jan 15;576(1 Pt 3):458-65. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.10.063. Epub 2015 
Oct 28.

Genomic structure and promoter functional analysis of GnRH3 gene in large yellow 
croaker (Larimichthys crocea).

Huang W(1), Zhang J(1), Liao Z(1), Lv Z(1), Wu H(1), Zhu A(1), Wu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)National Engineering Research Center of Marine Facilities Aquaculture, College
of Marine Science and Technology, Zhejiang Ocean University, Zhoushan, Zhejiang
316022, PR China.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone III (GnRH3) is considered to be a key neurohormone
in fish reproduction control. In the present study, the cDNA and genomic
sequences of GnRH3 were cloned and characterized from large yellow croaker
Larimichthys crocea. The cDNA encoded a protein of 99 amino acids with four
functional motifs. The full-length genome sequence was composed of 3797
nucleotides, including four exons and three introns. Higher identities of amino
acid sequences and conserved exon-intron organizations were found between LcGnRH3
and other GnRH3 genes. In addition, some special features of the sequences were
detected in partial species. For example, two specific residues (V and A) were
found in the family Sciaenidae, and the unique 75-72 bp type of the open reading 
frame 2 and 3 existed in the family Cyprinidae. Analysis of the 2576 bp promoter 
fragment of LcGnRH3 showed a number of transcription factor binding sites, such
as AP1, CREB, GATA-1, HSF, FOXA2, and FOXL1. Promoter functional analysis using
an EGFP reporter fusion in zebrafish larvae presented positive signals in the
brain, including the olfactory region, the terminal nerve ganglion, the
telencephalon, and the hypothalamus. The expression pattern was generally
consistent with the endogenous GnRH3 GFP-expressing transgenic zebrafish lines,
but the details were different. These results indicate that the structure and
function of LcGnRH3 are generally similar to the other teleost GnRH3 genes, but
there exist some distinctions among them.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26519998  [PubMed - in process]


32. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Jan 1;25(1):97-108. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv452. Epub 2015 Oct
28.

Dlx5 and Dlx6 control uterine adenogenesis during post-natal maturation: possible
consequences for endometriosis.

Bellessort B(1), Le Cardinal M(1), Bachelot A(2), Narboux-Nême N(1), Garagnani
P(3), Pirazzini C(3), Barbieri O(4), Mastracci L(5), Jonchere V(1),
Duvernois-Berthet E(6), Fontaine A(1), Alfama G(1), Levi G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Évolution des Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum Nationale
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris 75005, France. (2)Évolution des Régulations
Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum Nationale d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris
75005, France, AP-HP, Department of Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine,
Centre de Référence des Maladies Endocriniennes Rares de la Croissance,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital (Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière), Université
Pierre et Marie Curie, Site Pitié, 75013 Paris, France. (3)Department of
Experimental, Diagnostic and Specialty Medicine, Alma Mater Studiorum-University 
of Bologna, Bologna 40138, Italy, Interdepartmental Center 'L. Galvani',
University of Bologna, Bologna 40126, Italy. (4)Department of Experimental
Medicine (DIMES) and, IRCCS AOU San Martino-IST, National Institute for Cancer
Research, Genova, Italy and. (5)Department of Experimental Medicine and Center of
Excellence for Biomedical Research, Division of Anatomic Pathology, Department of
Surgical Science and Integrated Diagnostics (DISC), University of Genoa, Genova, 
Italy. (6)Department of Régulations, Développement et Diversité Moléculaire,
Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris 75005, France. (7)Évolution des
Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum Nationale d'Histoire Naturelle,
Paris 75005, France, glevi@mnhn.fr.

Dlx5 and Dlx6 are two closely associated homeobox genes which code for
transcription factors involved in the control of steroidogenesis and
reproduction. Inactivation of Dlx5/6 in the mouse results in a Leydig cell defect
in the male and in ovarian insufficiency in the female. DLX5/6 are also strongly 
expressed by the human endometrium but their function in the uterus is unknown.
The involvement of DLX5/6 in human uterine pathology is suggested by their strong
downregulation in endometriotic lesions and upregulation in endometrioïd
adenocarcinomas. We first show that Dlx5/6 expression begins in Müllerian ducts
epithelia and persists then in the uterine luminal and glandular epithelia
throughout post-natal maturation and in the adult. We then use a new mouse model 
in which Dlx5 and Dlx6 can be simultaneously inactivated in the endometrium using
a Pgr(cre/+) allele. Post-natal inactivation of Dlx5/6 in the uterus results in
sterility without any obvious ovarian involvement. The uteri of Pgr(cre/+);
Dlx5/6(flox/flox) mice present very few uterine glands and numerous abnormally
large and branched invaginations of the uterine lumen. In Dlx5/6 mutant uteri,
the expression of genes involved in gland formation (Foxa2) and in epithelial
remodelling during implantation (Msx1) is significantly reduced. Furthermore, we 
show that DLX5 is highly expressed in human endometrial glandular epithelium and 
that its expression is affected in endometriosis. We conclude that Dlx5 and Dlx6 
expression determines uterine architecture and adenogenesis and is needed for
implantation. Given their importance for female reproduction, DLX5 and DLX6 must 
be regarded as interesting targets for future clinical research.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26512061  [PubMed - in process]


33. BMC Genomics. 2015 Oct 28;16(1):874. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2022-2.

Prior infection with Type A Francisella tularensis antagonizes the pulmonary
transcriptional response to an aerosolized Toll-like receptor 4 agonist.

Walters KA(1), Olsufka R(2), Kuestner RE(3), Wu X(4), Wang K(5), Skerrett SJ(6), 
Ozinsky A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
Kathie.Walters@systemsbiology.org. (2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98104, USA.
rachael.olsufka@uky.edu. (3)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N,
Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. Rolf.Kuestner@systemsbiology.org. (4)Institute for
Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
Xiagang.Wu@systemsbiology.org. (5)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave.
N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. Kai.Wang@systemsbiology.com. (6)Division of Pulmonary
and Critical Care Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98104, USA.
shawn@u.washington.edu. (7)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N,
Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. aozinsky@systemsbiology.org.

BACKGROUND: Francisella infection attenuates immune cell infiltration and
expression of selected pro-inflammatory cytokines in response to endogenous LPS, 
suggesting the bacteria is actively antagonizing at least some part of the
response to Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) engagement. The ability of different
Francisella strains to inhibit the ability of E. coli LPS to induce a pulmonary
inflammatory response, as measured by gene expression profiling, was examined to 
define the scope of modulation and identify of inflammatory genes/pathways that
are specifically antagonized by a virulent F. tularensis infection.
RESULTS: Prior aerosol exposure to F. tularensis subsp. tularensis, but not the
live attenuated strain (LVS) of F. tularensis subsp. holarctica or F. novicida,
significantly antagonized the transcriptional response in the lungs of infected
mice exposed to aerosolized E. coli LPS. The response to E. coli LPS was not
completely inhibited, suggesting that the bacteria is targeting further
downstream of the TLR4 molecule. Analysis of the promotors of LPS-responsive
genes that were perturbed by Type A Francisella infection identified candidate
transcription factors that were potentially modulated by the bacteria, including 
multiple members of the forkhead transcription factor family (FoxA1, Foxa2,
FoxD1, Foxd3, Foxf2, FoxI1, Fox03, Foxq1), IRF1, CEBPA, and Mef2. The annotated
functional roles of the affected genes suggested that virulent Francisella
infection suppressed cellular processes including mRNA processing, antiviral
responses, intracellular trafficking, and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton.
Surprisingly, despite the broad overall suppression of LPS-induced genes by
virulent Francisella, and contrary to what was anticipated from prior studies,
Type A Francisella did not inhibit the expression of the majority of LPS-induced 
cytokines, nor the expression of many classic annotated inflammatory genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, this analysis demonstrates clear differences in the
ability of different Francisella strains to modulate TLR4 signaling and
identifies genes/pathways that are specifically targeted by virulent Type A
Francisella.

PMCID: PMC4625460
PMID: 26510639  [PubMed - in process]


34. Int Immunopharmacol. 2015 Dec;29(2):448-53. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2015.10.016.
Epub 2015 Oct 24.

HO-1 inhibits IL-13-induced goblet cell hyperplasia associated with CLCA1
suppression in normal human bronchial epithelial cells.

Mishina K(1), Shinkai M(2), Shimokawaji T(1), Nagashima A(1), Hashimoto Y(1),
Inoue Y(1), Inayama Y(3), Rubin BK(4), Ishigatsubo Y(5), Kaneko T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Respiratory Disease Center, Yokohama City University Medical Center, Yokohama,
Japan. (2)Respiratory Disease Center, Yokohama City University Medical Center,
Yokohama, Japan. Electronic address: shinkai@yokohama-cu.ac.jp. (3)Department of 
Pathology, Yokohama City University Medical Center, Yokohama, Japan.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, USA.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine and Clinical Immunology, Yokohama City
University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama, Japan. (6)Department of
Pulmonology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama,
Japan.

Mucus hypersecretion and goblet cell hyperplasia are common features that
characterize asthma. IL-13 increases mucin (MUC) 5AC, the major component of
airway mucus, in airway epithelial cells. According to the literature, IL-13
receptor activation leads to STAT6 activation and consequent induction of
chloride channel accessory 1 (CLCA1) gene expression, associated with the
induction of MUC5AC. Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is an enzyme that catalyzes
oxidation of heme to biliverdin, and has anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant
properties. We examined the effects of HO-1 on mucin production and goblet cell
hyperplasia induced by IL-13. Moreover, we assessed the cell signaling
intermediates that appear to be responsible for mucin production. Normal human
bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells were grown at air liquid interface (ALI) in the
presence or absence of IL-13 and hemin, a HO-1 inducer, for 14 days. Protein
concentration was analyzed using ELISA, and mRNA expression was examined by
real-time PCR. Histochemical analysis was performed using HE staining, andWestern
blotting was performed to evaluate signaling transduction pathway. Hemin (4 µM)
significantly increased HO-1 protein expression (p b 0.01) and HO-1 mRNA
expression (p b 0.001). IL-13 significantly increased goblet cells, MUC5AC
protein secretion (p b 0.01) and MUC5AC mRNA (p b 0.001), and these were
decreased by hemin by way of HO-1. Tin protoporphyrin (SnPP)-IX, a HO-1
inhibitor, blocked the effect of hemin restoring MUC5AC protein secretion (p b
0.05) and goblet cell hyperplasia. Hemin decreased the expression of CLCA1 mRNA
(p b 0.05) and it was reversed by SnPP-IX, but could not suppress IL-13-induced
phosphorylation of STAT6 or SAM pointed domain-containing ETS transcription
factor (SPDEF) and Forkhead box A2 (FOXA2) mRNA expression. In summary, HO-1
overexpression suppressed IL-13-induced goblet cell hyperplasia and MUC5AC
production, and involvement of CLCA1 in the mechanism was suggested.

PMID: 26507166  [PubMed - in process]


35. Genes Dev. 2015 Oct 15;29(20):2108-22. doi: 10.1101/gad.268979.115.

Lhx1 functions together with Otx2, Foxa2, and Ldb1 to govern anterior
mesendoderm, node, and midline development.

Costello I(1), Nowotschin S(2), Sun X(1), Mould AW(1), Hadjantonakis AK(2),
Bikoff EK(1), Robertson EJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1
3RE, United Kingdom; (2)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute,
New York, New York 10065, USA.

Gene regulatory networks controlling functional activities of spatially and
temporally distinct endodermal cell populations in the early mouse embryo remain 
ill defined. The T-box transcription factor Eomes, acting downstream from
Nodal/Smad signals, directly activates the LIM domain homeobox transcription
factor Lhx1 in the visceral endoderm. Here we demonstrate Smad4/Eomes-dependent
Lhx1 expression in the epiblast marks the entire definitive endoderm lineage, the
anterior mesendoderm, and midline progenitors. Conditional inactivation of Lhx1
disrupts anterior definitive endoderm development and impedes node and midline
morphogenesis in part due to severe disturbances in visceral endoderm
displacement. Transcriptional profiling and ChIP-seq (chromatin
immunoprecipitation [ChIP] followed by high-throughput sequencing) experiments
identified Lhx1 target genes, including numerous anterior definitive endoderm
markers and components of the Wnt signaling pathway. Interestingly, Lhx1-binding 
sites were enriched at enhancers, including the Nodal-proximal epiblast enhancer 
element and enhancer regions controlling Otx2 and Foxa2 expression. Moreover, in 
proteomic experiments, we characterized a complex comprised of Lhx1, Otx2, and
Foxa2 as well as the chromatin-looping protein Ldb1. These partnerships
cooperatively regulate development of the anterior mesendoderm, node, and midline
cell populations responsible for establishment of the left-right body axis and
head formation.

© 2015 Costello et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4617976
PMID: 26494787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Tumour Biol. 2015 Oct 20. [Epub ahead of print]

Establishment and characterization of a human intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
cell line derived from an Italian patient.

Cavalloni G(1), Peraldo-Neia C(2), Varamo C(3), Casorzo L(4), Dell'Aglio C(5),
Bernabei P(6), Chiorino G(7), Aglietta M(8,)(9), Leone F(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Division, Fondazione del Piemonte per l'Oncologia (FPO),
Candiolo Cancer Institute IRCCS, Strada Provinciale 142, Km 3,95, 10060,
Candiolo, Turin, Italy. giuliana.cavalloni@ircc.it. (2)Medical Oncology Division,
Fondazione del Piemonte per l'Oncologia (FPO), Candiolo Cancer Institute IRCCS,
Strada Provinciale 142, Km 3,95, 10060, Candiolo, Turin, Italy.
caterina.peraldoneia@ircc.it. (3)Department of Oncology, Candiolo Cancer
Institute IRCCS, University of Turin, Strada Provinciale 142, Km 3,95, 10060,
Candiolo, Turin, Italy. chiara.varamo@ircc.it. (4)Unit of Pathology FPO, Candiolo
Cancer Institute IRCCS, Strada Provinciale 142, Km 3,95, 10060, Candiolo, Turin, 
Italy. laura.casorzo@ircc.it. (5)Unit of Pathology FPO, Candiolo Cancer Institute
IRCCS, Strada Provinciale 142, Km 3,95, 10060, Candiolo, Turin, Italy.
carmine.dellaglio@ircc.it. (6)Flow Cytometry Center, (FPO), Candiolo Cancer
Institute IRCCS, Strada Provinciale 142, Km 3,95, 10060, Candiolo, Turin, Italy. 
paola.bernabei@ircc.it. (7)Cancer Genomics Laboratory, Fondazione Edo ed Elvo
Tempia Valenta, Biella, Italy. giovanna.chiorino@gmail.com. (8)Medical Oncology
Division, Fondazione del Piemonte per l'Oncologia (FPO), Candiolo Cancer
Institute IRCCS, Strada Provinciale 142, Km 3,95, 10060, Candiolo, Turin, Italy. 
massimo.aglietta@ircc.it. (9)Department of Oncology, Candiolo Cancer Institute
IRCCS, University of Turin, Strada Provinciale 142, Km 3,95, 10060, Candiolo,
Turin, Italy. massimo.aglietta@ircc.it. (10)Medical Oncology Division, Fondazione
del Piemonte per l'Oncologia (FPO), Candiolo Cancer Institute IRCCS, Strada
Provinciale 142, Km 3,95, 10060, Candiolo, Turin, Italy. francesco.leone@ircc.it.
(11)Department of Oncology, Candiolo Cancer Institute IRCCS, University of Turin,
Strada Provinciale 142, Km 3,95, 10060, Candiolo, Turin, Italy.
francesco.leone@ircc.it.

Biliary tract carcinoma is a rare malignancy with multiple causes, which underlie
the different genetic and molecular profiles. Cancer cell lines are affordable
models, reflecting the characteristics of the tumor of origin. They represent
useful tools to identify molecular targets for treatment. Here, we established
and characterized from biological, molecular, and genetic point of view, an
Italian intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma cell line (ICC), the MT-CHC01. MT-CHC01
cells were isolated from a tumor-derived xenograft. Immunophenotypical
characterization was evaluated both at early and after stabilization passages. In
vitro biological, genetic, and molecular features were also investigated. In vivo
tumorigenicity was assessed in NOD/SCID mice. MT-CHC01cells retain epithelial
cell markers, EPCAM, CK7, and CK19, and some stemness and pluripotency markers,
i.e., SOX2, Nanog, CD49f/integrin-a6, CD24, PDX1, FOXA2, and CD133. They grow as 
a monolayer, with a population double time of about 40 h; they show a low
migration and invasion potential. In low attachment conditions, they are able to 
form spheres and to growth in anchorage-independent manner. After subcutaneous
injection, they retain in vivo tumorigenicity; the expression of biliary markers 
as CA19-9 and CEA were maintained from primary tumor. The karyotype is highly
complex, with a hypotriploid to hypertriploid modal number (3n+/-) (52 to 77
chromosomes); low level of HER2 gene amplification, TP53 deletion, gain of AURKA 
were identified; K-RAS G12D mutation were maintained from primary tumor to
MT-CHC01 cells. We established the first ICC cell line derived from an Italian
patient. It will help to study either the biology of this tumor or to test drugs 
both in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 26486326  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


37. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 12;36(1):50-69. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00861-15.

Hepatic Long Intergenic Noncoding RNAs: High Promoter Conservation and Dynamic,
Sex-Dependent Transcriptional Regulation by Growth Hormone.

Melia T(1), Hao P(1), Yilmaz F(1), Waxman DJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA djw@bu.edu.

Long intergenic noncoding RNAs (lincRNAs) are increasingly recognized as key
chromatin regulators, yet few studies have characterized lincRNAs in a single
tissue under diverse conditions. Here, we analyzed 45 mouse liver RNA sequencing 
(RNA-Seq) data sets collected under diverse conditions to systematically
characterize 4,961 liver lincRNAs, 59% of them novel, with regard to gene
structures, species conservation, chromatin accessibility, transcription factor
binding, and epigenetic states. To investigate the potential for functionality,
we focused on the responses of the liver lincRNAs to growth hormone stimulation, 
which imparts clinically relevant sex differences to hepatic metabolism and liver
disease susceptibility. Sex-biased expression characterized 247 liver lincRNAs,
with many being nuclear RNA enriched and regulated by growth hormone. The
sex-biased lincRNA genes are enriched for nearby and correspondingly sex-biased
accessible chromatin regions, as well as sex-biased binding sites for growth
hormone-regulated transcriptional activators (STAT5, hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 
[HNF6], FOXA1, and FOXA2) and transcriptional repressors (CUX2 and BCL6).
Repression of female-specific lincRNAs in male liver, but not that of
male-specific lincRNAs in female liver, was associated with enrichment of
H3K27me3-associated inactive states and poised (bivalent) enhancer states.
Strikingly, we found that liver-specific lincRNA gene promoters are more highly
species conserved and have a significantly higher frequency of proximal binding
by liver transcription factors than liver-specific protein-coding gene promoters.
Orthologs for many liver lincRNAs were identified in one or more supraprimates,
including two rat lincRNAs showing the same growth hormone-regulated, sex-biased 
expression as their mouse counterparts. This integrative analysis of liver
lincRNA chromatin states, transcription factor occupancy, and growth hormone
regulation provides novel insights into the expression of sex-specific lincRNAs
and their potential for regulation of sex differences in liver physiology and
disease.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4702595 [Available on 2016-06-18]
PMID: 26459762  [PubMed - in process]


38. Front Pharmacol. 2015 Sep 15;6:199. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00199. eCollection
2015.

Systems pharmacology of adiposity reveals inhibition of EP300 as a common
therapeutic mechanism of caloric restriction and resveratrol for obesity.

Nishimura Y(1), Sasagawa S(2), Ariyoshi M(2), Ichikawa S(2), Shimada Y(2),
Kawaguchi K(2), Kawase R(2), Yamamoto R(3), Uehara T(3), Yanai T(3), Takata R(3),
Tanaka T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Pharmacogenomics and
Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Mie 
University Medical Zebrafish Research Center Tsu, Japan ; Department of Systems
Pharmacology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu, Japan ; Department 
of Omics Medicine, Mie University Industrial Technology Innovation Institute Tsu,
Japan ; Department of Bioinformatics, Mie University Life Science Research Center
Tsu, Japan. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology,
Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoinformatics, Mie University Graduate School of
Medicine Tsu, Japan. (3)Product Development Research Institute, Mercian
Corporation Fujisawa, Japan.

Both caloric restriction (CR) and resveratrol (RSV) have beneficial effects on
obesity. However, the biochemical pathways that mediate these beneficial effects 
might be complex and interconnected and have not been fully elucidated. To reveal
the common therapeutic mechanism of CR and RSV, we performed a comparative
transcriptome analysis of adipose tissues from diet-induced obese (DIO) zebrafish
and obese humans. We identified nine genes in DIO zebrafish and seven genes in
obese humans whose expressions were regulated by CR and RSV. Although the gene
lists did not overlap except for one gene, the gene ontologies enriched in the
gene lists were highly overlapped, and included genes involved in adipocyte
differentiation, lipid storage and lipid metabolism. Bioinformatic analysis of
cis-regulatory sequences of these genes revealed that their transcriptional
regulators also overlapped, including EP300, HDAC2, CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and
FOXA2. We also identified 15 and 46 genes that were dysregulated in the adipose
tissue of DIO zebrafish and obese humans, respectively. Bioinformatics analysis
identified EP300, HDAC2, and CEBPB as common transcriptional regulators for these
genes. EP300 is a histone and lysyl acetyltransferase that modulates the function
of histone and various proteins including CEBPB, CEBPD, FOXA1, and FOXA2. We
demonstrated that adiposity in larval zebrafish was significantly reduced by
C646, an inhibitor of EP300 that antagonizes acetyl-CoA. The reduction of
adiposity by C646 was not significantly different from that induced by RSV or
co-treatment of C646 and RSV. These results indicate that the inhibition of EP300
might be a common therapeutic mechanism between CR and RSV in adipose tissues of 
obese individuals.

PMCID: PMC4569862
PMID: 26441656  [PubMed]


39. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2015;135(10):1141-6. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.15-00194.

[Establishment of a Method of Hepatocyte Differentiation from Human Pluripotent
Stem Cells for Innovative Drug Development].

[Article in Japanese]

Takayama K(1).

Author information: 
(1)iPS Cell-based Research Project on Hepatic Toxicity and Metabolism, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University.

Hepatocyte-like cells differentiated from human pluripotent stem cells (such as
human embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells) are
expected to be utilized in drug screening. However, the hepatocyte
differentiation efficiency and hepatic functions of hepatocyte-like cells were
not sufficient to perform ES/iPS cell-based drug discovery. Therefore, we decided
to improve the method of hepatocyte differentiation from human ES/iPS cells. To
enhance this hepatocyte differentiation efficiency, hepatocyte-related
transcription factors, such as forkhead box protein A2 (FOXA2) and hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1a), were overexpressed during the hepatocyte
differentiation process. In addition, to enhance the functions of hepatocyte-like
cells, these cells were cultured in three dimensional (3D) conditions using a
Nanopillar plate. By FOXA2 and HNF1a overexpression, human ES/iPS cells could
efficiently (more than 80%) differentiate into albumin-positive hepatocyte-like
cells. Various hepatic functions, including albumin secretion and drug metabolism
capacities, of the hepatocyte-like cells were significantly enhanced by
performing 3D cell culture. These results suggest that the method of hepatocyte
differentiation could be improved by using gene transfer and 3D cell culture
technologies. We believe that these new hepatocyte-like cells would be useful
tools in drug development.

PMID: 26423870  [PubMed - in process]


40. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Oct 13;5(4):490-8. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.08.014.
Epub 2015 Sep 24.

OCT4 Coordinates with WNT Signaling to Pre-pattern Chromatin at the SOX17 Locus
during Human ES Cell Differentiation into Definitive Endoderm.

Ying L(1), Mills JA(1), French DL(2), Gadue P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapeutics, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Center for Cellular and Molecular
Therapeutics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (3)Center for Cellular and Molecular
Therapeutics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address:
gaduep@email.chop.edu.

We demonstrate that the pluripotency gene OCT4 has a role in regulating
differentiation via Wnt signaling. OCT4 expression levels in human embryonic stem
cells increases transiently during the first 24 hr of in vitro differentiation,
with OCT4 occupancy increasing at endoderm regulators such as SOX17 and FOXA2.
This increased occupancy correlates with loss of the PRC2 complex and the
inhibitory histone mark H3K27me3. Knockdown of OCT4 during differentiation
inhibits mesendoderm formation and removal of the H3K27me3 mark from the SOX17
promoter, suggesting that OCT4 acts to induce removal of the PRC2 complex.
Furthermore, OCT4 and ß-catenin can be co-immunoprecipitated upon
differentiation, and Wnt stimulation is required for the enhanced OCT4 occupancy 
and loss of the PRC2 complex from the SOX17 promoter. In conclusion, our study
reveals that OCT4, a master regulator of pluripotency, may also collaborate with 
Wnt signaling to drive endoderm induction by pre-patterning epigenetic markers on
endodermal promoters.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4624996
PMID: 26411902  [PubMed - in process]


41. Development. 2015 Oct 15;142(20):3519-28. doi: 10.1242/dev.126581. Epub 2015 Sep 
22.

Revising the embryonic origin of thyroid C cells in mice and humans.

Johansson E(1), Andersson L(1), Örnros J(1), Carlsson T(1), Ingeson-Carlsson
C(1), Liang S(1), Dahlberg J(2), Jansson S(2), Parrillo L(3), Zoppoli P(4),
Barila GO(5), Altschuler DL(5), Padula D(6), Lickert H(6), Fagman H(7), Nilsson
M(8).

Author information: 
(1)Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg,
Göteborg SE-40530, Sweden. (2)Department of Surgery, Sahlgrenska University
Hospital, Göteborg, SE-41345, Sweden. (3)IRGS, Biogem, Ariano Irpino (AV), 83031,
Italy. (4)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, 1130 St Nicholas
Avenue, New York, NY 10031, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical
Biology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
(6)Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration Research, Helmholtz Center Munich,
German Research Center for Environmental Health GmgH, Ingolstaedter Landstraße 1,
Munich 85764, Germany. (7)Department of Clinical Pathology and Genetics,
Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Göteborg, SE-41345, Sweden. (8)Sahlgrenska
Cancer Center, Institute of Biomedicine, University of Gothenburg, Göteborg
SE-40530, Sweden mikael.nilsson@gu.se.

Current understanding infers a neural crest origin of thyroid C cells, the major 
source of calcitonin in mammals and ancestors to neuroendocrine thyroid tumors.
The concept is primarily based on investigations in quail-chick chimeras
involving fate mapping of neural crest cells to the ultimobranchial glands that
regulate Ca(2+) homeostasis in birds, reptiles, amphibians and fishes, but
whether mammalian C cell development involves a homologous ontogenetic trajectory
has not been experimentally verified. With lineage tracing, we now provide direct
evidence that Sox17+ anterior endoderm is the only source of differentiated C
cells and their progenitors in mice. Like many gut endoderm derivatives,
embryonic C cells were found to coexpress pioneer factors forkhead box (Fox) a1
and Foxa2 before neuroendocrine differentiation takes place. In the
ultimobranchial body epithelium emerging from pharyngeal pouch endoderm in early 
organogenesis, differential Foxa1/Foxa2 expression distinguished two spatially
separated pools of C cell precursors with different growth properties. A similar 
expression pattern was recapitulated in medullary thyroid carcinoma cells in
vivo, consistent with a growth-promoting role of Foxa1. In contrast to embryonic 
precursor cells, C cell-derived tumor cells invading the stromal compartment
downregulated Foxa2, foregoing epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition designated by
loss of E-cadherin; both Foxa2 and E-cadherin were re-expressed at metastatic
sites. These findings revise mammalian C cell ontogeny, expand the neuroendocrine
repertoire of endoderm and redefine the boundaries of neural crest
diversification. The data further underpin distinct functions of Foxa1 and Foxa2 
in both embryonic and tumor development.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4631767
PMID: 26395490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Genes Dev. 2015 Sep 1;29(17):1850-62. doi: 10.1101/gad.267393.115.

Foxa2 and Cdx2 cooperate with Nkx2-1 to inhibit lung adenocarcinoma metastasis.

Li CM(1), Gocheva V(1), Oudin MJ(1), Bhutkar A(1), Wang SY(1), Date SR(1), Ng
SR(1), Whittaker CA(1), Bronson RT(2), Snyder EL(3), Gertler FB(1), Jacks T(4).

Author information: 
(1)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Department of
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
USA; (2)Department of Pathology, Tufts University School of Medicine and
Veterinary Medicine, North Grafton, Massachusetts 01536, USA; (3)Department of
Pathology, School of Medicine, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA; Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine,
University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA; 
(4)David H. Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research, Department of
Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139,
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Despite the fact that the majority of lung cancer deaths are due to metastasis,
the molecular mechanisms driving metastatic progression are poorly understood.
Here, we present evidence that loss of Foxa2 and Cdx2 synergizes with loss of
Nkx2-1 to fully activate the metastatic program. These three lineage-specific
transcription factors are consistently down-regulated in metastatic cells
compared with nonmetastatic cells. Knockdown of these three factors acts
synergistically and is sufficient to promote the metastatic potential of
nonmetastatic cells to that of naturally arising metastatic cells in vivo.
Furthermore, silencing of these three transcription factors is sufficient to
account for a significant fraction of the gene expression differences between the
nonmetastatic and metastatic states in lung adenocarcinoma, including
up-regulated expression of the invadopodia component Tks5long, the embryonal
proto-oncogene Hmga2, and the epithelial-to-mesenchymal mediator Snail. Finally, 
analyses of tumors from a genetically engineered mouse model and patients show
that low expression of Nkx2-1, Foxa2, and Cdx2 strongly correlates with more
advanced tumors and worse survival. Our findings reveal that a large part of the 
complex transcriptional network in metastasis can be controlled by a small number
of regulatory nodes that function redundantly, and loss of multiple nodes is
required to fully activate the metastatic program.

© 2015 Li et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4573857
PMID: 26341558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2015 Sep;153(2):465-74. doi: 10.1007/s10549-015-3553-6. 
Epub 2015 Aug 23.

FOXA2 mRNA expression is associated with relapse in patients with
Triple-Negative/Basal-like breast carcinoma.

Perez-Balaguer A(1), Ortiz-Martínez F, García-Martínez A, Pomares-Navarro C,
Lerma E, Peiró G.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit, Hospital General Universitari d'Alacant, C/Pintor Baeza 12,
03010, Alacant, Spain, arperez@ibecbarcelona.eu.

The FOXA family of transcription factors regulates chromatin structure and gene
expression especially during embryonic development. In normal breast tissue FOXA1
acts throughout mammary development; whereas in breast carcinoma its expression
promotes luminal phenotype and correlates with good prognosis. However, the role 
of FOXA2 has not been previously studied in breast cancer. Our purpose was to
analyze the expression of FOXA2 in breast cancer cells, to explore its role in
breast cancer stem cells, and to correlate its mRNA expression with
clinicopathological features and outcome in a series of patients diagnosed with
breast carcinoma. We analyzed FOXA2 mRNA expression in a retrospective cohort of 
230 breast cancer patients and in cell lines. We also knocked down FOXA2 mRNA
expression by siRNA to determine the impact on cell proliferation and
mammospheres formation using a cancer stem cells culture assay. In vitro studies 
demonstrated higher FOXA2 mRNA expression in Triple-Negative/Basal-like cells.
Further, when it was knocked down, cells decreased proliferation and its
capability of forming mammospheres. Similarly, FOXA2 mRNA expression was detected
in 10% (23/230) of the tumors, especially in Triple-Negative/Basal-like phenotype
(p < 0.001, Fisher's test). Patients whose tumors expressed FOXA2 had increased
relapses (59 vs. 79%, p = 0.024, log-rank test) that revealed an independent
prognostic value (HR = 3.29, C.I.95% = 1.45-7.45, p = 0.004, Cox regression). Our
results suggest that FOXA2 promotes cell proliferation, maintains cancer stem
cells, favors the development of Triple-Negative/Basal-like tumors, and is
associated with increase relapses.

PMID: 26298189  [PubMed - in process]


44. Development. 2015 Sep 15;142(18):3151-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.123547. Epub 2015 Aug 
20.

Defining the three cell lineages of the human blastocyst by single-cell RNA-seq.

Blakeley P(1), Fogarty NM(1), del Valle I(1), Wamaitha SE(1), Hu TX(2), Elder
K(3), Snell P(3), Christie L(3), Robson P(4), Niakan KK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Human Embryology and Stem Cell Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, Mill
Hill Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, UK. (2)Genome Institute of Singapore, A-STAR,
Singapore 138672, Singapore MRC Functional Genomics Unit, Department of
Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK.
(3)Bourn Hall Clinic, Bourn, Cambridge CB23 2TN, UK. (4)Genome Institute of
Singapore, A-STAR, Singapore 138672, Singapore The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic
Medicine, Farmington, CT 06030, USA. (5)Human Embryology and Stem Cell
Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, Mill Hill Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, UK
kathy.niakan@crick.ac.uk.

Erratum in
    Development. 2015 Oct 15;142(20):3613.

Here, we provide fundamental insights into early human development by single-cell
RNA-sequencing of human and mouse preimplantation embryos. We elucidate conserved
transcriptional programs along with those that are human specific. Importantly,
we validate our RNA-sequencing findings at the protein level, which further
reveals differences in human and mouse embryo gene expression. For example, we
identify several genes exclusively expressed in the human pluripotent epiblast,
including the transcription factor KLF17. Key components of the TGF-ß signalling 
pathway, including NODAL, GDF3, TGFBR1/ALK5, LEFTY1, SMAD2, SMAD4 and TDGF1, are 
also enriched in the human epiblast. Intriguingly, inhibition of TGF-ß signalling
abrogates NANOG expression in human epiblast cells, consistent with a requirement
for this pathway in pluripotency. Although the key trophectoderm factors Id2,
Elf5 and Eomes are exclusively localized to this lineage in the mouse, the human 
orthologues are either absent or expressed in alternative lineages. Importantly, 
we also identify genes with conserved expression dynamics, including Foxa2/FOXA2,
which we show is restricted to the primitive endoderm in both human and mouse
embryos. Comparison of the human epiblast to existing embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) reveals conservation of pluripotency but also additional pathways more
enriched in hESCs. Our analysis highlights significant differences in human
preimplantation development compared with mouse and provides a molecular
blueprint to understand human embryogenesis and its relationship to stem cells.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4582176
PMID: 26293300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Sep 1;112(35):E4929-38. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1503911112. Epub 2015 Aug 17.

Transcription factors FOXA1 and FOXA2 maintain dopaminergic neuronal properties
and control feeding behavior in adult mice.

Pristerà A(1), Lin W(1), Kaufmann AK(2), Brimblecombe KR(3), Threlfell S(4),
Dodson PD(5), Magill PJ(5), Fernandes C(6), Cragg SJ(4), Ang SL(7).

Author information: 
(1)The Francis Crick Institute Mill Hill Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, United
Kingdom; (2)Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics Unit, Department of
Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TH, United Kingdom; (3)Department
of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, United
Kingdom; (4)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of Oxford,
Oxford OX1 3QX, United Kingdom; Oxford Parkinson's Disease Centre, University of 
Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PT, United Kingdom; (5)Medical Research Council Brain Network
Dynamics Unit, Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3TH, 
United Kingdom; Oxford Parkinson's Disease Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford
OX1 3PT, United Kingdom; (6)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, 
Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College London,
London SE5 8AF, United Kingdom. (7)The Francis Crick Institute Mill Hill
Laboratory, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom; siew-lan.ang@crick.ac.uk.

Midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons are implicated in cognitive functions,
neuropsychiatric disorders, and pathological conditions; hence understanding
genes regulating their homeostasis has medical relevance. Transcription factors
FOXA1 and FOXA2 (FOXA1/2) are key determinants of mDA neuronal identity during
development, but their roles in adult mDA neurons are unknown. We used a
conditional knockout strategy to specifically ablate FOXA1/2 in mDA neurons of
adult mice. We show that deletion of Foxa1/2 results in down-regulation of
tyrosine hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme of dopamine (DA) biosynthesis,
specifically in dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc).
In addition, DA synthesis and striatal DA transmission were reduced after Foxa1/2
deletion. Furthermore, the burst-firing activity characteristic of SNc mDA
neurons was drastically reduced in the absence of FOXA1/2. These molecular and
functional alterations lead to a severe feeding deficit in adult Foxa1/2 mutant
mice, independently of motor control, which could be rescued by L-DOPA treatment.
FOXA1/2 therefore control the maintenance of molecular and physiological
properties of SNc mDA neurons and impact on feeding behavior in adult mice.

PMCID: PMC4568236
PMID: 26283356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 30;5:12622. doi: 10.1038/srep12622.

Selective Generation of Dopaminergic Precursors from Mouse Fibroblasts by Direct 
Lineage Conversion.

Tian C(1), Li Y(1), Huang Y(1), Wang Y(2), Chen D(3), Liu J(4), Deng X(5), Sun
L(6), Anderson K(2), Qi X(5), Li Y(4), Mosley RL(2), Chen X(3), Huang J(7), Zheng
JC(8).

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for Translational Neurodegeneration and Regenerative Therapy,
Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital affiliated to Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200072, China [2] Department of Pharmacology and Experimental 
Neuroscience [3] University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.
(2)1] Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience [2] University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. (3)Department of Nephrology,
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, P. R. China. (4)1] Department of
Emergency Medicine [2] University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198,
USA. (5)Center for Translational Neurodegeneration and Regenerative Therapy,
Shanghai Tenth People's Hospital affiliated to Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200072, China. (6)1] Department of Pathology and Microbiology 
[2] University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA. (7)Chinese
National Human Genome Center at Shanghai, Shanghai 201203, P.R. China. (8)1]
Center for Translational Neurodegeneration and Regenerative Therapy, Shanghai
Tenth People's Hospital affiliated to Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200072, China [2] Department of Pharmacology and Experimental
Neuroscience [3] Department of Pathology and Microbiology [4] University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.

Degeneration of midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neurons is a key pathological event of
Parkinson's disease (PD). Limited adult dopaminergic neurogenesis has led to
novel therapeutic strategies such as transplantation of dopaminergic precursors
(DPs). However, this strategy is currently restrained by a lack of cell source,
the tendency for the DPs to become a glial-restricted state, and the tumor
formation after transplantation. Here, we demonstrate the direct conversion of
mouse fibroblasts into induced DPs (iDPs) by ectopic expression of Brn2, Sox2 and
Foxa2. Besides expression with neural progenitor markers and midbrain genes
including Corin, Otx2 and Lmx1a, the iDPs were restricted to dopaminergic
neuronal lineage upon differentiation. After transplantation into MPTP-lesioned
mice, iDPs differentiated into DA neurons, functionally alleviated the motor
deficits, and reduced the loss of striatal DA neuronal axonal termini.
Importantly, no iDPs-derived astrocytes and neoplasia were detected in mouse
brains after transplantation. We propose that the iDPs from direct reprogramming 
provides a safe and efficient cell source for PD treatment.

PMCID: PMC4519786
PMID: 26224135  [PubMed - in process]


47. Mol Psychiatry. 2016 Jan;21(1):62-70. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.101. Epub 2015 Jul 28.

Direct conversion of human fibroblasts to induced serotonergic neurons.

Xu Z(1,)(2,)(3), Jiang H(2,)(3), Zhong P(2,)(3), Yan Z(2,)(3), Chen S(1), Feng
J(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Institute of Neurology, Ruijin Hospital affiliated
to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (2)Veterans
Affairs Western New York Healthcare System, Buffalo, NY, USA. (3)Department of
Physiology and Biophysics, State University of New York at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, 
USA.

Serotonergic (5HT) neurons exert diverse and widespread functions in the brain.
Dysfunction of the serotonergic system gives rise to a variety of mental
illnesses including depression, anxiety, obsessive compulsive disorder, autism
and eating disorders. Here we show that human primary fibroblasts were directly
converted to induced serotonergic (i5HT) neurons by the expression of Ascl1,
Foxa2, Lmx1b and FEV. The transdifferentiation was enhanced by p53 knockdown and 
appropriate culture conditions including hypoxia. The i5HT neurons expressed
markers for mature serotonergic neurons, had Ca(2+)-dependent 5HT release and
selective 5HT uptake, exhibited spontaneous action potentials and spontaneous
excitatory postsynaptic currents. Application of serotonin significantly
increased the firing rate of spontaneous action potentials, demonstrating the
functional utility of i5HT neurons for studying serotonergic neurotransmission.
The availability of human i5HT neurons will be very useful for research and drug 
discovery on many serotonin-related mental disorders.

PMCID: PMC4518549 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26216300  [PubMed - in process]


48. Int J Dev Biol. 2015;59(10-11-12):479-485.

Conditional pulmonary over-expression of Claudin 6 during embryogenesis delays
lung morphogenesis.

Jimenez FR(1), Belgique ST, Lewis JB, Albright SA, Jones CM, Howell BM, Mika AP, 
Jergensen TR, Gassman JR, Morris RJ, Arroyo JA, Reynolds PR.

Author information: 
(1)Lung and Placenta Research Laboratory, Brigham Young University, Physiology
and Developmental Biology, Provo, Utah, USA.

Claudin 6 (Cldn6) is a tetraspanin protein expressed by barrier epithelial cells.
In order to assess the effects of persistent tight junctions involving Cldn6
during lung development, a doxycycline (dox)-inducible conditional transgenic
mouse was generated that up-regulates Cldn6 in the distal lung. Pups had
unlimited access to dox from conception until sacrifice date at embryonic day (E)
18.5. Quantitative PCR, immunoblotting, and immunohistochemistry revealed
significantly elevated Cldn6 expression in transgenic mice compared to
non-transgenic controls. There were no differences in terms of lung size, lung
weight, or whole body weight at the time of necropsy. Histological evaluations
led to the discovery that E18.5 Cldn6 transgenic pups appeared to be in the early
canalicular stage of development coincident with fewer, thickened respiratory
airspaces. In contrast, controls appeared to have entered the saccular stage
characterized by thin airspace walls and spherical architecture. Immunostaining
for transcriptional regulators including TTF-1 and FoxA2 was conducted to assess 
cell differentiation and specific cell types were identified via staining for
pro-surfactant protein C (alveolar type II epithelial cells) or Clara Cell
Secretory Protein (cub or Clara cells). Lastly, cell turnover was qualitatively
measured via staining for cell proliferation or apoptosis. These data suggest
that Cldn6 is an important junctional protein potentially involved in the
programming of epithelial cells during lung development. Furthermore, genetic
down-regulation of Cldn6 as development proceeds may influence differentiation
observed in the transition from the canalicular to the saccular lung.

PMID: 26198145  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


49. Yonago Acta Med. 2015 Mar;58(1):15-22. Epub 2015 Mar 27.

P19 Cells Overexpressing Lhx1 Differentiate into the Definitive Endoderm by
Recapitulating an Embryonic Developmental Pathway.

Hasegawa A(1), Shirayoshi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regenerative Medicine and Therapeutics, Department of Genetic
Medicine and Regenerative Therapeutics, Institute of Regenerative Medicine and
Biofunction, Tottori University Graduate School of Medical Science, Yonago
683-8503, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epiblasts occur at the last pluripotent stage of embryonic
development and are important in elucidating how the three germ layers are
formed. However, little is known of the molecular mechanisms of their
development. We have shown that LIM homeobox 1 (Lhx1) was involved in epiblast
development in embryonic stem cells, especially meso- and endodermal
differentiation. However, since epiblasts in embryoid bodies spontaneously
develop into a further stage, it is difficult to study their development in this 
system.
METHODS: Mouse embryonal carcinoma P19 cells which have properties similar to
those of epiblasts provided new avenues of investigation into the regulatory
mechanism of epiblasts.
RESULTS: Overexpression of Lhx1 in P19 cells induced expression of organizer
marker genes (Cer1, Gsc) and endoderm marker genes (Gata6, Foxa2, Sox17) but not 
extra-embryonic endoderm marker genes (Sox7 or Hnf4alpha).
CONCLUSION: This study suggested that Lhx1 overexpression caused P19 cells to
differentiate into an endodermal lineage. Thus, P19 cells and their derivatives
can be a useful model system to study how the three germ layers are formed.

PMCID: PMC4502295
PMID: 26190893  [PubMed]


50. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2015 Sep;68:131-42. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2015.07.002. Epub 2015 
Jul 9.

Excessive Wnt/beta-catenin signaling promotes midbrain floor plate neurogenesis, 
but results in vacillating dopamine progenitors.

Nouri N(1), Patel MJ(2), Joksimovic M(3), Poulin JF(4), Anderegg A(5), Taketo
MM(6), Ma YC(7), Awatramani R(8).

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University, Feinberg Medical School, Department of Neurology and 
Center for Genetic Medicine, 7-113 Lurie Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA. Electronic address: navidnouri2015@u.northwestern.edu.
(2)Northwestern University, Feinberg Medical School, Department of Neurology and 
Center for Genetic Medicine, 7-113 Lurie Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA; Committee on Neurobiology, University of Chicago, 924 E 57th St.
R222, Chicago, IL 60637, USA. Electronic address: meerapatel@uchicago.edu.
(3)Northwestern University, Feinberg Medical School, Department of Neurology and 
Center for Genetic Medicine, 7-113 Lurie Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago,
IL 60611, USA. Electronic address: milanjok@hotmail.com. (4)Northwestern
University, Feinberg Medical School, Department of Neurology and Center for
Genetic Medicine, 7-113 Lurie Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago, IL 60611,
USA. Electronic address: j-poulin@northwestern.edu. (5)Northwestern University,
Feinberg Medical School, Department of Neurology and Center for Genetic Medicine,
7-113 Lurie Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic
address: angela.anderegg@gmail.com. (6)Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-Konoé-cho, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. Electronic address: 
taketo@mfour.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp. (7)Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Children's Hospital of Chicago Research
Center, 2430 North Halsted Street, Room C321, Chicago, IL 60614, USA. Electronic 
address: ma@northwestern.edu. (8)Northwestern University, Feinberg Medical
School, Department of Neurology and Center for Genetic Medicine, 7-113 Lurie
Bldg., 303 E Superior Street, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. Electronic address:
r-awatramani@northwestern.edu.

The floor plate (FP), a ventral midline structure of the developing neural tube, 
has differential neurogenic capabilities along the anterior-posterior axis. The
midbrain FP, unlike the hindbrain and spinal cord floor plate, is highly
neurogenic and produces midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons. Canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, at least in part, is thought to account for the
difference in neurogenic capability. Removal of beta-catenin results in mDA
progenitor specification defects as well as a profound reduction of neurogenesis.
To examine the effects of excessive Wnt/beta-catenin signaling on mDA
specification and neurogenesis, we have analyzed a model wherein beta-catenin is 
conditionally stabilized in the Shh+domain. Here, we show that the Foxa2+/Lmx1a+ 
domain is extended rostrally in mutant embryos, suggesting that canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling can drive FP expansion along the rostrocaudal axis.
Although excess canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling generally promotes
neurogenesis at midbrain levels, less tyrosine hydroxylase (Th)+, mDA neurons are
generated, particularly impacting the Substantia Nigra pars compacta. This is
likely because of improper progenitor specification. Excess canonical
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling causes downregulation of net Lmx1b, Shh and Foxa2
levels in mDA progenitors. Moreover, these progenitors assume a mixed identity to
that of Lmx1a+/Lmx1b+/Nkx6-1+/Neurog1+ progenitors. We also show by lineage
tracing analysis that normally, Neurog1+ progenitors predominantly give rise to
Pou4f1+ neurons, but not Th+ neurons. Accordingly, in the mutant embryos,
Neurog1+ progenitors at the midline generate ectopic Pou4f1+ neurons at the
expense of Th+ mDA neurons. Our study suggests that an optimal dose of
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is critical for proper establishment of the mDA
progenitor character. Our findings will impact embryonic stem cell protocols that
utilize Wnt pathway reagents to derive mDA neuron models and therapeutics for
Parkinson's disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4633300 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26164566  [PubMed - in process]


51. J Nutr Sci. 2015 May 20;4:e22. doi: 10.1017/jns.2015.11. eCollection 2015.

Lipid-rich diet enhances L-cell density in obese subjects and in mice through
improved L-cell differentiation.

Aranias T(1), Grosfeld A(2), Poitou C(3), Omar AA(1), Le Gall M(4), Miquel S(5), 
Garbin K(1), Ribeiro A(2), Bouillot JL(6), Bado A(7), Brot-Laroche E(2), Clément 
K(3), Leturque A(2), Guilmeau S(8), Serradas P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm UMR_S 1138 , Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers ; Sorbonne universités 
, UPMC Univ Paris 06 ; Sorbonne Cités , UPD Univ Paris 05 ; F-75006 , Paris ,
France. (2)Inserm UMR_S 1138 , Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers ; Sorbonne
universités , UPMC Univ Paris 06 ; Sorbonne Cités , UPD Univ Paris 05 ; F-75006 ,
Paris , France ; Institut de Cardiométabolisme et Nutrition , ICAN ,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital , Paris , France. (3)Institut de Cardiométabolisme et 
Nutrition , ICAN , Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital , Paris , France ; Sorbonne
universités , UPMC Univ Paris 06 , UMR_S ICAN U1166; Inserm; Nutriomic Team ,
F-75013 , Paris , France ; Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris ,
Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital , Heart and Metabolism Department , Nutrition Unit ,
47-83 Boulevard de l'Hôpital , 75651 Paris Cedex 13 , France. (4)Inserm UMR_S
1138 , Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers ; Sorbonne universités , UPMC Univ
Paris 06 ; Sorbonne Cités , UPD Univ Paris 05 ; F-75006 , Paris , France ; Inserm
UMR_S 1149 , DHU Unity , UFR de Médecine Paris Diderot ; Sorbonne Cités , UPD
Univ Paris 05 , F-75890 , Paris , France. (5)INRA UMR 1319 Micalis , Interactions
des Commensales et Probiotiques avec l'Hôte , F-78350 Jouy-en-Josas , France ;
AgroParisTech , UMR 1319 Micalis , F-78350 Jouy-en-Josas , France. (6)Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris , Surgery Department , Ambroise Paré Hospital ,
Boulogne-Billancourt , France. (7)Inserm UMR_S 1149 , DHU Unity , UFR de Médecine
Paris Diderot ; Sorbonne Cités , UPD Univ Paris 05 , F-75890 , Paris , France.
(8)Inserm UMR_S 1149 , DHU Unity , UFR de Médecine Paris Diderot ; Sorbonne Cités
, UPD Univ Paris 05 , F-75890 , Paris , France ; Institut Cochin , Inserm UMR_S
1016 , CNRS UMR 8104 , Sorbonne Cités , UPD Univ Paris 05 ; Endocrinology ,
Metabolism and Diabetes Department , F-75014; Paris , France.

The enterohormone glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) is required to amplify
glucose-induced insulin secretion that facilitates peripheral glucose
utilisation. Alteration in GLP-1 secretion during obesity has been reported but
is still controversial. Due to the high adaptability of intestinal cells to
environmental changes, we hypothesised that the density of GLP-1-producing cells 
could be modified by nutritional factors to prevent the deterioration of
metabolic condition in obesity. We quantified L-cell density in jejunum samples
collected during Roux-en-Y gastric bypass in forty-nine severely obese subjects
analysed according to their fat consumption. In mice, we deciphered the
mechanisms by which a high-fat diet (HFD) makes an impact on enteroendocrine cell
density and function. L-cell density in the jejunum was higher in obese subjects 
consuming >30 % fat compared with low fat eaters. Mice fed a HFD for 8 weeks
displayed an increase in GLP-1-positive cells in the jejunum and colon
accordingly to GLP-1 secretion. The regulation by the HFD appears specific to
GLP-1-producing cells, as the number of PYY (peptide YY)-positive cells remained 
unchanged. Moreover, genetically obese ob/ob mice did not show alteration of
GLP-1-positive cell density in the jejunum or colon, suggesting that obesity per 
se is not sufficient to trigger the mechanism. The higher L-cell density in
HFD-fed mice involved a rise in L-cell terminal differentiation as witnessed by
the increased expression of transcription factors downstream of neurogenin3
(Ngn3). We suggest that the observed increase in GLP-1-positive cell density
triggered by high fat consumption in humans and mice might favour insulin
secretion and therefore constitute an adaptive response of the intestine to
balance diet-induced insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC4459237
PMID: 26157580  [PubMed]


52. Reprod Sci. 2015 Sep;22(9):1060-72. doi: 10.1177/1933719115592709. Epub 2015 Jun 
30.

Integrative Analysis Reveals Regulatory Programs in Endometriosis.

Yang H(1), Kang K(2), Cheng C(3), Mamillapalli R(4), Taylor HS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA Department of Gynecology, Minimally Invasive
Gynecology Center, Beijing Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China. (2)Department of Gynecology, Minimally Invasive
Gynecology Center, Beijing Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China. (3)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine 
at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH, USA. (4)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and
Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
ramana.mamillapalli@yale.edu. (5)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and
Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

Endometriosis is a common gynecological disease found in approximately 10% of
reproductive-age women. Gene expression analysis has been performed to explore
alterations in gene expression associated with endometriosis; however, the
underlying transcription factors (TFs) governing such expression changes have not
been investigated in a systematic way. In this study, we propose a method to
integrate gene expression with TF binding data and protein-protein interactions
to construct an integrated regulatory network (IRN) for endometriosis. The IRN
has shown that the most regulated gene in endometriosis is RUNX1, which is
targeted by 14 of 26 TFs also involved in endometriosis. Using 2 published
cohorts, GSE7305 (Hover, n = 20) and GSE7307 (Roth, n = 36) from the Gene
Expression Omnibus database, we identified a network of TFs, which bind to target
genes that are differentially expressed in endometriosis. Enrichment analysis
based on the hypergeometric distribution allowed us to predict the TFs involved
in endometriosis (n = 40). This included known TFs such as androgen receptor (AR)
and critical factors in the pathology of endometriosis, estrogen receptor a, and 
estrogen receptor ß. We also identified several new ones from which we selected
FOXA2 and TFAP2C, and their regulation was confirmed by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Further, our analysis
revealed that the function of AR and p53 in endometriosis is regulated by
posttranscriptional changes and not by differential gene expression. Our
integrative analysis provides new insights into the regulatory programs involved 
in endometriosis.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26134036  [PubMed - in process]


53. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Dec;116(12):2980-91. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25256.

Zdhhc15b Regulates Differentiation of Diencephalic Dopaminergic Neurons in
zebrafish.

Wang F(1), Chen X(2), Shi W(1), Yao L(1), Gao M(3), Yang Y(4), Hao A(1).

Author information: 
(1)KeyLaboratory of the Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory
of Mental Department of Histology Embryology, Shandong University School of
Medicine, No. 44 Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, PR China. (2)Center of 
Medical Physics and Technology, Hefei Institutes of Physical Science, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, No. 350, Shushan Hu Road, Hefei, AnHui, 230031, PR China.
(3)Reproductive medical center of Shandong University, Shandong University School
of Medicine, No. 44, Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, PR China.
(4)Infertility Center, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University School of Medicine, No.
44, Wenhua Xi Road, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, PR China.

The aspartate-histidine-histidine-cysteine (DHHC) protein family shares a
50-amino acid cysteine-rich domain with a conserved DHHC signature motif. DHHC
proteins play a critical role in several biological processes. Several DHHC
family members have been implicated in neuronal differentiation and synaptic
plasticity. And disruptions to their function can lead to disease in the nervous 
system. Here, we investigate the role of Zdhhc15b, a DHHC family member, in neuro
development in zebrafish. Whole-mount in situ hybridization (WISH) revealed that 
zdhhc15b, an ortholog to human ZDHHC15, is abundant in zebrafish (Danio rerio)
forebrain, especially in the diencephalon. Downregulation of zdhhc15b resulted in
a smaller diencephalon and a reduction in mature dopaminergic neurons (DA
neurons). In the meanshile, mutant zdhhc15b zebrafish was associated with poor
learning behavior as detected by T-maze testing. The expression of zdhhc15b was
upregulated during DA neuronal differentiation whereas knock-down of zdhhc15b
diminished DA neuronal differentiation. Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)
immunofluorescence of cultured DA neurons in vitro also showed that DA neurons
were immature following zdhhc15b knock-down. Consistent with the decreased number
of DA neurons following knock-down of zdhhc15b, the expression of fate
determination-related transcription factors such as nurr1, foxA2, and lmx1a were 
also reduced in morphant zebrafish. Our results reveal that zdhhc15b controls DA 
neuronal fate decisions by regulating differentiation but not progenitor cell
proliferation or DA neuronal survival.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26095893  [PubMed - in process]


54. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Aug 7;463(4):961-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.06.042. Epub 2015 Jun 18.

Transcription factor FOXA2-centered transcriptional regulation network in
non-small cell lung cancer.

Jang SM(1), An JH(1), Kim CH(1), Kim JW(2), Choi KH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Republic of
Korea. (2)Department of Life Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: jungkim@cau.ac.kr. (3)Department of Life
Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea. Electronic
address: khchoi@cau.ac.kr.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-mediated death. Although various
therapeutic approaches are used for lung cancer treatment, these mainly target
the tumor suppressor p53 transcription factor, which is involved in apoptosis and
cell cycle arrest. However, p53-targeted therapies have limited application in
lung cancer, since p53 is found to be mutated in more than half of lung cancers. 
In this study, we propose tumor suppressor FOXA2 as an alternative target protein
for therapies against lung cancer and reveal a possible FOXA2-centered
transcriptional regulation network by identifying new target genes and binding
partners of FOXA2 by using various screening techniques. The genes encoding
Glu/Asp-rich carboxy-terminal domain 2 (CITED2), nuclear receptor subfamily 0,
group B, member 2 (NR0B2), cell adhesion molecule 1 (CADM1) and BCL2-associated X
protein (BAX) were identified as putative target genes of FOXA2. Additionally,
the proteins including highly similar to heat shock protein HSP 90-beta (HSP90A),
heat shock 70 kDa protein 1A variant (HSPA1A), histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) and 
HDAC3 were identified as novel interacting partners of FOXA2. Moreover, we showed
that FOXA2-dependent promoter activation of BAX and p21 genes is significantly
reduced via physical interactions between the identified binding partners and
FOXA2. These results provide opportunities to understand the FOXA2-centered
transcriptional regulation network and novel therapeutic targets to modulate this
network in p53-deficient lung cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26093302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jul 10;290(28):17401-14. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.629808. Epub
2015 May 28.

Generation of Dopamine Neurons from Rodent Fibroblasts through the Expandable
Neural Precursor Cell Stage.

Lim MS(1), Chang MY(2), Kim SM(3), Yi SH(2), Suh-Kim H(4), Jung SJ(5), Kim MJ(5),
Kim JH(6), Lee YS(7), Lee SY(8), Kim DW(9), Lee SH(10), Park CH(11).

Author information: 
(1)From the Graduate School of Biomedical Science and Engineering, the Hanyang
Biomedical Research Institute, the Departments of Microbiology. (2)the Hanyang
Biomedical Research Institute, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of
Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea. (3)the Department of
Biomedical Science, Graduate School, and. (4)the Department of Anatomy and Brain 
Disease Research Center, College of Medicine, Ajou University, Suwon 443-749,
Korea, and. (5)the Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, Physiology, and.
(6)From the Graduate School of Biomedical Science and Engineering, the Hanyang
Biomedical Research Institute, Physiology, and. (7)From the Graduate School of
Biomedical Science and Engineering, the Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute,
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University,
Seoul 133-791, Korea. (8)the Departments of Microbiology. (9)the Department of
Physiology and Cell Therapy Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 
120-752, Korea. (10)the Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea,
leesh@hanyang.ac.kr. (11)From the Graduate School of Biomedical Science and
Engineering, the Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, the Departments of
Microbiology, chshpark@hanyang.ac.kr.

Recent groundbreaking work has demonstrated that combined expression of the
transcription factors Brn2, Ascl1, and Myt1L (BAM; also known as Wernig factors) 
convert mouse fibroblasts into postmitotic neuronal cells. However, questions
remain regarding whether trans-conversion is achieved directly or involves an
intermediary precursor stage. Trans-conversion toward expandable neural precursor
cells (NPCs) is more useful than direct one-step neuron formation with respect to
yielding a sufficient number of cells and the feasibility of manipulating NPC
differentiation toward certain neuron subtypes. Here, we show that co-expression 
of Wernig factors and Bcl-xL induces fibroblast conversion into NPCs (induced
NPCs (iNPCs)) that are highly expandable for >100 passages. Gene expression
analyses showed that the iNPCs exhibited high expression of common NPC genes but 
not genes specific to defined embryonic brain regions. This finding indicated
that a regional identity of iNPCs was not established. Upon induction, iNPCs
predominantly differentiated into astrocytes. However, the differentiation
potential was not fixed and could be efficiently manipulated into general or
specific subtypes of neurons by expression of additional genes. Specifically,
overexpression of Nurr1 and Foxa2, transcription factors specific for midbrain
dopamine neuron development, drove iNPCs to yield mature midbrain dopamine
neurons equipped with presynaptic DA neuronal functions. We further assessed the 
therapeutic potential of iNPCs in Parkinson disease model rats.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4498077 [Available on 2016-07-10]
PMID: 26023233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Diabetologia. 2015 Aug;58(8):1836-44. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3635-3. Epub 2015
May 29.

The FOXP1, FOXP2 and FOXP4 transcription factors are required for islet alpha
cell proliferation and function in mice.

Spaeth JM(1), Hunter CS, Bonatakis L, Guo M, French CA, Slack I, Hara M, Fisher
SE, Ferrer J, Morrisey EE, Stanger BZ, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, 723 Light Hall, 2215 Garland Avenue, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Several forkhead box (FOX) transcription factor family members
have important roles in controlling pancreatic cell fates and maintaining beta
cell mass and function, including FOXA1, FOXA2 and FOXM1. In this study we have
examined the importance of FOXP1, FOXP2 and FOXP4 of the FOXP subfamily in islet 
cell development and function.
METHODS: Mice harbouring floxed alleles for Foxp1, Foxp2 and Foxp4 were crossed
with pan-endocrine Pax6-Cre transgenic mice to generate single and compound Foxp 
mutant mice. Mice were monitored for changes in glucose tolerance by IPGTT, serum
insulin and glucagon levels by radioimmunoassay, and endocrine cell development
and proliferation by immunohistochemistry. Gene expression and glucose-stimulated
hormone secretion experiments were performed with isolated islets.
RESULTS: Only the triple-compound Foxp1/2/4 conditional knockout (cKO) mutant had
an overt islet phenotype, manifested physiologically by hypoglycaemia and
hypoglucagonaemia. This resulted from the reduction in glucagon-secreting alpha
cell mass and function. The proliferation of alpha cells was profoundly reduced
in Foxp1/2/4 cKO islets through the effects on mediators of replication (i.e.
decreased Ccna2, Ccnb1 and Ccnd2 activators, and increased Cdkn1a inhibitor).
Adult islet Foxp1/2/4 cKO beta cells secrete insulin normally while the remaining
alpha cells have impaired glucagon secretion.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Collectively, these findings reveal an important role
for the FOXP1, 2, and 4 proteins in governing postnatal alpha cell expansion and 
function.

PMCID: PMC4785827
PMID: 26021489  [PubMed - in process]


57. Exp Gerontol. 2015 Sep;69:9-19. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2015.05.009. Epub 2015 May
21.

Aging impairs the hepatic subcellular distribution of ChREBP in response to
fasting/feeding in rats: Implications on hepatic steatosis.

Salamanca A(1), Bárcena B(1), Arribas C(1), Fernández-Agulló T(2), Martínez C(2),
Carrascosa JM(3), Ros M(2), Andrés A(4), Gallardo N(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Section, Faculty of Chemistry (Ciudad Real) and Faculty of
Biochemistry and Environmental Sciences (Toledo), Regional Centre for Biomedical 
Research (CRIB), University of Castilla-La Mancha, Ciudad Real/Toledo, Spain.
(2)Health Sciences Faculty, University Rey Juan Carlos, Alcorcón, Madrid, Spain. 
(3)Centre of Molecular Biology "Severo Ochoa", Autonomous University, Madrid,
Spain. (4)Biochemistry Section, Faculty of Chemistry (Ciudad Real) and Faculty of
Biochemistry and Environmental Sciences (Toledo), Regional Centre for Biomedical 
Research (CRIB), University of Castilla-La Mancha, Ciudad Real/Toledo, Spain.
Electronic address: antonio.andres@uclm.es. (5)Biochemistry Section, Faculty of
Chemistry (Ciudad Real) and Faculty of Biochemistry and Environmental Sciences
(Toledo), Regional Centre for Biomedical Research (CRIB), University of
Castilla-La Mancha, Ciudad Real/Toledo, Spain. Electronic address:
nilda.gallardo@uclm.es.

Aging is associated with alterations of lipid metabolism and increased prevalence
of non alcoholic hepatic steatosis. Nevertheless, the mechanisms by which fat is 
accumulated in the liver during aging remain incompletely understood. In the
present study, we investigated potential alterations that might contribute to the
development of hepatic steatosis with aging. To this end, we analyzed the
expression and the subcellular localization of key transcriptional factors
involved in lipid metabolism such as ChREBP, Foxo1, Foxa2 and SREBP-1c in the
liver of 3- and 24-month old Wistar rats. In addition, we studied the
intracellular redistribution of ChREBP in response to fasting/refeeding
transition. Old rats were characterized by hepatic steatosis, low serum ketone
body levels and postprandial hyperinsulinemia. These observations were paralleled
by the cytoplasmic localization and decreased expression of Foxa2, while ChREBP
expression was markedly up-regulated and mainly localized in the nucleus.
Consequently, the expression of lipogenic and ß-oxidation genes was up-regulated 
or down-regulated, respectively. Besides, the intracellular redistribution of
ChREBP in response to fasting/refeeding transition was also impaired in old
animals. Additionally, a negative correlation between serum ketone body levels
and the nuclear localization of ChREBP was observed only in adult but not in old 
rats. Taken together, these data suggest that an age-related dysfunctional
adaptation of ChREBP, in response to changes in the nutritional state, might
contribute to the development of liver steatosis with aging.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26004139  [PubMed - in process]


58. Thorax. 2015 Jul;70(7):668-76. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2014-205731. Epub 2015 May 
20.

Tiotropium attenuates IL-13-induced goblet cell metaplasia of human airway
epithelial cells.

Kistemaker LE(1), Hiemstra PS(2), Bos IS(1), Bouwman S(1), van den Berge M(3),
Hylkema MN(4), Meurs H(1), Kerstjens HA(3), Gosens R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands GRIAC Research Institute, University Medical Center Groningen,
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of
Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (3)GRIAC 
Research Institute, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)GRIAC Research Institute, University Medical Center Groningen, University of
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands Department of Pathology and Medical
Biology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: It has been shown that acetylcholine is both a neurotransmitter and
acts as a local mediator, produced by airway cells including epithelial cells. In
vivo studies have demonstrated an indirect role for acetylcholine in epithelial
cell differentiation. Here, we aimed to investigate direct effects of endogenous 
non-neuronal acetylcholine on epithelial cell differentiation.
METHODS: Human airway epithelial cells from healthy donors were cultured at an
air-liquid interface (ALI). Cells were exposed to the muscarinic antagonist
tiotropium (10 nM), interleukin (IL)-13 (1, 2 and 5 ng/mL), or a combination of
IL-13 and tiotropium, during or after differentiation at the ALI.
RESULTS: Human airway epithelial cells expressed all components of the
non-neuronal cholinergic system, suggesting acetylcholine production. Tiotropium 
had no effects on epithelial cell differentiation after air exposure.
Differentiation into goblet cells was barely induced after air exposure.
Therefore, IL-13 (1 ng/mL) was used to induce goblet cell metaplasia. IL-13
induced MUC5AC-positive cells (5-fold) and goblet cells (14-fold), as assessed by
histochemistry, and MUC5AC gene expression (105-fold). These effects were partly 
prevented by tiotropium (47-92%). Goblet cell metaplasia was induced by IL-13 in 
a dose-dependent manner, which was inhibited by tiotropium. In addition,
tiotropium reversed goblet cell metaplasia induced by 2 weeks of IL-13 exposure. 
IL-13 decreased forkhead box protein A2 (FoxA2) expression (1.6-fold) and
increased FoxA3 (3.6-fold) and SAM-pointed domain-containing ETS transcription
factor (SPDEF) (5.2-fold) expression. Tiotropium prevented the effects on FoxA2
and FoxA3, but not on SPDEF.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that tiotropium has no effects on epithelial cell
differentiation after air exposure, but inhibits and reverses IL-13-induced
goblet cell metaplasia, possibly via FoxA2 and FoxA3. This indicates that
non-neuronal acetylcholine contributes to goblet cell differentiation by a direct
effect on epithelial cells.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25995156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Genome Biol. 2015 May 21;16:105. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0668-3.

Inferring regulatory element landscapes and transcription factor networks from
cancer methylomes.

Yao L(1), Shen H(2), Laird PW(3), Farnham PJ(4), Berman BP(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 1450 Biggy Street, NRT 6503, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-9601,
USA. lijingya@usc.edu. (2)Center for Epigenetics, Van Andel Research Institute,
Grand Rapids, MI, 49503, USA. Hui.Shen@vai.org. (3)Center for Epigenetics, Van
Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, MI, 49503, USA. Peter.Laird@vai.org.
(4)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 1450 Biggy Street, NRT 6503, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-9601,
USA. peggy.farnham@med.usc.edu. (5)Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, 1450 Biggy Street, NRT
6503, Los Angeles, CA, 90089-9601, USA. benjamin.berman@cshs.org.
(6)Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Research Center, Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, AHSP Bldg., Suite A8111, Los
Angeles, CA, 90048, USA. benjamin.berman@cshs.org.

Recent studies indicate that DNA methylation can be used to identify
transcriptional enhancers, but no systematic approach has been developed for
genome-wide identification and analysis of enhancers based on DNA methylation. We
describe ELMER (Enhancer Linking by Methylation/Expression Relationships), an
R-based tool that uses DNA methylation to identify enhancers and correlates
enhancer state with expression of nearby genes to identify transcriptional
targets. Transcription factor motif analysis of enhancers is coupled with
expression analysis of transcription factors to infer upstream regulators. Using 
ELMER, we investigated more than 2,000 tumor samples from The Cancer Genome
Atlas. We identified networks regulated by known cancer drivers such as GATA3 and
FOXA1 (breast cancer), SOX17 and FOXA2 (endometrial cancer), and NFE2L2, SOX2,
and TP63 (squamous cell lung cancer). We also identified novel networks with
prognostic associations, including RUNX1 in kidney cancer. We propose ELMER as a 
powerful new paradigm for understanding the cis-regulatory interface between
cancer-associated transcription factors and their functional target genes.

PMCID: PMC4460959
PMID: 25994056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cancer Genomics Proteomics. 2015 May-Jun;12(3):103-12.

Transcriptomic profiling of Forkhead box transcription factors in adult
glioblastoma multiforme.

Robertson E(1), Perry C(2), Doherty R(1), Madhusudan S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Oncology, Division of Cancer and Stem Cells, School of
Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham University Hospitals, Nottingham, 
U.K. (2)Academic Unit of Oncology, Division of Cancer and Stem Cells, School of
Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham University Hospitals, Nottingham, 
U.K. Department of Oncology, Nottingham University Hospitals, Nottingham, U.K.

BACKGROUND: The Forkhead box transcription factor (FOX) family plays an essential
role in embryogenesis, especially during brain development. Our hypothesis is
that de-regulation of FOX genes may contribute to aggressive tumor biology and
therapy resistance in patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed to
evaluate prognostic significance of transcript levels of 31 FOX genes in a test
set of GBM patients (n=191) and validated them in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) 
cohort comprising of 508 adult cases of GBM. The predictive significance of key
FOX genes was investigated in patients who received chemotherapy or radiotherapy.
RESULTS: Low FOXA2 mRNA, low FOXN2 mRNA, low FOXN3 mRNA and high FOXG1 mRNA were 
associated with poor survival in the test and TCGA validation cohorts. In
multivariate analysis, low FOXA2 mRNA, low FOXN2 mRNA, low FOXN3 mRNA and high
FOXG1 mRNA remained independently associated with poor survival in the test and
TCGA validation cohorts. In patients who received chemotherapy or radiotherapy,
low FOXA2 mRNA, low FOXN2 mRNA and high FOXG1 mRNA correlated with adverse
outcomes in the TCGA validation cohort.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, our data provide the first comprehensive clinical
evidence that FOXA2, FOXN2, FOXN3 and FOXG1 are promising biomarkers of GBM and
warrant further investigation.

Copyright© 2015, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25977169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2015 May;31(5):672-6.

[Down-expression of FOXA2 in gastric adenocarcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang Z(1), Sun J(1), Bai Z(1), Li H(2), He S(2), Chen R(2), Che X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency, Second Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an 710004, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, First
Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of FOXA2 in human gastric adenocarcinoma
and its correlation with cell migration and invasion.
METHODS: Fifty-six pairs of gastric adenocarcinoma and matched tumor-adjacent
tissues were freshly collected. The expressions of FOXA2 and epithelial cadherin 
(E-cadherin) in the gastric specimens were detected using immunohistochemistry.
Western blotting was performed to test FOXA2 and E-cadherin expressions in
different gastric cancer cell lines. FOXA2 was over-expressed in MKN-45 cells.
TranswellTM assays were performed to observe gastric cancer cell migration and
invasion in vitro. Spearman rank correlation coefficient was used for correlation
analysis.
RESULTS: The expressions of FOXA2 and E-cadherin in gastric adenocarcinoma were
significantly lower than those in matched tumor-adjacent noncancerous tissues.
FOXA2 was positively correlated with E-cadherin expression in gastric
adenocarcinoma tissues. Clinical analysis suggested that FOXA2 expression was
prominently associated with tumor differentiation, infiltration depth, lymph node
metastasis and TNM stage, respectively. The lowest expressions of FOXA2 and
E-cadherin were found in highly invasive gastric cancer MKN-45 cell line; the
highest expressions of FOXA2 and E-cadherin were observed in low metastatic
gastric cancer N-87 cell line. Over-expression of FOXA2 significantly increased
the expression of E-cadherin protein and obviously inhibited cell migration and
invasion in MKN-45 cells.
CONCLUSION: Expression of FOXA2 is reduced in gastric adenocarcinoma tissues and 
its low-expression is correlated with malignant clinical pathological features.
Over-expression of FOXA2 in MKN-45 cells up-regulates E-cadherin expression and
inhibits gastric cancer cell migration and invasion.

PMID: 25940296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Drug Metab Dispos. 2015 Jul;43(7):1129-36. doi: 10.1124/dmd.115.064493. Epub 2015
May 1.

Chimeric MicroRNA-1291 Biosynthesized Efficiently in Escherichia coli Is
Effective to Reduce Target Gene Expression in Human Carcinoma Cells and Improve
Chemosensitivity.

Li MM(1), Addepalli B(1), Tu MJ(1), Chen QX(1), Wang WP(1), Limbach PA(1),
LaSalle JM(1), Zeng S(1), Huang M(1), Yu AM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Medicine, University of
California-Davis School of Medicine, Sacramento, California (M.-M.L., M.-J.T.,
Q.-X.C., W.-P.W., A.-M.Y.); Laboratory of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics,
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 
China (M.-M.L, M.H.); Rieveschl Laboratories for Mass Spectrometry, Department of
Chemistry, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio (B.A., P.A.L.); Laboratory 
of Pharmaceutical Analysis and Drug Metabolism, College of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China (Q.-X.C., S.Z.); and
Department of Medical Microbiology and Immunology, University of California Davis
School of Medicine, Davis, California (J.M.L.). (2)Department of Biochemistry &
Molecular Medicine, University of California-Davis School of Medicine,
Sacramento, California (M.-M.L., M.-J.T., Q.-X.C., W.-P.W., A.-M.Y.); Laboratory 
of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China (M.-M.L, M.H.); Rieveschl
Laboratories for Mass Spectrometry, Department of Chemistry, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio (B.A., P.A.L.); Laboratory of Pharmaceutical
Analysis and Drug Metabolism, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China (Q.-X.C., S.Z.); and Department of Medical 
Microbiology and Immunology, University of California Davis School of Medicine,
Davis, California (J.M.L.) aimyu@ucdavis.edu.

In contrast to the growing interests in studying noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) such as 
microRNA (miRNA or miR) pharmacoepigenetics, there is a lack of efficient means
to cost effectively produce large quantities of natural miRNA agents. Our recent 
efforts led to a successful production of chimeric pre-miR-27b in bacteria using 
a transfer RNA (tRNA)-based recombinant RNA technology, but at very low
expression levels. Herein, we present a high-yield expression of chimeric
pre-miR-1291 in common Escherichia coli strains using the same tRNA scaffold. The
tRNA fusion pre-miR-1291 (tRNA/mir-1291) was then purified to high homogeneity
using affinity chromatography, whose primary sequence and post-transcriptional
modifications were directly characterized by mass spectrometric analyses.
Chimeric tRNA/mir-1291 was readily processed to mature miR-1291 in human
carcinoma MCF-7 and PANC-1 cells. Consequently, recombinant tRNA/mir-1291 reduced
the protein levels of miR-1291 target genes, including ABCC1, FOXA2, and MeCP2,
as compared with cells transfected with the same doses of control methionyl-tRNA 
scaffold with a sephadex aptamer (tRNA/MSA). In addition, tRNA-carried
pre-miR-1291 suppressed the growth of MCF-7 and PANC-1 cells in a dose-dependent 
manner, and significantly enhanced the sensitivity of ABCC1-overexpressing PANC-1
cells to doxorubicin. These results indicate that recombinant miR-1291 agent is
effective in the modulation of target gene expression and chemosensitivity, which
may provide insights into high-yield bioengineering of new ncRNA agents for
pharmacoepigenetics research.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4468437 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25934574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Urol. 2015 Dec;194(6):1762-70. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2015.04.090. Epub 2015 Apr
29.

A Murine Model of K-RAS and ß-Catenin Induced Renal Tumors Expresses High Levels 
of E2F1 and Resembles Human Wilms Tumor.

Yi Y(1), Polosukhina D(1), Love HD(1), Hembd A(1), Pickup M(1), Moses HL(1),
Lovvorn HN 3rd(1), Zent R(1), Clark PE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee. (2)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee. Electronic address:
peter.clark@vanderbilt.edu.

PURPOSE: Wilms tumor is the most common renal neoplasm of childhood. We
previously found that restricted activation of the WNT/ß-catenin pathway in renal
epithelium late in kidney development is sufficient to induce small primitive
neoplasms with features of epithelial Wilms tumor. Metastatic disease progression
required simultaneous addition of an activating mutation of the oncogene K-RAS.
We sought to define the molecular pathways activated in this process and their
relationship to human renal malignancies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Affymetrix® expression microarray data from murine kidneys
with activation of K-ras and/or Ctnnb1 (ß-catenin) restricted to renal epithelium
were analyzed and compared to publicly available expression data on normal and
neoplastic human renal tissue. Target genes were verified by immunoblot and
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Mouse kidney tumors with activation of K-ras and Ctnnb1, and human renal
malignancies had similar mRNA expression signatures and were associated with
activation of networks centered on ß-catenin and TP53. Up-regulation of
WNT/ß-catenin targets (MYC, Survivin, FOXA2, Axin2 and Cyclin D1) was confirmed
by immunoblot. K-RAS/ß-catenin murine kidney tumors were more similar to human
Wilms tumor than to other renal malignancies and demonstrated activation of a
TP53 dependent network of genes, including the transcription factor E2F1.
Up-regulation of E2F1 was confirmed in murine and human Wilms tumor samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Simultaneous activation of K-RAS and ß-catenin in embryonic renal
epithelium leads to neoplasms similar to human Wilms tumor and associated with
activation of TP53 and up-regulation of E2F1. Further studies are warranted to
evaluate the role of TP53 and E2F1 in human Wilms tumor.

Copyright © 2015 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4782590
PMID: 25934441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Physiol Genomics. 2015 Jul;47(7):290-7. doi: 10.1152/physiolgenomics.00024.2015. 
Epub 2015 Apr 28.

FOXA2 regulates a network of genes involved in critical functions of human
intestinal epithelial cells.

Gosalia N(1), Yang R(1), Kerschner JL(1), Harris A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie Children's Research Center, Chicago,
Illinois; Department of Pediatrics, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois; and. (2)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Lurie
Children's Research Center, Chicago, Illinois; Department of Pediatrics,
Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois; and
Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois ann-harris@northwestern.edu.

The forkhead box A (FOXA) family of pioneer transcription factors is critical for
the development of many endoderm-derived tissues. Their importance in regulating 
biological processes in the lung and liver is extensively characterized, though
much less is known about their role in intestine. Here we investigate the
contribution of FOXA2 to coordinating intestinal epithelial cell function using
postconfluent Caco2 cells, differentiated into an enterocyte-like model. FOXA2
binding sites genome-wide were determined by ChIP-seq and direct targets of the
factor were validated by ChIP-qPCR and siRNA-mediated depletion of FOXA1/2
followed by RT-qPCR. Peaks of FOXA2 occupancy were frequent at loci contributing 
to gene ontology pathways of regulation of cell migration, cell motion, and
plasma membrane function. Depletion of both FOXA1 and FOXA2 led to a significant 
reduction in the expression of multiple transmembrane proteins including ion
channels and transporters, which form a network that is essential for maintaining
normal ion and solute transport. One of the targets was the adenosine A2B
receptor, and reduced receptor mRNA levels were associated with a functional
decrease in intracellular cyclic AMP. We also observed that 30% of FOXA2 binding 
sites contained a GATA motif and that FOXA1/A2 depletion reduced GATA-4, but not 
GATA-6 protein levels. These data show that FOXA2 plays a pivotal role in
regulating intestinal epithelial cell function. Moreover, that the FOXA and GATA 
families of transcription factors may work cooperatively to regulate gene
expression genome-wide in the intestinal epithelium.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4491527 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25921584  [PubMed - in process]


65. Clin Chim Acta. 2015 Jun 15;446:21-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2015.03.038. Epub 2015
Apr 7.

Apolipoprotein M.

Ren K(1), Tang ZL(1), Jiang Y(1), Tan YM(1), Yi GH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Key Lab for Arteriosclerology of Hunan
Province, University of South China, Hengyang City 421001 Hunan Province, China. 
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Key Lab for Arteriosclerology of Hunan
Province, University of South China, Hengyang City 421001 Hunan Province, China. 
Electronic address: ghyi6108@163.com.

Apolipoprotein M (ApoM) is a novel apolipoprotein that was discovered in 1999 and
is bound primarily to high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) in the plasma. Multiple
factors may influence its expression at both the post-transcriptional and the
transcriptional levels both in vivo and ex vivo as follows: hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1a, 4a (HNF-1a, 4a), liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH-1), forkhead box A2
(Foxa2) and platelet activating factor (PAF) upregulate its expression; liver X
receptor (LXR), retinoid X receptor (RXR), farnesoid X receptor (FXR), small
heterodimer partner (SHP) and the majority of cytokines downregulate its
expression. However, mechanisms underlying these processes remain unknown.
Structurally, there exists a characterized hydrophobic binding pocket within the 
apoM protein, which enables it to bind functional lipids such as
Sphingosine-1-Phosphate (S1P). Functionally, it facilitates the formation of
preß-HDL and enhances an avalanche of atheroprotective effects exerted by HDL.
Moreover, in patients with diabetes, the levels of plasma apoM may decrease,
whereas the augmentation of apoM decreases plasma glucose levels and magnifies
the secretion of insulin. This article offers a panorama of the progress made in 
the research regarding the characteristics of apoM, particularly the regulation
of its expression and its functions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25858547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Cell Rep. 2015 Apr 7;11(1):137-48. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.03.008. Epub 2015
Apr 2.

The lncRNA DEANR1 facilitates human endoderm differentiation by activating FOXA2 
expression.

Jiang W(1), Liu Y(2), Liu R(3), Zhang K(3), Zhang Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, WAB-149G, 200
Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Program in Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, WAB-149G, 200
Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical
School, WAB-149G, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
wei.jiang@childrens.harvard.edu. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard
Medical School, WAB-149G, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Program in 
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, WAB-149G, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, WAB-149G, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA
02115, USA. (3)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego,
La Jolla, CA 92093-0412, USA. (4)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, WAB-149G, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Program in Cellular
and Molecular Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
WAB-149G, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Genetics,
Harvard Medical School, WAB-149G, 200 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, WAB-149G, 200 Longwood
Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
yzhang@genetics.med.harvard.edu.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) regulate diverse biological processes, including
cell lineage specification. Here, we report transcriptome profiling of human
endoderm and pancreatic cell lineages using purified cell populations. Analysis
of the data sets allows us to identify hundreds of lncRNAs that exhibit
differentiation-stage-specific expression patterns. As a first step in
characterizing these lncRNAs, we focus on an endoderm-specific lncRNA,
definitive endoderm-associated lncRNA1 (DEANR1), and demonstrate that it plays an
important role in human endoderm differentiation. DEANR1 contributes to endoderm 
differentiation by positively regulating expression of the endoderm factor FOXA2.
Importantly, overexpression of FOXA2 is able to rescue endoderm differentiation
defects caused by DEANR1 depletion. Mechanistically, DEANR1 facilitates FOXA2
activation by facilitating SMAD2/3 recruitment to the FOXA2 promoter. Thus, our
study not only reveals a large set of differentiation-stage-specific lncRNAs but 
also characterizes a functional lncRNA that is important for endoderm
differentiation.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25843708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Apr 2;16(4):386-99. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.02.013.

Epigenetic priming of enhancers predicts developmental competence of hESC-derived
endodermal lineage intermediates.

Wang A(1), Yue F(2), Li Y(3), Xie R(1), Harper T(1), Patel NA(1), Muth K(1),
Palmer J(1), Qiu Y(3), Wang J(1), Lam DK(1), Raum JC(4), Stoffers DA(4), Ren
B(5), Sander M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Diabetes Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0983, USA; Sanford Consortium for
Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, The Pennsylvania State University,
Hershey, PA 17033, USA. (3)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA
92093-0653, USA. (4)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism,
Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA. (5)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA 92093-0653, USA;
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0651, USA; Institute of Genomic Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0761, USA; Moores Cancer Center,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0653, USA. Electronic
address: biren@ucsd.edu. (6)Pediatric Diabetes Research Center, Department of
Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0983, USA;
Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA; Department
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La
Jolla, CA 92093-0651, USA; Institute of Genomic Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0761, USA; Moores Cancer Center,
University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0653, USA. Electronic
address: masander@ucsd.edu.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Apr 2;16(4):343-4.

Embryonic development relies on the capacity of progenitor cells to appropriately
respond to inductive cues, a cellular property known as developmental competence.
Here, we report that epigenetic priming of enhancers signifies developmental
competence during endodermal lineage diversification. Chromatin mapping during
pancreatic and hepatic differentiation of human embryonic stem cells revealed the
en masse acquisition of a poised chromatin state at enhancers specific to
endoderm-derived cell lineages in gut tube intermediates. Experimentally, the
acquisition of this poised enhancer state predicts the ability of endodermal
intermediates to respond to inductive signals. Furthermore, these enhancers are
first recognized by the pioneer transcription factors FOXA1 and FOXA2 when
competence is acquired, while subsequent recruitment of lineage-inductive
transcription factors, such as PDX1, leads to enhancer and target gene
activation. Together, our results identify the acquisition of a poised chromatin 
state at enhancers as a mechanism by which progenitor cells acquire developmental
competence.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4478079 [Available on 2016-04-02]
PMID: 25842977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. FEBS Lett. 2015 Apr 28;589(10):1112-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.03.022. Epub
2015 Mar 30.

Negative regulation of hepatitis B virus replication by forkhead box protein A in
human hepatoma cells.

Okumura N(1), Ikeda M(2), Satoh S(3), Dansako H(3), Sugiyama M(4), Mizokami M(4),
Kato N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Virology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama
700-8558, Japan; Department of Persistent and Oncogenic Viruses, Center for
Chronic Viral Disease, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan. (2)Department of Tumor
Virology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8558, Japan;
Department of Persistent and Oncogenic Viruses, Center for Chronic Viral Disease,
Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1
Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan. Electronic address:
maikeda@m3.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Tumor Virology, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8558, Japan. (4)The Research Center for
Hepatitis and Immunology, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-7-1
Konodai, Ichikawa, Chiba 272-8516, Japan.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication is controlled by liver-enriched
transcriptional factors, including forkhead box protein A (FOXA) members. Here,
we found that FOXA members are directly and indirectly involved in HBV
replication in human hepatic cells. HBV replication was elevated in HuH-7 treated
with individual FOXA members-specific siRNA. Reciprocally, the downregulation of 
HBV replication was observed in FOXA-induced HuH-7. However, the mechanism of
downregulation is different among FOXA members at the level of HBV RNA
transcription, such as precore/pg RNA and 2.1 kb RNA. In addition, FOXA1 and
FOXA2 suppressed nuclear hormone receptors, such as HNF4a, that are related to
HBV replication.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25836733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. EMBO J. 2015 May 12;34(10):1417-33. doi: 10.15252/embj.201490819. Epub 2015 Mar
31.

Insm1 cooperates with Neurod1 and Foxa2 to maintain mature pancreatic ß-cell
function.

Jia S(1), Ivanov A(2), Blasevic D(3), Müller T(3), Purfürst B(4), Sun W(5), Chen 
W(5), Poy MN(6), Rajewsky N(2), Birchmeier C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin,
Germany cbirch@mdc-berlin.de jshiqi@mdc-berlin.de. (2)Systems Biology of Gene
Regulatory Elements, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Developmental Biology, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin,
Germany. (4)Electron Microscopy Platform, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular
Medicine, Berlin, Germany. (5)Scientific Genomics Platform, Max-Delbrück-Center
for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany. (6)Molecular Mechanisms of Metabolic
Disease, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

Key transcription factors control the gene expression program in mature
pancreatic ß-cells, but their integration into regulatory networks is little
understood. Here, we show that Insm1, Neurod1 and Foxa2 directly interact and
together bind regulatory sequences in the genome of mature pancreatic ß-cells. We
used Insm1 ablation in mature ß-cells in mice and found pronounced deficits in
insulin secretion and gene expression. Insm1-dependent genes identified
previously in developing ß-cells markedly differ from the ones identified in the 
adult. In particular, adult mutant ß-cells resemble immature ß-cells of newborn
mice in gene expression and functional properties. We defined Insm1, Neurod1 and 
Foxa2 binding sites associated with genes deregulated in Insm1 mutant ß-cells.
Remarkably, combinatorial binding of Insm1, Neurod1 and Foxa2 but not binding of 
Insm1 alone explained a significant fraction of gene expression changes. Human
genomic sequences corresponding to the murine sites occupied by
Insm1/Neurod1/Foxa2 were enriched in single nucleotide polymorphisms associated
with glycolytic traits. Thus, our data explain part of the mechanisms by which
ß-cells maintain maturity: Combinatorial Insm1/Neurod1/Foxa2 binding identifies
regulatory sequences that maintain the mature gene expression program in ß-cells,
and disruption of this network results in functional failure.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY NC ND 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4492000
PMID: 25828096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Development. 2015 Apr 1;142(7):1315-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.115808.

Genome-wide characterisation of Foxa1 binding sites reveals several mechanisms
for regulating neuronal differentiation in midbrain dopamine cells.

Metzakopian E(1), Bouhali K(1), Alvarez-Saavedra M(2), Whitsett JA(3), Picketts
DJ(4), Ang SL(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, NIMR, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, 
UK. (2)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6 Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5. (3)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center and University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (4)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa
Hospital Research Institute, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8L6 Departments of
Biochemistry, Microbiology & Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
K1H 8M5. (5)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, NIMR, The Ridgeway, London 
NW7 1AA, UK sang@nimr.mrc.ac.uk.

Midbrain dopamine neuronal progenitors develop into heterogeneous subgroups of
neurons, such as substantia nigra pars compacta, ventral tegmental area and
retrorubal field, that regulate motor control, motivated and addictive
behaviours. The development of midbrain dopamine neurons has been extensively
studied, and these studies indicate that complex cross-regulatory interactions
between extrinsic and intrinsic molecules regulate a precise temporal and spatial
programme of neurogenesis in midbrain dopamine progenitors. To elucidate direct
molecular interactions between multiple regulatory factors during neuronal
differentiation in mice, we characterised genome-wide binding sites of the
forkhead/winged helix transcription factor Foxa1, which functions redundantly
with Foxa2 to regulate the differentiation of mDA neurons. Interestingly, our
studies identified a rostral brain floor plate Neurog2 enhancer that requires
direct input from Otx2, Foxa1, Foxa2 and an E-box transcription factor for its
transcriptional activity. Furthermore, the chromatin remodelling factor Smarca1
was shown to function downstream of Foxa1 and Foxa2 to regulate differentiation
from immature to mature midbrain dopaminergic neurons. Our genome-wide
Foxa1-bound cis-regulatory sequences from ChIP-Seq and Foxa1/2 candidate target
genes from RNA-Seq analyses of embryonic midbrain dopamine cells also provide an 
excellent resource for probing mechanistic insights into gene regulatory networks
involved in the differentiation of midbrain dopamine neurons.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4378246
PMID: 25804738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Cancer Lett. 2015 Jun 1;361(2):240-50. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.03.008. Epub
2015 Mar 14.

FOXA2 attenuates the epithelial to mesenchymal transition by regulating the
transcription of E-cadherin and ZEB2 in human breast cancer.

Zhang Z(1), Yang C(1), Gao W(1), Chen T(1), Qian T(1), Hu J(2), Tan Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Biology,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Chemistry and Molecular Medicine, Hunan
University, Changsha, Hunan 410082, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Hunan
Provincial Tumor Hospital, Changsha, Hunan 410013, China. (3)State Key Laboratory
of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Biology, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Chemistry and Molecular Medicine, Hunan University,
Changsha, Hunan 410082, China. Electronic address: yjtan@hnu.edu.cn.

The Forkhead Box A2 (FOXA2) transcription factor is required for embryonic
development and for normal functions of multiple adult tissues, in which the
maintained expression of FOXA2 is usually related to preventing the progression
of malignant transformation. In this study, we found that FOXA2 prevented the
epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human breast cancer. We observed a 
strong correlation between the expression levels of FOXA2 and the epithelial
phenotype. Knockdown of FOXA2 promoted the mesenchymal phenotype, whereas stable 
overexpression of FOXA2 attenuated EMT in breast cancer cells. FOXA2 was found to
endogenously bind to and stimulate the promoter of E-cadherin that is crucial for
epithelial phenotype of the tumor cells. Meanwhile, FOXA2 prevented EMT of breast
cancer cells by repressing the expression of EMT-related transcription factor
ZEB2 through recruiting a transcriptional corepressor TLE3 to the ZEB2 promoter. 
The stable overexpression of FOXA2 abolished metastasis of breast cancer cells in
vivo. This study confirmed that FOXA2 inhibited EMT in breast cancer cells by
regulating the transcription of EMT-related genes such as E-cadherin and ZEB2.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25779673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 16;10(3):e0119904. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119904.
eCollection 2015.

Resveratrol ameliorates the maturation process of ß-cell-like cells obtained from
an optimized differentiation protocol of human embryonic stem cells.

Pezzolla D(1), López-Beas J(1), Lachaud CC(2), Domínguez-Rodríguez A(3), Smani
T(3), Hmadcha A(1), Soria B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cells, Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and
Regenerative Medicine (CABIMER)-Fundación Progreso y Salud (FPS), Sevilla, Spain;
Spanish Biomedical Research Centre in Diabetes and Associated Metabolic Disorders
(CIBERDEM), Barcelona, Spain. (2)Department of Stem Cells, Andalusian Center for 
Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine (CABIMER)-Fundación Progreso y Salud 
(FPS), Sevilla, Spain. (3)Cardiovascular Pathophysiology, Institute of
Biomedicine of Seville (IBIS), Sevilla, Spain.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) retain the extraordinary capacity to
differentiate into different cell types of an adult organism, including
pancreatic ß-cells. For this particular lineage, although a lot of effort has
been made in the last ten years to achieve an efficient and reproducible
differentiation protocol, it was not until recently that this aim was roughly
accomplished. Besides, several studies evidenced the impact of resveratrol (RSV) 
on insulin secretion, even though the mechanism by which this polyphenol
potentiates glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) is still not clear. The
aim of this study was to optimize an efficient differentiation protocol that
mimics in vivo pancreatic organogenesis and to investigate whether RSV may
improve the final maturation step to obtain functional insulin-secreting cells.
Our results indicate that treatment of hESCs (HS-181) with activin-A induced
definitive endoderm differentiation as detected by the expression of SOX17 and
FOXA2. Addition of retinoic acid (RA), Noggin and Cyclopamine promoted pancreatic
differentiation as indicated by the expression of the early pancreatic progenitor
markers ISL1, NGN3 and PDX1. Moreover, during maturation in suspension culture,
differentiating cells assembled in islet-like clusters, which expressed specific 
endocrine markers such as PDX1, SST, GCG and INS. Similar results were confirmed 
with the human induced Pluripotent Stem Cell (hiPSC) line MSUH-001. Finally,
differentiation protocols incorporating RSV treatment yielded numerous
insulin-positive cells, induced significantly higher PDX1 expression and were
able to transiently normalize glycaemia when transplanted in streptozotocin (STZ)
induced diabetic mice thus promoting its survival. In conclusion, our strategy
allows the efficient differentiation of hESCs into pancreatic endoderm capable of
generating ß-cell-like cells and demonstrates that RSV improves the maturation
process.

PMCID: PMC4361612
PMID: 25774684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Clin Invest. 2015 Apr;125(4):1533-44. doi: 10.1172/JCI73137. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

Resetting the transcription factor network reverses terminal chronic hepatic
failure.

Nishikawa T, Bell A, Brooks JM, Setoyama K, Melis M, Han B, Fukumitsu K, Handa K,
Tian J, Kaestner KH, Vodovotz Y, Locker J, Soto-Gutierrez A, Fox IJ.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 May;12(5):250.

The cause of organ failure is enigmatic for many degenerative diseases, including
end-stage liver disease. Here, using a CCl4-induced rat model of irreversible and
fatal hepatic failure, which also exhibits terminal changes in the extracellular 
matrix, we demonstrated that chronic injury stably reprograms the critical
balance of transcription factors and that diseased and dedifferentiated cells can
be returned to normal function by re-expression of critical transcription
factors, a process similar to the type of reprogramming that induces somatic
cells to become pluripotent or to change their cell lineage. Forced re-expression
of the transcription factor HNF4a induced expression of the other
hepatocyte-expressed transcription factors; restored functionality in terminally 
diseased hepatocytes isolated from CCl4-treated rats; and rapidly reversed fatal 
liver failure in CCl4-treated animals by restoring diseased hepatocytes rather
than replacing them with new hepatocytes or stem cells. Together, the results of 
our study indicate that disruption of the transcription factor network and
cellular dedifferentiation likely mediate terminal liver failure and suggest
reinstatement of this network has therapeutic potential for correcting organ
failure without cell replacement.

PMCID: PMC4396487
PMID: 25774505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Int J Hematol Oncol Stem Cell Res. 2014 Oct 1;8(4):20-9.

Efficient Differentiation of Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell (hiPSC) Derived 
Hepatocyte-Like Cells on hMSCs Feeder.

Mobarra N(1), Soleimani M(2), Kouhkan F(3), Hesari Z(4), Lahmy R(5),
Mossahebi-Mohammadi M(2), Arefian E(6), Jaafarpour Z(7), Nasiri H(8), Pakzad
R(9), Tavakoli R(3), Pasalar P(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Tehran University of 
Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran ; Students'Sciences Research Center, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of Hematology, School
of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. (3)Department of
Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering, Stem Cell Technology Research Center, 
Tehran, Iran. (4)Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tehran
University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (5)Department of Genetics, Faculty 
of Biological Sciences, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran. (6)Department
of Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering, Stem Cell Technology Research
Center, Tehran, Iran ; Microbial Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of
Microbiology, School of Biology, College of Science, Tehran University, Tehran,
Iran. (7)Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad
University, Tehran, Iran. (8)Hematology-Oncology and Stem cell Transplantation
Research Center, Shariati Hospital, Tehran university of Medical Science,
Tehran,Iran. (9)Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public
Health, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. (10)Metabolic
disorder Research center, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Molecular sciences
institute, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran.

BACKGROUND: The use of stem cells is considered as an appropriate source in cell 
therapy and tissue engineering. Differentiation of human induced Pluripotent Stem
Cells (hiPSCs) to Hepatocyte-like Cells (HLCs) on mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) feeders is confronted with several problems that hinder the clinical
applications of these differentiated cells for the treatment of liver injuries.
Safe appropriate cells for stem cell-based therapies could create new hopes for
liver diseases. This work focused on the determination of a capacity/efficiency
for the differentiation of the hiPSCs into Hepatocyte-like Cells on a novel human
adult bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) feeder.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Undifferentiated human iPSCs were cultured on mitotically 
inactivated human adult bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells. A three-step
differentiation process has been performed in presence of activin A which added
for 3 days to induce a definitive endoderm formation. In the second step, medium 
was exchanged for six days. Subsequently, cells were treated with oncostatin M
plus dexamethasone for 9 days to generate hepatic cells. Endodermic and
liver-specific genes were assessed via quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and RT-PCR, moreover, immunocytochemical 
staining for liver proteins including albumin and alpha-fetoprotein. In addition,
functional tests for glycogen storage, oil red examination, urea production and
alpha-fetoprotein synthesis, as well as, cells differentiated with a
hepatocyte-like morphology was also performed.
RESULTS: Our results show that inactivated human adult bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cell feeders could support the efficient differentiation of hiPSCs into
HLCs. This process induced differentiation of iPSCs into definitive endocrine
cells that expressed sox17, foxa2 and expression of the specific genes profiles
in hepatic-like cells. In addition, immunocytochemical analysis confirmed albumin
and alpha-fetoprotein protein expression, as well as, the hiPSCs-derived
Hepatocyte-like Cells on human feeder exhibited a typical morphology.
CONCLUSIONS: we suggested a successful and efficient culture for differentiation 
and maturation of hepatocytes on an alternative human feeders; this is an
important step to generate safe and functional hepatocytes that is vital for
regenerative medicine and transplantation on the cell-based therapies.

PMCID: PMC4345294
PMID: 25774264  [PubMed]


75. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Apr 17;459(4):655-61. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.166. Epub 2015 Mar 10.

Direct conversion of human fibroblasts into dopaminergic neural progenitor-like
cells using TAT-mediated protein transduction of recombinant factors.

Mirakhori F(1), Zeynali B(2), Rassouli H(3), Salekdeh GH(4), Baharvand H(5).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, College of Science, Tehran University, P.O. Box 14155-6455,
Tehran, Iran; Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology at Cell Science 
Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR,
1998777494, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address: mirakhori@ut.ac.ir. (2)School of
Biology, College of Science, Tehran University, P.O. Box 14155-6455, Tehran,
Iran. Electronic address: bzeynali@khayam.ut.ac.ir. (3)Department of Molecular
Systems Biology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell
Biology and Technology, ACECR, P.O. Box 19395-4644, Tehran, Iran. Electronic
address: rassouli59@gmail.com. (4)Department of Molecular Systems Biology at Cell
Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology,
ACECR, P.O. Box 19395-4644, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
hsalekdeh@yahoo.com. (5)School of Biology, College of Science, Tehran University,
P.O. Box 14155-6455, Tehran, Iran; Department of Developmental Biology,
University of Science and Culture, ACECR, P.O. Box 19395-4644, Tehran, Iran.
Electronic address: baharvand@royaninstitute.org.

Recent progress in the generation of induced neural progenitor cells (iNPCs)
holds tremendous potential for regenerative medicine. However, a major limitation
is the lack of a reliable source for cell replacement therapy in neurological
diseases such as Parkinson's disease (PD). Here, we show that the combination of 
small molecules (SM) and TAT-mediated protein transduction of SOX2 and LMX1a in a
3D sphere culture directly convert human fibroblasts to induced dopaminergic
neural progenitor-like cells (iDPCs). The generated iDPCs expressed various NPC
markers (SOX2, PAX6, NESTIN, OLIG2) and midbrain progenitor markers (EN1, LMX1a, 
FOXA2, WNT1) as detected by immunostaining and real-time PCR. Following
differentiation, the majority of cells expressed neuronal dopaminergic markers as
indicated by co-expression of TH with NURR1, and/or PITX3. We found that SOX2 and
LMX1a TAT-mediated protein transduction in the combination of SM could directly
convert human fibroblasts to self-renewal iDPCs. In conclusion, to our best
knowledge, this is the first report of generation of safe DPCs and may suggest an
alternative strategy for cell therapy for the treatment of neurodegenerative
disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25767075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Hum Mutat. 2015 Jun;36(6):631-7. doi: 10.1002/humu.22786. Epub 2015 Apr 21.

Heterozygous deletion of FOXA2 segregates with disease in a family with
heterotaxy, panhypopituitarism, and biliary atresia.

Tsai EA(1), Grochowski CM(2), Falsey AM(2), Rajagopalan R(2), Wendel D(3), Devoto
M(4,)(5,)(6,)(7), Krantz ID(4,)(5), Loomes KM(3,)(5), Spinner NB(2,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Computational Biology Graduate Group, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (2)Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (3)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania. (4)Division of Human Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (6)Department
of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (7)Department of Molecular Medicine,
University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy. (8)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania.

Biliary atresia (BA) is a pediatric cholangiopathy with unknown etiology
occurring in isolated and syndromic forms. Laterality defects affecting the
cardiovascular and gastrointestinal systems are the most common features present 
in syndromic BA. Most cases are sporadic, although reports of familial cases have
led to the hypothesis of genetic susceptibility in some patients. We identified a
child with BA, malrotation, and interrupted inferior vena cava whose father
presented with situs inversus, polysplenia, panhypopituitarism, and mildly
dysmorphic facial features. Chromosomal microarray analysis demonstrated a 277 kb
heterozygous deletion on chromosome 20, which included a single gene, FOXA2, in
the proband and her father. This deletion was confirmed to be de novo in the
father. The proband and her father share a common diagnosis of heterotaxy, but
they also each presented with a variety of other issues. Further genetic
screening revealed that the proband carried an additional protein-altering
polymorphism (rs1904589; p.His165Arg) in the NODAL gene that is not present in
the father, and this variant has been shown to decrease expression of the gene.
As FOXA2 can be a regulator of NODAL expression, we propose that
haploinsufficiency for FOXA2 combined with a decreased expression of NODAL is the
likely cause for syndromic BA in this proband.

© 2015 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

PMCID: PMC4477513 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25765999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2015 Mar;80(3):310-22. doi: 10.1134/S0006297915030062.

Epigenetic mechanisms of peptidergic regulation of gene expression during aging
of human cells.

Ashapkin VV(1), Linkova NS, Khavinson VKh, Vanyushin BF.

Author information: 
(1)Belozersky Institute of Physico-Chemical Biology, Lomonosov Moscow State
University, Moscow, 119992, Russia. ashapkin@genebee.msu.ru.

Expression levels of genes encoding specific transcription factors and other
functionally important proteins vary upon aging of pancreatic and bronchial
epithelium cell cultures. The peptides KEDW and AEDL tissue-specifically affect
gene expression in pancreatic and bronchial cell cultures, respectively. It is
established in this work that the DNA methylation patterns of the PDX1, PAX6,
NGN3, NKX2-1, and SCGB1A1 gene promoter regions change upon aging in pancreatic
and bronchial cell cultures in correlation with variations in their expression
levels. Thus, stable changes in gene expression upon aging of cell cultures could
be caused by changes in their promoter methylation patterns. The methylation
patterns of the PAX4 gene in pancreatic cells as well as those of the FOXA1,
SCGB3A2, and SFTPA1 genes in bronchial cells do not change upon aging and are
unaffected by peptides, whereas their expression levels change in both cases. The
promoter region of the FOXA2 gene in pancreatic cells contains a small number of 
methylated CpG sites, their methylation levels being affected by cell culture
aging and KEDW, though without any correlation with gene expression levels. The
promoter region of the FOXA2 gene is completely unmethylated in bronchial cells
irrespective of cell culture age and AEDL action. Changes in promoter methylation
might be the cause of age- and peptide-induced variations in expression levels of
the PDX1, PAX6, and NGN3 genes in pancreatic cells and NKX2-1 and SCGB1A1 genes
in bronchial cells. Expression levels of the PAX4 and FOXA2 genes in pancreatic
cells and FOXA1, FOXA2, SCGB3A2, and SFTPA1 genes in bronchial cells seem to be
controlled by some other mechanisms.

PMID: 25761685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. EMBO Mol Med. 2015 Mar 9;7(5):510-25. doi: 10.15252/emmm.201404610.

Combined Nurr1 and Foxa2 roles in the therapy of Parkinson's disease.

Oh SM(1), Chang MY(2), Song JJ(1), Rhee YH(1), Joe EH(3), Lee HS(4), Yi SH(5),
Lee SH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute, Hanyang
University, Seoul, Korea Graduate School of Biomedical Science and Engineering,
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (2)Hanyang Biomedical Research Institute,
Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Phamacology, Ajou University
School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea. (4)Department of Applied Bioscience, College of
Life Science, CHA University, Seoul, Korea. (5)Hanyang Biomedical Research
Institute, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea sanghooni@hanmail.net
leesh@hanyang.ac.kr. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College
of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea Hanyang Biomedical Research
Institute, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea Graduate School of Biomedical Science
and Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea sanghooni@hanmail.net
leesh@hanyang.ac.kr.

Erratum in
    EMBO Mol Med. 2016;8(2):171.

Use of the physiological mechanisms promoting midbrain DA (mDA) neuron survival
seems an appropriate option for developing treatments for Parkinson's disease
(PD). mDA neurons are specifically marked by expression of the transcription
factors Nurr1 and Foxa2. We show herein that Nurr1 and Foxa2 interact to protect 
mDA neurons against various toxic insults, but their expression is lost during
aging and degenerative processes. In addition to their proposed cell-autonomous
actions in mDA neurons, forced expression of these factors in neighboring glia
synergistically protects degenerating mDA neurons in a paracrine mode. As a
consequence of these bimodal actions, adeno-associated virus (AAV)-mediated gene 
delivery of Nurr1 and Foxa2 in a PD mouse model markedly protected mDA neurons
and motor behaviors associated with nigrostriatal DA neurotransmission. The
effects of the combined gene delivery were dramatic, highly reproducible, and
sustained for at least 1 year, suggesting that expression of these factors is a
promising approach in PD therapy.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4492814
PMID: 25759364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Sci Rep. 2015 Mar 10;5:8922. doi: 10.1038/srep08922.

Novel genetic variants in differentiated thyroid cancer and assessment of the
cumulative risk.

Figlioli G(1), Chen B(2), Elisei R(3), Romei C(3), Campo C(1), Cipollini M(4),
Cristaudo A(3), Bambi F(5), Paolicchi E(4), Hoffmann P(6), Herms S(6), Kalemba
M(7), Kula D(7), Pastor S(8), Marcos R(8), Velázquez A(8), Jarzab B(7), Landi
S(4), Hemminki K(9), Gemignani F(4), Försti A(9).

Author information: 
(1)1] Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany [2] Department of Biology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(2)Molecular Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ),
Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (4)Department of Biology, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(5)Blood Centre, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria A. Meyer, Firenze, Italy.
(6)1] Department of Genomics, Life and Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn,
Germany [2] Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany [3]
Division of Medical Genetics, University Hospital Basel; Department of
Biomedicine, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. (7)Department of Nuclear
Medicine and Endocrine Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center
and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice Branch, Gliwice, Poland. (8)1] Grup de
Mutagènesi, Departament de Genètica i de Microbiologia, Facultat de Biociències, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Cerdanyola del Vallés, Barcelona, Spain [2]
CIBER Epidemiologia y Salud Pública, ISCIII, Madrid, Spain. (9)1] Molecular
Genetic Epidemiology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
[2] Center for Primary Health Care Research, Clinical Research Center, Lund
University, Malmö, Sweden.

A genome-wide association study (GWAS) performed on a high-incidence Italian
population followed by replications on low-incidence cohorts suggested a strong
association of differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) with single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) at 9q22.33, 2q35, 20q11.22-q12 and 14q24.3. Moreover, six
additional susceptibility loci were associated with the disease only among
Italians. The present study had two aims, first to identify loci involved in DTC 
risk and then to assess the cumulative effect of the SNPs identified so far in
the Italian population. The combined analysis of the previous GWAS and the
present Italian study provided evidence of association with rs7935113 (GALNTL4,
OR = 1.36, 95%CI 1.20-1.53, p-value = 7.41 × 10(-7)) and rs1203952 (FOXA2, OR =
1.29, 95%CI 1.16-1.44, p-value = 4.42 × 10(-6)). Experimental ENCODE and eQTL
data suggested that both SNPs may influence the closest genes expression through 
a differential recruitment of transcription factors. The assessment of the
cumulative risk of eleven SNPs showed that DTC risk increases with an increasing 
number of risk alleles (p-trend = 3.13 × 10(-47)). Nonetheless, only a small
fraction (about 4% on the disease liability scale) of DTC is explained by these
SNPs. These data are consistent with a polygenic model of DTC predisposition and 
highlight the importance of association studies in the discovery of the disease
hereditability.

PMCID: PMC4354074
PMID: 25753578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Allergy Asthma Immunol Res. 2015 Sep;7(5):458-66. doi: 10.4168/aair.2015.7.5.458.
Epub 2015 May 22.

Expression and Regulation of Transcription Factor FoxA2 in Chronic Rhinosinusitis
With and Without Nasal Polyps.

Luo Q(1), Zhang J(2), Wang H(3), Chen F(2), Luo X(2), Miao B(4), Wu X(2), Ma
R(2), Luo X(2), Xu G(2), Shi J(5), Li H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Allergy Center, Otorhinolaryngology Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China.; Department of Otolaryngology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, China. (2)Allergy
Center, Otorhinolaryngology Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Department of Otolaryngology, PLA
General Hospital, Beijing, China. (4)Department of Otolaryngology, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China. (5)Allergy Center,
Otorhinolaryngology Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China. tsjbent@163.com. (6)Allergy Center,
Otorhinolaryngology Hospital, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou, China.; Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck
Surgery, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, China. allergyli@163.com.

PURPOSE: Chronic rhinosinusitis (CRS) is characterized by the excessive
production of mucus. However, the molecular mechanism underlying mucin
overproduction in CRS with or without nasal polyps (CRSwNP and CRSsNP,
respectively) is poorly understood. This study was conducted to assess the
importance of the transcription factor FoxA2 in mucin production and to
investigate the targeting of FoxA2 as a potential therapeutic strategy for mucus 
hypersecretion in CRS patients.
METHODS: We enrolled 15 CRSwNP patients, 15 CRSsNP patients, and 10 normal
controls in this study. The expression levels of FoxA2, MUC5AC, and MUC5B in
inflamed and healthy nasal tissues were examined via immunohistochemistry and
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and the levels of
several proinflammatory cytokines in nasal secretions were measured via
FlowCytomix analysis. In addition, the expression of MUC5AC and FoxA2 was
determined in polyp-derived epithelial cells and NCI-H292 cells after in vitro
stimulation.
RESULTS: FoxA2 was significantly down-regulated, and MUC5AC and MUC5B were
significantly up-regulated in both the CRSwNP and CRSsNP patients compared to the
controls (P<0.05), and the protein level of FoxA2 was negatively associated with 
the IL-6 level in the CRS patients (P<0.05). IL-6 significantly increased MUC5AC 
expression but inhibited FoxA2 expression in vitro (P<0.05). Transfection with a 
FoxA2 expression plasmid significantly decreased MUC5AC promoter activity
(P<0.05) and inhibited IL-6-induced MUC5AC production (P<0.05). In addition,
clarithromycin significantly alleviated IL-6-induced FoxA2 suppression and
decreased MUC5AC expression in vitro (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that FoxA2 may be considered a therapeutic
target for the modulation of mucus hypersecretion in CRS patients.

PMCID: PMC4509658
PMID: 25749777  [PubMed]


81. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Jul 1;24(13):1521-35. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0588. Epub 2015 
Apr 9.

VAV3 Overexpressed in Cancer Stem Cells Is a Poor Prognostic Indicator in Ovarian
Cancer Patients.

Kwon AY(1), Kim GI(1,)(2), Jeong JY(2), Song JY(2), Kwack KB(3), Lee C(4), Kang
HY(1,)(2), Kim TH(1,)(2), Heo JH(1,)(2), An HJ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, CHA University , Sungnam,
Republic of Korea. (2)2 Institute for Clinical Research, College of Medicine, CHA
University , Sungnam, Republic of Korea. (3)3 Department of Biomedical Science,
College of Medicine, CHA University , Sungnam, Republic of Korea. (4)4 Department
of Gynecologic Oncology, College of Medicine, CHA University , Sungnam, Republic 
of Korea.

Ovarian carcinoma is a highly lethal malignancy due to frequent relapse and drug 
resistance. Cancer stem cells (CSCs) are thought to contribute significantly to
disease relapse and drug resistance. In this study, a subpopulation of CSCs of
ovarian carcinoma was isolated and the genes differentially expressed in these
cells were identified to characterize CSCs and to find candidate biomarkers.
Ovarian carcinoma cells from patients were primarily cultured, and
spheroid-forming cells (SFCs) were isolated. The characteristic genes of SFCs
were identified through cDNA microarray and validation by quantitative real-time 
polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemistry, and the association of their 
expression with clinicopathologic parameters was analyzed. GSC (4.26-fold), VAV3 
(7.05-fold), FOXA2 (12.06-fold), LEF1 (17.26-fold), COMP (21.33-fold), GRIN2A
(9.36-fold), CD86 (23.14-fold), PYY (4.18-fold), NKX3-2 (10.35-fold), and PDK4
(74.26-fold) were significantly upregulated in SFCs compared with parental cancer
cells. With validation for human ovarian carcinomas, LEF1, PYY, NKX3-2, and WNT3A
were significantly upregulated in chemoresistant cancers compared with
chemosensitive cancers. Overexpression of LEF1, VAV3, and NKX3-2 was
significantly associated with distant metastasis by immunohistochemistry. VAV3
overexpression was an independent poor survival indicator (hazard ratio=15.27,
P<0.05) by multivariate Cox analysis. The further functional assay revealed that 
VAV3 knockdown regulated CSC activation and ovarian cancer cell proliferation and
sensitized paclitaxel (PTX)-resistant cancer cells to PTX treatment. Taken
together, we identified by high-throughput analysis of CSCs that VAV3
overexpression is a novel biomarker for poor prognosis and survival in ovarian
carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4499777 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25715123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Mar 15;332(2):190-201. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.02.004. Epub 
2015 Feb 17.

Dynamic heterogeneity of DNA methylation and hydroxymethylation in embryonic stem
cell populations captured by single-cell 3D high-content analysis.

Tajbakhsh J(1), Stefanovski D(2), Tang G(3), Wawrowsky K(4), Liu N(5), Fair
JH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Chromatin Biology Laboratory, Department of Surgery, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA; Translational Cytomics Group, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA; Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer
Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. Electronic
address: tajbakhshj@cshs.org. (2)Translational Cytomics Group, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA; Department of Biomedical Sciences,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA; Department of Clinical
Studies, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA 19348, USA. (3)Chromatin Biology Laboratory, Department of Surgery,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA; Translational Cytomics
Group, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. (4)Translational 
Cytomics Group, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA;
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA
90048, USA. (5)Department of Surgery and UF Health Comprehensive Transplant
Center, University of Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32608, USA.

Cell-surface markers and transcription factors are being used in the assessment
of stem cell fate and therapeutic safety, but display significant variability in 
stem cell cultures. We assessed nuclear patterns of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine
(5hmC, associated with pluripotency), a second important epigenetic mark, and its
combination with 5-methylcytosine (5mC, associated with differentiation), also in
comparison to more established markers of pluripotency (Oct-4) and endodermal
differentiation (FoxA2, Sox17) in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESC) over a 10-day
differentiation course in vitro: by means of confocal and super-resolution
imaging together with 3D high-content analysis, an essential tool in single-cell 
screening.IN SUMMARY: 1) We did not measure any significant correlation of
putative markers with global 5mC or 5hmC. 2) While average Oct-4 levels stagnated
on a cell-population base (0.015 lnIU/day), Sox17 and FoxA2 increased 22-fold and
3-fold faster, respectively (Sox17: 0.343 lnIU/day; FoxA2: 0.046 lnIU/day). In
comparison, global DNA methylation levels increased 4-fold faster (0.068
lnIU/day), and global hydroxymethylation declined at 0.046 lnIU/day, both with a 
better explanation of the temporal profile. 3) This progression was concomitant
with the occurrence of distinct nuclear codistribution patterns that represented 
a heterogeneous spectrum of states in differentiation; converging to three major 
coexisting 5mC/5hmC phenotypes by day 10: 5hmC(+)/5mC(-), 5hmC(+)/5mC(+), and
5hmC(-)/5mC(+) cells. 4) Using optical nanoscopy we could delineate the
respective topologies of 5mC/5hmC colocalization in subregions of nuclear DNA: in
the majority of 5hmC(+)/5mC(+) cells 5hmC and 5mC predominantly occupied mutually
exclusive territories resembling euchromatic and heterochromatic regions,
respectively. Simultaneously, in a smaller subset of cells we observed a tighter 
colocalization of the two cytosine variants, presumably delineating chromatin
domains in remodeling. We conclude that 1) 5mC emerges as the most differential
marker in our model system. 2) However, the combined enrollment of the two DNA
modifications provided higher-definition screening and lead to the identification
of cell subpopulations based on differential 5hmC/5mC phenotypes corresponding to
different 5hmC/5mC ratios. The results encourage: a) assessing the regenerative
potential of early-endodermal cells enriched for the three DNA
methylation/hydroxymethylation categories, and b) exploring the universality of
this type of epigenetic phenotyping across other lineage-specific
differentiations.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4364299
PMID: 25700729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Dent Res. 2015 Jun;94(6):843-52. doi: 10.1177/0022034515570316. Epub 2015 Feb
11.

Human periapical cyst-mesenchymal stem cells differentiate into neuronal cells.

Marrelli M(1), Paduano F(2), Tatullo M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Maxillofacial Surgery, Calabrodental, Crotone, Italy. (2)Tecnologica
Research Institute, Biomedical Section, Crotone, Italy. (3)Tecnologica Research
Institute, Biomedical Section, Crotone, Italy marco.tatullo@tecnologicasrl.com.

It was recently reported that human periapical cysts (hPCys), a commonly
occurring odontogenic cystic lesion of inflammatory origin, contain mesenchymal
stem cells (MSCs) with the capacity for self-renewal and multilineage
differentiation. In this study, periapical inflammatory cysts were compared with 
dental pulp to determine whether this tissue may be an alternative accessible
tissue source of MSCs that retain the potential for neurogenic differentiation.
Flow cytometry and immunofluorescence analysis indicated that hPCy-MSCs and
dental pulp stem cells spontaneously expressed the neuron-specific protein ß-III 
tubulin and the neural stem-/astrocyte-specific protein glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP) in their basal state before differentiation occurs. Furthermore,
undifferentiated hPCy-MSCs showed a higher expression of transcripts for neuronal
markers (ß-III tubulin, NF-M, MAP2) and neural-related transcription factors
(MSX-1, Foxa2, En-1) as compared with dental pulp stem cells. After exposure to
neurogenic differentiation conditions (neural media containing epidermal growth
factor [EGF], basic fibroblast growth factor [bFGF], and retinoic acid), the
hPCy-MSCs showed enhanced expression of ß-III tubulin and GFAP proteins, as well 
as increased expression of neurofilaments medium, neurofilaments heavy, and
neuron-specific enolase at the transcript level. In addition, neurally
differentiated hPCy-MSCs showed upregulated expression of the neural
transcription factors Pitx3, Foxa2, Nurr1, and the dopamine-related genes
tyrosine hydroxylase and dopamine transporter. The present study demonstrated for
the first time that hPCy-MSCs have a predisposition toward the neural phenotype
that is increased when exposed to neural differentiation cues, based on
upregulation of a comprehensive set of proteins and genes that define neuronal
cells. In conclusion, these results provide evidence that hPCy-MSCs might be
another optimal source of neural/glial cells for cell-based therapies to treat
neurologic diseases.

© International & American Associations for Dental Research 2015.

PMID: 25672890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. FASEB J. 2015 May;29(5):1986-98. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-264580. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Pulmonary expression of CYP2A13 and ABCB1 is regulated by FOXA2, and their
genetic interaction is associated with lung cancer.

Xiang C(1), Wang J(1), Kou X(1), Chen X(1), Qin Z(1), Jiang Y(1), Sun C(1), Xu
J(1), Tan W(1), Jin L(1), Lin D(1), He F(1), Wang H(2).

Author information: 
(1)*State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and Ministry of Education Key
Laboratory of Contemporary Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences; Institutes of Biomedical
Sciences of Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China;
Department of Etiology and Carcinogenesis, Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China; Department of 
Cardiothoracic Surgery, Changzheng Hospital of the Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai, China; and State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, China. (2)*State Key Laboratory of
Genetic Engineering and Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Contemporary
Anthropology, Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and Development,
School of Life Sciences; Institutes of Biomedical Sciences of Shanghai Medical
College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China; Department of Etiology and
Carcinogenesis, Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking 
Union Medical College, Beijing, China; Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery,
Changzheng Hospital of the Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China;
and State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, 
Beijing, China haijianwang@fudan.edu.cn.

Inhaled xenobiotics such as tobacco-specific carcinogen
4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone are mainly metabolized by phase I 
oxidase cytochrome P450, family 2, subfamily A, polypeptide 13 (CYP2A13), phase
II conjugate UDP glucuronosyltransferase 2 family, polypeptide B17 (UGT2B17), and
phase III transporter ATP-binding cassette, subfamily B (MDR/TAP), member 1
(ABCB1), with genetic polymorphisms implicated in lung cancer. Their genetic
interaction and pulmonary expression regulation are largely unknown. We analyzed 
joint association for CYP2A13 and ABCB1 polymorphisms in 2 independent lung
cancer case populations (669 and 566 patients) and 1 common control population
(749 subjects), and characterized the trans-acting function of the lung
development-related transcription factor forkhead box A2 (FOXA2). We undertook
FOXA2 overexpression and down-regulation in lung epithelial cell lines, analyzed 
functional impact on the transactivation of CYP2A13, UGT2B17, and ABCB1, and
measured correlation for their expressions in lung tissues. We found a
substantial reduction in cancer risk (OR 0.39; 95% CI 0.25-0.61; Pinteraction =
0.029) associated with combined genotypes for CYP2A13 R257C and a functionary
regulatory variant in the cis element of ABCB1 synergistically targeted by GATA
binding protein 6 and FOXA2. Genetic manipulation of FOXA2 consistently
influenced its binding to and transactivation of the promoters of CYP2A13,
UGT2B17, and ABCB1, whose mRNA and protein expressions were all consistently
correlated with those of FOXA2 in both tumorous and normal lung tissues. We
therefore establish FOXA2 as a core transcriptional modulator for pulmonary
xenobiotic metabolic pathways and uncover an etiologically relevant interaction
between CYP2A13 and ABCB1, furthering our understanding of expression and
function of the xenobiotic metabolism system.

© FASEB.

PMID: 25667220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Dec 15;418 Pt 3:334-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.01.043. 
Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Interplay of estrogen receptors and FOXA factors in the liver cancer.

Zhao Y(1), Li Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, 
FL 32224, USA. (2)Department of Cancer Biology, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road,
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. Electronic address: li.zhaoyu@mayo.edu.

Liver cancer is the fifth most common cancer in human with male dominance. Sexual
dimorphism of liver cancer is conserved from rodents to humans, which was firstly
found in mice in late 1930s and female mice were resistant to liver cancer. Sex
hormones were found to affect the incidence of liver cancer in rodents. Estrogen 
receptor alpha (ERa)-mediated estrogen signaling or androgen receptor-mediated
androgen signaling prevents or promotes the growth of rodent liver tumors,
respectively. Forkhead box protein A (Foxa) factors, Foxa1 and Foxa2, also known 
as pioneer transcription factors in liver specification, are essential for both
estrogen and androgen signaling by acting as central regulators of sexual
dimorphism in liver cancer. This review mainly focuses on the interplay between
ERa and FOXA factors in liver cancer, and summarizes recent breakthrough studies 
in elucidating the mechanisms of sexual dimorphism in liver cancer.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4524798 [Available on 2016-12-15]
PMID: 25661537  [PubMed - in process]


86. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 6;10(2):e0117580. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117580.
eCollection 2015.

Investigating the potential influence of cause of death and cocaine levels on the
differential expression of genes associated with cocaine abuse.

Bannon MJ(1), Savonen CL(1), Hartley ZJ(1), Johnson MM(1), Schmidt CJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Wayne State University School of Medicine,
Detroit, Michigan, United States of America. (2)Department of Pathology,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of
America.

The development of new therapeutic strategies for the treatment of complex brain 
disorders such as drug addiction is likely to be advanced by a more complete
understanding of the underlying molecular pathophysiology. Although the study of 
postmortem human brain represents a unique resource in this regard, it can be
challenging to disentangle the relative contribution of chronic pathological
processes versus perimortem events to the observed changes in gene expression. To
begin to unravel this issue, we analyzed by quantitative PCR the midbrain
expression of numerous candidate genes previously associated with cocaine abuse. 
Data obtained from chronic cocaine abusers (and matched control subjects) dying
of gunshot wounds were compared with a prior study of subjects with deaths
directly attributable to cocaine abuse. Most of the genes studied (i.e., tyrosine
hydroxylase, dopamine transporter, forkhead box A2, histone variant H3 family 3B,
nuclear factor kappa B inhibitor alpha, growth arrest and DNA damage-inducible
beta) were found to be differentially expressed in chronic cocaine abusers
irrespective of immediate cause of death or perimortem levels of cocaine,
suggesting that these may represent core pathophysiological changes arising with 
chronic drug abuse. On the other hand, chemokine C-C motif ligand 2 and jun
proto-oncogene expression were unaffected in cocaine-abusing subjects dying of
gunshot wounds, in contrast to the differential expression previously reported in
cocaine-related fatalities. The possible influence of cause of death and other
factors on the cocaine-responsiveness of these genes is discussed.

PMCID: PMC4319936
PMID: 25658879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 5;5:8272. doi: 10.1038/srep08272.

Deficiency of Capicua disrupts bile acid homeostasis.

Kim E(1), Park S(1), Choi N(1), Lee J(2), Yoe J(1), Kim S(1), Jung HY(3), Kim
KT(4), Kang H(5), Fryer JD(6), Zoghbi HY(7), Hwang D(8), Lee Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
Pohang, Gyeongbuk 790-784, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Chemical
Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Gyeongbuk
790-784, Republic of Korea. (3)Division of Integrative Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, Gyeongbuk
790-784, Republic of Korea. (4)1] Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University 
of Science and Technology, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 790-784, Republic of Korea [2]
Division of Integrative Bioscience and Biotechnology, Pohang University of
Science and Technology, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 790-784, Republic of Korea. (5)National
Institute of Supercomputing and Networking, Korea Institute of Science and
Technology Information, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea. (6)Department of
Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. (7)Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Departments of Molecular and Human Genetics, and Neuroscience, Baylor 
College of Medicine, and Jan and Dan Duncan Neurological Research Institute at
Texas Children's Hospital, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (8)1] Division of Integrative 
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
Pohang, Gyeongbuk 790-784, Republic of Korea [2] Center for Plant Aging Research,
Institute for Basic Science, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science and Technology,
Daegu, 711-873, Republic of Korea.

Capicua (CIC) has been implicated in pathogenesis of spinocerebellar ataxia type 
1 and cancer in mammals; however, the in vivo physiological functions of CIC
remain largely unknown. Here we show that Cic hypomorphic (Cic-L(-/-)) mice have 
impaired bile acid (BA) homeostasis associated with induction of proinflammatory 
cytokines. We discovered that several drug metabolism and BA transporter genes
were down-regulated in Cic-L(-/-) liver, and that BA was increased in the liver
and serum whereas bile was decreased within the gallbladder of Cic-L(-/-) mice.
We also found that levels of proinflammatory cytokine genes were up-regulated in 
Cic-L(-/-) liver. Consistent with this finding, levels of hepatic transcriptional
regulators, such as hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1a),
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPß), forkhead box protein A2 (FOXA2),
and retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRa), were markedly decreased in Cic-L(-/-) mice.
Moreover, induction of tumor necrosis factor alpha (Tnfa) expression and decrease
in the levels of FOXA2, C/EBPß, and RXRa were found in Cic-L(-/-) liver before BA
was accumulated, suggesting that inflammation might be the cause for the
cholestasis in Cic-L(-/-) mice. Our findings indicate that CIC is a critical
regulator of BA homeostasis, and that its dysfunction might be associated with
chronic liver disease and metabolic disorders.

PMCID: PMC4317698
PMID: 25653040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Stem Cells. 2015 May;33(5):1601-17. doi: 10.1002/stem.1949.

Epigenetic regulation contributes to urocortin-enhanced midbrain dopaminergic
neuron differentiation.

Huang HY(1), Chiu TL, Chang HF, Hsu HR, Pang CY, Liew HK, Wang MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research, Neuro-Medical Scientific Center, Buddhist Tzu 
Chi General Hospital, Hualien, Taiwan.

The production of midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons requires precise extrinsic 
inductive signals and intrinsic transcriptional cascade at a specific time point 
in development. Urocortin (UCN) is a peptide of the corticotropin-releasing
hormone family that mediates various responses to stress. UCN was first cloned
from adult rat midbrain. However, the contribution of UCN to the development of
mDA neurons is poorly understood. Here, we show that UCN is endogenously
expressed in the developing ventral midbrain (VM) and its receptors are exhibited
in Nurr1(+) postmitotic mDA precursors and TH(+) neurons, suggesting possible
roles in regulating their terminal differentiation. UCN treatment increased DA
cell numbers in rat VM precursor cultures by promoting the conversion of Nurr1(+)
precursors into DA neurons. Furthermore, neutralization of secreted UCN with
anti-UCN antibody resulted in a reduction in the number of DA neurons. UCN
induced an abundance of acetylated histone H3 and enhanced late DA regulator
Nurr1, Foxa2, and Pitx3 expressions. Using pharmacological and RNA interference
approaches, we further demonstrated that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition
and late transcriptional factors upregulation contribute to UCN-mediated DA
neuron differentiation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that UCN 
promoted histone acetylation of chromatin surrounding the TH promoter by directly
inhibiting HDAC and releasing of methyl CpG binding protein 2-CoREST-HDAC1
repressor complex from the promoter, ultimately leading to an increase in
Nurr1/coactivators-mediated transcription of TH gene. Moreover, UCN treatment in 
vivo also resulted in increased DA neuron differentiation. These findings suggest
that UCN might contribute to regulate late mDA neuron differentiation during VM
development.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25641682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Cell Biol Int. 2015 May;39(5):591-9. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10430. Epub 2015 Feb 12.

Differential effect of Activin A and WNT3a on definitive endoderm differentiation
on electrospun nanofibrous PCL scaffold.

Hoveizi E(1), Massumi M, Ebrahimi-barough S, Tavakol S, Ai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Shahid Chamran University of
Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran.

The first step in the formation of hepatocytes and beta cells is the generation
of definitive endoderm (DE) which involves a central issue in developmental
biology. Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) have the pluripotency to
differentiate into all three germ layers in vitro and have been considered potent
candidates for regenerative medicine as an unlimited source of cells for
therapeutic applications. In this study, we investigated the differentiating
potential of hiPSCs on poly (e-caprolactone) (PCL) nanofibrous scaffold into DE
cells. Here, we demonstrate directed differentiation of hiPSCs by factors such as
Activin A and Wnt3a. The differentiation was determined by immunofluoresence
staining with Sox17, FoxA2 and Goosecoid (Gsc) and also by qRT-PCR analysis. The 
results of this study showed that hiPSCs, as a new cell source, have the ability 
to differentiate into DE cells with a high capacity and also demonstrate that
three dimension (3D) culture provides a suitable nanoenviroment for growth,
proliferation and differentiation of hiPSCs. PCL nanofibrous scaffold with
essential supplements, stimulating factors and EB-derived cells is able to
provide a novel method for enhancing functional differentiation of hiPSCs into DE
cells.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 25640312  [PubMed - in process]


90. Diabetes. 2015 May;64(5):1794-803. doi: 10.2337/db14-0635. Epub 2015 Jan 27.

Engineered commensal bacteria reprogram intestinal cells into glucose-responsive 
insulin-secreting cells for the treatment of diabetes.

Duan FF(1), Liu JH(1), March JC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY. (2)Department of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY jcm224@cornell.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 Apr;11(4):192.

The inactive full-length form of GLP-1(1-37) stimulates conversion of both rat
and human intestinal epithelial cells into insulin-secreting cells. We
investigated whether oral administration of human commensal bacteria engineered
to secrete GLP-1(1-37) could ameliorate hyperglycemia in a rat model of diabetes 
by reprogramming intestinal cells into glucose-responsive insulin-secreting
cells. Diabetic rats were fed daily with human lactobacilli engineered to secrete
GLP-1(1-37). Diabetic rats fed GLP-1-secreting bacteria showed significant
increases in insulin levels and, additionally, were significantly more glucose
tolerant than those fed the parent bacterial strain. These rats developed
insulin-producing cells within the upper intestine in numbers sufficient to
replace ~25-33% of the insulin capacity of nondiabetic healthy rats. Intestinal
tissues in rats with reprogrammed cells expressed MafA, PDX-1, and FoxA2. HNF-6
expression was observed only in crypt epithelia expressing insulin and not in
epithelia located higher on the villous axis. Staining for other cell markers in 
rats treated with GLP-1(1-37)-secreting bacteria suggested that normal function
was not inhibited by the close physical proximity of reprogrammed cells. These
results provide evidence of the potential for a safe and effective nonabsorbed
oral treatment for diabetes and support the concept of engineered commensal
bacterial signaling to mediate enteric cell function in vivo.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4407861 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25626737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Dev Biol. 2015 Mar 15;399(2):263-82. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.037. Epub 2015 
Jan 17.

Ontogeny of the mouse vocal fold epithelium.

Lungova V(1), Verheyden JM(2), Herriges J(2), Sun X(3), Thibeault SL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, UW Madison, 5107 WIMR, 1111 Highland Ave, Madison, WI
53705, USA. (2)Laboratory of Genetics, Biotechnology Center, UW Madison, 425-g
Henry Mall, Madison, WI 53706, USA. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, Biotechnology
Center, UW Madison, 425-g Henry Mall, Madison, WI 53706, USA. Electronic address:
xsun@wisc.edu. (4)Department of Surgery, UW Madison, 5107 WIMR, 1111 Highland
Ave, Madison, WI 53705, USA. Electronic address: Thibeaul@surgery.wisc.edu.

This investigation provides the first systematic determination of the cellular
and molecular progression of vocal fold (VF) epithelium development in a murine
model. We define five principal developmental events that constitute the
progression from VF initiation in the embryonic anterior foregut tube to fully
differentiated and functional adult tissue. These developmental events include
(1) the initiation of the larynx and vocal folds with apposition of the lateral
walls of the primitive laryngopharynx (embryonic (E) day 10.5); (2) the
establishment of the epithelial lamina with fusion of the lateral walls of the
primitive laryngopharynx (E11.5); (3) the epithelial lamina recanalization and
separation of VFs (E13.5-18.5); (4) the stratification of the vocal folds
(E13.5-18.5); and (5) the maturation of vocal fold epithelium (postnatal stages).
The illustration of these morphogenetic events is substantiated by dynamic
changes in cell proliferation and apoptosis, as well as the expression pattern of
key transcription factors, FOXA2, SOX2 and NKX2-1 that specify and pattern the
foregut endoderm. Furthermore, we documented the gradual conversion of VF
epithelial cells from simple precursors expressing cytokeratins 8 and 18 in the
embryo into mature stratified epithelial cells also expressing cytokeratins 5 and
14 in the adult. Interestingly, in the adult, cytokeratins 5 and 14 appear to be 
expressed in all cell layers in the VF, in contrast to their preferential
localization to the basal cell layer in surrounding epithelium. To begin
investigating the role of signaling molecules in vocal fold development, we
characterized the expression pattern of SHH pathway genes, and how loss of Shh
affects vocal fold development in the mutant. This study defines the cellular and
molecular context and serves as the necessary foundation for future functional
investigations of VF formation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4352410
PMID: 25601450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Inflammation. 2015;38(3):1329-36. doi: 10.1007/s10753-014-0104-y.

Propofol Attenuates Lipopolysaccharide-Induced Monocyte Chemoattractant Protein-1
Production Through Enhancing apoM and foxa2 Expression in HepG2 Cells.

Ma X(1), Zhao JY, Zhao ZL, Ye J, Li SF, Fang HH, Gu MN, Hu YW, Qin ZS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510515, China.

Monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1) is a cytokine that mediates the influx
of cells to sites of inflammation. Our group recently reported that propofol
exerted an anti-inflammatory effect and could inhibit lipopolysaccharide
(LPS)-induced production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. However, the effect and
possible mechanisms of propofol on MCP-1 expression remain unclear.
LPS-stimulated HepG2 cells were treated with 50 µM propofol for 0, 6, 12, and 24 
h, respectively. The transcript and protein levels were measured by real-time
quantitative PCR and Western blot analyses, respectively. We found that propofol 
markedly decreased both MCP-1 messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein levels in
LPS-stimulated HepG2 cells in a time-dependent manner. Expression of
apolipoprotein M (apoM) and forkhead box protein A2 (foxa2) was increased by
propofol treatment in HepG2 cells. In addition, the inhibitory effect of propofol
on MCP-1 expression was significantly abolished by small interfering RNA against 
apoM and foxa2 in LPS-stimulated HepG2 cells. Propofol attenuates LPS-induced
MCP-1 production through enhancing apoM and foxa2 expression in HepG2 cells.

PMID: 25586482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Stem Cells Int. 2014;2014:379678. doi: 10.1155/2014/379678. Epub 2014 Dec 3.

Transient Downregulation of Nanog and Oct4 Induced by DETA/NO Exposure in Mouse
Embryonic Stem Cells Leads to Mesodermal/Endodermal Lineage Differentiation.

Mora-Castilla S(1), Tejedo JR(2), Tapia-Limonchi R(2), Díaz I(2), Hitos AB(2),
Cahuana GM(2), Hmadcha A(3), Martín F(2), Soria B(3), Bedoya FJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine (CABIMER),
University Pablo de Olavide, Biomedical Research Network (CIBER) of Diabetes and 
Related Metabolic Diseases, Red-Tercel, Avenida Américo Vespucio S/N, 41092
Seville, Spain ; Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, University of
California San Diego, 2880 Torrey Pines Scenic Drive, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
(2)Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine (CABIMER),
University Pablo de Olavide, Biomedical Research Network (CIBER) of Diabetes and 
Related Metabolic Diseases, Red-Tercel, Avenida Américo Vespucio S/N, 41092
Seville, Spain. (3)Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative
Medicine (CABIMER), Progress and Health Foundation, Biomedical Research Network
(CIBER) of Diabetes and Related Metabolic Diseases, Red TerCel, Américo Vespucio 
S/N, 41092 Seville, Spain.

The function of pluripotency genes in differentiation is a matter of
investigation. We report here that Nanog and Oct4 are reexpressed in two mouse
embryonic stem cell (mESC) lines following exposure to the differentiating agent 
DETA/NO. Both cell lines express a battery of both endoderm and mesoderm markers 
following induction of differentiation with DETA/NO-based protocols. Confocal
analysis of cells undergoing directed differentiation shows that the majority of 
cells expressing Nanog express also endoderm genes such as Gata4 and FoxA2 (75.4%
and 96.2%, resp.). Simultaneously, mRNA of mesodermal markers Flk1 and Mef2c are 
also regulated by the treatment. Acetylated histone H3 occupancy at the promoter 
of Nanog is involved in the process of reexpression. Furthermore, Nanog binding
to the promoter of Brachyury leads to repression of this gene, thus disrupting
mesendoderm transition.

PMCID: PMC4269087
PMID: 25544848  [PubMed]


94. Toxicology. 2015 Feb 3;328:160-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2014.12.010. Epub 2014 Dec
12.

Effect of perfluorooctane sulfonate on pluripotency and differentiation factors
in mouse embryoid bodies.

Xu B(1), Ji X(2), Chen X(3), Yao M(2), Han X(2), Chen M(2), Tang W(4), Xia Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China; Key Laboratory of Modern
Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 211166, China; Department of Endocrinology, The Affiliated
Jiangyin People's Hospital of Wuxi Clinical School of Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Jiangyin 214400, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive
Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166,
China; Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of
Public Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 211166, China; State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine,
Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 
210029, China. (4)Department of Endocrinology, The Affiliated Jiangyin People's
Hospital of Wuxi Clinical School of Medicine, Nanjing Medical University,
Jiangyin 214400, China. (5)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine,
Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China; Key
Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 211166, China. Electronic address:
yankaixia@njmu.edu.cn.

Perfluorooctane sulfonate (PFOS) poses potential risks to early development, but 
the molecular mechanisms how PFOS affects embryonic development are still
unclear. Mouse embryoid bodies (mEBs) provide ideal models for testing safety or 
toxicity of chemicals in vitro. In this study, mEBs were exposed to PFOS up to 6 
days and then their pluripotency and differentiation markers were evaluated. Our 
data showed that the mRNA and protein levels of pluripotency markers (Oct4, Sox2,
Nanog) in mEBs were significantly increased following exposure to PFOS.
Meanwhile, the expressions of miR-134, miR-145, miR-490-3p were decreased
accordingly. PFOS reduced the mRNA levels of endodermal markers (Sox17, FOXA2),
mesodermal markers (SMA, Brachyury) and ectodermal markers (Nestin, Fgf5) in
mEBs. Meanwhile, PFOS increased the mRNA and protein levels of polycomb group
(PcG) family members (Cbx4, Cbx7, Ezh2). Overall, our results showed that PFOS
could increase the expression levels of pluripotency factors and decrease the
differentiation markers.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25510869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 12;9(12):e114868. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114868.
eCollection 2014.

Moderate hypoxia induces ß-cell dysfunction with HIF-1-independent gene
expression changes.

Sato Y(1), Inoue M(2), Yoshizawa T(1), Yamagata K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Osaka Medical Center 
for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Japan.

Pancreatic ß-cell failure is central to the development and progression of type 2
diabetes. We recently demonstrated that ß-cells become hypoxic under high glucose
conditions due to increased oxygen consumption and that the pancreatic islets of 
diabetic mice but not those of control mice are moderately hypoxic. However, the 
impact of moderate hypoxia on ß-cell number and function is unknown. In the
present study, moderate hypoxia induced a hypoxic response in MIN6 cells, as
evidenced by increased levels of HIF-1a protein and target genes. Under these
conditions, a selective downregulation of Mafa, Pdx1, Slc2a2, Ndufa5, Kcnj11,
Ins1, Wfs1, Foxa2, and Neurod1, which play important roles in ß-cells, was also
observed in both MIN6 cells and isolated pancreatic islets. Consistent with the
altered expression of these genes, abnormal insulin secretion was detected in
hypoxic MIN6 cells. Most of the hypoxia-induced gene downregulation in MIN6 cells
was not affected by the suppression of HIF-1a, suggesting a HIF-1-independent
mechanism. Moderate hypoxia also induced apoptosis in MIN6 cells. These results
suggest that hypoxia is a novel stressor of ß-cells and that hypoxic stress may
play a role in the deterioration of ß-cell function.

PMCID: PMC4264765
PMID: 25503986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cell Signal. 2015 Apr;27(4):729-38. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.11.038. Epub 2014
Dec 12.

Molecular mechanisms of hepatic apoptosis regulated by nuclear factors.

Wang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Peoria, IL
61605, USA. Electronic address: kewang@uic.edu.

Apoptosis is a prominent characteristic in the pathogenesis of liver disease. The
mechanism of hepatic apoptosis is not well understood. Hepatic apoptosis alters
relative levels of nuclear factors such as Foxa2, NF-<U+03BA>B, C/EBPß, and p53.
Regulation of nuclear factors modulates the degree of hepatic apoptosis and the
progression of liver disease. Nuclear factors have distinctive mechanisms to
mediate hepatic apoptosis. The modification of nuclear factors is a novel
therapeutic strategy for liver disease as demonstrated by pre-clinical models and
clinical trials.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25499978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Hepatol. 2015 Apr;62(4):889-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.10.033. Epub 2014 Oct 
30.

Dysregulated miR-124 and miR-200 expression contribute to cholangiocyte
proliferation in the cholestatic liver by targeting IL-6/STAT3 signalling.

Xiao Y(1), Wang J(2), Yan W(2), Zhou Y(2), Chen Y(3), Zhou K(3), Wen J(3), Wang
Y(3), Cai W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Xin Hua Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Institute of Pediatric
Research, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pediatric Gastroenterology 
and Nutrition, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Xin Hua
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China;
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Shanghai,
China. (3)Shanghai Institute of Pediatric Research, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Shanghai, China.
(4)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Xin Hua Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Institute of Pediatric
Research, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pediatric Gastroenterology 
and Nutrition, Shanghai, China. Electronic address: caiw1978@163.com.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Cholestatic liver disease is associated with dysregulated
expression of microRNAs (miRNAs). However, it remains unknown whether miRNAs are 
involved in the cholestasis-induced proliferation of cholangiocytes. In this
study, we tested the hypothesis that miRNAs modulate cholangiocyte proliferation 
through effects on the IL-6 pathway, a known regulator of cholangiocyte
proliferation.
METHODS: Expression of IL-6, Foxa2, and phosphorylated signal transducer
activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) was investigated in patients with biliary
atresia (BA) and in rats subjected to bile duct ligation (BDL). miRNA expression 
was determined in BA patients and BDL rats, with miRNA array and quantitative
real-time PCR. Biological functions of miRNAs were studied using immunoblot,
immunohistochemical and proliferation assays. Luciferase reporter assays and
Western blots were performed to identify miRNA targets.
RESULTS: Hepatic interleukin-6 (IL-6) expression was significantly elevated in BA
patients and BDL rats, while the expression of miR-124 was dramatically decreased
in comparison to controls. Moreover, mRNA levels of STAT3 and IL-6 receptor
(IL-6R) were inversely correlated with those of miR-124. Ectopic expression of
miR-124 inhibited IL-6-mediated cholangiocyte proliferation in vitro and
cholangiocyte hyperplasia in vivo, through a mechanism involving direct targeting
of the 3'-untranslated region of STAT3 and IL-6R. We further demonstrated that
miR-200 family members were significantly upregulated in cholestasis and
inhibited FOXA2 expression in cholangiocytes, which further enhanced the
expression of IL-6.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that downregulation of miR-124 and upregulation
of miR-200 collaboratively promote bile duct proliferation through the IL-6/STAT3
pathway.

Copyright © 2014 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25450715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Dev Biol. 2014 Dec 15;396(2):201-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.10.002. Epub 2014 
Oct 18.

Hepatic Notch2 deficiency leads to bile duct agenesis perinatally and secondary
bile duct formation after weaning.

Falix FA(1), Weeda VB(2), Labruyere WT(3), Poncy A(4), de Waart DR(3), Hakvoort
TB(3), Lemaigre F(4), Gaemers IC(3), Aronson DC(5), Lamers WH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Tytgat Institute for Liver and Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Emma Children's Hospital AMC and Pediatric Surgical
Center of Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: f.a.falix@amc.nl. (2)Tytgat Institute for Liver and
Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Emma
Children's Hospital AMC and Pediatric Surgical Center of Amsterdam, Academic
Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Tytgat Institute for Liver and
Intestinal Research, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Université Catholique de Louvain and the Duve Institute, Brussels, Belgium.
(5)Emma Children's Hospital AMC and Pediatric Surgical Center of Amsterdam,
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Notch signaling plays an acknowledged role in bile-duct development, but its
involvement in cholangiocyte-fate determination remains incompletely understood. 
We investigated the effects of early Notch2 deletion in
Notch2(fl/fl)/Alfp-Cre(tg/-) ("Notch2-cKO") and Notch2(fl/fl)/Alfp-Cre(-/-)
("control") mice. Fetal and neonatal Notch2-cKO livers were devoid of
cytokeratin19 (CK19)-, Dolichos-biflorus agglutinin (DBA)-, and SOX9-positive
ductal structures, demonstrating absence of prenatal cholangiocyte
differentiation. Despite extensive cholestatic hepatocyte necrosis and growth
retardation, mortality was only ~15%. Unexpectedly, a slow process of secondary
cholangiocyte differentiation and bile-duct formation was initiated around
weaning that histologically resembled the ductular reaction. Newly formed ducts
varied from rare and non-connected, to multiple, disorganized tubular structures 
that connected to the extrahepatic bile ducts. Jaundice had disappeared in ~30%
of Notch2-cKO mice by 6 months. The absence of NOTCH2 protein in postnatally
differentiating cholangiocyte nuclei of Notch2-cKO mice showed that these cells
had not originated from non-recombined precursor cells. Notch2 and Hnf6 mRNA
levels were permanently decreased in Notch2-cKO livers. Perinatally, Foxa1,
Foxa2, Hhex, Hnf1ß, Cebpa and Sox9 mRNA levels were all significantly lower in
Notch2-cKO than control mice, but all except Foxa2 returned to normal or
increased levels after weaning, coincident with the observed secondary bile-duct 
formation. Interestingly, Hhex and Sox9 mRNA levels remained elevated in icteric 
6 months old Notch2-cKOs, but decreased to control levels in non-icteric
Notch2-cKOs, implying a key role in secondary bile-duct formation.CONCLUSION:
Cholangiocyte differentiation becomes progressively less dependent on NOTCH2
signaling with age, suggesting that ductal-plate formation is dependent on
NOTCH2, but subsequent cholangiocyte differentiation is not.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Cell Rep. 2014 Nov 6;9(3):996-1006. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.09.048. Epub 2014 
Oct 23.

Changes in nucleosome occupancy associated with metabolic alterations in aged
mammalian liver.

Bochkis IM(1), Przybylski D(2), Chen J(3), Regev A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic
address: ibochkis@broadinstitute.org. (2)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (3)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA; Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (4)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Aging is accompanied by physiological impairments, which, in insulin-responsive
tissues, including the liver, predispose individuals to metabolic disease.
However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these changes remain largely
unknown. Here, we analyze genome-wide profiles of RNA and chromatin organization 
in the liver of young (3 months) and old (21 months) mice. Transcriptional
changes suggest that derepression of the nuclear receptors PPARa, PPAR<U+03B3>, and LXRa
in aged mouse liver leads to activation of targets regulating lipid synthesis and
storage, whereas age-dependent changes in nucleosome occupancy are associated
with binding sites for both known regulators (forkhead factors and nuclear
receptors) and candidates associated with nuclear lamina (Hdac3 and Srf)
implicated to govern metabolic function of aging liver. Winged-helix
transcription factor Foxa2 and nuclear receptor corepressor Hdac3 exhibit a
reciprocal binding pattern at PPARa targets contributing to gene expression
changes that lead to steatosis in aged liver.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4250828
PMID: 25437555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. BMC Cancer. 2014 Nov 25;14:879. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-879.

microRNA-141 inhibits cell proliferation and invasion and promotes apoptosis by
targeting hepatocyte nuclear factor-3ß in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Lin L, Liang H, Wang Y, Yin X, Hu Y, Huang J, Ren T, Xu H, Zheng L(1), Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, North of Guangzhou avenue No,1838, Baiyun District, Guangzhou 510515,
P,R, China. nfyyzhenglei@smu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3ß (HNF-3ß) plays a critical role in
hepatocyte differentiation and controls liver-specific gene expression during the
development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), but the molecular basis of this
process has not been fully elucidated. microRNAs (miRNAs) are powerful,
post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression. Whether miRNAs can impact the
effects of HNF-3ß in HCC is still unknown.
METHODS: HNF-3ß and miR-141 expression levels were detected in HepG2 cells, using
real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). Luciferase reporter assays and Western
blots were used to validate HNF-3ß as a direct target gene of miR-141. Cell
proliferation, invasion, and apoptosis were also examined to confirm whether
miR-141 could impact on HNF-3ß in HCC.
RESULTS: In this study, we found that HNF-3ß protein levels were consistently
upregulated in HCC clinical tissues compared with matched normal adjacent
tissues. However, the mRNA levels of HNF-3ß varied in random tissues, suggesting 
that a post-transcriptional mechanism was involved in its regulation. We used
bioinformatic analyses to search for miRNAs that could potentially target HNF-3ß,
and identified specific targeting sites for miR-141 in the 3'-untranslated region
(3'-UTR) of the HNF-3ß gene. By overexpressing miR-141 in HepG2 cells, we
experimentally validated that miR-141 directly regulated HNF-3ß expression.
Furthermore, the biological consequences of targeting HNF-3ß by miR-141 were
examined using cell proliferation, invasion and apoptosis assays in vitro. We
demonstrated that the repression of HNF-3ß by miR-141 suppressed the
proliferation and invasion and promoted the apoptosis of HepG2 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-141 functions as a tumor suppressor in HCC cells through the
inhibition of HNF-3ß translation.

PMCID: PMC4289273
PMID: 25425543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Dec;16(12):1146-56. doi: 10.1038/ncb3070. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

SOX17 links gut endoderm morphogenesis and germ layer segregation.

Viotti M(1), Nowotschin S(2), Hadjantonakis AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York 10065, USA [2] Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology Program,
Weill Graduate School of Medical Sciences of Cornell University, New York 10065, 
USA. (2)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, 1275 York
Avenue, New York 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Dec;16(12):1128-9.

Gastrulation leads to three germ layers--ectoderm, mesoderm and endoderm--that
are separated by two basement membranes. In the mouse embryo, the emergent gut
endoderm results from the widespread intercalation of cells of two distinct
origins: pluripotent epiblast-derived definitive endoderm (DE) and
extra-embryonic visceral endoderm (VE). Here we image the trajectory of
prospective DE cells before intercalating into the VE epithelium. We show that
the transcription factor SOX17, which is activated in prospective DE cells before
intercalation, is necessary for gut endoderm morphogenesis and the assembly of
the basement membrane that separates gut endoderm from mesoderm. Our results
mechanistically link gut endoderm morphogenesis and germ layer segregation, two
central and conserved features of gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC4250291
PMID: 25419850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Acta Diabetol. 2015 Jun;52(3):523-30. doi: 10.1007/s00592-014-0675-y. Epub 2014
Nov 19.

MicroRNA-124a is hyperexpressed in type 2 diabetic human pancreatic islets and
negatively regulates insulin secretion.

Sebastiani G(1), Po A, Miele E, Ventriglia G, Ceccarelli E, Bugliani M, Marselli 
L, Marchetti P, Gulino A, Ferretti E, Dotta F.

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione Umberto Di Mario ONLUS, c/o Toscana Life Science Park, Siena,
Italy, sebastianiguido@gmail.com.

AIMS: MicroRNAs are a class of negative regulators of gene expression, which have
been shown to be involved in the development of endocrine pancreas and in the
regulation of insulin secretion. Since type 2 diabetes (T2D) is characterized by 
beta cell dysfunction, we aimed at evaluating expression levels of miR-124a and
miR-375, both involved in the control of beta cell function, in human pancreatic 
islets obtained from T2D and from age-matched non-diabetic organ donors.
METHODS: We analyzed miR-124a and miR-375 expression by real-time qRT-PCR in
human pancreatic islets and evaluated the potential role of miR-124a by
overexpressing or silencing such miRNA in MIN6 pseudoislets.
RESULTS: We identified a major miR-124a hyperexpression in T2D human pancreatic
islets with no differential expression of miR-375. Of note, miR-124a
overexpression in MIN6 pseudoislets resulted in an impaired glucose-induced
insulin secretion. In addition, miR-124a silencing in MIN6 pseudoislets resulted 
in increased expression of predicted target genes (Mtpn, Foxa2, Flot2, Akt3,
Sirt1 and NeuroD1) involved in beta cell function. For Mtpn and Foxa2, we further
demonstrated the actual binding of miR-124a to their 3UTR sequences by luciferase
assay.
CONCLUSIONS: We uncovered a major hyperexpression of miR-124a in T2D islets,
whose silencing resulted in increased expression of target genes of major
importance for beta cell function and whose overexpression impaired
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, leading to the hypothesis that an altered
miR-124a expression may contribute to beta cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 25408296  [PubMed - in process]


103. Cell Transplant. 2015;24(10):2155-68. doi: 10.3727/096368914X685438. Epub 2014
Nov 13.

Pancreatic Islet-Like Three-Dimensional Aggregates Derived From Human Embryonic
Stem Cells Ameliorate Hyperglycemia in Streptozotocin-Induced Diabetic Mice.

Shim JH(1), Kim J, Han J, An SY, Jang YJ, Son J, Woo DH, Kim SK, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cells and Tissue Regeneration, Department of Biotechnology,
College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Republic of 
Korea.

We previously reported the in vitro differentiation of human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) into pancreatic endoderm. Here we demonstrate that islet-like
three-dimensional (3D) aggregates can be derived from the pancreatic endoderm by 
optimizing our previous protocol. Sequential treatment with Wnt3a, activin A, and
noggin induced a transient upregulation of T and MixL1, followed by increased
expression of endodermal genes, including FOXA2, SOX17, and CXCR4. Subsequent
treatment with retinoic acid highly upregulated PDX1 expression. We also show
that inhibition of sonic hedgehog signaling by bFGF/activin ßB and cotreatment
with VEGF and FGF7 produced many 3D cellular clusters that express both SOX17 and
PDX1. We found for the first time that proteoglycans and vimentin(+) mesenchymal 
cells were mainly localized in hESC-derived PDX1(+) clusters. Importantly,
treatment with chlorate, an inhibitor of proteoglycan sulfation, together with
inhibition of Notch signaling significantly increased the expression of Neurog3
and NeuroD1, promoting a transition from PDX1(+) progenitor cells toward mature
pancreatic endocrine cells. Purified dithizone(+) 3D aggregates generated by our 
refined protocol produced pancreatic hormones and released insulin in response to
both glucose and pharmacological drugs in vitro. Furthermore, the islet-like 3D
aggregates decreased blood glucose levels and continued to exhibit pancreatic
features after transplantation into diabetic mice. Generation of islet-like 3D
cell aggregates from human pluripotent stem cells may overcome the shortage of
cadaveric donor islets for future cases of clinical islet transplantation.

PMID: 25397866  [PubMed - in process]


104. Mol Biotechnol. 2015 Feb;57(2):184-94. doi: 10.1007/s12033-014-9814-5.

Efficient differentiation of human embryonic stem cells toward dopaminergic
neurons using recombinant LMX1A factor.

Fathi A(1), Rasouli H, Yeganeh M, Salekdeh GH, Baharvand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Systems Biology at the Cell Science Research Center,
Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.

Direct differentiation of dopaminergic (DA) neurons from human pluripotent stem
cells (hPSCs) in the absence of gene manipulation is the most desired alternative
to clinical treatment of Parkinson disease. Protein transduction-based methods
could be efficient, safe approaches to enhance direct differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to DA neurons. In the present study, we compared the
differentiation efficiency of DA neurons from hESCs with and without the
application of LIM homeobox transcription factor 1 alpha (LMX1A), a master
regulatory protein in the development of the midbrain neurons and SHH proteins.
The results obtained revealed that the treatment of hESCs with recombinant LMX1A 
(rLMX1A) protein along with dual SMAD inhibition led to higher expression of
LMX1B, LMX1A, FOXA2, PITX3, EN1, and WNT1 effector endogenous genes and two-fold 
expression of PITX3. Moreover, the highest expression level of PITX3 and TH was
observed when rLMX1A was added to the induction medium supplemented with SHH. To 
our best knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating the application of
TAT-LMX1A recombinant protein to enhance hESC differentiation to DA as shown by
the expression of DA specific makers. These findings pave the way for enhancing
the differentiation of hESCs to DA neurons safely and efficiently without genetic
modification.

PMID: 25380985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Oct 14;3(4):556-65. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.08.009.
Epub 2014 Sep 18.

Endoderm generates endothelial cells during liver development.

Goldman O(1), Han S(1), Hamou W(1), Jodon de Villeroche V(2), Uzan G(2), Lickert 
H(3), Gouon-Evans V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Black Family Stem Cell
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine, Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA.
(2)INSERM U972, Hospital Paul Brousse, 12 Avenue Paul Vaillant Couturier, 94807
Villejuif, France. (3)Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration Research, Helmholtz 
Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. (4)Department of Developmental and
Regenerative Biology, Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Icahn School of Medicine,
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address:
valerie.gouon-evans@mssm.edu.

Organogenesis requires expansion of the embryonic vascular plexus that migrates
into developing organs through a process called angiogenesis. Mesodermal
progenitors are thought to derive endothelial cells (ECs) that contribute to both
embryonic vasculogenesis and the subsequent organ angiogenesis. Here, we
demonstrate that during development of the liver, which is an endoderm
derivative, a subset of ECs is generated from FOXA2+ endoderm-derived fetal
hepatoblast progenitor cells expressing KDR (VEGFR2/FLK-1). Using human and mouse
embryonic stem cell models, we demonstrate that KDR+FOXA2+ endoderm cells
developing in hepatic differentiation cultures generate functional ECs. This
introduces the concept that ECs originate not exclusively from mesoderm but also 
from endoderm, supported in Foxa2 lineage-tracing mouse embryos by the
identification of FOXA2+ cell-derived CD31+ ECs that integrate the vascular
network of developing fetal livers.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4223703
PMID: 25358784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Physiol Rep. 2014 Jul 16;2(7). pii: e12075. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12075.

Low oxygen tension enhances the generation of lung progenitor cells from mouse
embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells.

Garreta E(1), Melo E(2), Navajas D(3), Farré R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Facultat de Medicina, Unitat de Biofísica i Bioenginyeria, Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Madrid, Spain
Institut Investigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain Centre de Medicina Regenerativa de Barcelona (CMRB), Parc de Recerca
Biomèdica de Barcelona (PRBB), Dr. Aiguader88 7ª Planta, Barcelona, 08003, Spain.
(2)Facultat de Medicina, Unitat de Biofísica i Bioenginyeria, Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Madrid, Spain
Institut Investigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain F. Hoffmann-La Roche, AG, NORD DTABldg. 69/331, Basel, CH-4070,
Switzerland. (3)Facultat de Medicina, Unitat de Biofísica i Bioenginyeria,
Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias,
Madrid, Spain Institut de Bioenginyeria de Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Facultat de Medicina, Unitat de Biofísica i Bioenginyeria, Universitat de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain CIBER de Enfermedades Respiratorias, Madrid, Spain
Institut Investigacions Biomediques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona,
Spain.

Whole-organ decellularization technology has emerged as a new alternative for the
fabrication of bioartificial lungs. Embryonic stem cells (ESC) and induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) are potentially useful for recellularization since 
they can be directed to express phenotypic marker genes of lung epithelial cells.
Normal pulmonary development takes place in a low oxygen environment ranging from
1 to 5%. By contrast, in vitro ESC and iPSC differentiation protocols are usually
carried out at room-air oxygen tension. Here, we sought to determine the role
played by oxygen tension on the derivation of Nkx2.1+ lung/thyroid progenitor
cells from mouse ESC and iPSC. A step-wise differentiation protocol was used to
generate Nkx2.1+ lung/thyroid progenitors under 20% and 5% oxygen tension. On day
12, gene expression analysis revealed that Nkx2.1 and Foxa2 (endodermal and early
lung epithelial cell marker) were significantly upregulated at 5% oxygen tension 
in ESC and iPSC differentiated cultures compared to 20% oxygen conditions. In
addition, quantification of Foxa2+Nkx2.1+Pax8- cells corresponding to the lung
field, with exclusion of the potential thyroid fate identified by Pax8
expression, confirmed that the low physiologic oxygen tension exerted a
significant positive effect on early pulmonary differentiation of ESC and iPSC.
In conclusion, we found that 5% oxygen tension enhanced the derivation of lung
progenitors from mouse ESC and iPSC compared to 20% room-air oxygen tension.

© 2014 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4187564
PMID: 25347858  [PubMed]


107. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 24;9(10):e110559. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110559.
eCollection 2014.

FoxA4 favours notochord formation by inhibiting contiguous mesodermal fates and
restricts anterior neural development in Xenopus embryos.

Murgan S(1), Castro Colabianchi AM(1), Monti RJ(1), Boyadjián López LE(1),
Aguirre CE(1), Stivala EG(1), Carrasco AE(1), López SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Embriología Molecular "Prof. Dr. Andrés E. Carrasco," Instituto
de Biología Celular y Neurociencia, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos
Aires, Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

In vertebrates, the embryonic dorsal midline is a crucial signalling centre that 
patterns the surrounding tissues during development. Members of the FoxA
subfamily of transcription factors are expressed in the structures that compose
this centre. Foxa2 is essential for dorsal midline development in mammals, since 
knock-out mouse embryos lack a definitive node, notochord and floor plate. The
related gene foxA4 is only present in amphibians. Expression begins in the
blastula -chordin and -noggin expressing centre (BCNE) and is later restricted to
the dorsal midline derivatives of the Spemann's organiser. It was suggested that 
the early functions of mammalian foxa2 are carried out by foxA4 in frogs, but
functional experiments were needed to test this hypothesis. Here, we show that
some important dorsal midline functions of mammalian foxa2 are exerted by foxA4
in Xenopus. We provide new evidence that the latter prevents the respecification 
of dorsal midline precursors towards contiguous fates, inhibiting prechordal and 
paraxial mesoderm development in favour of the notochord. In addition, we show
that foxA4 is required for the correct regionalisation and maintenance of the
central nervous system. FoxA4 participates in constraining the prospective
rostral forebrain territory during neural specification and is necessary for the 
correct segregation of the most anterior ectodermal derivatives, such as the
cement gland and the pituitary anlagen. Moreover, the early expression of foxA4
in the BCNE (which contains precursors of the whole forebrain and most of the
midbrain and hindbrain) is directly required to restrict anterior neural
development.

PMCID: PMC4208771
PMID: 25343614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(4):1318-38. doi: 10.1159/000366340. Epub 2014 Oct
2.

Functional characteristics of reversibly immortalized hepatic progenitor cells
derived from mouse embryonic liver.

Bi Y(1), He Y, Huang J, Su Y, Zhu GH, Wang Y, Qiao M, Zhang BQ, Zhang H, Wang Z, 
Liu W, Cui J, Kang Q, Zhang Z, Deng Y, Li R, Zhang Q, Yang K, Luu HH, Haydon RC, 
He TC, Tang N.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology and Therapy Laboratory, Ministry of Education Key Laboratory
of Child Development and Disorders, the Children's Hospital of Chongqing Medical 
University, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Liver is a vital organ and retains its regeneration capability
throughout adulthood, which requires contributions from different cell
populations, including liver precursors and intrahepatic stem cells. To overcome 
the mortality of hepatic progenitors (iHPs) in vitro, we aim to establish
reversibly immortalized hepatic progenitor cells from mouse embryonic liver.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using retroviral system to stably express SV40 T antigen
flanked with Cre/LoxP sites, we establish a repertoire of iHP clones with varied 
differentiation potential. The iHP cells maintain long-term proliferative
activity and express varied levels of progenitor markers (Pou5f1/Oct4 and Dlk)
and hepatocyte markers (AFP, Alb and ApoB). Five representative iHP clones
express hepatic/pancreatic transcription factors HNF3a/Foxa1, HNF3ß/Foxa2, and
HNF4a/MODY1. Dexamethasone is shown to promote the expression of hepatocyte
markers AFP and TAT, along with ICG-uptake and glycogen storage functions in the 
iHP clones. Cre-mediated removal of SV40 T antigen reverses the proliferative
activity of iHP cells. When iHP cells are subcutaneously implanted in athymic
nude mice, no tumor formation is observed for up to 8 weeks.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrate that the established iHP cells are stable,
reversible, and non-tumorigenic hepatic progenitor-like cells, which should be
valuable for studying liver organogenesis, metabolic regulations, and hepatic
lineage-specific differentiation.

PMID: 25301359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014 Oct 9;10(10):e1003884. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003884. 
eCollection 2014.

Reconstruction of the gene regulatory network involved in the sonic hedgehog
pathway with a potential role in early development of the mouse brain.

Liu J(1), Wang X(1), Li J(1), Wang H(1), Wei G(1), Yan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)CAS-MPG Partner Institute for Computational Biology, Shanghai Institutes of
Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China.

The Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling pathway is crucial for pattern formation in
early central nervous system development. By systematically analyzing
high-throughput in situ hybridization data of E11.5 mouse brain, we found that
Shh and its receptor Ptch1 define two adjacent mutually exclusive gene expression
domains: Shh+Ptch1- and Shh-Ptch1+. These two domains are associated respectively
with Foxa2 and Gata3, two transcription factors that play key roles in specifying
them. Gata3 ChIP-seq experiments and RNA-seq assays on Gata3-knockdown cells
revealed that Gata3 up-regulates the genes that are enriched in the Shh-Ptch1+
domain. Important Gata3 targets include Slit2 and Slit3, which are involved in
the process of axon guidance, as well as Slc18a1, Th and Qdpr, which are
associated with neurotransmitter synthesis and release. By contrast, Foxa2 both
up-regulates the genes expressed in the Shh+Ptch1- domain and down-regulates the 
genes characteristic of the Shh-Ptch1+ domain. From these and other data, we were
able to reconstruct a gene regulatory network governing both domains. Our work
provides the first genome-wide characterization of the gene regulatory network
involved in the Shh pathway that underlies pattern formation in the early mouse
brain.

PMCID: PMC4191885
PMID: 25299227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Infect Immun. 2014 Dec;82(12):5246-55. doi: 10.1128/IAI.01989-14. Epub 2014 Oct
6.

Mycoplasma pneumoniae modulates STAT3-STAT6/EGFR-FOXA2 signaling to induce
overexpression of airway mucins.

Hao Y(1), Kuang Z(1), Jing J(1), Miao J(2), Mei LY(1), Lee RJ(1), Kim S(1), Choe 
S(1), Krause DC(3), Lau GW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, Illinois, USA. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural
University, Nanjing, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Microbiology,
University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, USA. (4)Department of Pathobiology,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois, USA
geelau@illinois.edu.

Aberrant mucin secretion and accumulation in the airway lumen are clinical
hallmarks associated with various lung diseases such as asthma, chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, and cystic fibrosis. Mycoplasma pneumoniae, long
appreciated as one of the triggers of acute exacerbations of chronic pulmonary
diseases, has recently been reported to promote excessive mucus secretion.
However, the mechanism of mucin overproduction induced by M. pneumoniae remains
unclear. This study aimed to determine the mechanism by which M. pneumoniae
induces mucus hypersecretion by using M. pneumoniae infection of mouse lungs,
human primary bronchial epithelial (NHBE) cells cultured at the air-liquid
interface, and the conventionally cultured airway epithelial NCI-H292 cell line. 
We demonstrated that M. pneumoniae induced the expression of mucins MUC5AC and
MUC5B by activating the STAT6-STAT3 and epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
signal pathways, which in turn downregulated FOXA2, a transcriptional repressor
of mucin biosynthesis. The upstream stimuli of these pathways, including
interleukin-4 (IL-4), IL-6, and IL-13, increased dramatically upon exposure to M.
pneumoniae. Inhibition of the STAT6, STAT3, and EGFR signaling pathways
significantly restored the expression of FOXA2 and attenuated the expression of
airway mucins MUC5AC and MUC5B. Collectively, these studies demonstrated that M. 
pneumoniae induces airway mucus hypersecretion by modulating the STAT/EGFR-FOXA2 
signaling pathways.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4249270
PMID: 25287927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. FEBS Lett. 2014 Nov 3;588(21):4065-70. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.09.033. Epub
2014 Oct 2.

The expression of p21 is upregulated by forkhead box A1/2 in p53-null H1299
cells.

An JH(1), Jang SM(1), Kim JW(2), Kim CH(1), Song PI(3), Choi KH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Sciences, Chung-Ang University,
Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Life Science, College of
Natural Sciences, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea;
Neurobiology-Neurodegeneration and Repair Laboratory, NEI, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)Department of Dermatology, University of
Colorado Denver Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. Electronic
address: PETER.SONG@ucdenver.edu. (4)Department of Life Science, College of
Natural Sciences, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: khchoi@cau.ac.kr.

The expression of the cell cycle inhibitor p21 is increased in response to
various stimuli and stress signals through p53-dependent and independent
pathways. We demonstrate in this study that forkhead box A1/2 (FOXA1/2) is a
crucial transcription factor in the activation of p21 transcription via direct
binding to the p21 promoter in p53-null H1299 lung carcinoma cells. In addition, 
histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA)-mediated upregulation of p21
expression was repressed by knockdown of FOXA1/2 in H1299 cells. Consequently,
these results suggest that FOXA1/2 is required for p53-independent p21
expression.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. All rights
reserved.

PMID: 25281925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Cell Signal. 2014 Dec;26(12):2940-50. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.09.014. Epub
2014 Sep 30.

Methylosome protein 50 promotes androgen- and estrogen-independent tumorigenesis.

Wei TY(1), Hsia JY(2), Chiu SC(3), Su LJ(4), Juan CC(5), Lee YC(6), Chen JM(7),
Chou HY(8), Huang JY(7), Huang HM(9), Yu CT(10).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Biomedicine and Biomedical Technology, National Chi Nan 
University, Puli, Nantou 545, Taiwan. (2)Department of Surgery, Taichung Veterans
General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (3)Graduate Institute of Immunology, China
Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Center for Neuropsychiatry, China Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Systems Biology and
Bioinformatics, National Central University, Jhongli City, Taoyuan County,
Taiwan. (5)Institutes of Physiology and Clinical Medicine, School of Medicine,
National Yang-Ming University, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Department of Medical Research and Education, Taipei Veterans General Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. (6)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Informatics, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Department of Applied Chemistry, National Chi Nan 
University, Puli, Nantou 545, Taiwan. (8)Institutes of Physiology and Clinical
Medicine, School of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei Veterans
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. (9)Department of Neurosurgery, China Medical
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (10)Graduate Institute of Biomedicine and 
Biomedical Technology, National Chi Nan University, Puli, Nantou 545, Taiwan;
Department of Applied Chemistry, National Chi Nan University, Puli, Nantou 545,
Taiwan. Electronic address: ctyu@ncnu.edu.tw.

Methylosome protein 50 (MEP50) is a component of methylosome where MEP50 binds
protein substrates and activates the oncogenic protein arginine methyl
transferase 5 (PRMT5). MEP50 is also a coactivator for androgen receptor (AR) and
estrogen receptor (ER), and transforms cells in the presence of androgen or
estrogen. To extend the understanding of how MEP50 transforms cells, we
investigated whether MEP50 could transform cells independent of AR and ER, and
clarified whether PRMT5 could contribute to the MEP50-caused tumor formation.
Microarray and Western blot analyses revealed the association of MEP50 with many 
human cancers including lung cancer. Knockdown of MEP50 retarded cell growth and 
migration in selected lung cancer cell lines, which expressed very low level of
AR and ER and were insensitive to inhibitors of AR and ER. Moreover,
overexpression of Myc-MEP50 enhanced cell transforming activities of 293T cells
which are known lack of expression of AR and ER. Mechanistic analyses showed that
MEP50 controlled G2 progression, upregulated cyclin-dependent kinase
1(CDK1)/cyclin B1, and activated the survival cascade Phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K)/AKT. MEP50 promoted cell migration, and activated the cell migration
pathways such as Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1
(Rac1)/vasodilator-stimulated phosphoprotein (VASP), and forkhead box protein A2 
(FOXA2)/slug/cadherin cascades. Further analyses revealed that MEP50 activated
the survival factor PI3K through PRMT5-catalyzed dimethylation of PI3K.
Collectively, it is concluded that MEP50 can transform cells independent of AR
and ER, and PRMT5 has partial contribution to that process.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25277535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 24;453(3):405-10. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.09.095. Epub 2014 Sep 27.

miRNA-302 facilitates reprogramming of human adult hepatocytes into pancreatic
islets-like cells in combination with a chemical defined media.

Lu J(1), Dong H(2), Lin L(2), Wang Q(2), Huang L(2), Tan J(3).

Author information: 
(1)FuJian Provincial Key Laboratory of Transplant Biology, Fuzhou General
Hospital/ or Dongfang Hospital, Xiamen University, Fuzhou 350025, China.
Electronic address: junlu.heather@yahoo.com. (2)FuJian Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Transplant Biology, Fuzhou General Hospital/ or Dongfang Hospital, Xiamen
University, Fuzhou 350025, China. (3)FuJian Provincial Key Laboratory of
Transplant Biology, Fuzhou General Hospital/ or Dongfang Hospital, Xiamen
University, Fuzhou 350025, China. Electronic address: tanjm156@xmu.edu.cn.

The direct conversion of one cell type to another without an intermediate
pluripotent stage is required for regenerative therapies. The ventral pancreas
and liver share a common developmental origin. Recent studies have shown that
hepatocytes could be induced to transdifferentiate into insulin-producing cells. 
In this paper, we showed a new strategy to achieve the direct conversion of human
hepatocytes into surrogate ß cells. Hepatocytes were transfected with
microRNA-302 (miR-302) mimic and Pdx1, Ngn3 and MafA expressed plasmids, followed
by a chemical-defined culture system for maturation of insulin-secreting cells.
Co-transfection of miR-302 mimic increased the transcription of pancreatic
development-related genes (Sox17, Foxa2, and endogenous Pdx1). Furthermore, at
the end of this treatment, hepatocytes became insulin expressed cells that
released the hormone in response to a physiological glucose change in vitro. This
work shows that miR-302 participation may facilitates the conversion of adult
hepatocytes into pancreatic islets-like cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25268319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Cell Rep. 2014 Oct 9;9(1):261-71. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.046. Epub 2014
Sep 25.

Hippo signaling influences HNF4A and FOXA2 enhancer switching during hepatocyte
differentiation.

Alder O(1), Cullum R(1), Lee S(1), Kan AC(1), Wei W(1), Yi Y(1), Garside VC(1),
Bilenky M(2), Griffith M(2), Morrissy AS(2), Robertson GA(2), Thiessen N(2), Zhao
Y(2), Chen Q(3), Pan D(3), Jones SJ(4), Marra MA(5), Hoodless PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada.
(2)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC
V5Z1L3, Canada. (3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (4)Canada's Michael
Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada;
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, BC V5A1S6, Canada; Department of Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z4H4, Canada. (5)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences
Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada; Department of Medical
Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z4H4, Canada. (6)Terry 
Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada; Department of
Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z4H4, Canada.
Electronic address: hoodless@bccrc.ca.

Cell fate acquisition is heavily influenced by direct interactions between master
regulators and tissue-specific enhancers. However, it remains unclear how
lineage-specifying transcription factors, which are often expressed in both
progenitor and mature cell populations, influence cell differentiation. Using in 
vivo mouse liver development as a model, we identified thousands of enhancers
that are bound by the master regulators HNF4A and FOXA2 in a
differentiation-dependent manner, subject to chromatin remodeling, and associated
with differentially expressed target genes. Enhancers exclusively occupied in the
embryo were found to be responsive to developmentally regulated TEAD2 and
coactivator YAP1. Our data suggest that Hippo signaling may affect hepatocyte
differentiation by influencing HNF4A and FOXA2 interactions with temporal
enhancers. In summary, transcription factor-enhancer interactions are not only
tissue specific but also differentiation dependent, which is an important
consideration for researchers studying cancer biology or mammalian development
and/or using transformed cell lines.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4612615
PMID: 25263553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Reprod Dev. 2014;60(6):468-75. doi: 10.1262/jrd.2014-086. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Expression and regulation of Foxa2 in the rat uterus during early pregnancy.

Yamagami K(1), Yamauchi N, Kubota K, Nishimura S, Chowdhury VS, Yamanaka K,
Takahashi M, Tabata S, Hattori MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Marine Bioresource Sciences, Graduate School Kyushu
University, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan.

The forkhead box a (Foxa) protein family has been found to play important roles
in mammals. Recently, the expression of Foxa2 was reported in the mouse uterus,
and it was reported to be involved in regulation of implantation. However, the
regulation of Foxa2 expression in the uterus is still poorly understood.
Therefore, the present study was conducted to investigate the expressional
profiles of Foxa2 in the rat uterus during the estrus cycle and pregnancy.
Furthermore, the effect of steroid hormones and Hedgehog protein on the
expression of Foxa2 was analyzed in vivo and in vitro. In this study, the level
of expression of Foxa2 was low in the rat uterus during the different stages of
the estrus cycle. However, the expression increased transiently during early
pregnancy at 3.5 days post coitus (dpc) and decreased at 5.5 dpc. In
ovariectomized rats, P4 treatment had no effect on the expression of Foxa2
compared with the expression in control animals. Moreover, the expression of
Foxa2 in cultured epithelial cells was not increased by P4 treatment in vitro.
However, Foxa2 expression was significantly decreased in the rat uterus after 24 
h of E2 treatment. Treatment of cells with a recombinant Hedgehog protein
significantly increased the expression of Foxa2. These results suggest that the
expression of Foxa2 may transiently increase just before the implantation and it 
may be regulated by E2 and Hedgehog protein.

PMCID: PMC4284322
PMID: 25262775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Sep 9;8:275. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00275. eCollection
2014.

Transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 are required for adult dopamine neurons
maintenance.

Domanskyi A(1), Alter H(1), Vogt MA(2), Gass P(2), Vinnikov IA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ) Heidelberg, Germany. (2)RG Animal Models in Psychiatry, Medical Faculty
Mannheim, Central Institute of Mental Health, Heidelberg University Mannheim,
Germany.

The proteins Foxa1 and Foxa2 belong to the forkhead family of transcription
factors and are involved in the development of several tissues, including liver, 
pancreas, lung, prostate, and the neural system. Both Foxa1 and Foxa2 are also
crucial for the specification and differentiation of dopamine (DA) neurons during
embryonic development, while about 30% of mice with an embryonic deletion of a
single allele of the Foxa2 gene exhibit an age-related asymmetric loss of DA
neurons and develop locomotor symptoms resembling Parkinson's disease (PD).
Notably, both Foxa1 and Foxa2 factors continue to be expressed in the adult
dopamine system. To directly assess their functions selectively in adult DA
neurons, we induced genetic deletions of Foxa1/2 transcription factors in mice
using a tamoxifen inducible tissue-specific CreERT2 recombinase expressed under
control of the dopamine transporter (DAT) promoter (DATCreERT2). The conditional 
DA neurons-specific ablation of both genes, but not of Foxa2 alone, in early
adulthood, caused a decline of striatal dopamine and its metabolites, along with 
locomotor deficits. At early pre-symptomatic stages, we observed a decline in
aldehyde dehydrogenase family 1, subfamily A1 (Aldh1a1) protein expression in DA 
neurons. Further analyses revealed a decline of aromatic amino acid decarboxylase
(AADC) and a complete loss of DAT expression in these neurons. These molecular
changes ultimately led to a reduction of DA neuron numbers in the substantia
nigra pars compacta (SNpc) of aged cFoxa1/2 (-/-) mice, resembling the
progressive course of PD in humans. Altogether, in this study, we address the
molecular, cellular, and functional role of both Foxa1 and Foxa2 factors in the
maintenance of the adult dopamine system which may help to find better approaches
for PD treatment.

PMCID: PMC4158790
PMID: 25249938  [PubMed]


117. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Feb 15;24(4):520-33. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0218. Epub 2014
Nov 3.

Epigenetic activation of the Foxa2 gene is required for maintaining the potential
of neural precursor cells to differentiate into dopaminergic neurons after
expansion.

Bang SY(1), Kwon SH, Yi SH, Yi SA, Park EK, Lee JC, Jang CG, You JS, Lee SH, Han 
JW.

Author information: 
(1)1 Research Center for Epigenome Regulation, School of Pharmacy, Sungkyunkwan
University , Suwon, Republic of Korea.

Erratum in
    Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Feb 1;24(3):403.

Dysregulation of forkhead box protein A2 (Foxa2) expression in fetal ventral
mesencephalon (VM)-derived neural precursor cells (NPCs) appears to be associated
with the loss of their potential to differentiate into dopaminergic (DA) neurons 
after mitogenic expansion in vitro, hindering their efficient use as a
transplantable cell source. Here, we report that epigenetic activation of Foxa2
in VM-derived NPCs by inducing histone hyperacetylation rescues the
mitogenic-expansion-dependent decrease of differentiation potential to DA
neurons. The silencing of Foxa2 gene expression after expansion is accompanied by
repressive histone modifications, including hypoacetylation of histone H3 and H4 
and trimethylation of H3K27 on the Foxa2 promoter, as well as on the global
level. In addition, histone deacetylase 7 (HDAC7) is highly expressed during
differentiation and recruited to the Foxa2 promoter. Induction of histone
acetylation in VM-derived NPCs by either knockdown of HDAC7 or treatment with the
HDAC inhibitor apicidin upregulates Foxa2 expression via hyperacetylation of H3
and a decrease in H3K27 trimethylation on the promoter regions, leading to the
expression of DA neuron developmental genes and enhanced differentiation of DA
neurons. These effects are antagonized by the expression of shRNAs specific for
Foxa2 but enhanced by shRNA for HDAC7. Collectively, these findings indicate that
loss of differentiation potential of expanded VM-derived NPCs is attributed to a 
decrease in Foxa2 expression and suggest that activation of the endogenous Foxa2 
gene by epigenetic regulation might be an approach to enhance the generation of
DA neurons.

PMID: 25233056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Mar 1;24(5):663-76. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0343. Epub 2014
Oct 27.

Hypoxia enhances differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells into definitive
endoderm and distal lung cells.

Pimton P(1), Lecht S, Stabler CT, Johannes G, Schulman ES, Lelkes PI.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biology, School of Science, Walailak University , Nakhon Si
Thammarat, Thailand .

We investigated the effects of hypoxia on spontaneous (SP)- and activin A
(AA)-induced definitive endoderm (DE) differentiation of mouse embryonic stem
cells (mESCs) and their subsequent differentiation into distal pulmonary
epithelial cells. SP differentiation for 6 days of mESCs toward endoderm at
hypoxia of 1% O2, but not at 3% or 21% (normoxia), increased the expression of
Sox17 and Foxa2 by 31- and 63-fold above maintenance culture, respectively.
Treatment of mESCs with 20 ng/mL AA for 6 days under hypoxia further increased
the expression of DE marker genes Sox17, Foxa2, and Cxcr4 by 501-, 1,483-, and
126-fold above maintenance cultures, respectively. Transient exposure to hypoxia,
as short as 24<U+2009>h, was sufficient to enhance AA-induced endoderm formation. The
involvement of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1a and reactive oxygen species
(ROS) in the AA-induced endoderm enrichment was assessed using HIF-1a(-/-) mESCs 
and the ROS scavenger N-acetylcysteine (NAC). Under SP conditions, HIF-1a(-/-)
mESCs failed to increase the expression of endodermal marker genes but rather
shifted toward ectoderm. Hypoxia induced only a marginal potentiation of
AA-induced endoderm differentiation in HIF-1a(-/-) mESCs. Treatment of mESCs with
AA and NAC led to a dose-dependent decrease in Sox17 and Foxa2 expression. In
addition, the duration of exposure to hypoxia in the course of a recently
reported lung differentiation protocol resulted in differentially enhanced
expression of distal lung epithelial cell marker genes aquaporin 5 (Aqp5),
surfactant protein C (Sftpc), and secretoglobin 1a1 (Scgb1a1) for alveolar
epithelium type I, type II, and club cells, respectively. Our study is the first 
to show the effects of in vitro hypoxia on efficient formation of DE and lung
lineages. We suggest that the extent of hypoxia and careful timing may be
important components of in vitro differentiation bioprocesses for the
differential generation of distal lung epithelial cells from pluripotent
progenitors.

PMCID: PMC4333609
PMID: 25226206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. PLoS Genet. 2014 Sep 11;10(9):e1004633. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004633.
eCollection 2014.

Identification of a regulatory variant that binds FOXA1 and FOXA2 at the
CDC123/CAMK1D type 2 diabetes GWAS locus.

Fogarty MP(1), Cannon ME(1), Vadlamudi S(1), Gaulton KJ(2), Mohlke KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, North Carolina, United States of America. (2)Wellcome Trust Centre for
Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Many of the type 2 diabetes loci identified through genome-wide association
studies localize to non-protein-coding intronic and intergenic regions and likely
contain variants that regulate gene transcription. The CDC123/CAMK1D type 2
diabetes association signal on chromosome 10 spans an intergenic region between
CDC123 and CAMK1D and also overlaps the CDC123 3'UTR. To gain insight into the
molecular mechanisms underlying the association signal, we used open chromatin,
histone modifications and transcription factor ChIP-seq data sets from type 2
diabetes-relevant cell types to identify SNPs overlapping predicted regulatory
regions. Two regions containing type 2 diabetes-associated variants were tested
for enhancer activity using luciferase reporter assays. One SNP, rs11257655,
displayed allelic differences in transcriptional enhancer activity in 832/13 and 
MIN6 insulinoma cells as well as in human HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells.
The rs11257655 risk allele T showed greater transcriptional activity than the
non-risk allele C in all cell types tested. Using electromobility shift and
supershift assays we demonstrated that the rs11257655 risk allele showed
allele-specific binding to FOXA1 and FOXA2. We validated FOXA1 and FOXA2
enrichment at the rs11257655 risk allele using allele-specific ChIP in human
islets. These results suggest that rs11257655 affects transcriptional activity
through altered binding of a protein complex that includes FOXA1 and FOXA2,
providing a potential molecular mechanism at this GWAS locus.

PMCID: PMC4161327
PMID: 25211022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 8;9(9):e107246. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107246. eCollection
2014.

Integrative genomic analysis identifies that SERPINA6-rs1998056 regulated by
FOXA/ERa is associated with female hepatocellular carcinoma.

Shen N(1), Gong J(2), Wang Y(3), Tian J(4), Qian J(5), Zou L(2), Chen W(2), Zhu
B(2), Lu X(5), Zhong R(2), Guo A(6), Wang L(4), Miao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Environment Health (Incubation), MOE (Ministry of
Education) Key Laboratory of Environment & Health, Ministry of Environmental
Protection Key Laboratory of Environment and Health (Wuhan), and Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Tongji Medical College, 
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China; Department of
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences; School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Environment Health
(Incubation), MOE (Ministry of Education) Key Laboratory of Environment & Health,
Ministry of Environmental Protection Key Laboratory of Environment and Health
(Wuhan), and Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public
Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology,
Wuhan, China. (3)Wuhan Centers for Disease Prevention and Control, Wuhan, China. 
(4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences; School of Basic Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing, China. (5)Division of Gastroenterology, Peking
Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing, China. (6)Hubei Bioinformatics and Molecular Imaging
Key Laboratory, Department of Systems Biology, College of Life Science and
Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

The human forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) and A2 (FOXA2) transcription factors have been 
found to control estrogen and androgen signaling through co-regulating target
genes with sex hormone receptors. Here we used an integrative strategy to examine
the hypothesis that genetic variants at FOXA1/2 binding elements may be
associated with sexual dimorphism of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) risk. Firstly
we extracted chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) data of FOXA1,
FOXA2 and estrogen receptor 1(ERa) from ENCODE database to obtain dual target
regions of FOXA/ERa, and further intersected these regions with genes' promoters.
Then we used MATCH program to predict FOXA binding elements, in which genetic
variants were retrieved by dbSNP database (NCBI, build 134). A total of 15
candidate variants were identified in this stage. Secondly we performed a
case-control study with 1,081 HCC patients and 2,008 matched controls and found a
significant association of SERPINA6-rs1998056 with female HCC risk under common
genetic models (e.g. GG versus CC: OR = 2.03, 95% CI = 1.26-3.27, P = 0.004).
Moreover, results from our real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
(qPCR) using 72 normal liver tissues adjacent to the tumors showed that SERPINA6 
expression was significantly different among different genotypes of this variant 
(GG versus CC: P = 0.032; Group test: P = 0.060). In summary, our study suggested
that SERPINA6-rs1998056 regulated by FOXA/ERa might be associated with female HCC
risk.

PMCID: PMC4157870
PMID: 25198130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cell Res. 2014 Oct;24(10):1181-200. doi: 10.1038/cr.2014.118. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Systematically labeling developmental stage-specific genes for the study of
pancreatic ß-cell differentiation from human embryonic stem cells.

Liu H(1), Yang H(1), Zhu D(1), Sui X(1), Li J(2), Liang Z(1), Xu L(3), Chen Z(4),
Yao A(4), Zhang L(5), Zhang X(5), Yi X(4), Liu M(1), Xu S(6), Zhang W(6), Lin
H(7), Xie L(8), Lou J(6), Zhang Y(5), Xi J(2), Deng H(9).

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Stem Cell Engineering Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Chemical
Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055,
China. (2)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking
University, Beijing 100871, China. (3)Department of Hematopoietic Stem Cell
Transplantation, 307 Hospital, Academy of Military Medicine Sciences, Beijing
100071, China. (4)The MOE Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and
Differentiation, College of Life Sciences, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. (5)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen,
Guangdong 518083, China. (6)Institute of Clinical Medical Sciences, China-Japan
Friendship Hospital, Beijing 100029, China. (7)Department of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing 100029, China. (8)Department
of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Beijing Renhe Hospital, Beijing 102600, China.
(9)1] Shenzhen Stem Cell Engineering Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Chemical
Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518055,
China [2] The MOE Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation,
College of Life Sciences, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking
University, Beijing 100871, China [3] Peking University Stem Cell Research
Center, Department of Cell Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking
University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.

The applications of human pluripotent stem cell (hPSC)-derived cells in
regenerative medicine has encountered a long-standing challenge: how can we
efficiently obtain mature cell types from hPSCs? Attempts to address this problem
are hindered by the complexity of controlling cell fate commitment and the lack
of sufficient developmental knowledge for guiding hPSC differentiation. Here, we 
developed a systematic strategy to study hPSC differentiation by labeling
sequential developmental genes to encompass the major developmental stages, using
the directed differentiation of pancreatic ß cells from hPSCs as a model. We
therefore generated a large panel of pancreas-specific mono- and dual-reporter
cell lines. With this unique platform, we visualized the kinetics of the entire
differentiation process in real time for the first time by monitoring the
expression dynamics of the reporter genes, identified desired cell populations at
each differentiation stage and demonstrated the ability to isolate these cell
populations for further characterization. We further revealed the expression
profiles of isolated NGN3-eGFP(+) cells by RNA sequencing and identified sushi
domain-containing 2 (SUSD2) as a novel surface protein that enriches for
pancreatic endocrine progenitors and early endocrine cells both in human
embryonic stem cells (hESC)-derived pancreatic cells and in the developing human 
pancreas. Moreover, we captured a series of cell fate transition events in real
time, identified multiple cell subpopulations and unveiled their distinct gene
expression profiles, among heterogeneous progenitors for the first time using our
dual reporter hESC lines. The exploration of this platform and our new findings
will pave the way to obtain mature ß cells in vitro.

PMCID: PMC4185345
PMID: 25190258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Ann Thorac Surg. 2014 Nov;98(5):1721-9; discussion 1729. doi:
10.1016/j.athoracsur.2014.05.080. Epub 2014 Aug 19.

Enhanced lung epithelial specification of human induced pluripotent stem cells on
decellularized lung matrix.

Gilpin SE(1), Ren X(1), Okamoto T(1), Guyette JP(1), Mou H(1), Rajagopal J(1),
Mathisen DJ(1), Vacanti JP(1), Ott HC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Department of Surgery, Massachusetts General
Hospital, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address: 
hott@partners.org.

BACKGROUND: Whole-lung scaffolds can be created by perfusion decellularization of
cadaveric donor lungs. The resulting matrices can then be recellularized to
regenerate functional organs. This study evaluated the capacity of acellular lung
scaffolds to support recellularization with lung progenitors derived from human
induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs).
METHODS: Whole rat and human lungs were decellularized by constant-pressure
perfusion with 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate solution. Resulting lung scaffolds
were cryosectioned into slices or left intact. Human iPSCs were differentiated to
definitive endoderm, anteriorized to a foregut fate, and then ventralized to a
population expressing NK2 homeobox 1 (Nkx2.1). Cells were seeded onto slices and 
whole lungs, which were maintained under constant perfusion biomimetic culture.
Lineage specification was assessed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction and 
immunofluorescent staining. Regenerated left lungs were transplanted in an
orthotopic position.
RESULTS: Activin-A treatment, followed by transforming growth factor-ß
inhibition, induced differentiation of human iPSCs to anterior foregut endoderm
as confirmed by forkhead box protein A2 (FOXA2), SRY (Sex Determining Region
Y)-Box 17 (SOX17), and SOX2 expression. Cells cultured on decellularized lung
slices demonstrated proliferation and lineage commitment after 5 days. Cells
expressing Nkx2.1 were identified at 40% to 60% efficiency. Within whole-lung
scaffolds and under perfusion culture, cells further upregulated Nkx2.1
expression. After orthotopic transplantation, grafts were perfused and ventilated
by host vasculature and airways.
CONCLUSIONS: Decellularized lung matrix supports the culture and lineage
commitment of human iPSC-derived lung progenitor cells. Whole-organ scaffolds and
biomimetic culture enable coseeding of iPSC-derived endothelial and epithelial
progenitors and enhance early lung fate. Orthotopic transplantation may enable
further in vivo graft maturation.

Copyright © 2014 The Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4252658
PMID: 25149047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 21;9(8):e104675. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104675.
eCollection 2014.

Sox17 regulates insulin secretion in the normal and pathologic mouse ß cell.

Jonatan D(1), Spence JR(2), Method AM(1), Kofron M(1), Sinagoga K(1), Haataja
L(3), Arvan P(3), Deutsch GH(4), Wells JM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States of America. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of Michigan Medical School,
Ann Arbor, MI, United States of America; Department of Cell and Developmental
Biology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, United States of
America; Center for Organogenesis, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, MI, United States of America. (3)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology,
and Diabetes, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, United States
of America. (4)Seattle Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA, United States of
America. (5)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, United States of America; Division of
Endocrinology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH,
United States of America.

SOX17 is a key transcriptional regulator that can act by regulating other
transcription factors including HNF1ß and FOXA2, which are known to regulate
postnatal ß cell function. Given this, we investigated the role of SOX17 in the
developing and postnatal pancreas and found a novel role for SOX17 in regulating 
insulin secretion. Deletion of the Sox17 gene in the pancreas (Sox17-paLOF) had
no observable impact on pancreas development. However, Sox17-paLOF mice had
higher islet proinsulin protein content, abnormal trafficking of proinsulin, and 
dilated secretory organelles suggesting that Sox17-paLOF adult mice are
prediabetic. Consistant with this, Sox17-paLOF mice were more susceptible to
aged-related and high fat diet-induced hyperglycemia and diabetes. Overexpression
of Sox17 in mature ß cells using Ins2-rtTA driver mice resulted in precocious
secretion of proinsulin. Transcriptionally, SOX17 appears to broadly regulate
secretory networks since a 24-hour pulse of SOX17 expression resulted in global
transcriptional changes in factors that regulate hormone transport and secretion.
Lastly, transient SOX17 overexpression was able to reverse the insulin secretory 
defects observed in MODY4 animals and restored euglycemia. Together, these data
demonstrate a critical new role for SOX17 in regulating insulin trafficking and
secretion and that modulation of Sox17-regulated pathways might be used
therapeutically to improve cell function in the context of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4140688
PMID: 25144761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Nov;35(11):2576-83. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu180. Epub 2014
Aug 20.

FOXA2 suppresses the metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma partially through
matrix metalloproteinase-9 inhibition.

Wang J(1), Zhu CP(2), Hu PF(1), Qian H(1), Ning BF(1), Zhang Q(1), Chen F(1), Liu
J(1), Shi B(1), Zhang X(1), Xie WF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200003, China and Department of Internal Medicine, Chinese
PLA 531 Hospital, Tonghua 134000, Jilin, China. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, Chinese PLA 531 Hospital, Tonghua 134000, Jilin, China. (3)Department
of Gastroenterology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai 200003, China and Department of Internal Medicine, Chinese PLA 531
Hospital, Tonghua 134000, Jilin, China weifenxie@medmail.com.cn.

The forkhead box transcription factor A2 (FOXA2) is a member of the hepatocyte
nuclear factor family and plays an important role in liver development and
metabolic homeostasis, but its role in the metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) has not been evaluated. In this study, we found that the expression of
FOXA2 was decreased in 68.1% (49/72) of human HCC tissues compared with their
paired non-cancerous adjacent tissues. Clinicopathological analysis revealed that
reduced FOXA2 expression was correlated with aggressive characteristics (venous
invasion, poor differentiation, high tumor node metastasis grade). FOXA2 level
was even lower in portal vein tumor thrombus compared with primary tumor tissues 
and correlated with epithelial-mesenchymal transition in HCC cells.
Overexpression of FOXA2 inhibited migration and invasion of Focus cells, whereas 
knockdown of FOXA2 in HepG2 showed the opposite effect. Moreover, upregulation of
FOXA2 suppressed HCC metastasis to bone, brain and lung in two distinct mouse
models. Finally, we proved that FOXA2 repressed the transcription of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-9 and exerted its antimetastasis effect partially through
downregulation of MMP-9. In conclusion, our findings indicate that FOXA2 plays a 
critical role in HCC metastasis and may serve as a novel therapeutic target for
HCC.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25142974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Dig Dis Sci. 2015 Jan;60(1):109-17. doi: 10.1007/s10620-014-3290-4. Epub 2014 Aug
17.

The transcription factor FOXA2 suppresses gastric tumorigenesis in vitro and in
vivo.

Zhu CP(1), Wang J, Shi B, Hu PF, Ning BF, Zhang Q, Chen F, Chen WS, Zhang X, Xie 
WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical
University, 415 Fengyang Road, Shanghai, 200003, China.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The transcription factor forkhead box A2 (FOXA2) plays a
central role in the development of endoderm-derived organs. It has been reported 
that FOXA2 acts as a suppressor in many kinds of tumor. However, little is known 
about the role of FOXA2 in gastric cancer.
METHODS: The expression of FOXA2 in gastric cancer tissue samples from 89
patients was assessed by immunohistochemistry, and the clinicopathological
characteristics of the samples were analyzed. The human gastric cancer cell line,
BGC-823, was used to investigate the effects of FOXA2 in gastric cancer in vitro 
and in vivo and the potential mechanism involved was explored.
RESULTS: FOXA2 expression in human gastric cancer cell lines and human gastric
cancer tissues was lower compared with the normal gastric epithelium cell line
GES1 and normal adult gastric tissues, respectively. Patients with high FOXA2
expression level had longer 5-year overall survival than those with low FOXA2
expression level. FOXA2 markedly inhibited growth of BGC-823 cells accompanied
with the cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Infection of BGC-823 cells by FOXA2
lentivirus resulted in reduced cell tumorigenesis in vitro and in vivo. Moreover,
expression of Mucin 5AC was up-regulated along with increased expression of
exogenous FOXA2 in BGC-823 cells; in contrast, dedifferentiation markers, BMI,
CD54 and CD24, were down-regulated.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that FOXA2 induces the differentiation of
gastric cancer and highlight FOXA2 as a novel therapeutic target and prognostic
marker for human gastric cancer.

PMID: 25129104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Sep;13(2):262-74. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2014.07.004. Epub 2014
Jul 27.

The Shh coreceptor Cdo is required for differentiation of midbrain dopaminergic
neurons.

Kwon YR(1), Jeong MH(1), Leem YE(1), Lee SJ(2), Kim HJ(3), Bae GU(4), Kang JS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of
Medicine, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. (2)Research Center for Cell Fate
Control, Sookmyung Women's University, Seoul 140-742, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Physiology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Samsung 
Biomedical Research Institute, Suwon 440-746, Republic of Korea. (4)Research
Center for Cell Fate Control, Sookmyung Women's University, Seoul 140-742,
Republic of Korea. Electronic address: gbae@sm.ac.kr. (5)Department of Molecular 
Cell Biology, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon 440-746, Republic
of Korea. Electronic address: kangj01@skku.edu.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling is required for numerous developmental processes
including specification of ventral cell types in the central nervous system such 
as midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neurons. The multifunctional coreceptor Cdo
increases the signaling activity of Shh which is crucial for development of
forebrain and neural tube. In this study, we investigated the role of Cdo in
midbrain DA neurogenesis. Cdo and Shh signaling components are induced during
neurogenesis of embryonic stem (ES) cells. Cdo(-/-) ES cells show reduced
neuronal differentiation accompanied by increased cell death upon neuronal
induction. In addition, Cdo(-/-) ES cells form fewer tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)
and microtubule associated protein 2 (MAP2)-positive DA neurons correlating with 
the decreased expression of key regulators of DA neurogenesis, such as Shh,
Neurogenin2, Mash1, Foxa2, Lmx1a, Nurr1 and Pitx3, relative to the Cdo(+/+) ES
cells. Consistently, the Cdo(-/-) embryonic midbrain displays a reduction in
expression of TH and Nurr1. Furthermore, activation of Shh signaling by treatment
with Purmorphamine (Pur) restores the DA neurogenesis of Cdo(-/-) ES cells,
suggesting that Cdo is required for the full Shh signaling activation to induce
efficient DA neurogenesis.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25117422  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 5;9(8):e95453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095453. eCollection 
2014.

Functionally significant, rare transcription factor variants in tetralogy of
Fallot.

Töpf A(1), Griffin HR(1), Glen E(1), Soemedi R(1), Brown DL(1), Hall D(1), Rahman
TJ(1), Eloranta JJ(2), Jüngst C(3), Stuart AG(4), O'Sullivan J(5), Keavney BD(6),
Goodship JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom. (2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Department of
Medicine II, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany. (4)Bristol
Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Kingdom. (5)Paediatric Cardiology,
Freeman Hospital Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle
upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (6)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; Institute of Cardiovascular
Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Rare variants in certain transcription factors involved in cardiac
development cause Mendelian forms of congenital heart disease. The purpose of
this study was to systematically assess the frequency of rare transcription
factor variants in sporadic patients with the cardiac outflow tract malformation 
tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We sequenced the coding, 5'UTR, and 3'UTR regions of twelve 
transcription factor genes implicated in cardiac outflow tract development
(NKX2.5, GATA4, ISL1, TBX20, MEF2C, BOP/SMYD1, HAND2, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXH, FOXA2
and TBX1) in 93 non-syndromic, non-Mendelian TOF cases. We also analysed Illumina
Human 660W-Quad SNP Array data for copy number variants in these genes; none were
detected. Four of the rare variants detected have previously been shown to affect
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays: FOXC1 p.P297S, FOXC2 p.Q444R, FOXH1 
p.S113T and TBX1 p.P43_G61del PPPPRYDPCAAAAPGAPGP. Two further rare variants,
HAND2 p.A25_A26insAA and FOXC1 p.G378_G380delGGG, A488_491delAAAA, affected
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays. Each of these six functionally
significant variants was present in a single patient in the heterozygous state;
each of the four for which parental samples were available were maternally
inherited. Thus in the 93 TOF cases we identified six functionally significant
mutations in the secondary heart field transcriptional network.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study indicates that rare genetic variants in the secondary
heart field transcriptional network with functional effects on protein function
occur in 3-13% of patients with TOF. This is the first report of a functionally
significant HAND2 mutation in a patient with congenital heart disease.

PMCID: PMC4122343
PMID: 25093829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Clin Invest. 2014 Sep;124(9):3767-80. doi: 10.1172/JCI66603. Epub 2014 Aug 1.

Hedgehog signaling regulates FOXA2 in esophageal embryogenesis and Barrett's
metaplasia.

Wang DH, Tiwari A, Kim ME, Clemons NJ, Regmi NL, Hodges WA, Berman DM, Montgomery
EA, Watkins DN, Zhang X, Zhang Q, Jie C, Spechler SJ, Souza RF.

Metaplasia can result when injury reactivates latent developmental signaling
pathways that determine cell phenotype. Barrett's esophagus is a
squamous-to-columnar epithelial metaplasia caused by reflux esophagitis. Hedgehog
(Hh) signaling is active in columnar-lined, embryonic esophagus and inactive in
squamous-lined, adult esophagus. We showed previously that Hh signaling is
reactivated in Barrett's metaplasia and overexpression of Sonic hedgehog (SHH) in
mouse esophageal squamous epithelium leads to a columnar phenotype. Here, our
objective was to identify Hh target genes involved in Barrett's pathogenesis. By 
microarray analysis, we found that the transcription factor Foxa2 is more highly 
expressed in murine embryonic esophagus compared with postnatal esophagus.
Conditional activation of Shh in mouse esophageal epithelium induced FOXA2, while
FOXA2 expression was reduced in Shh knockout embryos, establishing Foxa2 as an
esophageal Hh target gene. Evaluation of patient samples revealed FOXA2
expression in Barrett's metaplasia, dysplasia, and adenocarcinoma but not in
esophageal squamous epithelium or squamous cell carcinoma. In esophageal squamous
cell lines, Hh signaling upregulated FOXA2, which induced expression of MUC2, an 
intestinal mucin found in Barrett's esophagus, and the MUC2-processing protein
AGR2. Together, these data indicate that Hh signaling induces expression of genes
that determine an intestinal phenotype in esophageal squamous epithelial cells
and may contribute to the development of Barrett's metaplasia.

PMCID: PMC4151220
PMID: 25083987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Development. 2014 Aug;141(16):3123-33. doi: 10.1242/dev.109405. Epub 2014 Jul 25.

The nuclear hormone receptor family member NR5A2 controls aspects of multipotent 
progenitor cell formation and acinar differentiation during pancreatic
organogenesis.

Hale MA(1), Swift GH(1), Hoang CQ(1), Deering TG(1), Masui T(1), Lee YK(2), Xue
J(1), MacDonald RJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology, University of 
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9041, USA. (3)Department of
Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-9148, USA raymond.macdonald@utsouthwestern.edu.

The orphan nuclear receptor NR5A2 is necessary for the stem-like properties of
the epiblast of the pre-gastrulation embryo and for cellular and physiological
homeostasis of endoderm-derived organs postnatally. Using conditional gene
inactivation, we show that Nr5a2 also plays crucial regulatory roles during
organogenesis. During the formation of the pancreas, Nr5a2 is necessary for the
expansion of the nascent pancreatic epithelium, for the subsequent formation of
the multipotent progenitor cell (MPC) population that gives rise to pre-acinar
cells and bipotent cells with ductal and islet endocrine potential, and for the
formation and differentiation of acinar cells. At birth, the NR5A2-deficient
pancreas has defects in all three epithelial tissues: a partial loss of endocrine
cells, a disrupted ductal tree and a >90% deficit of acini. The acinar defects
are due to a combination of fewer MPCs, deficient allocation of those MPCs to
pre-acinar fate, disruption of acinar morphogenesis and incomplete acinar cell
differentiation. NR5A2 controls these developmental processes directly as well as
through regulatory interactions with other pancreatic transcriptional regulators,
including PTF1A, MYC, GATA4, FOXA2, RBPJL and MIST1 (BHLHA15). In particular,
Nr5a2 and Ptf1a establish mutually reinforcing regulatory interactions and
collaborate to control developmentally regulated pancreatic genes by binding to
shared transcriptional regulatory regions. At the final stage of acinar cell
development, the absence of NR5A2 affects the expression of Ptf1a and its acinar 
specific partner Rbpjl, so that the few acinar cells that form do not complete
differentiation. Nr5a2 controls several temporally distinct stages of pancreatic 
development that involve regulatory mechanisms relevant to pancreatic oncogenesis
and the maintenance of the exocrine phenotype.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197540
PMID: 25063451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Endocrinology. 2014 Oct;155(10):3781-92. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1843. Epub 2014 Jul
24.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate a-cell differentiation, glucagon biosynthesis, and
secretion.

Heddad Masson M(1), Poisson C, Guérardel A, Mamin A, Philippe J, Gosmain Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes, Hypertension and Nutrition, University 
Hospital of Geneva, Medical School, 1211 Geneva 14, Switzerland.

The Forkhead box A transcription factors are major regulators of glucose
homeostasis. They show both distinct and redundant roles during pancreas
development and in adult mouse ß-cells. In vivo ablation studies have revealed
critical implications of Foxa1 on glucagon biosynthesis and requirement of Foxa2 
in a-cell terminal differentiation. In order to examine the respective role of
these factors in mature a-cells, we used small interfering RNA (siRNA) directed
against Foxa1 and Foxa2 in rat primary pancreatic a-cells and rodent a-cell lines
leading to marked decreases in Foxa1 and Foxa2 mRNA levels and proteins. Both
Foxa1 and Foxa2 control glucagon gene expression specifically through the G2
element. Although we found that Foxa2 controls the expression of the glucagon,
MafB, Pou3f4, Pcsk2, Nkx2.2, Kir6.2, and Sur1 genes, Foxa1 only regulates
glucagon gene expression. Interestingly, the Isl1 and Gipr genes were not
controlled by either Foxa1 or Foxa2 alone but by their combination. Foxa1 and
Foxa2 directly activate and bind the promoter region the Nkx2.2, Kir6.2 and Sur1,
Gipr, Isl1, and Pou3f4 genes. We also demonstrated that glucagon secretion is
affected by the combined effects of Foxa1 and Foxa2 but not by either one alone. 
Our results indicate that Foxa1 and Foxa2 control glucagon biosynthesis and
secretion as well as a-cell differentiation with both common and unique target
genes.

PMID: 25057789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2014 Sep 5;289(36):24898-910. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.570507. Epub
2014 Jul 15.

Indian hedgehog signaling regulates transcription and expression of collagen type
X via Runx2/Smads interactions.

Amano K(1), Densmore M(2), Nishimura R(3), Lanske B(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oral Medicine, Infection, and Immunity, Harvard School 
of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and the Departments of Oral and
Maxillofacial Surgery and. (2)From the Department of Oral Medicine, Infection,
and Immunity, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02115 and.
(3)Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate School of
Dentistry, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. (4)From the Department of Oral Medicine,
Infection, and Immunity, Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts
02115 and beate_lanske@hsdm.harvard.edu.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) is essential for chondrocyte differentiation and
endochondral ossification and acts with parathyroid hormone-related peptide in a 
negative feedback loop to regulate early chondrocyte differentiation and entry to
hypertrophic differentiation. Independent of this function, we and others
recently reported independent Ihh functions to promote chondrocyte hypertrophy
and matrix mineralization in vivo and in vitro. However, the molecular mechanisms
for these actions and their functional significance are still unknown. We
recently discovered that Ihh overexpression in chondrocytes stimulated the
expression of late chondrocyte differentiation markers and induced matrix
mineralization. Focusing on collagen type X (Col10a1) expression and
transcription, we observed that hedgehog downstream transcription factors
GLI-Krüppel family members (Gli) 1/2 increased COL10A1 promoter activity and
identified a novel Gli1/2 response element in the 250-bp basic promoter. In
addition, we found that Ihh induced Runx2 expression in chondrocytes without
up-regulating other modulators of chondrocyte maturation such as Mef2c, Foxa2,
and Foxa3. Runx2 promoted Col10a1 expression in cooperation with Ihh. Further
analyses using promoter assays, immunofluorescence, and binding assays showed the
interaction of Gli1/2 in a complex with Runx2/Smads induces chondrocyte
differentiation. Finally, we could demonstrate that Ihh promotes in vitro matrix 
mineralization using similar molecular mechanisms. Our data provide an in vitro
mechanism for Ihh signaling to positively regulate Col10a1 transcription. Thus,
Ihh signaling could be an important player for not only early chondrocyte
differentiation but maturation and calcification of chondrocytes.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4155658
PMID: 25028519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. PLoS Biol. 2014 Jul 15;12(7):e1001907. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001907.
eCollection 2014.

Integration of signals along orthogonal axes of the vertebrate neural tube
controls progenitor competence and increases cell diversity.

Sasai N(1), Kutejova E(1), Briscoe J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Medical Research Council, National
Institute for Medical Research, London, United Kingdom.

A relatively small number of signals are responsible for the variety and pattern 
of cell types generated in developing embryos. In part this is achieved by
exploiting differences in the concentration or duration of signaling to increase 
cellular diversity. In addition, however, changes in cellular competence-temporal
shifts in the response of cells to a signal-contribute to the array of cell types
generated. Here we investigate how these two mechanisms are combined in the
vertebrate neural tube to increase the range of cell types and deliver spatial
control over their location. We provide evidence that FGF signaling emanating
from the posterior of the embryo controls a change in competence of neural
progenitors to Shh and BMP, the two morphogens that are responsible for
patterning the ventral and dorsal regions of the neural tube, respectively. Newly
generated neural progenitors are exposed to FGF signaling, and this maintains the
expression of the Nk1-class transcription factor Nkx1.2. Ventrally, this acts in 
combination with the Shh-induced transcription factor FoxA2 to specify floor
plate cells and dorsally in combination with BMP signaling to induce neural crest
cells. As development progresses, the intersection of FGF with BMP and Shh
signals is interrupted by axis elongation, resulting in the loss of Nkx1.2
expression and allowing the induction of ventral and dorsal interneuron
progenitors by Shh and BMP signaling to supervene. Hence a similar mechanism
increases cell type diversity at both dorsal and ventral poles of the neural
tube. Together these data reveal that tissue morphogenesis produces changes in
the coincidence of signals acting along orthogonal axes of the neural tube and
this is used to define spatial and temporal transitions in the competence of
cells to interpret morphogen signaling.

PMCID: PMC4098999
PMID: 25026549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Stem Cells Transl Med. 2014 Sep;3(9):1032-42. doi: 10.5966/sctm.2014-0011. Epub
2014 Jul 14.

Selection Based on FOXA2 Expression Is Not Sufficient to Enrich for Dopamine
Neurons From Human Pluripotent Stem Cells.

Aguila JC(1), Blak A(1), van Arensbergen J(1), Sousa A(1), Vázquez N(1), Aduriz
A(1), Gayosso M(1), Lopez Mato MP(1), Lopez de Maturana R(1), Hedlund E(1),
Sonntag KC(1), Sanchez-Pernaute R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cells and Neural Repair and Cytometry and Advanced Optical 
Microscopy Facility, Inbiomed, San Sebastian, Spain; STEMCELL Technologies, Inc.,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada; Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands
Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Neuroscience,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Psychiatry, McLean
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Belmont, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Laboratory of
Stem Cells and Neural Repair and Cytometry and Advanced Optical Microscopy
Facility, Inbiomed, San Sebastian, Spain; STEMCELL Technologies, Inc., Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada; Division of Gene Regulation, Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Psychiatry, McLean Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Belmont, Massachusetts, USA rpernaute@inbiomed.org.

Human embryonic and induced pluripotent stem cells are potential cell sources for
regenerative approaches in Parkinson disease. Inductive differentiation protocols
can generate midbrain dopamine neurons but result in heterogeneous cell mixtures.
Therefore, selection strategies are necessary to obtain uniform dopamine cell
populations. Here, we developed a selection approach using lentivirus vectors to 
express green fluorescent protein under the promoter region of FOXA2, a
transcription factor that is expressed in the floor plate domain that gives rise 
to dopamine neurons during embryogenesis. We first validated the specificity of
the vectors in human cell lines against a promoterless construct. We then
selected FOXA2-positive neural progenitors from several human pluripotent stem
cell lines, which demonstrated a gene expression profile typical for the ventral 
domain of the midbrain and floor plate, but failed to enrich for dopamine
neurons. To investigate whether this was due to the selection approach, we
overexpressed FOXA2 in neural progenitors derived from human pluripotent stem
cell lines. FOXA2 forced expression resulted in an increased expression of floor 
plate but not mature neuronal markers. Furthermore, selection of the FOXA2
overexpressing fraction also failed to enrich for dopamine neurons. Collectively,
our results suggest that FOXA2 is not sufficient to induce a dopaminergic fate in
this system. On the other hand, our study demonstrates that a combined approach
of promoter activation and lentivirus vector technology can be used as a
versatile tool for the selection of a defined cell population from a variety of
human pluripotent stem cell lines.

©AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4149300
PMID: 25024431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Biol Chem. 2014 Aug 22;289(34):23882-92. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.573469. Epub
2014 Jul 11.

Paradoxical role of DNA methylation in activation of FoxA2 gene expression during
endoderm development.

Bahar Halpern K(1), Vana T(1), Walker MD(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot 76100, Israel. (2)From the Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann
Institute of Science, Rehovot 76100, Israel m.walker@weizmann.ac.il.

The transcription factor FoxA2 is a master regulator of endoderm development and 
pancreatic beta cell gene expression. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying the 
activation of the FoxA2 gene during differentiation, we have compared the
epigenetic status of undifferentiated human embryonic stem cells (hESCs),
hESC-derived early endoderm stage cells (CXCR4+ cells), and pancreatic islet
cells. Unexpectedly, a CpG island in the promoter region of the FoxA2 gene
displayed paradoxically high levels of DNA methylation in expressing tissues
(CXCR4+, islets) and low levels in nonexpressing tissues. This CpG island region 
was found to repress reporter gene expression and bind the Polycomb group protein
SUZ12 and the DNA methyltransferase (DNMT)3b preferentially in undifferentiated
hESCs as compared with CXCR4+ or islets cells. Consistent with this, activation
of FoxA2 gene expression, but not CXCR4 or SOX17, was strongly inhibited by
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and by knockdown of DNMT3b. We hypothesize that in
nonexpressing tissues, the lack of DNA methylation allows the binding of DNA
methyltransferases and repressing proteins, such as Polycomb group proteins; upon
differentiation, DNMT activation leads to CpG island methylation, causing loss of
repressor protein binding. These results suggest a novel and unexpected role for 
DNA methylation in the activation of FoxA2 gene expression during
differentiation.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4156079
PMID: 25016019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Lung. 2014 Oct;192(5):781-91. doi: 10.1007/s00408-014-9620-7. Epub 2014 Jul 12.

Peptide regulation of gene expression and protein synthesis in bronchial
epithelium.

Khavinson VKh(1), Tendler SM, Vanyushin BF, Kasyanenko NA, Kvetnoy IM, Linkova
NS, Ashapkin VV, Polyakova VO, Basharina VS, Bernadotte A.

Author information: 
(1)Pavlov Institute of Physiology of RAS, St-Petersburg, Russia.

INTRODUCTION: Some studies have shown that peptides have high treatment potential
due to their biological activity, harmlessness, and tissue-specific action.
Tetrapeptide Ala-Asp-Glu-Leu (ADEL) was effective on models of acute bacterial
lung inflammation, fibrosis, and toxic lung damage in several studies.
METHODS: We measured Ki67, Mcl-1, p53, CD79, and NOS-3 protein levels in the 1st,
7th, and 14th passages of bronchoepithelial human embryonic cell cultures. Gene
expression of NKX2-1, SCGB1A1, SCGB3A2, FOXA1, FOXA2, MUC4, MUC5AC, and SFTPA1
was measured by real-time polymerase chain reaction. Using the methods of
spectrophotometry, viscometry, and circular dichroism, we studied the ADEL-DNA
interaction in vitro.
RESULTS: Peptide ADEL regulates the levels of Ki67, Mcl-1, p53, CD79, and NOS-3
proteins in cell cultures of human bronchial epithelium in various passages. The 
strongest activating effect of peptide ADEL on bronchial epithelial cell
proliferation through Ki67 and Mcl-1 was observed in "old" cell cultures. ADEL
regulates the expression of genes involved in bronchial epithelium
differentiation: NKX2-1, SCGB1A1, SCGB3A2, FOXA1, and FOXA2. ADEL also activates 
several genes, which reduced expression correlated with pathological lung
development: MUC4, MUC5AC, and SFTPA1. Spectrophotometry, viscometry, and
circular dichroism showed ADEL-DNA interaction, with a binding region in the
major groove (N7 guanine).
CONCLUSIONS: ADEL can bind to specific DNA regions and regulate gene expression
and synthesis of proteins involved in the differentiation and maintenance of
functional activity of the bronchial epithelium. Through activation of some
specific gene expression, peptide ADEL may protect the bronchial epithelium from 
pulmonary pathology. ADEL also may have a geroprotective effect on bronchial
tissue.

PMID: 25015171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Genomics. 2014 Aug;104(2):105-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2014.04.006. Epub 2014 Jul
2.

Strategies to fine-map genetic associations with lipid levels by combining
epigenomic annotations and liver-specific transcription profiles.

Lo KS(1), Vadlamudi S(2), Fogarty MP(2), Mohlke KL(2), Lettre G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Heart Institute, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. (2)Department of Genetics,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (3)Montreal Heart Institute, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Université de Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
Electronic address: guillaume.lettre@umontreal.ca.

Characterization of the epigenome promises to yield the functional elements
buried in the human genome sequence, thus helping to annotate non-coding DNA
polymorphisms with regulatory functions. Here, we develop two novel strategies to
combine epigenomic data with transcriptomic profiles in humans or mice to
prioritize potential candidate SNPs associated with lipid levels by genome-wide
association study (GWAS). First, after confirming that lipid-associated loci that
are also expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) in human livers are enriched
for ENCODE regulatory marks in the human hepatocellular HepG2 cell line, we
prioritize candidate SNPs based on the number of these marks that overlap the
variant position. This method recognized the known SORT1 rs12740374 regulatory
SNP associated with LDL-cholesterol, and highlighted candidate functional SNPs at
15 additional lipid loci. In the second strategy, we combine ENCODE chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput DNA sequencing (ChIP-seq) data
and liver expression datasets from knockout mice lacking specific transcription
factors. This approach identified SNPs in specific transcription factor binding
sites that are located near target genes of these transcription factors. We show 
that FOXA2 transcription factor binding sites are enriched at lipid-associated
loci and experimentally validate that alleles of one such proxy SNP located near 
the FOXA2 target gene BIRC5 show allelic differences in FOXA2-DNA binding and
enhancer activity. These methods can be used to generate testable hypotheses for 
many non-coding SNPs associated with complex diseases or traits.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4373602
PMID: 24997396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Respir Res. 2014 Jun 26;15:70. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-15-70.

Developmental lung expression and transcriptional regulation of claudin-6 by
TTF-1, Gata-6, and FoxA2.

Jimenez FR, Lewis JB, Belgique ST, Wood TT, Reynolds PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Brigham Young University, 
3054 Life Sciences Building, Provo, UT 84602, USA. paul_reynolds@byu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Claudins are transmembrane proteins expressed in tight junctions that
prevent paracellular transport of extracellular fluid and a variety of other
substances. However, the expression profile of Claudin-6 (Cldn6) in the
developing lung has not been characterized.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cldn6 expression was determined during important periods of 
lung organogenesis by microarray analysis, qPCR and immunofluorescence.
Expression patterns were confirmed to peak at E12.5 and diminish as lung
development progressed. Immunofluorescence revealed that Cldn6 was detected in
cells that also express TTF-1 and FoxA2, two critical transcriptional regulators 
of pulmonary branching morphogenesis. Cldn6 was also observed in cells that
express Sox2 and Sox9, factors that influence cell differentiation in the
proximal and distal lung, respectively. In order to assess transcriptional
control of Cldn6, 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0-kb of the proximal murine Cldn6 promoter was 
ligated into a luciferase reporter and co-transfected with expression vectors for
TTF-1 or two of its important transcriptional co-regulators, FoxA2 and Gata-6. In
almost every instance, TTF-1, FoxA2, and Gata-6 activated gene transcription in
cell lines characteristic of proximal airway epithelium (Beas2B) and distal
alveolar epithelium (A-549).
CONCLUSIONS: These data revealed for the first time that Cldn6 might be an
important tight junctional component expressed by pulmonary epithelium during
lung organogenesis. Furthermore, Cldn6-mediated aspects of cell differentiation
may describe mechanisms of lung perturbation coincident with impaired cell
junctions and abnormal membrane permeability.

PMCID: PMC4082679
PMID: 24970044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Dev Biol. 2014 Sep 1;393(1):137-48. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.06.012. Epub 2014
Jun 23.

Arx together with FoxA2, regulates Shh floor plate expression.

Cho G(1), Lim Y(2), Cho IT(2), Simonet JC(3), Golden JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women<U+05F3>s Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of
Philadelphia, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women<U+05F3>s Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, USA. (3)Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, USA. (4)Department of
Pathology, Brigham and Women<U+05F3>s Hospital, Harvard Medical School, USA; Department 
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children<U+05F3>s Hospital of Philadelphia, USA.
Electronic address: jagolden@partners.org.

Mutations in the Aristaless related homeodomain transcription factor (ARX) are
associated with a diverse set of X-linked mental retardation and epilepsy
syndromes in humans. Although most studies have been focused on its function in
the forebrain, ARX is also expressed in other regions of the developing nervous
system including the floor plate (FP) of the spinal cord where its function is
incompletely understood. To investigate the role of Arx in the FP, we performed
gain-of-function studies in the chick using in ovo electroporation, and
loss-of-function studies in Arx-deficient mice. We have found that Arx, in
conjunction with FoxA2, directly induces Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression through 
binding to a Shh floor plate enhancer (SFPE2). We also observed that FoxA2
induces Arx through its transcriptional activation domain whereas Nkx2.2, induced
by Shh, abolishes this induction. Our data support a feedback loop model for Arx 
function; through interactions with FoxA2, Arx positively regulates Shh
expression in the FP, and Shh signaling in turn activates Nkx2.2, which
suppresses Arx expression. Furthermore, our data are evidence that Arx plays a
role as a context dependent transcriptional activator, rather than a primary
inducer of Shh expression, potentially explaining how mutations in ARX are
associated with diverse, and often subtle, defects.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4681535
PMID: 24968361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Genes Dev. 2014 Jun 15;28(12):1363-79. doi: 10.1101/gad.238782.114.

Long noncoding RNAs are spatially correlated with transcription factors and
regulate lung development.

Herriges MJ(1), Swarr DT(2), Morley MP(3), Rathi KS(3), Peng T(3), Stewart KM(3),
Morrisey EE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (2)Division of Neonatology, Division of
Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (3)Department of Medicine. (4)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA; Department of Medicine, Institute for Regenerative Medicine,
Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19104, USA.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are thought to play important roles in regulating
gene transcription, but few have well-defined expression patterns or known
biological functions during mammalian development. Using a conservative pipeline 
to identify lncRNAs that have important biological functions, we identified 363
lncRNAs in the lung and foregut endoderm. Importantly, we show that these lncRNAs
are spatially correlated with transcription factors across the genome. In-depth
expression analyses of lncRNAs with genomic loci adjacent to the critical
transcription factors Nkx2.1, Gata6, Foxa2 (forkhead box a2), and Foxf1 mimic the
expression patterns of their protein-coding neighbor. Loss-of-function analysis
demonstrates that two lncRNAs, LL18/NANCI (Nkx2.1-associated noncoding intergenic
RNA) and LL34, play distinct roles in endoderm development by controlling
expression of critical developmental transcription factors and pathways,
including retinoic acid signaling. In particular, we show that LL18/NANCI acts
upstream of Nkx2.1 and downstream from Wnt signaling to regulate lung endoderm
gene expression. These studies reveal that lncRNAs play an important role in
foregut and lung endoderm development by regulating multiple aspects of gene
transcription, often through regulation of transcription factor expression.

© 2014 Herriges et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4066405
PMID: 24939938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Neurosci. 2014 Jun 11;34(24):8318-23. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2501-13.2014.

Reducing glypican-4 in ES cells improves recovery in a rat model of Parkinson's
disease by increasing the production of dopaminergic neurons and decreasing
teratoma formation.

Fico A(1), de Chevigny A(1), Melon C(1), Bohic M(1), Kerkerian-Le Goff L(1),
Maina F(1), Dono R(2), Cremer H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Aix-Marseille University, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
Marseille, IBDM, UMR7288, Marseille, France. (2)Aix-Marseille University, Centre 
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Marseille, IBDM, UMR7288, Marseille,
France rosanna.dono@univ-amu.fr harold.cremer@univ-amu.fr.

The heparan sulfate proteoglycan Glypican 4 (Gpc4) is strongly expressed in mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells where it controls the maintenance of self-renewal by
modulating Wnt/ß-catenin signaling activities. Here we show that mouse ES cells
carrying a hypomorphic Gpc4 allele, in a single-step neuronal differentiation
protocol, show increased differentiation into dopaminergic neurons expressing
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and nuclear receptor related-1 protein (Nurr1) 1. In
contrast to wild-type cells, these differentiating Gpc4-mutant cells expressed
high levels of DOPA decarboxylase and the dopamine transporter, two markers
expressed by fully mature dopaminergic neurons. Intrastriatal transplantation of 
Gpc4 hypomorphic cells into a 6-OHDA rat model for Parkinson's disease improved
motor behavior in the cylinder test and amphetamine-induced rotations at a higher
level than transplanted wild-type cells. Importantly, Gpc4 hypomorphic cell
grafts, in contrast to wild-type cells, did not generate teratomas in the host
brains, leading to strongly enhanced animal survival. Therefore, control of Gpc4 
activity level represents a new potential strategy to reduce ES cell tumorigenic 
features while at the same time increasing neuronal differentiation and
integration.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/348318-06$15.00/0.

PMID: 24920634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Development. 2014 Jun;141(12):2494-505. doi: 10.1242/dev.101790.

The facial neural crest controls fore- and midbrain patterning by regulating
Foxg1 expression through Smad1 activity.

Aguiar DP(1), Sghari S(1), Creuzet S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Neurobiologie, Laboratoire de Neurobiologie et Développement,
Avenue de la Terrasse, Gif-sur-Yvette 91198, France. (2)Institut de
Neurobiologie, Laboratoire de Neurobiologie et Développement, Avenue de la
Terrasse, Gif-sur-Yvette 91198, France sophie.creuzet@inaf.cnrs-gif.fr.

The facial neural crest (FNC), a pluripotent embryonic structure forming
craniofacial structures, controls the activity of brain organisers and stimulates
cerebrum growth. To understand how the FNC conveys its trophic effect, we have
studied the role of Smad1, which encodes an intracellular transducer, to which
multiple signalling pathways converge, in the regulation of Foxg1. Foxg1 is a
transcription factor essential for telencephalic specification, the mutation of
which leads to microcephaly and mental retardation. Smad1 silencing, based on RNA
interference (RNAi), was performed in pre-migratory FNC cells. Soon after
electroporation of RNAi molecules, Smad1 inactivation abolished the expression of
Foxg1 in the chick telencephalon, resulting in dramatic microcephaly and partial 
holoprosencephaly. In addition, the depletion of Foxg1 activity altered the
expression Otx2 and Foxa2 in di/mesencephalic neuroepithelium. However, when
mutated forms of Smad1 mediating Fgf and Wnt signalling were transfected into FNC
cells, these defects were overcome. We also show that, downstream of Smad1
activity, Dkk1, a Wnt antagonist produced by the FNC, initiated the specification
of the telencephalon by regulating Foxg1 activity. Additionally, the activity of 
Cerberus in FNC-derived mesenchyme synergised with Dkk1 to control Foxg1
expression and maintain the balance between Otx2 and Foxa2.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 24917504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Transl Med. 2014 May 20;12:135. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-12-135.

Laminin 411 acts as a potent inducer of umbilical cord mesenchymal stem cell
differentiation into insulin-producing cells.

Qu H, Liu X, Ni Y, Jiang Y, Feng X, Xiao J, Guo Y, Kong D, Li A, Li X, Zhuang X, 
Wang Z, Wang Y, Chang Y, Chen S, Kong F, Zhang X, Zhao S, Sun Y, Xu D, Wang D(1),
Zheng C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hematology and Cellular Therapy, the Second Hospital of
Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, PR China. wdq5445@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Diabetes mellitus (DM) is an incurable metabolic disease constituting
a major threat to human health. Insulin-producing cells (IPCs) differentiated
from mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) hold great promise in the treatment of DM. The
development of an efficient IPC induction system is a crucial step for the
clinical application of IPCs for DM. Laminin 411 is a key component of the
basement membrane and is involved in the regulation of cell differentiation;
however, little is known about a role of laminin 411 in the regulation of IPC
differentiation from human MSCs.
METHODS: MSCs were isolated from human umbilical cord (UC-MSCs) and expanded in
an in vitro culture system. UC-MSCs were then cultured in the IPC induction and
differentiation medium in the presence of laminin 411. Flow cytometry,
Quantitative realtime PCR, immunofluorescence staining, ELISA, Western blotting
and other techniques were applied to determine IPC generation, insulin expression
and related mechanisms. To evaluate potential therapeutic efficacy of IPCs
induced from UC-MSCs, a type-1 diabetes (T1DM) rat model was generated using
streptozotocin. Blood glucose, insulin levels, and survival of rats were
monitored periodically following intravenous injection of the tested cells.
RESULTS: Laminin 411 markedly induced the expression of the genes Foxa2 and
Sox17, markers for pancreatic precursor cells, efficiently induced IPC
differentiation from MSCs, and up-regulated insulin expression at both mRNA and
protein levels. Furthermore, the expression of the genes known to govern insulin 
expression including Pdx1 and Ngn3 was markedly induced by laminin 411, which
suggests that Pdx1 and Ngn3 signaling pathways are involved in laminin 411
induced-insulin expression machinery. More importantly, administration of laminin
411-induced IPCs rapidly and significantly down-regulated fasting blood glucose
levels, significantly reduced the HbA1c concentration and markedly improved the
symptoms and survival of T1DM rats.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that laminin 411 acts as a potent
differentiation inducer of IPCs from UC-MSCs via the Pdx1 and Ngn3 signaling
pathways. Moreover, transfusion of laminin 411 induced-IPCs more efficiently
improves symptoms and survival of T1DM rats. These novel finding highlights a
potential clinical application of laminin 411 induced-IPCs in the treatment of
T1DM, which calls for further studies.

PMCID: PMC4040110
PMID: 24885418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Aug;99(8):E1580-5. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-4503. Epub 
2014 May 30.

Genome-wide analyses of ChIP-Seq derived FOXA2 DNA occupancy in liver points to
genetic networks underpinning multiple complex traits.

Johnson ME(1), Schug J, Wells AD, Kaestner KH, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics (M.E.J., S.F.A.G.) and Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine (A.D.W.), The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, and
Department of Genetics and Institute of Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism (J.S., 
K.H.K., S.F.A.G.), and Department of Pediatrics (S.F.A.G.), Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.

BACKGROUND: Forkhead Box A2 (FOXA2) exerts an influence on glucose homeostasis
via activity in the liver. In addition, a key genome-wide association study
(GWAS) recently demonstrated that genetic variation, namely rs6048205, at the
FOXA2 locus is robustly associated with fasting glucose levels. Our hypothesis
was that this DNA-binding protein regulates the expression of a set of molecular 
pathways critical to endocrine traits.
METHODS: Drawing on our laboratory and bioinformatic experience with chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel sequencing, we analyzed our
existing FOXA2 chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel
sequencing data generated in human liver, using the algorithm hypergeometric
optimization of motif enrichment, to gain insight into its global genomic binding
pattern from a disease perspective.
RESULTS: We performed a pathway analysis of the gene list using the gene set
enrichment analysis algorithm, which yielded a number of significant annotations.
Motivated by the fact that the FOXA2 locus has been implicated by GWAS, we
cross-referenced the occupancy sites with the National Institutes of Health GWAS 
catalog and found strong evidence for the enrichment of loci implicated in
endocrine, neuropsychiatric, cardiovascular, and cancer trait categories, but
interestingly there was no evidence for enrichment for inflammation related
traits. Intriguingly, a FOXA2 occupancy site coincided with rs6048205, suggesting
that this variant confers its effect, at least partially, via a perturbation of a
FOXA2 feedback mechanism.
CONCLUSION: Our data strongly suggest that FOXA2 is acting as a master regulator 
of key pathways that are enriched for loci implicated by GWAS for most trait
categories, with the clear exception of inflammation, suggesting that this factor
exerts its effect in this context via noninflammatory processes.

PMCID: PMC4121035
PMID: 24878043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. PLoS One. 2014 May 29;9(5):e98438. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098438. eCollection
2014.

SIRT1 mediates FOXA2 breakdown by deacetylation in a nutrient-dependent manner.

van Gent R(1), Di Sanza C(2), van den Broek NJ(2), Fleskens V(3), Veenstra A(2), 
Stout GJ(2), Brenkman AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of Molecular Cancer Research,
Section Metabolic Diseases, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The
Netherlands, and Netherlands Metabolomics Centre, Leiden, The Netherlands;
Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Center for Molecular Medicine, Department of
Molecular Cancer Research, Section Metabolic Diseases, University Medical Center 
Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands, and Netherlands Metabolomics Centre, Leiden,
The Netherlands. (3)University Medical Center Utrecht, Department of Cell
Biology, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The Forkhead transcription factor FOXA2 plays a fundamental role in controlling
metabolic homeostasis in the liver during fasting. The precise molecular
regulation of FOXA2 in response to nutrients is not fully understood. Here, we
studied whether FOXA2 could be controlled at a post-translational level by
acetylation. By means of LC-MS/MS analyses, we identified five acetylated
residues in FOXA2. Sirtuin family member SIRT1 was found to interact with and
deacetylate FOXA2, the latter process being dependent on the NAD+-binding
catalytic site of SIRT1. Deacetylation by SIRT1 reduced protein stability of
FOXA2 by targeting it towards proteasomal degradation, and inhibited
transcription from the FOXA2-driven G6pase and CPT1a promoters. While mutation of
the five identified acetylated residues weakly affected protein acetylation and
stability, mutation of at least seven additional lysine residues was required to 
abolish acetylation and reduce protein levels of FOXA2. The importance of
acetylation of FOXA2 became apparent upon changes in nutrient levels. The
interaction of FOXA2 and SIRT1 was strongly reduced upon nutrient withdrawal in
cell culture, while enhanced Foxa2 acetylation levels were observed in murine
liver in vivo after starvation for 36 hours. Collectively, this study
demonstrates that SIRT1 controls the acetylation level of FOXA2 in a
nutrient-dependent manner and in times of nutrient shortage the interaction
between SIRT1 and FOXA2 is reduced. As a result, FOXA2 is protected from
degradation by enhanced acetylation, hence enabling the FOXA2 transcriptional
program to be executed to maintain metabolic homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4038515
PMID: 24875183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Appl Biochem Biotechnol. 2014 Aug;173(7):1727-36. doi: 10.1007/s12010-014-0960-9.
Epub 2014 May 27.

Small molecules differentiate definitive endoderm from human induced pluripotent 
stem cells on PCL scaffold.

Hoveizi E(1), Khodadadi S, Tavakol S, Karima O, Nasiri-Khalili MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Shahid Chamran University of
Ahvaz, Ahvaz, Iran, e.hoveizi@yahoo.com.

Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) are attractive sources of cells for
disease modeling in vitro, and they may eventually provide access to
cells/tissues for the treatment of many degenerative diseases. Stepwise
differentiation from hiPSCs to definitive endoderm (DE) will identify a key step 
in hepatocytes and beta cell development and may prove useful for transplantation
therapy for liver diseases and diabetes. Inducer of definitive endoderm 1 (IDE1) 
is known to play an important role in the regional specification of DE. Here, we 
have investigated the effect of stimulation with IDE1 on the development of
hiPSCs into DE cells in three-dimensional (3D) cultures. The differentiation was 
determined by immunofluorescence staining with Sox17, FoxA2, and goosecoid (Gsc) 
and also by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) analysis. In this study, we showed that hiPSCs with 6-day IDE1
treatment (as chemical tool) on poly(e-caprolactone) (PCL) nanofibrous scaffold
were able to differentiate into DE cells.

PMID: 24861317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Lab Invest. 2014 Jul;94(7):726-39. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2014.64. Epub 2014 May 
19.

FOXA1 deletion in luminal epithelium causes prostatic hyperplasia and alteration 
of differentiated phenotype.

DeGraff DJ(1), Grabowska MM(2), Case TC(2), Yu X(2), Herrick MK(2), Hayward
WJ(2), Strand DW(2), Cates JM(3), Hayward SW(2), Gao N(4), Walter MA(5), Buttyan 
R(6), Yi Y(7), Kaestner KH(8), Matusik RJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Pennsylvania State University, Hershey, PA, USA.
(2)Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN, 
USA. (4)Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ, USA.
(5)Department Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, USA.
(6)Vancouver Prostate Centre, Vancouver, BC, USA. (7)Institute for Integrative
Genomics and Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.
(8)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(9)1] Department of Pathology, Pennsylvania State University, Hershey, PA, USA
[2] Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN, USA [3] Vanderbilt-Ingram Cancer Center, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

The forkhead box (Fox) superfamily of transcription factors has essential roles
in organogenesis and tissue differentiation. Foxa1 and Foxa2 are expressed during
prostate budding and ductal morphogenesis, whereas Foxa1 expression is retained
in adult prostate epithelium. Previous characterization of prostatic tissue
rescued from embryonic Foxa1 knockout mice revealed Foxa1 to be essential for
ductal morphogenesis and epithelial maturation. However, it is unknown whether
Foxa1 is required to maintain the differentiated status in adult prostate
epithelium. Here, we employed the PBCre4 transgenic system and determined the
impact of prostate-specific Foxa1 deletion in adult murine epithelium.
PBCre4/Foxa1(loxp/loxp) mouse prostates showed progressive florid hyperplasia
with extensive cribriform patterning, with the anterior prostate being most
affected. Immunohistochemistry studies show mosaic Foxa1 KO consistent with
PBCre4 activity, with Foxa1 KO epithelial cells specifically exhibiting altered
cell morphology, increased proliferation, and elevated expression of basal cell
markers. Castration studies showed that, while PBCre4/Foxa1(loxp/loxp) prostates 
did not exhibit altered sensitivity in response to hormone ablation compared with
control prostates, the number of Foxa1-positive cells in mosaic Foxa1 KO
prostates was significantly reduced compared with Foxa1-negative cells following 
castration. Unexpectedly, gene expression profile analyses revealed that Foxa1
deletion caused abnormal expression of seminal vesicle-associated genes in KO
prostates. In summary, these results indicate Foxa1 expression is required for
the maintenance of prostatic cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4451837
PMID: 24840332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Jul 15;307(2):G205-18. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00105.2014. Epub 2014 May 15.

Biological functional annotation of retinoic acid alpha and beta in mouse liver
based on genome-wide binding.

He Y(1), Tsuei J(1), Wan YJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California
Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, California. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of California Davis Medical Center, Sacramento,
California yjywan@ucdavis.edu.

Retinoic acid (RA) has diverse biological effects. The liver stores vitamin A,
generates RA, and expresses receptors for RA. The current study examines the
hepatic binding profile of two RA receptor isoforms, RARA (RARa) and RARB (RARß),
in response to RA treatment in mouse livers. Our data uncovered 35,521, and
14,968 genomic bindings for RARA and RARB, respectively. Each expressed unique
and common bindings, implying their redundant and specific roles. RARB has higher
RA responsiveness than RARB. RA treatment generated 18,821 novel RARB bindings
but only 14,798 of RARA bindings, compared with the control group. RAR frequently
bound the consensus hormone response element [HRE; (A/G)G(G/T)TCA], which often
contained the motifs assigned to SP1, GABPA, and FOXA2, suggesting potential
interactions between those transcriptional factors. Functional annotation coupled
with principle component analysis revealed that the function of RAR target genes 
were motif dependent. Taken together, the cistrome of RARA and RARB revealed
their extensive biological roles in the mouse liver. RAR target genes are
enriched in various biological processes. The hepatic RAR genome-wide binding
data can help us understand the global molecular mechanisms underlying RAR and
RA-mediated gene and pathway regulation.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4101682
PMID: 24833708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jun;1839(6):526-36. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.04.021.
Epub 2014 May 5.

Novel mechanism of transcriptional repression of the human ATP binding cassette
transporter A1 gene in hepatic cells by the winged helix/forkhead box
transcription factor A2.

Thymiakou E(1), Kardassis D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Basic Sciences, University of Crete 
Medical School, Heraklion 71110, Greece; Institute of Molecular Biology and
Biotechnology, Foundation of Research and Technology of Hellas, Heraklion 71110, 
Greece. (2)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Department of Basic Sciences, University
of Crete Medical School, Heraklion 71110, Greece; Institute of Molecular Biology 
and Biotechnology, Foundation of Research and Technology of Hellas, Heraklion
71110, Greece. Electronic address: kardasis@imbb.forth.gr.

ATP binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) plays a key role in the biogenesis of
HDL by promoting the efflux of cellular cholesterol and phospholipids to lipid
free apoA-I. Mutations in the ABCA1 gene cause Tangier disease which is
characterized by near or complete absence of circulating plasma HDL. In the
present study we show that the winged helix/forkhead box containing transcription
factor A2 (FOXA2) shown previously to play a role in glucose and bile acid
homeostasis in the liver and in energy utilization in adipose tissue is a
negative modulator of ABCA1 gene expression in hepatic cells. We show that the
ABCA1 promoter contains three FOXA2 binding elements in the proximal region. Two 
of the sites are localized in a region of the ABCA1 promoter enriched in binding 
elements for transcriptional repressor proteins whereas the third site is the
core of the TATA element of the ABCA1 promoter. Inhibition of FOXA2 binding to
the ABCA1 promoter by site-directed mutagenesis or FOXA2 gene expression by siRNA
was associated with increased ABCA1 promoter activity and protein levels.
Overexpression of FOXA2 inhibited both the constitutive ABCA1 gene expression as 
well as ABCA1 gene induction by oxysterols and retinoids via nuclear receptors
LXRa/RXRa. In summary, the present study identifies transcription factor FOXA2 as
a negative modulator of ABCA1 gene expression in hepatic cells and reveals a
novel mechanism of transcriptional repression by FOXA2 which involves the TATA
element of the ABCA1 gene.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24807696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Mar 31;13(1):2231-9. doi: 10.4238/2014.March.31.3.

EZH2 suppresses hepatocellular differentiation of mouse bone marrow mesenchymal
stem cells.

Lu T(1), Sun H(1), Lv J(1), Yang MF(1), Zhang F(1), Qian Y(1), Dong XJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory Center of Shaoxing People's Hospital, Shaoxing Hospital of
Zhejiang University, Shaoxing, China.

Our previous studies have indicated that mouse bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
(mBMMSCs) have potential to differentiate into hepatocytes with high efficiency. 
Our study aimed to evaluate the role of the mouse histone methyltransferase
enhancer of zeste homolog 2 gene (EZH2) in the hepatocellular differentiation of 
mBMMSCs. The mBMMSCs isolated from femurs and tibias were cultured in Iscove's
modified Eagle's medium (IMEM) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum.
Hepatocellular differentiation was induced by 20 ng/mL hepatocyte growth factor
and 10 ng/mL fibroblast growth factor 4. The mouse histone methyltransferase EZH2
gene was introduced via PLenti-eGFP-EZH2 or PLenti-eGFP-NEO as a control.
Hepatocellular-induced mBMMSCs showed lower expression of EZH2 and lower level of
histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) in the AFP and FOXa2 gene promoter
regions compared to uninduced mBMMSCs. Introduction of EZH2 inhibited
hepatocellular induction, reduced both the mRNA and protein levels of AFP and
FOXa2, and increased the level of histone H3K27me3 in the AFP and FOXa2 gene
promoter regions. In summary, the mouse histone methyltransferase EZH2 gene could
suppress hepatocellular differentiation of mBMMSCs by increasing the level of
H3K27me3 in the AFP and FOXa2 gene promoter regions.

PMID: 24737471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Aug 15;23(16):1910-22. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0504. Epub 2014
Jun 6.

The differential effects of 2% oxygen preconditioning on the subsequent
differentiation of mouse and human pluripotent stem cells.

Fynes K(1), Tostoes R, Ruban L, Weil B, Mason C, Veraitch FS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemical Engineering, The Advanced Centre for Biochemical
Engineering, University College London , London, United Kingdom .

A major challenge facing the development of effective cell therapies is the
efficient differentiation of pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) into pure populations.
Lowering oxygen tension to physiological levels can affect both the expansion and
differentiation stages. However, to date, there are no studies investigating the 
knock-on effect of culturing PSCs under low oxygen conditions on subsequent
lineage commitment at ambient oxygen levels. PSCs were passaged three times at 2%
O2 before allowing cells to spontaneously differentiate as embryoid bodies (EBs) 
in high oxygen (20% O2) conditions. Maintenance of mouse PSCs in low oxygen was
associated with a significant increase in the expression of early differentiation
markers FGF5 and Eomes, while conversely we observed decreased expression of
these genes in human PSCs. Low oxygen preconditioning primed mouse PSCs for their
subsequent differentiation into mesodermal and endodermal lineages, as confirmed 
by increased gene expression of Eomes, Goosecoid, Brachyury, AFP, Sox17, FoxA2,
and protein expression of Brachyury, Eomes, Sox17, FoxA2, relative to high oxygen
cultures. The effects extended to the subsequent formation of more mature
mesodermal lineages. We observed significant upregulation of cardiomyocyte marker
Nkx2.5, and critically a decrease in the number of contaminant pluripotent cells 
after 12 days using a directed cardiomyocyte protocol. However, the impact of low
oxygen preconditioning was to prime human cells for ectodermal lineage commitment
during subsequent EB differentiation, with significant upregulation of Nestin and
ß3-tubulin. Our research demonstrates the importance of oxygen tension control
during cell maintenance on the subsequent differentiation of both mouse and human
PSCs, and highlights the differential effects.

PMID: 24734982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Diabetes. 2014 Sep;63(9):3141-8. doi: 10.2337/db13-1015. Epub 2014 Apr 10.

MicroRNA-29 fine-tunes the expression of key FOXA2-activated lipid metabolism
genes and is dysregulated in animal models of insulin resistance and diabetes.

Kurtz CL(1), Peck BC(2), Fannin EE(1), Beysen C(3), Miao J(4), Landstreet SR(5), 
Ding S(6), Turaga V(1), Lund PK(6), Turner S(3), Biddinger SB(4), Vickers KC(5), 
Sethupathy P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC. (2)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC Genetics and
Molecular Biology Curriculum, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC. (3)KineMed, Inc., Emeryville, CA. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, MA. (5)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine,
Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN. (6)Department of Nutrition, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC. (7)Department of Genetics, School
of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC
Genetics and Molecular Biology Curriculum, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, Chapel Hill, NC praveen_sethupathy@med.unc.edu.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have emerged as biomarkers of metabolic status, etiological
factors in complex disease, and promising drug targets. Recent reports suggest
that miRNAs are critical regulators of pathways underlying the pathophysiology of
type 2 diabetes. In this study, we demonstrate by deep sequencing and real-time
quantitative PCR that hepatic levels of Foxa2 mRNA and miR-29 are elevated in a
mouse model of diet-induced insulin resistance. We also show that Foxa2 and
miR-29 are significantly upregulated in the livers of Zucker diabetic fatty
(fa/fa) rats and that the levels of both returned to normal upon treatment with
the insulin-sensitizing agent pioglitazone. We present evidence that miR-29
expression in human hepatoma cells is controlled in part by FOXA2, which is known
to play a critical role in hepatic energy homeostasis. Moreover, we demonstrate
that miR-29 fine-tunes FOXA2-mediated activation of key lipid metabolism genes,
including PPARGC1A, HMGCS2, and ABHD5. These results suggest that miR-29 is an
important regulatory factor in normal metabolism and may represent a novel
therapeutic target in type 2 diabetes and related metabolic syndromes.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMCID: PMC4141370
PMID: 24722248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Jul;41(7):4783-94. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3349-5. Epub 2014
Apr 10.

Generation of high-yield insulin producing cells from human bone marrow
mesenchymal stem cells.

Jafarian A(1), Taghikhani M, Abroun S, Pourpak Z, Allahverdi A, Soleimani M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Tarbiat
Modares University, Tehran, Iran, ajafaryan@modares.ac.ir.

Allogenic islet transplantation is a most efficient approach for treatment of
diabetes mellitus. However, the scarcity of islets and long term need for an
immunosuppressant limits its application. Recently, cell replacement therapies
that generate of unlimited sources of ß cells have been developed to overcome
these limitations. In this study we have described a stage specific
differentiation protocol for the generation of insulin producing islet-like
clusters from human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (hBM-MSCs). This specific 
stepwise protocol induced differentiation of hMSCs into definitive endoderm,
pancreatic endoderm and pancreatic endocrine cells that expressed of sox17,
foxa2, pdx1, ngn3, nkx2.2, insulin, glucagon, somatostatin, pancreatic
polypeptide, and glut2 transcripts respectively. In addition, immunocytochemical 
analysis confirmed protein expression of the above mentioned genes. Western blot 
analysis discriminated insulin from proinsulin in the final differentiated cells.
In derived insulin producing cells (IPCs), secreted insulin and C-peptide was in 
a glucose dependent manner. We have developed a protocol that generates effective
high-yield human IPCs from hBM-MSCs in vitro. These finding suggest that
functional IPCs generated by this procedure can be used as a cell-based approach 
for insulin dependent diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 24718781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Dev Growth Differ. 2014 May;56(4):276-92. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12129. Epub 2014 Apr
3.

Pulmonary endoderm, second heart field and the morphogenesis of distal outflow
tract in mouse embryonic heart.

Liang S(1), Li HC, Wang YX, Wu SS, Cai YJ, Cui HL, Yang YP, Ya J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Shanxi Medical University, 56 Xin Jian
Nan Road, Taiyuan, 030001, Shanxi, China.

The second heart field (SHF), foregut endoderm and sonic hedgehog (SHH) signaling
pathway are all reported to associate with normal morphogenesis and septation of 
outflow tract (OFT). However, the morphological relationships of the development 
of foregut endoderm and expression of SHH signaling pathway members with the
development of surrounding SHF and OFT are seldom described. In this study,
serial sections of mouse embryos from ED9 to ED13 (midgestation) were stained
with a series of marker antibodies for specifically highlighting SHF (Isl-1),
endoderm (Foxa2), basement membrane (Laminin), myocardium (MHC) and smooth muscle
(a-SMA) respectively, or SHH receptors antibodies including patched1 (Ptc1),
patched2 (Ptc2) and smoothened, to observe the spatiotemporal relationship
between them and their contributions to OFT morphogenesis. Our results
demonstrated that the development of an Isl-1 positive field in the splanchnic
mesoderm ventral to foregut, a subset of SHF, is closely coupled with pulmonary
endoderm or tracheal groove, the Isl-1 positive cells surrounding pulmonary
endoderm are distributed in a special cone-shaped pattern and take part in the
formation of the lateral walls of the intrapericardial aorta and pulmonary trunk 
and the transient aortic-pulmonary septum, and Ptc1 and Ptc2 are exclusively
expressed in pulmonary endoderm during this Isl-l positive field development,
suggesting special roles played in inducing the Isl-l positive field formation by
pulmonary endoderm. It is indicated that pulmonary endoderm plays a role in the
development and specification of SHF in midgestation, and that pulmonary
endoderm-associated Isl-l positive field is involved in patterning the
morphogenesis and septation of the intrapericardial arterial trunks.

© 2014 The Authors Development, Growth & Differentiation © 2014 Japanese Society 
of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 24697670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2014 Mar;102(1):52-73. doi: 10.1002/bdrc.21060.

The chondrocytic journey in endochondral bone growth and skeletal dysplasia.

Yeung Tsang K(1), Wa Tsang S, Chan D, Cheah KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

The endochondral bones of the skeleton develop from a cartilage template and grow
via a process involving a cascade of chondrocyte differentiation steps
culminating in formation of a growth plate and the replacement of cartilage by
bone. This process of endochondral ossification, driven by the generation of
chondrocytes and their subsequent proliferation, differentiation, and production 
of extracellular matrix constitute a journey, deviation from which inevitably
disrupts bone growth and development, and is the basis of human skeletal
dysplasias with a wide range of phenotypic severity, from perinatal lethality to 
progressively deforming. This highly coordinated journey of chondrocyte
specification and fate determination is controlled by a myriad of intrinsic and
extrinsic factors. SOX9 is the master transcription factor that, in concert with 
varying partners along the way, directs the different phases of the journey from 
mesenchymal condensation, chondrogenesis, differentiation, proliferation, and
maturation. Extracellular signals, including bone morphogenetic proteins,
wingless-related MMTV integration site (WNT), fibroblast growth factor, Indian
hedgehog, and parathyroid hormone-related peptide, are all indispensable for
growth plate chondrocytes to align and organize into the appropriate columnar
architecture and controls their maturation and transition to hypertrophy.
Chondrocyte hypertrophy, marked by dramatic volume increase in phases, is
controlled by transcription factors SOX9, Runt-related transcription factor, and 
FOXA2. Hypertrophic chondrocytes mediate the cartilage to bone transition and
concomitantly face a live-or-die situation, a subject of much debate. We review
recent insights into the coordination of the phases of the chondrocyte journey,
and highlight the need for a systems level understanding of the regulatory
networks that will facilitate the development of therapeutic approaches for
skeletal dysplasia.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24677723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Mar 6;2(3):337-50. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.01.013.
eCollection 2014.

Isolation of human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived dopaminergic progenitors
by cell sorting for successful transplantation.

Doi D(1), Samata B(1), Katsukawa M(1), Kikuchi T(1), Morizane A(1), Ono Y(2),
Sekiguchi K(3), Nakagawa M(4), Parmar M(5), Takahashi J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Application, Center for iPS Cell Research and
Application, Kyoto University, 606-8507 Kyoto, Japan. (2)Group for Neuronal
Differentiation and Development, KAN Research Institute, Inc., 650-0047 Kobe,
Japan. (3)Laboratory of Extracellular Matrix Biochemistry, Institute for Protein 
Research, Osaka University, 565-0871 Osaka, Japan. (4)Department of Reprogramming
Science, Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, 606-8507
Kyoto, Japan. (5)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg
Neuroscience Center, Lund University, 221 84 Lund, Sweden. (6)Department of
Clinical Application, Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto
University, 606-8507 Kyoto, Japan ; Department of Biological Repair, Institute
for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, 606-8507 Kyoto, Japan ;
Department of Neurosurgery, Kyoto University School of Medicine, 606-8507 Kyoto, 
Japan.

Human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) can provide a promising source of
midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neurons for cell replacement therapy for Parkinson's
disease. However, iPSC-derived donor cells inevitably contain tumorigenic or
inappropriate cells. Here, we show that human iPSC-derived DA progenitor cells
can be efficiently isolated by cell sorting using a floor plate marker, CORIN. We
induced DA neurons using scalable culture conditions on human laminin fragment,
and the sorted CORIN(+) cells expressed the midbrain DA progenitor markers, FOXA2
and LMX1A. When transplanted into 6-OHDA-lesioned rats, the CORIN(+) cells
survived and differentiated into midbrain DA neurons in vivo, resulting in
significant improvement of the motor behavior, without tumor formation. In
particular, the CORIN(+) cells in a NURR1(+) cell-dominant stage exhibited the
best survival and function as DA neurons. Our method is a favorable strategy in
terms of scalability, safety, and efficiency and may be advantageous for clinical
application.

PMCID: PMC3964289
PMID: 24672756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Lipids Health Dis. 2014 Mar 19;13:50. doi: 10.1186/1476-511X-13-50.

Dihydrocapsaicin down-regulates apoM expression through inhibiting Foxa2
expression and enhancing LXRa expression in HepG2 cells.

Zhao JY, Hu YW, Li SF, Hu YR, Ma X, Wu SG, Wang YC, Gao JJ, Sha YH, Zheng L(1),
Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Medicine Center, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China. nfyyzl@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Apolipoprotein M (apoM), as a novel apolipoprotein which is mainly
expressed in liver and kidney tissues, is associated with development and
progression of atherosclerosis and diabetes. Our group have recently shown that
Dihydrocapsaicin(DHC)can significantly decrease atherosclerotic plaque formation 
in apoE-/- mice. However, the effect and possible mechanism of DHC on apoM
expression remain unclear.
METHODS: HepG2 cells were treated with 0 µM, 25 µM, 50 µM and 100 µM DHC for 24 h
or were treated with 100 µM DHC for 0, 6, 12, and 24 h, respectively. The mRNA
levels and protein levels were measured by real-time quantitative PCR and western
blot analysis, respectively.
RESULTS: We found that DHC markedly decreased expression of apoM at both mRNA and
protein level in HepG2 cells in a dose-dependent and time-dependent manner.
Expression of Foxa2 was decreased while expression of LXRa was increased by DHC
treatment in HepG2 cells. In addittion, overexpression of Foxa2 markedly
compensated the inhibition effect induced by DHC on apoM expression. LXRa small
interfering RNA significantly abolished the inhibition effect which induced by
DHC on apoM expression. The liver of C57BL/6 mice treated with DHC had
significantly lower expression of apoM. Furthermore, the liver had lower
expression of Foxa2 while had higher expression of LXRa.
CONCLUSIONS: DHC could down-regulate apoM expression through inhibiting Foxa2
expression and enhancing LXRa expression in HepG2 cells.

PMCID: PMC3999941
PMID: 24642298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2014 Apr 25;289(17):11807-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.525022. Epub
2014 Mar 13.

Thioredoxin-interacting protein promotes islet amyloid polypeptide expression
through miR-124a and FoxA2.

Jing G(1), Westwell-Roper C, Chen J, Xu G, Verchere CB, Shalev A.

Author information: 
(1)From the Comprehensive Diabetes Center and Department of Medicine, Division of
Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, University of Alabama at Birmingham,
Birmingham, Alabama 35294 and.

Thioredoxin-interacting protein (TXNIP) is up-regulated by glucose and diabetes
and plays a critical role in glucotoxicity, inflammation, and beta-cell
apoptosis, whereas we have found that TXNIP deficiency protects against diabetes.
Interestingly, human islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) is also induced by glucose,
aggregates into insoluble amyloid fibrils found in islets of most individuals
with type 2 diabetes and promotes inflammation and beta-cell cytotoxicity.
However, so far no connection between TXNIP and IAPP signaling had been reported.
Using TXNIP gain and loss of function experiments, INS-1 beta-cells and
beta-cell-specific Txnip knock-out mice, we now found that TXNIP regulates IAPP
expression. Promoter analyses and chromatin-immunoprecipitation assays further
demonstrated that TXNIP increases IAPP expression at the transcriptional level,
and we discovered that TXNIP-induced FoxA2 (forkhead box A2) transcription factor
expression was conferring this effect by promoting FoxA2 enrichment at the
proximal FoxA2 site in the IAPP promoter. Moreover, we found that TXNIP
down-regulates miR-124a expression, a microRNA known to directly target FoxA2.
Indeed, miR-124a overexpression led to decreased FoxA2 expression and IAPP
promoter occupancy and to a significant reduction in IAPP mRNA and protein
expression and also effectively inhibited TXNIP-induced IAPP expression. Thus,
our studies have identified a novel TXNIP/miR-124a/FoxA2/IAPP signaling cascade
linking the critical beta-cell signaling pathways of TXNIP and IAPP and thereby
provide new mechanistic insight into an important aspect of transcriptional
regulation and beta-cell biology.

PMCID: PMC4002088
PMID: 24627476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Mar 25;111(12):4478-83. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1402612111. Epub 2014 Mar 10.

Charting Brachyury-mediated developmental pathways during early mouse
embryogenesis.

Lolas M(1), Valenzuela PD, Tjian R, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Junior Fellow Program, Janelia Farm Research Campus, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Ashburn, VA 20147.

To gain insights into coordinated lineage-specification and morphogenetic
processes during early embryogenesis, here we report a systematic identification 
of transcriptional programs mediated by a key developmental regulator--Brachyury.
High-resolution chromosomal localization mapping of Brachyury by ChIP sequencing 
and ChIP-exonuclease revealed distinct sequence signatures enriched in
Brachyury-bound enhancers. A combination of genome-wide in vitro and in vivo
perturbation analysis and cross-species evolutionary comparison unveiled a
detailed Brachyury-dependent gene-regulatory network that directly links the
function of Brachyury to diverse developmental pathways and cellular housekeeping
programs. We also show that Brachyury functions primarily as a transcriptional
activator genome-wide and that an unexpected gene-regulatory feedback loop
consisting of Brachyury, Foxa2, and Sox17 directs proper stem-cell lineage
commitment during streak formation. Target gene and mRNA-sequencing correlation
analysis of the T(c) mouse model supports a crucial role of Brachyury in
up-regulating multiple key hematopoietic and muscle-fate regulators. Our results 
thus chart a comprehensive map of the Brachyury-mediated gene-regulatory network 
and how it influences in vivo developmental homeostasis and coordination.

PMCID: PMC3970479
PMID: 24616493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 28;446(1):49-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.051. Epub 2014 Feb 26.

Interleukin-13-induced MUC5AC expression is regulated by a PI3K-NFAT3 pathway in 
mouse tracheal epithelial cells.

Yan F(1), Li W(1), Zhou H(1), Wu Y(1), Ying S(1), Chen Z(1), Shen H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Second Affiliated
Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.
(2)Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Second Affiliated
Hospital of Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China;
State Key Lab. of Respiratory Disease (SKLRS), China. Electronic address:
huahaoshen@163.com.

Interleukin-13 (IL-13) plays a critical role in asthma mucus overproduction,
while the mechanisms underlying this process are not fully elucidated. Previous
studies showed that nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) is involved in the
pathogenesis of asthma, but whether it can directly regulate IL-13-induced mucus 
(particularly MUC5AC) production is still not clear. Here we showed that IL-13
specifically induced NFAT3 activation through promoting its dephosphorylation in 
air-liquid interface (ALI) cultures of mouse tracheal epithelial cells (mTECs).
Furthermore, both Cyclosporin A (CsA, a specific NFAT inhibitor) and LY294002 (a 
Phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) inhibitor) significantly blocked IL-13-induced
MUC5AC mRNA and protein production through the inhibition of NFAT3 activity. We
also confirmed that CsA could not influence the forkhead Box A2 (Foxa2) and mouse
calcium dependent chloride channel 3 (mClca3) expression in IL-13-induced MUC5AC 
production, which both are known to be important in IL-13-stimulated mucus
expression. Our study is the first to demonstrate that the PI3K-NFAT3 pathway is 
positively involved in IL-13-induced mucus production, and provided novel
insights into the molecular mechanism of asthma mucus hypersecretion.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24583134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):1535-47. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0442. Epub 2014 
Apr 3.

Engineering of midbrain organoids containing long-lived dopaminergic neurons.

Tieng V(1), Stoppini L, Villy S, Fathi M, Dubois-Dauphin M, Krause KH.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Pathology and Immunology, University Medical Center,
University of Geneva , Geneva, Switzerland .

The possibility to generate dopaminergic (DA) neurons from pluripotent stem cells
represents an unlimited source of material for tissue engineering and cell
therapy for neurodegenerative disease. We set up a protocol based on the
generation of size-calibrated neurospheres for a rapid production (3 weeks) of a 
high amount of DA neurons (>60%) oriented toward a midbrain-like phenotype,
characterized by the expression of FOXA2, LMX1A, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH),
NURR1, and EN1. By using <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitors and varying culture time of
neurospheres, we controlled maturation and cellular composition of a
three-dimensional (3D) engineered nervous tissue (ENT). ENT contained neurons and
glial cells expressing various markers of maturity, such as synaptophysin,
neuronal nuclei-specific protein (NeuN), and glial fibrillary acidic protein
(GFAP), and were electrophysiologically active. We found that 3-week-old
neurospheres were optimal to generate 3D tissue containing DA neurons with
typical A9 morphology. ENT generated from 4-week-old neurospheres launched glial 
cell type since astrocytes and myelin could be detected massively at the expense 
of TH-immunoreactive neurons. All <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitors were not equivalent;
compound E was more efficient than DAPT in generating DA neurons. This DA tissue 
provides a tool for drug screening, and toxicology. It should also become a
useful biomaterial for studies on Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 24576173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Genet Mol Res. 2014 Jan 21;13(1):415-24. doi: 10.4238/2014.January.21.9.

FGF4 and HGF promote differentiation of mouse bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells 
into hepatocytes via the MAPK pathway.

Lu T(1), Yang C(2), Sun H(1), Lv J(1), Zhang F(1), Dong XJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Laboratory Center of Shaoxing People's Hospital, Shaoxing Hospital of
Zhejiang University, Shaoxing, China. (2)Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Medical
College, Xi'an, Shanxi Province, China. (3)Clinical Laboratory Center of Shaoxing
People's Hospital, Shaoxing Hospital of Zhejiang University, Shaoxing, China
dxj9666@163.com.

Our research demonstrated the potential for mouse bone marrow mesenchymal stem
cells (mBMMSCs) to differentiate into hepatocytes in vitro and in vivo. However, 
the exact mechanism of this process remains unknown. In this study, we
investigated the role of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
cell-signaling pathway in the differentiation of mBMMSCs into hepatocytes.
mBMMSCs were isolated from femurs and tibias, and hepatic differentiation was
induced in Isove's modified Eagle's medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum, containing human growth factor and fibroblast growth factor 4. After seven
days of induction, morphological characteristics were examined. For inhibition of
signaling molecular activities, the inhibitors p38 (SB203580), ERK1/2 (U0126),
and MSK1 (H89) were added to the differentiation medium. Real-time polymerase
chain reaction and Western blot analysis were used to evaluate the gene
expression profiles and protein expression of several markers, including the
early specific markers of hepatocytes (AFP and FOXa2), phosphorylated-p38
(p-p38), phosphorylated-ERK1/2 (p-ERK1/2), and phosphorylated- MSK1 (p-MSK1).
Expressions of p-p38, p-ERK1/2, and p-MSK1 were effectively inhibited by their
respective inhibitors. Expressions of early specific markers, AFP and FOXa2, in
the p38, ERK1/2, and MSK1 inhibitor-treated groups were significantly decreased
compared to those of the cytokine-induced control. Notably, the expressions of
AFP and FOXa2 in the p38 inhibitor group were more obviously reduced than those
in the ERK1/2 inhibitor group. The MAPK signaling pathway, especially p38, is
sufficient to drive differentiation of mBMMSCs into hepatocytes. This could
increase the efficiency of hepatocyte differentiation, which would benefit
clinical applications.

PMID: 24535868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cell J. 2014 Feb 3;16(1):63-72. Epub 2014 Feb 3.

Stauprimide Priming of Human Embryonic Stem Cells toward Definitive Endoderm.

Tahamtani Y(1), Azarnia M(1), Farrokhi A(2), Moradmand A(2), Mirshahvaladi S(2), 
Aghdami N(2), Baharvand H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Kharazmi University, Tehran, Iran. (2)Department of
Stem Cells and Developmental Biology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.

OBJECTIVE: In vitro production of a definitive endoderm (DE) is an important
issue in stem cell-related differentiation studies and it can assist with the
production of more efficient endoderm derivatives for therapeutic applications.
Despite tremendous progress in DE differentiation of human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs), researchers have yet to discover universal, efficient and cost-effective
protocols.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this experimental study, we have treated hESCs with 200
nM of Stauprimide (Spd) for one day followed by activin A (50 ng/ml; A50) for the
next three days (Spd-A50). In the positive control group, hESCs were treated with
Wnt3a (25 ng/ml) and activin A (100 ng/ml) for the first day followed by activin 
A for the next three days (100 ng/ml; W/A100-A100).
RESULTS: Gene expression analysis showed up regulation of DE-specific marker
genes (SOX17, FOXA2 and CXCR4) comparable to that observed in the positive
control group. Expression of the other lineage specific markers did not
significantly change (p<0.05). We also obtained the same gene expression results 
using another hESC line. The use of higher concentrations of Spd (400 and 800 nM)
in the Spd-A50 protocol caused an increase in the expression SOX17 as well as a
dramatic increase in mortality rate of the hESCs. A lower concentration of
activin A (25 ng/ml) was not able to up regulate the DE-specific marker genes.
Then, A50 was replaced by inducers of definitive endoderm; IDE1/2 (IDE1 and
IDE2), two previously reported small molecule (SM) inducers of DE, in our
protocol (Spd-IDE1/2). This replacement resulted in the up regulation of visceral
endoderm (VE) marker (SOX7) but not DE-specific markers. Therefore, while the
Spd-A50 protocol led to DE production, we have shown that IDE1/2 could not fully 
replace activin A in DE induction of hESCs.
CONCLUSION: These findings can assist with the design of more efficient
chemically-defined protocols for DE induction of hESCs and lead to a better
understanding of the different signaling networks that are involved in DE
differentiation of hESCs.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Royan Institute (ACECR).The full text is avalible 
in: www.celljournal.org.

PMCID: PMC3933440
PMID: 24518969  [PubMed]


163. Development. 2014 Feb;141(4):761-72. doi: 10.1242/dev.095802.

Foxa2 acts as a co-activator potentiating expression of the Nurr1-induced DA
phenotype via epigenetic regulation.

Yi SH(1), He XB, Rhee YH, Park CH, Takizawa T, Nakashima K, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine, Hanyang
University, Seoul 133-791, Korea.

Understanding how dopamine (DA) phenotypes are acquired in midbrain DA (mDA)
neuron development is important for bioassays and cell replacement therapy for
mDA neuron-associated disorders. Here, we demonstrate a feed-forward mechanism of
mDA neuron development involving Nurr1 and Foxa2. Nurr1 acts as a transcription
factor for DA phenotype gene expression. However, Nurr1-mediated DA gene
expression was inactivated by forming a protein complex with CoREST, and then
recruiting histone deacetylase 1 (Hdac1), an enzyme catalyzing histone
deacetylation, to DA gene promoters. Co-expression of Nurr1 and Foxa2 was
established in mDA neuron precursor cells by a positive cross-regulatory loop. In
the presence of Foxa2, the Nurr1-CoREST interaction was diminished (by
competitive formation of the Nurr1-Foxa2 activator complex), and CoREST-Hdac1
proteins were less enriched in DA gene promoters. Consequently, histone 3
acetylation (H3Ac), which is responsible for open chromatin structures, was
strikingly increased at DA phenotype gene promoters. These data establish the
interplay of Nurr1 and Foxa2 as the crucial determinant for DA phenotype
acquisition during mDA neuron development.

PMID: 24496614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Virol. 2014 Apr;88(8):4195-203. doi: 10.1128/JVI.03327-13. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Forkhead box transcription factor regulation and lipid accumulation by hepatitis 
C virus.

Bose SK(1), Kim H, Meyer K, Wolins N, Davidson NO, Ray R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology & Immunology, Saint Louis University, St.
Louis, Missouri, USA.

We have previously shown that hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection modulates the
expression of forkhead box transcription factors, including FoxO1 and FoxA2,
which play key roles in gluconeogenesis and ß-oxidation of fatty acid,
respectively. The aim of the present study was to determine the role of forkhead 
box transcription factors in modulating lipid metabolism. HCV infection or core
protein expression alone in transfected Huh7.5 cells increased expression of
sterol regulatory element binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c) and its downstream
target, fatty acid synthase (FASN), which are key proteins involved in lipid
synthesis. Knockdown of FoxO1 by small interfering RNA in HCV-infected cells
significantly decreased SREBP-1c and FASN expression. Further, HCV infection or
core protein expression in Huh7.5 cells significantly decreased the expression of
medium-chain acyl coenzyme A dehydrogenase (MCAD) and short-chain acyl coenzyme A
dehydrogenase (SCAD), involved in the regulation of ß-oxidation of fatty acids.
Ectopic expression of FoxA2 in HCV-infected cells rescued the expression of MCAD 
and SCAD. Oil red O and neutral lipid staining indicated that HCV infection
significantly increases lipid accumulation compared to that in the mock-infected 
control. This was further verified by the increased expression of perilipin-2 and
decreased activity of hormone-sensitive lipase (HSL) in HCV-infected hepatocytes,
implying increased accumulation of neutral lipids. Knockdown of FoxO1 and ectopic
expression of FoxA2 significantly decreased HCV replication. Taken together,
these results suggest that HCV modulates forkhead box transcription factors which
together increase lipid accumulation and promote viral replication.IMPORTANCE:
Hepatic steatosis is a frequent complication associated with chronic HCV
infection. Its presence is a key prognostic indicator associated with the
progression to hepatic fibrosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Several mechanisms 
have been proposed to account for the development of steatosis and fatty liver
during HCV infection. We observed that HCV infection increases expression of both
SREBP-1c and FASN. Further investigation suggested that the expression of
SREBP-1c and FASN is controlled by the transcription factor FoxO1 during HCV
infection. In addition, HCV infection significantly decreased both MCAD and SCAD 
expression, which is controlled by FoxA2. HCV infection also increased lipid
droplet accumulation, increased perilipin-2 expression, and decreased HSL
activity. Thus, knockdown of FoxO1 (decreased lipogenesis) and overexpression of 
FoxA2 (increased ß-oxidation) resulted in a significant disruption of the
platform and, hence, a decrease in HCV genome replication. Thus, targeting of
FoxO1 and FoxA2 might be useful in developing a therapeutic approach against HCV 
infection.

PMCID: PMC3993747
PMID: 24478438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Mar 4;21(2):311-26. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0548. Print
2014 Apr.

RANK- and c-Met-mediated signal network promotes prostate cancer metastatic
colonization.

Chu GC(1), Zhau HE, Wang R, Rogatko A, Feng X, Zayzafoon M, Liu Y, Farach-Carson 
MC, You S, Kim J, Freeman MR, Chung LW.

Author information: 
(1)Uro-Oncology Research, Department of Medicine, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8750 Beverly Blvd., Atrium 103, Los
Angeles, California 90048, USA Departments of Surgery Biomedical Sciences
Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Center, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA Department of
Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama, USA
Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA 
Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Rice University, Houston, Texas,
USA.

Prostate cancer (PCa) metastasis to bone is lethal and there is no adequate
animal model for studying the mechanisms underlying the metastatic process. Here,
we report that receptor activator of NF-<U+03BA>B ligand (RANKL) expressed by PCa cells 
consistently induced colonization or metastasis to bone in animal models.
RANK-mediated signaling established a premetastatic niche through a feed-forward 
loop, involving the induction of RANKL and c-Met, but repression of androgen
receptor (AR) expression and AR signaling pathways. Site-directed mutagenesis and
transcription factor (TF) deletion/interference assays identified common TF
complexes, c-Myc/Max, and AP4 as critical regulatory nodes. RANKL-RANK signaling 
activated a number of master regulator TFs that control the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (Twist1, Slug, Zeb1, and Zeb2), stem cell
properties (Sox2, Myc, Oct3/4, and Nanog), neuroendocrine differentiation (Sox9, 
HIF1a, and FoxA2), and osteomimicry (c-Myc/Max, Sox2, Sox9, HIF1a, and Runx2).
Abrogating RANK or its downstream c-Myc/Max or c-Met signaling network minimized 
or abolished skeletal metastasis in mice. RANKL-expressing LNCaP cells recruited 
and induced neighboring non metastatic LNCaP cells to express RANKL,
c-Met/activated c-Met, while downregulating AR expression. These initially
non-metastatic cells, once retrieved from the tumors, acquired the potential to
colonize and grow in bone. These findings identify a novel mechanism of tumor
growth in bone that involves tumor cell reprogramming via RANK-RANKL signaling,
as well as a form of signal amplification that mediates recruitment and stable
transformation of non-metastatic bystander dormant cells.

PMCID: PMC3959765
PMID: 24478054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Histochem Cell Biol. 2014 Aug;142(2):217-26. doi: 10.1007/s00418-014-1183-4. Epub
2014 Jan 30.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to hepatocyte-like cells on a new
developed xeno-free extracellular matrix.

Farzaneh Z(1), Pakzad M, Vosough M, Pournasr B, Baharvand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cells and Developmental Biology at the Cell Science
Research Center, Royan Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, PO 
Box 19395-4644, Tehran, Iran.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) provide a new source for hepatocyte production
in translational medicine and cell replacement therapy. The reported hESC-derived
hepatocyte-like cells (HLCs) were commonly generated on Matrigel, a mouse cell
line-derived extracellular matrix (ECM). Here, we performed the hepatic lineage
differentiation of hESCs following a stepwise application of growth factors on a 
newly developed serum- and xeno-free, simple and cost-benefit ECM, designated
"RoGel," which generated from a modified conditioned medium of human fibroblasts.
In comparison with Matrigel, the differentiated HLCs on both ECMs expressed
similar levels of hepatocyte-specific genes, secreted a-fetoprotein, and
metabolized ammonia, showed glycogen storage activity as well as low-density
lipoprotein and indocyanine green uptake. The transplantation of hESC-HLCs into
the carbon tetrachloride-injured liver demonstrated incorporation of the cells
into the host mouse liver and the expression of albumin. The results suggest that
the xeno-free and cost-benefit matrix may be applicable in bioartificial livers
and also may facilitating a clinical application of human pluripotent stem
cell-derived hepatocytes in the future.

PMID: 24477550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jan 29;15:80. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-80.

Application of experimentally verified transcription factor binding sites models 
for computational analysis of ChIP-Seq data.

Levitsky VG(1), Kulakovskiy IV, Ershov NI, Oshchepkov DY, Makeev VJ, Hodgman TC, 
Merkulova TI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics of the Siberian Division of Russian Academy
of Sciences, Lavrentieva Prospect 10, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia.
levitsky@bionet.nsc.ru.

BACKGROUND: ChIP-Seq is widely used to detect genomic segments bound by
transcription factors (TF), either directly at DNA binding sites (BSs) or
indirectly via other proteins. Currently, there are many software tools
implementing different approaches to identify TFBSs within ChIP-Seq peaks.
However, their use for the interpretation of ChIP-Seq data is usually complicated
by the absence of direct experimental verification, making it difficult both to
set a threshold to avoid recognition of too many false-positive BSs, and to
compare the actual performance of different models.
RESULTS: Using ChIP-Seq data for FoxA2 binding loci in mouse adult liver and
human HepG2 cells we compared FoxA binding-site predictions for four
computational models of two fundamental classes: pattern matching based on
existing training set of experimentally confirmed TFBSs (oPWM and SiteGA) and de 
novo motif discovery (ChIPMunk and diChIPMunk). To properly select prediction
thresholds for the models, we experimentally evaluated affinity of 64 predicted
FoxA BSs using EMSA that allows safely distinguishing sequences able to bind TF. 
As a result we identified thousands of reliable FoxA BSs within ChIP-Seq loci
from mouse liver and human HepG2 cells. It was found that the performance of
conventional position weight matrix (PWM) models was inferior with the highest
false positive rate. On the contrary, the best recognition efficiency was
achieved by the combination of SiteGA & diChIPMunk/ChIPMunk models, properly
identifying FoxA BSs in up to 90% of loci for both mouse and human ChIP-Seq
datasets.
CONCLUSIONS: The experimental study of TF binding to oligonucleotides
corresponding to predicted sites increases the reliability of computational
methods for TFBS-recognition in ChIP-Seq data analysis. Regarding ChIP-Seq data
interpretation, basic PWMs have inferior TFBS recognition quality compared to the
more sophisticated SiteGA and de novo motif discovery methods. A combination of
models from different principles allowed identification of proper TFBSs.

PMCID: PMC4234207
PMID: 24472686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Tissue Cell. 2014 Apr;46(2):127-35. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2013.12.006. Epub 2013
Dec 31.

Valproic acid promotes differentiation of hepatocyte-like cells from whole human 
umbilical cord-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

An SY(1), Han J(1), Lim HJ(1), Park SY(1), Kim JH(2), Do BR(2), Kim JH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Biotechnology, College of Life
Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of Korea.
(2)Biotechnology Research Institute, HurimBioCell Inc., Seoul 157-793, Republic
of Korea. (3)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Division of Biotechnology, College 
of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul 136-713, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: jhkim@korea.ac.kr.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are mesoderm-derived cells that are considered a
good source of somatic cells for treatment of many degenerative diseases.
Previous studies have reported the differentiation of mesodermal MSCs into
endodermal and ectodermal cell types beyond their embryonic lineages, including
hepatocytes and neurons. However, the molecular pathways responsible for the
direct or indirect cell type conversion and the functional ability of the
differentiated cells remain unclear and need further research. In the present
study, we demonstrated that valproic acid (VPA), which is a histone deacetylase
inhibitor, induced an increase in the expression of endodermal genes including
CXCR4, SOX17, FOXA1, FOXA2, GSC, c-MET, EOMES, and HNF-1ß in human umbilical cord
derived MSCs (hUCMSCs). In addition, we found that VPA is able to increase these 
endodermal genes in hUCMSCs by activating signal transduction of AKT and ERK. VPA
pretreatment increased hepatic differentiation at the expense of adipogenic
differentiation. The effects of VPA on modulating hUCMSCs fate were diminished by
blocking AKT and ERK activation using specific signaling inhibitors. Together,
our results suggest that VPA contributes to the lineage conversion of hUCMSCs to 
hepatic cell fate by upregulating the expression of endodermal genes through AKT 
and ERK activation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24472423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Shanghai Kou Qiang Yi Xue. 2013 Dec;22(6):634-42.

[Recombinant hFOXA2 and hPDX1 lentivirus induced dental pulp stem cells from
deciduous teeth reprogramming for insulin-producing cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi JF(1), Zhu CH, Liu J, Sun JY, Rao GZ, Li A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Centre, Stomatological Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University.
Xi'an 710004, Shaanxi Province, China.E-mail:921676599@qq.com.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to culture and identify dental pulp stem
cells(DPSCs) from deciduous teeth in vitro and construct the recombinant hFOXA2
and hPDX1 lentivirus vectors and transfect the DPSCs to induce insulin-producing 
cells (IPCs).
METHODS: DPSCs were separated and cultured by enzyme digest method, and purified 
by limited dilution method. Flow cytometry was used to determine the surface
marker expression of the DPSCs, and the ability of multiple differentiations was 
determined by specific staining. hFOXA2 and hPDX1 genes were amplified by PCR,
and the recombinant hFOXA2 and hPDX1 lentivirus vectors were reconstructed and
transfected into 293T cells by lipofectamine2000 for virus packaging. The viral
infection efficiency and titer were determined through fluorescence cell count.
The recombinant virus was used to infect the DPSCs cells via multiplicity of
infection (MOI) and induce the DPSCs reprogramming for IPCs. Immunofluorescence
staining was used to measure the expression of proinsulin, FOXA2 and PDX1. ELISA 
method was used to detect the insulin secretion. The data was analyzed Using
SPSS13.0 software package.
RESULTS: DPSCs were isolated and cultured successfully. Cell surface highly
expressed STRO-1 (98.01%), CDl46 (98.51%), CD34 (99.54%) and CD45 (24.08%). The
multi-lineage differentiation capacity into osteoblasts, chondrocytes, and
adipose was achieved. The recombinant hFOXA2 and hPDX1 lentivirus vectors were
successfully constructed. Double enzyme digestion and sequencing appraisal showed
that the sequence was fully consistent with GenBank retrieval. Virus packing
efficiency was (96.15±0.17) % and (95.49±0.21) % respectively, and the infection 
titer was about 1.80±108 GTU/mL. The best MOI of the virus was 20. After inducing
the cells to express proinsulin, FOXA2 and PDX1, insulin secretion volume was
about 1.92 µmol/L. Compared with the uninduced group and control group, insulin
secretion increased significantly (P<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The recombinant transcription factor virus can activate cell
reprogramming mechanism, form insulin-producing cells, and can be used for gene
therapy of diabetes seed cells. Supported by Science and Technology Research
Program of Shaanxi Province (2009K17-06) and Science and Technology Innovation as
a Whole Plan Resources Leading Industry Key Technology (Chain) Project of Shaanxi
Province (2011KTCL03-24).

PMID: 24469124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 10;9(1):e85148. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085148. eCollection
2014.

Overexpression of dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 1 attenuates airway
inflammation in a mouse model of asthma.

Kinker KG(1), Gibson AM(1), Bass SA(1), Day BP(1), Deng J(2), Medvedovic M(2),
Figueroa JA(3), Hershey GK(4), Chen W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Asthma Research, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America. (2)Department of Environmental
Health, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio, United
States of America. (3)Department of Chemistry, University of Cincinnati,
Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America. (4)Division of Asthma Research,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of
America ; Division of Allergy and Immunology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.

Levels of asymmetric dimethylarginine (ADMA), an endogenous inhibitor of nitric
oxide synthase, are increased in lung, sputum, exhaled breath condensate and
plasma samples from asthma patients. ADMA is metabolized primarily by
dimethylarginine dimethylaminohydrolase 1 (DDAH1) and DDAH2. We determined the
effect of DDAH1 overexpression on development of allergic inflammation in a mouse
model of asthma. The expression of DDAH1 and DDAH2 in mouse lungs was determined 
by RT-quantitative PCR (qPCR). ADMA levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF)
and serum samples were determined by mass spectrometry. Wild type and
DDAH1-transgenic mice were intratracheally challenged with PBS or house dust mite
(HDM). Airway inflammation was assessed by bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) total and
differential cell counts. The levels of IgE and IgG1 in BALF and serum samples
were determined by ELISA. Gene expression in lungs was determined by RNA-Seq and 
RT-qPCR. Our data showed that the expression of DDAH1 and DDAH2 was decreased in 
the lungs of mice following HDM exposure, which correlated with increased ADMA
levels in BALF and serum. Transgenic overexpression of DDAH1 resulted in
decreased BAL total cell and eosinophil numbers following HDM exposure. Total IgE
levels in BALF and serum were decreased in HDM-exposed DDAH1-transgenic mice
compared to HDM-exposed wild type mice. RNA-Seq results showed downregulation of 
genes in the inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) signaling pathway in
PBS-treated DDAH1-transgenic mice versus PBS-treated wild type mice and
downregulation of genes in IL-13/FOXA2 signaling pathway in HDM-treated
DDAH1-transgenic mice versus HDM-treated wild type mice. Our findings suggest
that decreased expression of DDAH1 and DDAH2 in the lungs may contribute to
allergic asthma and overexpression of DDAH1 attenuates allergen-induced airway
inflammation through modulation of Th2 responses.

PMCID: PMC3894860
PMID: 24465497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Development. 2014 Feb;141(3):514-25. doi: 10.1242/dev.104232.

miR-335 promotes mesendodermal lineage segregation and shapes a transcription
factor gradient in the endoderm.

Yang D(1), Lutter D, Burtscher I, Uetzmann L, Theis FJ, Lickert H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stem Cell Research, Helmholtz Zentrum München, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany.

Transcription factors (TFs) pattern developing tissues and determine cell fates; 
however, how spatio-temporal TF gradients are generated is ill defined. Here we
show that miR-335 fine-tunes TF gradients in the endoderm and promotes
mesendodermal lineage segregation. Initially, we identified miR-335 as a
regulated intronic miRNA in differentiating embryonic stem cells (ESCs). miR-335 
is encoded in the mesoderm-specific transcript (Mest) and targets the 3'-UTRs of 
the endoderm-determining TFs Foxa2 and Sox17. Mest and miR-335 are co-expressed
and highly accumulate in the mesoderm, but are transiently expressed in endoderm 
progenitors. Overexpression of miR-335 does not affect initial mesendoderm
induction, but blocks Foxa2- and Sox17-mediated endoderm differentiation in ESCs 
and ESC-derived embryos. Conversely, inhibition of miR-335 activity leads to
increased Foxa2 and Sox17 protein accumulation and endoderm formation.
Mathematical modeling predicts that transient miR-335 expression in endoderm
progenitors shapes a TF gradient in the endoderm, which we confirm by functional 
studies in vivo. Taken together, our results suggest that miR-335 targets
endoderm TFs for spatio-temporal gradient formation in the endoderm and to
stabilize lineage decisions during mesendoderm formation.

PMID: 24449834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 May;41(5):2745-55. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3129-2. Epub 2014
Jan 22.

Effect of dietary n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on transcription factor
regulation in the bovine endometrium.

Waters SM(1), Coyne GS, Kenny DA, Morris DG.

Author information: 
(1)Animal and Bioscience Research Department, Animal and Grassland Research and
Innovation Centre, Teagasc, Grange, Dunsany, Co. Meath, Ireland,
sinead.waters@teagasc.ie.

Dietary n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (n-3 PUFA) supplementation is postulated
to have positive effects on fertility. The impact of dietary n-3 PUFA
supplementation on physiological and biochemical processes involved in
reproduction is likely to be associated with significant alterations in gene
expression in key reproductive tissues which is in turn regulated by
transcription factors. Beef heifers were supplemented with a rumen protected
source of either a saturated fatty acid or high n-3 PUFA diet per animal per day 
for 45 days and uterine endometrial tissue was harvested post slaughter. A
microarray analysis was conducted and bioinformatic tools were employed to
evaluate the effect of n-3 PUFA supplementation on gene expression in the bovine 
endometrium. Clustering of microarray gene expression data was performed to
identify co-expressed genes. Functional annotation of each cluster of genes was
carried out using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Furthermore, oPOSSUM was employed
to identify transcription factors involved in gene expression changes due to
supplementary PUFA. Gene functions which showed a significant response to n-3
PUFA supplementation included tissue development, immune function and
reproductive function. Numerous transcription factors such as FOXD1, FOXD3,
NFKB1, ESR1, PGR, FOXA2, NKX3-1 and PPARa were identified as potential regulators
of gene expression in the endometrium of cattle supplemented with n-3 PUFA. This 
study demonstrates the complex nature of the alterations in the transcriptional
regulation process in the uterine endometrium of cattle following dietary
supplementation which may positively influence the uterine environment.

PMID: 24449365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Epigenetics. 2014 Apr;9(4):557-65. doi: 10.4161/epi.27696. Epub 2014 Jan 17.

Chromatin remodeling mediated by the FOXA1/A2 transcription factors activates
CFTR expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

Kerschner JL(1), Gosalia N(1), Leir SH(1), Harris A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program; Lurie Children's Research Center; Chicago,
IL USA; Department of Pediatrics; Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine; Chicago, IL USA.

The forkhead box A transcription factors, FOXA1 and FOXA2, function as pioneer
factors to open condensed chromatin and facilitate binding of other proteins. We 
showed previously that these factors are key components of a transcriptional
network that drives enhancer function at the cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator (CFTR) locus in intestinal epithelial cells. The CFTR
promoter apparently lacks tissue-specific regulatory elements and expression of
the gene is controlled by multiple cis-acting elements, which coordinate gene
expression in different cell types. Here we show that concurrent depletion of
FOXA1 and FOXA2 represses CFTR expression and alters the three-dimensional
architecture of the active locus by diminishing interactions between the promoter
and intronic cis-acting elements. Reduction of FOXA1/A2 also modifies the
enrichment profile of the active enhancer marks H3K27ac and H3K4me2 across the
CFTR locus and alters chromatin accessibility at individual cis-elements.
Moreover, loss of FOXA1/A2 suppresses the recruitment of other members of the
transcriptional network including HNF1 and CDX2, to multiple cis-elements. These 
data reveal a complex molecular mechanism underlying the role of FOXA1/A2 in
achieving high levels of CFTR expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

PMCID: PMC4121366
PMID: 24440874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Mar 10;322(1):51-61. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.01.006. Epub
2014 Jan 13.

Efficient programming of human eye conjunctiva-derived induced pluripotent stem
(ECiPS) cells into definitive endoderm-like cells.

Massumi M(1), Hoveizi E(2), Baktash P(3), Hooti A(3), Ghazizadeh L(3), Nadri
S(4), Pourasgari F(5), Hajarizadeh A(6), Soleimani M(7), Nabiuni M(2),
Khorramizadeh MR(8).

Author information: 
(1)Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell Biotechnology Team, Stem Cells Department,
National Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran; Stem
Cells Biology Department, Stem Cell Technology Research Center, Tehran, Iran;
Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Electronic address: massumi.mohammad@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biology, Faculty
of Sciences, Kharazmi University (Tarbiat Moallem), Tehran, Iran. (3)Induced
Pluripotent Stem Cell Biotechnology Team, Stem Cells Department, National
Institute of Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology, Tehran, Iran. (4)Stem Cells
Biology Department, Stem Cell Technology Research Center, Tehran, Iran.
(5)Department of Biotechnology, Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Center, Karaj,
Iran; Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering Department, Stem Cell Technology 
Research Center, Tehran, Iran. (6)Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering
Department, Stem Cell Technology Research Center, Tehran, Iran. (7)Department of 
Hematology, Faculty of Medical Science, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran.
(8)Department of Medical Biotechnology, School of Advanced Medical Technologies, 
Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran. Electronic address:
khoramza@sina.tums.ac.ir.

Due to pluripotency of induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells, and the lack of
immunological incompatibility and ethical issues, iPS cells have been considered 
as an invaluable cell source for future cell replacement therapy. This study was 
aimed first at establishment of novel iPS cells, ECiPS, which directly
reprogrammed from human Eye Conjunctiva-derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells (EC-MSCs);
second, comparing the inductive effects of Wnt3a/Activin A biomolecules to IDE1
small molecule in derivation of definitive endoderm (DE) from the ECiPS cells. To
that end, first, the EC-MSCs were transduced by SOKM-expressing lentiviruses and 
characterized for endogenous expression of embryonic markers Then the established
ECiPS cells were induced to DE formation by Wnt3a/Activin A or IDE1.
Quantification of GSC, Sox17 and Foxa2 expression, as DE-specific markers, in
both mRNA and protein levels revealed that induction of ECiPS cells by either
Wnt3a/Activin A or IDE1 could enhance the expression level of the genes; however 
the levels of increase were higher in Wnt3a/Activin A induced ECiPS-EBs than IDE1
induced cells. Furthermore, the flow cytometry analyses showed no synergistic
effect between Activin A and Wnt3a to derive DE-like cells from ECiPS cells. The 
comparative findings suggest that although both Wnt3a/Activin A signaling and
IDE1 molecule could be used for differentiation of iPS into DE cells, the
DE-inducing effect of Wnt3a/Activin A was statistically higher than IDE1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24434355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 28;289(9):5784-98. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.483115. Epub 2014 
Jan 14.

Myostatin induces DNA damage in skeletal muscle of streptozotocin-induced type 1 
diabetic mice.

Sriram S(1), Subramanian S, Juvvuna PK, McFarlane C, Salerno MS, Kambadur R,
Sharma M.

Author information: 
(1)From the Division of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, School of Biological
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551.

Retraction in
    J Biol Chem. 2015 Nov 6;290(45):27012.

One of the features of uncontrolled type 1 diabetes is oxidative stress that
induces DNA damage and cell death. Skeletal muscle atrophy is also considerable
in type 1 diabetes, however, the signaling mechanisms that induce oxidative
stress culminating in muscle atrophy are not fully known. Here, we show that in
Streptozotocin-induced diabetic wild type mice, hypo-phosphorylation of Akt,
resulted in activation of Foxa2 transcription factor in the muscle. Foxa2
transcriptionally up-regulated Myostatin, contributing to exaggerated oxidative
stress leading to DNA damage via p63/REDD1 pathway in skeletal muscle of
Streptozotocin-treated wild type mice. In Myostatin(-/-) mice however,
Streptozotocin treatment did not reduce Akt phosphorylation despite reduced IRS-1
signaling. Moreover, Foxa2 levels remained unaltered in Myostatin(-/-) mice,
while levels of p63/REDD1 were higher compared with wild type mice. Consistent
with these results, relatively less DNA damage and muscle atrophy was observed in
Myostatin(-/-) muscle in response to Streptozotocin treatment. Taken together,
our results for the first time show the role of Foxa2 in Myostatin regulation in 
skeletal muscle in diabetic mice. Altogether, these results demonstrate the
mechanism by which Myostatin contributes to DNA damage in skeletal muscle of the 
diabetic mice that would lead to myofiber degeneration.

PMCID: PMC3937650
PMID: 24425880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Development. 2014 Feb;141(3):574-84. doi: 10.1242/dev.104372. Epub 2014 Jan 8.

Nato3 plays an integral role in dorsoventral patterning of the spinal cord by
segregating floor plate/p3 fates via Nkx2.2 suppression and Foxa2 maintenance.

Mansour AA(1), Khazanov-Zisman S, Netser Y, Klar A, Ben-Arie N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Life Sciences,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

During embryogenesis, the dorsal roof plate and the ventral floor plate (FP) act 
as organizing centers to pattern the developing neural tube. Organizer-secreted
morphogens provide signals that are interpreted via the graded expression of
transcription factors. These factors establish a combinatorial code, which
subsequently determines the fate of neuronal progenitors along the dorsoventral
axis. To further separate the fates and promote distinct identities of the neural
progenitors, mutual repression takes place among transcription factors expressed 
in progenitors situated along the dorsoventral axis. The molecular mechanisms
acting in the developing spinal cord and underlying the segregation of the
progenitor pool containing cells with a mixed FP/p3 fate into separate FP cells
and V3 neurons are not fully understood. Using in vivo ectopic expression in
chick, we found that Nato3 induces ectopic Foxa2-positive cells and indirectly
downregulates Nkx2.2 expression. To examine the role of Nato3 in the FP,
Foxa2-Nato3 signaling was blocked in Nato3 null mice and to a greater extent in
Nato3 null/Foxa2 heterozygous bigenic mutants. Complementary to the findings
obtained by gain of function in chick, the loss of function in mouse indicated
that the segregation of the FP/p3 population into its derivatives was
interrupted. Together, the data suggest that Nato3 is a novel determinant factor 
regulating the segregation of the FP and p3 identities, which is an essential
step for establishing a definitive FP fate in the embryonic spinal cord.

PMID: 24401371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Oral Oncol. 2014 Mar;50(3):155-62. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2013.12.006. Epub 
2013 Dec 31.

Stem cell profiling in head and neck cancer reveals an Oct-4 expressing
subpopulation with properties of chemoresistance.

Reers S(1), Pfannerstill AC(1), Maushagen R(1), Pries R(1), Wollenberg B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Schleswig-Holstein, Lübeck, 
Germany. (2)Departments of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Schleswig-Holstein,
Lübeck, Germany. Electronic address: Barbara.Wollenberg@uk-sh.de.

OBJECTIVES: In the past decade cancer, including head and neck squamous cell
cancer (HNSCC), is increasingly being regarded as a stem cell associated disease 
which arises from cells with the property of stemness. According to the cancer
stem cell (CSC) theory, only a specific subpopulation of cancer cells has the
ability to initiate and perpetuate cancer growth, especially under treatment. In 
this article we describe a subpopulation of cells within HNSCC that expresses the
stemness factor Oct-4, which leads to apoptotic resistance after exposure to
chemotherapeutic agents.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Permanent cell lines and HNSCC tissue were analyzed for
expression of stem cell markers using flow cytometric, immunohistochemical
approaches and an antibody based protein array. Chemotherapeutic agent-induced
growth inhibition, also known as "enrichment", was determined by the colorimetric
cell proliferation assay (MTT-based) and putative stem cell markers were
investigated by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Various potential CSC markers were identified in heterogenic expression 
profiles in permanent cell lines and solid tumors. Our data suggest the Oct-4A
isoform as a marker of stemness in HNSCC and the enrichment of cancer stem-like
cells by various chemotherapeutic agents was associated with a significantly
higher expression of Oct-4.
CONCLUSION: This data suggests that many potential CSC markers are expressed on
different expression levels in HNSCC. Among these markers Oct-4(A) plays a
pivotal role in the detection of cancer cells with enhanced chemoresistance and
provide evidence for the existence of cancer stem-like cells in HNSCC.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24387977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cell Reprogram. 2014 Feb;16(1):65-76. doi: 10.1089/cell.2013.0057. Epub 2013 Dec 
31.

Efficient generation of hepatic cells from multipotent adult mouse germ-line stem
cells using an OP9 co-culture system.

Streckfuss-Bömeke K(1), Jende J, Cheng IF, Hasenfuss G, Guan K.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cardiology and Pneumology, Georg-August-University of
Göttingen , 37075, Göttingen, Germany .

On the basis of their self-renewal capacity and their ability to differentiate
into derivatives of all three germ layers, germ line-derived multipotent adult
stem cells (maGSCs) from mouse testis might serve as one of preferable sources
for pluripotent stem cells in regenerative medicine. In our study, we aimed for
an efficient hepatic differentiation protocol that is applicable for both maGSCs 
and embryonic stem cells (ESCs). We attempted to accomplish this goal by using a 
new established co-culture system with OP9 stroma cells for direct
differentiation of maGSCs and ESCs into hepatic cells. We found that the hepatic 
differentiation of maGSCs was induced by the OP9 co-culture system in comparison 
to the gelatin culture. Furthermore, we showed that the combination of OP9
co-culture with activin A resulted in the increased expression of endodermal and 
early hepatic markers Gata4, Sox17, Foxa2, Hnf4, Afp, and Ttr compared to
differentiated cells on gelatin or on OP9 alone. Moreover, the hepatic
progenitors were capable of differentiating further into mature hepatic cells,
demonstrated by the expression of liver-specific markers Aat, Alb, Tdo2, Krt18,
Krt8, Krt19, Cps1, Sek, Cyp7a1, Otc, and Pah. A high percentage of maGSC-derived 
hepatic progenitors (51% AFP- and 61% DLK1-positive) and mature hepatic-like
cells (26% ALB-positive) were achieved using this OP9 co-culture system. These
generated hepatic cells successfully demonstrated in vitro functions associated
with mature hepatocytes, including albumin and urea secretion, glycogen storage, 
and uptake of low-density lipoprotein. The established co-culture system for
maGSCs into functional hepatic cells might serve as a suitable model to delineate
the differentiation process for the generation of high numbers of mature
hepatocytes in humans without genetic manipulations and make germ line-derived
stem cells a potential autologous and alternative cell source for hepatic
transplants in metabolic liver disorders.

PMCID: PMC3920844
PMID: 24380658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Gene. 2014 Feb 25;536(2):385-92. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.046. Epub 2013 Dec
11.

Association analysis of bovine Foxa2 gene single sequence variant and haplotype
combinations with growth traits in Chinese cattle.

Liu M(1), Li M(2), Wang S(1), Xu Y(1), Lan X(1), Li Z(1), Lei C(1), Yang D(3),
Jia Y(4), Chen H(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
China. (2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University,
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi
712100, China; Key Laboratory of Crop High Quality and Efficient Cultivation and 
Security Control of College in Yunnan Province, Honghe University, Mengzi, Yunnan
661100, China. (3)Department of Biology, Dezhou University, Dezhou, Shandong
253023, China. (4)Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary, Anhui Academy of 
Agricultural Sciences, Hefei, Anhui 230031, China. (5)College of Animal Science
and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular
Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100, China. Electronic address:
chenhong1212@263.net.

Forkhead box A2 (Foxa2) has been recognized as one of the most potent
transcriptional activators that is implicated in the control of feeding behavior 
and energy homeostasis. However, similar researches about the effects of genetic 
variations of Foxa2 gene on growth traits are lacking. Therefore, this study
detected Foxa2 gene polymorphisms by DNA pool sequencing, PCR-RFLP and PCR-ACRS
methods in 822 individuals from three Chinese cattle breeds. The results showed
that four sequence variants (SVs) were screened, including two mutations (SV1, g.
7005 C>T and SV2, g. 7044 C>G) in intron 4, one mutation (SV3, g. 8449 A>G) in
exon 5 and one mutation (SV4, g. 8537 T>C) in the 3'UTR. Notably, association
analysis of the single mutations with growth traits in total individuals (at
24months) revealed that significant statistical difference was found in four SVs,
and SV4 locus was highly significantly associated with growth traits throughout
all three breeds (P<0.05 or P<0.01). Meanwhile, haplotype combination CCCCAGTC
also indicated remarkably associated to better chest girth and body weight in
Jiaxian Red cattle (P<0.05). We herein described a comprehensive study on the
variability of bovine Foxa2 gene that was predictive of molecular markers in
cattle breeding for the first time.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24333857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Metab. 2013 Aug 24;2(4):447-56. doi: 10.1016/j.molmet.2013.08.005.
eCollection 2013.

Bile acid-induced inflammatory signaling in mice lacking Foxa2 in the liver leads
to activation of mTOR and age-onset obesity.

Bochkis IM(1), Shin S, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Cytokine signaling has been connected to regulation of metabolism and energy
balance. Numerous cytokine gene expression changes are stimulated by accumulation
of bile acids in livers of young Foxa2 liver-conditional null mice. We
hypothesized that bile acid-induced inflammation in young Foxa2 mutants, once
chronic, affects metabolic homeostasis. We found that loss of Foxa2 in the liver 
results in a premature aging phenotype, including significant weight gain,
reduced food intake, and decreased energy expenditure. We show that Foxa2
antagonizes the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway, resulting in
increased hepatic lipogenesis and adiposity. While much prior work has focused on
adipose tissue in obesity, we discovered a novel age-onset obesity phenotype in a
model where gene deletion occurs only in the liver, underscoring the importance
of the role hepatic lipogenesis plays in the development of obesity.

PMCID: PMC3855091
PMID: 24327960  [PubMed]


181. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2013 Nov 28;4(4):193-206. eCollection 2013.

Fine mapping of variants associated with endometriosis in the WNT4 region on
chromosome 1p36.

Luong HT(1), Painter JN, Shakhbazov K, Chapman B, Henders AK, Powell JE, Nyholt
DR, Montgomery GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Computational Biology, QIMR Berghofer Medical
Research Institute Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

Genome-wide association studies show strong evidence of association with
endometriosis for markers on chromosome 1p36 spanning the potential candidate
genes WNT4, CDC42 and LINC00339. WNT4 is involved in development of the uterus,
and the expression of CDC42 and LINC00339 are altered in women with
endometriosis. We conducted fine mapping to examine the role of coding variants
in WNT4 and CDC42 and determine the key SNPs with strongest evidence of
association in this region. We identified rare coding variants in WNT4 and CDC42 
present only in endometriosis cases. The frequencies were low and cannot account 
for the common signal associated with increased risk of endometriosis. Genotypes 
for five common SNPs in the region of chromosome 1p36 show stronger association
signals when compared with rs7521902 reported in published genome scans. Of
these, three SNPs rs12404660, rs3820282, and rs55938609 were located in DNA
sequences with potential functional roles including overlap with transcription
factor binding sites for FOXA1, FOXA2, ESR1, and ESR2. Functional studies will be
required to identify the gene or genes implicated in endometriosis risk.

PMCID: PMC3852639
PMID: 24319535  [PubMed]


182. Exp Eye Res. 2014 Jan;118:117-24. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2013.11.011. Epub 2013 Dec 
4.

Topical interferon-gamma neutralization prevents conjunctival goblet cell loss in
experimental murine dry eye.

Zhang X(1), De Paiva CS(2), Su Z(2), Volpe EA(2), Li DQ(2), Pflugfelder SC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Surface Center, Cullen Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology,
Baylor College of Medicine, 6565 Fannin Street, NC505, Houston, TX 77030, USA;
Shenyang He Eye Hospital, Shenyang, Liaoning, China. (2)Ocular Surface Center,
Cullen Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine,
6565 Fannin Street, NC505, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Ocular Surface Center,
Cullen Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Baylor College of Medicine,
6565 Fannin Street, NC505, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address:
stevenp@bcm.edu.

Evidence suggests that the cytokine interferon (IFN)-<U+03B3> released by natural killer
and CD4(+) T cells contributes to the conjunctival goblet cell (GC) loss in dry
eye. The purpose of this study was to investigate if topical neutralization of
IFN-<U+03B3> prevents or alleviates GC loss in an experimental desiccating stress (DS)
model of dry eye. In this study, we found that topical IFN-<U+03B3> neutralization
significantly decreased DS-induced conjunctival GC loss. This was accompanied by 
decreased epithelial apoptosis, and increased IL-13 and decreased FoxA2
expression in the forniceal conjunctiva. To establish that IFN-<U+03B3> produced by
pathogenic CD4(+) T cells contributes to DS-induced GC loss, adoptive transfer of
CD4(+) T cells isolated from DS exposed donors to naïve RAG-1(-/-) recipient mice
was performed. Similar to the donor mice, topical IFN-<U+03B3> neutralization decreased 
conjunctival GC loss, suppressed apoptosis and increased IL-13 expression in
adoptive transfer recipients. In summary, this study demonstrated that topical
neutralization of IFN-<U+03B3> prevents GC loss via modulating apoptosis and maintaining
IL-13 signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3901360
PMID: 24315969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Mar;42(5):e34. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1290. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

DICE, an efficient system for iterative genomic editing in human pluripotent stem
cells.

Zhu F(1), Gamboa M, Farruggio AP, Hippenmeyer S, Tasic B, Schüle B, Chen-Tsai Y, 
Calos MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA,
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA, Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of
Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA, Parkinson's Institute and 
Clinical Center, Sunnyvale, CA 94085, USA and Stanford Transgenic Research
Facility, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

To reveal the full potential of human pluripotent stem cells, new methods for
rapid, site-specific genomic engineering are needed. Here, we describe a system
for precise genetic modification of human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). We identified a novel human locus, H11, located
in a safe, intergenic, transcriptionally active region of chromosome 22, as the
recipient site, to provide robust, ubiquitous expression of inserted genes.
Recipient cell lines were established by site-specific placement of a 'landing
pad' cassette carrying attP sites for phiC31 and Bxb1 integrases at the H11 locus
by spontaneous or TALEN-assisted homologous recombination. Dual integrase
cassette exchange (DICE) mediated by phiC31 and Bxb1 integrases was used to
insert genes of interest flanked by phiC31 and Bxb1 attB sites at the H11 locus, 
replacing the landing pad. This system provided complete control over content,
direction and copy number of inserted genes, with a specificity of 100%. A series
of genes, including mCherry and various combinations of the neural transcription 
factors LMX1a, FOXA2 and OTX2, were inserted in recipient cell lines derived from
H9 ESC, as well as iPSC lines derived from a Parkinson's disease patient and a
normal sibling control. The DICE system offers rapid, efficient and precise gene 
insertion in ESC and iPSC and is particularly well suited for repeated
modifications of the same locus.

PMCID: PMC3950688
PMID: 24304893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Gene. 2014 Feb 10;535(2):290-3. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.11.012. Epub 2013 Dec 1.

Genetic analysis of the TBX1 gene promoter in indirect inguinal hernia.

Zhang Y(1), Han Q(1), Li C(2), Li W(1), Fan H(1), Xing Q(1), Yan B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery, Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital,
Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China. (2)Division of
Electrocardiogram, Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical 
University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China. (3)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory
of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment, Jining Medical University Affiliated 
Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China. Electronic
address: yanbo@mail.jnmc.edu.cn.

Inguinal hernia is a common disease, most cases of which are indirect inguinal
hernia (IIH). Genetic factors play an important role for inguinal hernia.
Increased incidences of inguinal hernia have been reported in patients with
22q11.2 microdeletion syndrome, which is mainly caused by TBX1 gene mutations.
Thus, we hypothesized that altered TBX1 gene expression may contribute to IIH
development. In this study, the human TBX1 gene promoter was genetically analyzed
in children with IIH (n=100) and ethnic-matched controls (n=167). Functions of
DNA sequence variants (DSVs) within the TBX1 gene promoter were examined in
cultured human fibroblast cells. The results showed that two heterozygous DSVs
were found, both of which were single nucleotide polymorphisms. One DSV, g.4248
C>T (rs41298629), was identified in a 2-year-old boy with right-sided IIH, but
not in all controls, which significantly decreased TBX1 gene promoter activity.
Another DSV, g.4199 C>T (rs41260844), was found in both IIH patients and controls
with similar frequencies (P>0.05), which did not affect TBX1 gene promoter
activity. Collectively, our data suggested that the DSV within the TBX1 gene
promoter may change TBX1 level, contributing to IIH development as a rare risk
factor. Underlying molecular mechanisms need to be established.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24295890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2014 Nov;102(11):4027-36. doi: 10.1002/jbm.a.35039. Epub
2014 Jan 10.

Definitive endoderm differentiation of human-induced pluripotent stem cells using
signaling molecules and IDE1 in three-dimensional polymer scaffold.

Hoveizi E(1), Nabiuni M, Parivar K, Ai J, Massumi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Sciences, Shahid Chamran University, Ahvaz, 
Iran.

Human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) are considered to be potentially
able to differentiate into all human cell lineages and thus hold promise as an
unlimited source for cell replacement therapies in clinical applications.
Definitive endoderm (DE) formation is the first and crucial step in the
development of visceral organs such as liver, lung, pancreas and so forth.
Therefore, efficient generation of DE cells ensures the efficient generation of
eventual target cells used in cell therapy. In the present study, Matrigel-coated
poly(lactic acid)/gelatin (PLA/gelatin) nanofibrous scaffolds were utilized to
investigate the proliferation and differentiation of hiPSCs into DE cells.
Analyses of DE-specific markers including Sox17, FoxA2, and Gooscoid (Gsc) genes 
revealed higher levels of mRNA and protein expression in the differentiated
hiPSCs cells cultured on PLA/gelatin scaffolds than cells differentiated in
two-dimensional (2D) culture. Our results showed that three-dimensional (3D)
cultures could significantly promote DE differentiation in comparison with 2D
culture. Also using small molecules such as inducer of definitive endoderm 1
(IDE1) and signaling molecules such as Activin A and Wnt3a could enhance the DE
differentiation of hiPSCs with Activin A/Wnt3a being significantly more potent in
both 2D and 3D cultures compared to IDE1. The results of this study may have
impact in tissue engineering and cell replacement therapy of visceral
organs-related diseases.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24277503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Jan;12(1):166-77. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.10.004. Epub 2013
Oct 23.

Efficient definitive endoderm induction from mouse embryonic stem cell adherent
cultures: a rapid screening model for differentiation studies.

Mfopou JK(1), Geeraerts M(2), Dejene R(2), Van Langenhoven S(2), Aberkane A(2),
Van Grunsven LA(3), Bouwens L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cell Differentiation Unit, Diabetes Research Center, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Belgium. Electronic address: jmfopouk@vub.ac.be. (2)Cell Differentiation
Unit, Diabetes Research Center, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium. (3)Liver
Cell Biology, Department of Cell Biology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Belgium.

Definitive endoderm (DE) differentiation from mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC)
monolayer cultures has been limited by poor cell survival or low efficiency.
Recently, a combination of TGFß and Wnt activation with BMP inhibition improved
DE induction in embryoid bodies cultured in suspension. Based on these
observations we developed a protocol to efficiently induce DE cells in monolayer 
cultures of mESCs. We obtained a good cell yield with 54.92% DE induction as
shown by Foxa2, Sox17, Cxcr4 and E-Cadherin expression. These DE-cells could be
further differentiated into posterior foregut and pancreatic phenotypes using a
culture protocol initially developed for human embryonic stem cell (hESC)
differentiation. In addition, this mESC-derived DE gave rise to hepatocyte-like
cells after exposure to BMP and FGF ligands. Our data therefore indicate a
substantial improvement of monolayer DE induction from mESCs and support the
concept that differentiation conditions for mESC-derived DE are similar to those 
for hESCs. As mESCs are easier to maintain and manipulate in culture compared to 
hESCs, and considering the shorter duration of embryonic development in the
mouse, this method of efficient DE induction on monolayer will promote the
development of new differentiation protocols to obtain DE-derivatives, like
pancreatic beta-cells, for future use in cell replacement therapies.

© 2013.

PMID: 24239964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Jan;34(2):158-79. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00631-13. Epub 2013 Nov 4.

LSD1 regulates pluripotency of embryonic stem/carcinoma cells through histone
deacetylase 1-mediated deacetylation of histone H4 at lysine 16.

Yin F(1), Lan R, Zhang X, Zhu L, Chen F, Xu Z, Liu Y, Ye T, Sun H, Lu F, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemical Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School,
Shenzhen, China.

LSD1 is essential for the maintenance of pluripotency of embryonic stem (ES) or
embryonic carcinoma/teratocarcinoma (EC) cells. We have previously developed
novel LSD1 inhibitors that selectively inhibit ES/EC cells. However, the critical
targets of LSD1 remain unclear. Here, we found that LSD1 interacts with histone
deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to regulate the proliferation of ES/EC cells through
acetylation of histone H4 at lysine 16 (H4K16), which we show is a critical
substrate of HDAC1. The LSD1 demethylase and HDAC1 deacetylase activities were
both inactivated if one of them in the complex was chemically inhibited in ES/EC 
cells or in reconstituted protein complexes. Loss of HDAC1 phenocopied the
selective growth-inhibitory effects and increased the levels of H3K4 methylation 
and H4K16 acetylation of LSD1 inactivation on ES/EC cells. Reduction of
acetylated H4K16 by ablation of the acetyltransferase males absent on the first
(MOF) is sufficient to rescue the growth inhibition induced by LSD1 inactivation.
While LSD1 or HDAC1 inactivation caused the downregulation of Sox2 and Oct4 and
induction of differentiation genes, such as FOXA2 or BMP2, depletion of MOF
restored the levels of Sox2, Oct4, and FoxA2 in LSD1-deficient cells. Our studies
reveal a novel mechanism by which LSD1 acts through the HDAC1- and MOF-mediated
regulation of H4K16 acetylation to maintain the pluripotency of ES/EC cells.

PMCID: PMC3911295
PMID: 24190971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Jul 9;93(26):2020-4.

[Expression of Foxa2 and its early alarm value of cancerous in gastric polyps].

[Article in Chinese]

Chai NL(1), Zhang WC, Wang YM, Zhou ZT, Zhang YE, Liu HY, Wan J, Qin JH, Wang SY,
Wang YF, Pei XT, Wu BY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Division of South Building, Chinese People's
Liberation Army General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the expression of Foxa2 in different pathological types of 
gastric polyps and examine the correlation with cancerous risk.
METHODS: According to computerize random number, a total of 2000 patients were
selected to receive endoscopic biopsy during November 2011 to October 2012.
Tissues were harvested from 170 with gastric polyps and suspicious cancerous
lesions and their histological types detected. There were hyperplastic polyps(n =
35), adenomatous polyps(n = 31), fundic gland polyps(n = 42), advanced gastric
cancer tissues (n = 32)and normal gastric mucosa tissues (n = 30). ABC
immunohistochemical staining and reverse transcription(RT)-PCR were employed to
detect the expression of Foxa2 in these different types of tissues. Imagepro plus
was used for quantitative and statistical analyses.
RESULTS: A low-level expression of Foxa2 was 3.6% ± 1.3% in normal gastric mucosa
group. And its expreesion gradually higher in proliferative inflammatory polyp
group(33.1% ± 8.0%), adenomatous polyp group (71.4% ± 1.7%) and gastric cancer
group(96.3% ± 0.9%, all P < 0.05). Its expression was 35.6% ± 5.6% in fundic
gland polyps, similar to that of proliferative inflammatory polyp group (P >
0.05), it was markedly lower than the gastric cancer group (P < 0.05) and higher 
than the normal gastric mucosa group (P < 0.05). Correlation analyses of
clinicopathological parameters showed that no significant correlation existed
between its expression and patient gender, age, predilection, Helicobacter.
pylori infection or proton pump inhibitor used (all P > 0.05). However, the size 
of polyps was correlated with Foxa2 (rs = 0.69, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The expression level of Foxa2 in different types of gastric polyps
may be used as a clinical predicator of polyps risk.

PMID: 24169277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Jun;229(6):801-12. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24501.

Direct differentiation of homogeneous human adipose stem cells into functional
hepatocytes by mimicking liver embryogenesis.

Li X(1), Yuan J, Li W, Liu S, Hua M, Lu X, Zhang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Municipal Laboratory for Liver Protection and
Regulation of Regeneration, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.

The potential of adult human adipose tissue stem cells (hASCs) to differentiate
into hepatocytes has generated much excitement over the possible use of hASCs in 
therapeutic applications. An understanding of the molecular mechanisms that
underlie the plasticity of hASCs toward hepatocytes will help to make this
possibility a reality. Herein, we show that a homogenous population of hASCs
characterized by a high level of CD73, CD90, and CD105 express the pluripotent
transcription factors OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, and SALL4 under proliferation
conditions. A high level of activin A allows for hASCs acquiring the fate of
definitive endoderm (DE) cells and expressing the specific transcription factors 
HEX, FOXA2, SOX17, and GATA4 synchronously. Using a reproducible three-stage
method by mimicking liver embryogenesis, hASCs were directed to differentiate
into functional hepatocytes. In the first stage, hASCs were induced to become DE 
cells by 2 days cultured in serum-free medium and 3 days of activin A treatment. 
Next, the presence of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 4 and bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) 2 in the medium for 5 days induced efficient hepatic
differentiation from DE cells. After 10 days of further maturated by the
sequential exposure to hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), oncostatin M (OSM), and
dexamethasone (DEX), the hASC-derived hepatocytes expressed mature hepatocytes
marker and exhibited functional characterization, including albumin secretion,
glycogen storage, urea production, activity of drug transporters, and cytochrome 
P450 activity. These findings will be useful for the implementation of
hASC-derived hepatocytes in therapeutic purposes, metabolic analyses, drug
toxicity screening, and studies of hepatocyte function.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24166453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Int J Biol Sci. 2013 Sep 21;9(9):934-46. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.7529. eCollection
2013.

SIRT1 deacetylates FOXA2 and is critical for Pdx1 transcription and ß-cell
formation.

Wang RH(1), Xu X, Kim HS, Xiao Z, Deng CX.

Author information: 
(1)1. Genetics of Development and Disease Branch, 10/9N105, National Institute of
Diabetes, Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland MD 20892, USA.

Pancreas duodenum homeobox 1 (PDX1) is essential for pancreas development and
ß-cell formation; however more studies are needed to clearly illustrate the
precise mechanism regarding spatiotemporal regulation of Pdx1 expression during
ß-cell formation and development. Here, we demonstrate that SIRT1, FOXA2 and a
number of proteins form a protein complex on the promoter of the Pdx1 gene. SIRT1
and PDX1 are expressed in the same set of cells during ß-cell differentiation and
maturation. Pancreas-specific disruption of SIRT1 diminished PDX1 expression and 
impaired islet development. Consequently, SIRT1 mutant mice develop progressive
hyperglycemia, glucose intolerance, and insulin insufficiency, which directly
correlate with the extent of SIRT1 deletion. We further show that SIRT1 interacts
with and deacetylates FOXA2 on the promoter of the Pdx1gene, and positively
regulates its transcription. These results uncover an essential role of SIRT1 in 
ß-cell formation by maintaining expression of PDX1 and its downstream genes, and 
identify pancreas-specific SIRT1 mutant mice as a relevant model for studying
insulin insufficiency.

PMCID: PMC3807017
PMID: 24163589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Life Sci. 2013 Nov 19;93(22):805-13. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.10.011. Epub 2013
Oct 21.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1a/4a and forkhead box A2 regulate the solute carrier 
2A2 (Slc2a2) gene expression in the liver and kidney of diabetic rats.

David-Silva A(1), Freitas HS, Okamoto MM, Sabino-Silva R, Schaan BD, Machado UF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.

AIMS: Solute carrier 2a2 (Slc2a2) gene codifies the glucose transporter GLUT2, a 
key protein for glucose flux in hepatocytes and renal epithelial cells of
proximal tubule. In diabetes mellitus, hepatic and tubular glucose output has
been related to Slc2a2/GLUT2 overexpression; and controlling the expression of
this gene may be an important adjuvant way to improve glycemic homeostasis. Thus,
the present study investigated transcriptional mechanisms involved in the
diabetes-induced overexpression of the Slc2a2 gene.
MAIN METHODS: Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1a and 4a (HNF-1a and HNF-4a), forkhead 
box A2 (FOXA2), sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c) and the
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPß) mRNA expression (RT-PCR) and binding
activity into the Slc2a2 promoter (electrophoretic mobility assay) were analyzed 
in the liver and kidney of diabetic and 6-day insulin-treated diabetic rats.
KEY FINDINGS: Slc2a2/GLUT2 expression increased by more than 50% (P<0.001) in the
liver and kidney of diabetic rats, and 6-day insulin treatment restores these
values to those observed in non-diabetic animals. Similarly, the mRNA expression 
and the binding activity of HNF-1a, HNF-4a and FOXA2 increased by 50 to 100%
(P<0.05 to P<0.001), also returning to values of non-diabetic rats after insulin 
treatment. Neither the Srebf1 and Cebpb mRNA expression, nor the SREBP-1c and
C/EBP-ß binding activity was altered in diabetic rats.
SIGNIFICANCE: HNF-1a, HNF-4a and FOXA2 transcriptional factors are involved in
diabetes-induced overexpression of Slc2a2 gene in the liver and kidney. These
data point out that these transcriptional factors are important targets to
control GLUT2 expression in these tissues, which can contribute to glycemic
homeostasis in diabetes.

© 2013.

PMID: 24157454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Jan;35(1):96-102. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt323. Epub 2013 Oct 
8.

Estrogen receptor a or ß loss in the colon of Min/+ mice promotes crypt expansion
and impairs TGFß and HNF3ß signaling.

Hasson RM(1), Briggs A, Carothers AM, Davids JS, Wang J, Javid SH, Cho NL,
Bertagnolli MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)-regulated Wnt and transforming growth factor-ß
(TGFß) signaling cooperate in the intestine to maintain normal enterocyte
functions. Human clinical trials showed that estrogen [17ß-estradiol (E2)], the
ligand of nuclear receptors estrogen receptor a (ERa) and ERß, inhibited
colorectal cancer (CRC) in women. Consistent with this finding, we reported that 
E2, ERa and ERß suppressed intestinal tumorigenesis in the C57BL/6J-Min/+ (Min/+)
mouse, a CRC model. Here, we extended our results with further comparisons of
colon and small intestine from intact female Apc (+/+) (WT), Min/+ and
ER-deficient Min/+ mice. In the colon of ER-deficient Min/+ mice, ER loss reduced
TGFß signaling in crypt base cells as evidenced by minimal expression of the
effectors Smad 2, 3 and 4 in these strains. We also found reduced expression of
Indian hedgehog (Ihh), bone morphogenetic protein 4 and hepatocyte nuclear factor
3ß or FoxA2, factors needed for paracrine signaling between enterocytes and
mesenchyme. In proximal colon, ER loss produced a >10-fold increased incidence of
crypt fission, a marker for wound healing and tumor promotion. These data,
combined with our previous work detailing the specific roles of E2, ERa and ERß
in the colon, suggest that ER activity helps to maintain the intestinal stem cell
(ISC) microenvironment by modulating epithelial-stromal crosstalk in ways that
regulate cytokine, Wnt and Ihh availability in the extracellular matrix (ECM).

PMCID: PMC3871939
PMID: 24104551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Oct;29(10):1015-9.

[MicroRNA-10a accelerates endodermal lineage differentiation of mesenchymal stem 
cells from human placenta].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen D(1), Ma H, Liu S, Wang L, Li Y, Wei J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Stem Cell, General Hospital, Key Laboratory of Fertility
Preservation and Maintenance, Ministry of Education, Ningxia Medical University, 
Yinchuan 750004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To improve the potential of endodermal differentiation of human
placenta-derived mesenchymal stem cells (PMSCs) by microRNA-10a
(miR-10a)-mediated post-transcriptional regulation of its mRNA targets.
METHODS: Lentiviral vectors were used to stably and specifically over-express
miR-10a and inhibited the miR-10a function by its antagomir. In addition, the
relationship between miR-10a and Hoxa1 expression was analyzed. Real-time
quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) and immunofluorescent cytochemical staining were
utilized to test the mRNA and protein expression variation and assess the ability
of PMSCs to differentiate into endodermal cells. Results Over-expression of
miR-10a led to the suppression of endogenous Hoxa1 expression, and inhibition of 
miR-10a relieved the repression of Hoxa1. Over-expression of miR-10a in PMSCs
resulted in the up-regulation of endoderm-specific genes (FoxA2, Sox-17, Pdx-1
and Cdx2) and the increased proportions of FOXA2, SOX-17 and PDX-1 positive
events as compared with the control treated cells.
CONCLUSION: miR-10a was up-regulated during endodermal differentiation of PMSCs
and involved in its differentiation partially via the suppression of the Hoxa1
gene. Furthermore, the miR-10a accelerates endodermal differentiation, likely
mediated by the up-reguation of endoderm-specific down-stream genes.

PMID: 24103260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. BMC Genomics. 2013 Oct 4;14:680. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-680.

A systematic approach identifies FOXA1 as a key factor in the loss of epithelial 
traits during the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in lung cancer.

Wang H(1), Meyer CA, Fei T, Wang G, Zhang F, Liu XS.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092,
China. wanghaiyun@tongji.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition is an important mechanism in
cancer metastasis. Although transcription factors including SNAIL, SLUG, and
TWIST1 regulate the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, other unknown
transcription factors could also be involved. Identification of the full
complement of transcription factors is essential for a more complete
understanding of gene regulation in this process. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-Seq) technologies have been used to detect
genome-wide binding of transcription factors; here, we developed a systematic
approach to integrate existing ChIP-Seq and transcriptome data. We scanned
multiple transcription factors to investigate their functional impact on the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in the human A549 lung adenocarcinoma cell
line.
RESULTS: Among the transcription factors tested, impact scores identified the
forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1) as the most significant transcription factor in
the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. FOXA1 physically associates with the
promoters of its predicted target genes. Several critical
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition effectors involved in cellular adhesion and 
cellular communication were identified in the regulatory network of FOXA1,
including FOXA2, FGA, FGB, FGG, and FGL1. The implication of FOXA1 in the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition via its regulatory network indicates that
FOXA1 may play an important role in the initiation of lung cancer metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified FOXA1 as a potentially important transcription factor 
and negative regulator in the initial stages of lung cancer metastasis. FOXA1 may
modulate the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition via its transcriptional
regulatory network. Further, this study demonstrates how ChIP-Seq and expression 
data could be integrated to delineate the impact of transcription factors on a
specific biological process.

PMCID: PMC3852829
PMID: 24093963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. ACS Nano. 2013 Oct 22;7(10):8423-40. doi: 10.1021/nn401418n. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Nonviral cell labeling and differentiation agent for induced pluripotent stem
cells based on mesoporous silica nanoparticles.

Chen W(1), Tsai PH, Hung Y, Chiou SH, Mou CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, National Taiwan University , Taipei 106, Taiwan.

The generation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) is an innovative
personalized-regenerative technology, which can transform own-self somatic cells 
into embryonic stem (ES)-like cells, which have the potential to differentiate
into all cell types of three dermal lineages. However, how to quickly,
efficiently, and safely produce specific-lineage differentiation from
pluripotent-state cells and iPSCs is still an open question. The objective of the
present study was to develop a platform of a nonviral gene delivery system of
mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) to rapidly generate iPSC-derived
definitive-lineage cells, including endodermal-differentiated cells. We also
evaluated the feasibility and efficiency of FITC-conjugated MSNs (FMSNs) for
labeling of iPSCs and utilized the multifunctional properties of FMSNs for a
suitable carrier for biomolecule delivery. We showed that FMSNs of various
surface charges could be efficiently internalized by iPSCs without causing
cytotoxicity. The levels of reactive oxygen species and pluripotent status,
including in vitro stemness signatures and in vivo teratoma formation, remained
unaltered. Notably, positive-charged FMSN enhanced cellular uptake efficiency and
retention time. Moreover, when using positive-charged FMSN to deliver hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 3ß (HNF3ß) plasmid DNA (pDNA), the treated iPSCs exhibited
significantly improved definitive endoderm formation and further quickly
differentiated into hepatocyte-like cells with mature functions (low-density
lipoprotein uptake and glycogen storage) within 2 weeks in vitro. Double delivery
of pHNF3ß further improved mRNA expression levels of liver-specific genes. These 
findings reveal the multiple advantages of FMSNs to serve as ideal vectors not
only for stem cell labeling but also for safe gene delivery to promote the
production of hepatocyte-like cells from iPSCs.

PMID: 24063246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Cells Tissues Organs. 2013;198(2):111-26. doi: 10.1159/000353942. Epub 2013 Sep
21.

Culture of mouse amniotic fluid-derived cells on irradiated STO feeders results
in the generation of primitive endoderm cell lines capable of self-renewal in
vitro.

Babic AM(1), Jang S, Nicolov E, Voicu H, Luckey CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine, The Methodist Hospital, Houston,
Tex., USA.

The cells present in amniotic fluid (AF) are currently used for prenatal
diagnosis of fetal anomalies but are also a potential source of cells for cell
therapy. To better characterize putative progenitor cell populations present in
AF, we used culture conditions that support self-renewal to determine if these
promoted the generation of stable cell lines from AF-derived cells (AFC). Cells
isolated from E11.5 mouse were cultured on irradiated STO fibroblast feeder
layers in human embryonic germ cell derivation conditions. The cultures grew
multicellular epithelial colonies that could be repropagated from single cells.
Reverse transcription semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction of established
cell lines revealed that they belonged to the extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn)
expressing high levels of Gata6, Gata4, Sox17, Foxa2 and Sox7 mRNA. Hierarchical 
clustering based on the whole transcriptome expression profile of the AFC lines
(AFCL) shows significant correlation between transcription profiles of AFCL and
blastocyst-derived XEN, an ExEn cell line. In vitro differentiation of AFCL
results in the generation of cells expressing albumin and a-fetoprotein (AFP),
while intramuscular injection of AFCL into immunodeficient mice produced
AFP-positive tumors with primitive endodermal appearance. Hence, E11.5 mouse AF
contains cells that efficiently produce XEN lines. These AF-derived XEN lines do 
not spontaneously differentiate into embryonic-type cells but are phenotypically 
stable and have the capacity for extensive expansion. The lack of requirement for
reprogramming factors to turn AF-derived progenitor cells into stable cell lines 
capable of massive expansion together with the known ability of ExEn to
contribute to embryonic tissue suggests that this cell type may be a candidate
for banking for cell therapies.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMCID: PMC3914766
PMID: 24060676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Dec;136(2):514-26. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kft208. Epub 2013 Sep
19.

A single gestational exposure to 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin disrupts the
adult uterine response to estradiol in mice.

Burns KA(1), Zorrilla LM, Hamilton KJ, Reed CE, Birnbaum LS, Korach KS.

Author information: 
(1)* Receptor Biology Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709;

2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) given as a cotreatment with estrogen
exhibits antiestrogenic properties on the rodent adult uterus, but less is
understood regarding hormonal responsiveness of the adult uterus from animals
having been exposed to TCDD during critical periods of development. We
characterized the inhibitory effects of TCDD (T) exposure at gestational day 15
(GD15), 4 weeks, and 9 weeks of age (TTT) on the adult uterus following hormone
treatment. TTT-exposed mice in response to hormone treatment exhibited a blunted 
weight increase, had fewer uterine glands, displayed morphological anomalies, and
had marked decreases in the hormonal regulation of genes involved in fluid
transport (Aqp3 and Aqp5), cytoarchitectural (Dsc2 and Sprr2A), and immune (Lcn2 
and Ltf) regulation. To determine if the 9-week exposure was responsible for the 
blunted uterine response, due to the 7- to 11-day half-life of TCDD in mice, a
second set of experiments was performed to examine exposure to TCDD given at
GD15, GD15 only (cross-fostered at birth), only during lactation (cross-fostered 
at birth), or at GD15 and 4 weeks of age. Our studies demonstrate that a single
developmental TCDD exposure at GD15 is sufficient to elicit a blunted adult
uterine response to estradiol and is due in part to fewer gland numbers and the
reduced expression of forkhead box A2 (FoxA2), a gene involved in gland
development. Together, these results provide insight regarding the critical
nature of in utero exposure and the potential impact on ensuing uterine biology
and reproductive health later in life.

PMCID: PMC3858195
PMID: 24052564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. FASEB J. 2014 Jan;28(1):230-43. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-237446. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Integrated chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing and microarray analysis
identifies FOXA2 target genes in the glands of the mouse uterus.

Filant J(1), Lydon JP, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Animal Sciences, 1815 Ferdinand's Lane, VMRB 175, Washington
State University, Pullman, WA 83843, USA. thomas.spencer@wsu.edu.

Uterine glands and their secretions are indispensable for endometrial function
and fertility; however, the mechanisms regulating their development and function 
are not well understood. Forkhead transcription factor box A2 (FOXA2) is uniquely
expressed in the glandular epithelial (GE) cells of the uterus, and conditional
deletion of Foxa2 after birth impedes uterine gland development. An integrative
approach was used here to define the FOXA2 cistrome in the murine uterus.
Genome-wide mapping of FOXA2 binding sites was combined with transcriptomic
analyses of isolated GE and Foxa2-deleted uteri. ChIP-Seq analyses found the
number of FOXA2 target genes was substantially greater in the adult (8893) than
neonatal uterus (1101). In the neonatal uterus, FOXA2-bound and GE-expressed
genes (469) were enriched for developmentally related processes, including cell
cycle, cell junction, focal adhesion, and WNT signaling. In the adult uterus,
FOXA2-bound and GE-expressed genes (3730) were enriched for functional processes,
including metabolic pathways, focal adhesion, bacterial invasion of epithelial
cells, and WNT signaling. Analysis of the uterine FOXA2 cistrome provides novel
insights into mechanisms governing endometrial gland development and function,
which are important to understand fundamental aspects of uterine differentiation,
regeneration and disease.

PMID: 24025729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Cell Tissue Res. 2013 Dec;354(3):751-9. doi: 10.1007/s00441-013-1695-6. Epub 2013
Aug 31.

FGF7 and cell density are required for final differentiation of pancreatic
amylase-positive cells from human ES cells.

Takizawa-Shirasawa S(1), Yoshie S, Yue F, Mogi A, Yokoyama T, Tomotsune D, Sasaki
K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Health Sciences, Bourbon Institutes of Health, BOURBON
Corporation, 4-2-14 Matsunami, Kashiwazaki, Niigata, 945-8611, Japan.

The major molecular signals of pancreatic exocrine development are largely
unknown. We examine the role of fibroblast growth factor 7 (FGF7) in the final
induction of pancreatic amylase-containing exocrine cells from induced-pancreatic
progenitor cells derived from human embryonic stem (hES) cells. Our protocol
consisted in three steps: Step I, differentiation of definitive endoderm (DE) by 
activin A treatment of hES cell colonies; Step II, differentiation of pancreatic 
progenitor cells by re-plating of the cells of Step I onto 24-well plates at high
density and stimulation with all-trans retinoic acid; Step III, differentiation
of pancreatic exocrine cells with a combination of FGF7, glucagon-like peptide 1 
and nicotinamide. The expression levels of pancreatic endodermal markers such as 
Foxa2, Sox17 and gut tube endoderm marker HNF1ß were up-regulated in both Step I 
and II. Moreover, in Step III, the induced cells expressed pancreatic markers
such as amylase, carboxypeptidase A and chymotrypsinogen B, which were similar to
those in normal human pancreas. From day 8 in Step III, cells
immunohistochemically positive for amylase and for carboxypeptidase A, a
pancreatic exocrine cell product, were induced by FGF7. Pancreatic progenitor
Pdx1-positive cells were localized in proximity to the amylase-positive cells. In
the absence of FGF7, few amylase-positive cells were identified. Thus, our
three-step culture protocol for human ES cells effectively induces the
differentiation of amylase- and carboxypeptidase-A-containing pancreatic exocrine
cells.

PMID: 23996199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. FASEB J. 2013 Dec;27(12):4917-28. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-232215. Epub 2013 Aug 23.

LGR4 expressed in uterine epithelium is necessary for uterine gland development
and contributes to decidualization in mice.

Sone M(1), Oyama K, Mohri Y, Hayashi R, Clevers H, Nishimori K.

Author information: 
(1)3Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Agricultural Science,
Tohoku University, 1-1, Tsutsumidori-Amamiyamachi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 981-8555,
Japan. knishimori@m.tohoku.ac.jp.

In previous work we generated mice with a tissue specific ablation of a
leucine-rich repeat containing G-protein-coupled receptor 4 (Lgr4) using the
Keratin-5 (K5) Cre transgenic mouse strain (Lgr4(K5 KO)). Interestingly, the
Lgr4(K5 KO) female mice were subfertile, and their embryos had impaired
development. Notably, the contributions of uterine development to the
subfertility phenotype were not elucidated in the previous report. In a
readdress, the following study explores uterine aberration in Lgr4(K5 KO) female 
mice. Histological analysis revealed that the uteri of Lgr4(K5 KO) mice displayed
altered epithelial differentiation characterized by a reduction in the number of 
uterine glands. Furthermore, Lgr4 deletion led to the reduced expression of
morphoregulatory genes related to the Wnt signaling pathway. Additionally, the
uteri of the Lgr4(K5 KO) mice lost the ability to undergo induced
decidualization. Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) analysis and administration of recombinant leukemia inhibitory factor
(LIF) demonstrated that the impaired decidualization in Lgr4(K5 KO) mice resulted
from the decreased secretion of LIF concurrent with a reduction in uterine gland 
count. Thus, we propose that LGR4 contributes to uterine gland development, which
supports decidualization during pregnancy.

PMID: 23975934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Pharmazie. 2013 Jul;68(7):608-15.

Molecular determinants of cancer cell sensitivity and resistance towards the
sesquiterpene farnesol.

Kuete V(1), Efferth T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, 
Germany.

Farnesol is a non-cyclic sesquiterpene (isoprenoid) found in the essential oils
of many plants. In cancer biology, farnesylation of mutated Ras oncoproteins
allows the proteins to dock to the membrane and be functionalized. Therefore,
farnesyltransferase is a target for drug development to inhibit Ras. Farnesol
exhibits cytotoxic activity against tumor cells in vitro and in vivo, implying
that novel treatment strategies may be devised independent of Ras farnesylation. 
Tumors frequently develop resistance towards standard chemotherapies, and thus
novel agents are urgently required that bypass the cross-resistance evoked by
established anticancer drugs. We investigated whether classical mechanisms of
drug resistance such as ATP-binding cassette transporters (P-glycoprotein/MDR1,
MRP1, BCRP), the tumor suppressor gene TP53, and the oncogene EGFR play a role in
the response of tumor cells to farnesol. Remarkably, none of these genes
conferred resistance to farnesol, indicating that this compound may be useful for
the treatment of otherwise drug-resistant and refractory tumors expressing these 
mechanisms of resistance. Furthermore, we applied a pharmacogenomic approach to
explore molecular determinants of sensitivity and resistance to farnesol. Among
the candidates were genes involved in apoptosis (STAB2, NUMBL), regulation of
transcription (CDYL, FOXA2) and diverse other functional groups (INE1, CTRL,
MRS2, NEB, LMO7, C9orf3, EHBP1). The fact that these genes are not associated
with resistance to traditional anticancer drugs suggests farnesol may possess a
novel mechanism of action, and consequently might bypass drug resistance to
established chemotherapeutics.

PMID: 23923645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Nov;11(3):1003-12. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.06.007. Epub 2013 
Jun 29.

Generation of organized anterior foregut epithelia from pluripotent stem cells
using small molecules.

Kearns NA(1), Genga RM, Ziller M, Kapinas K, Peters H, Brehm MA, Meissner A,
Maehr R.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Medicine, Diabetes Center of Excellence, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, 368 Plantation Street, Worcester, MA 01605, USA.

Anterior foregut endoderm (AFE) gives rise to therapeutically relevant cell types
in tissues such as the esophagus, salivary glands, lung, thymus, parathyroid and 
thyroid. Despite its importance, reports describing the generation of AFE from
pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) by directed differentiation have mainly focused on 
the Nkx2.1(+) lung and thyroid lineages. Here, we describe a novel protocol to
derive a subdomain of AFE, identified by expression of Pax9, from PSCs using
small molecules and defined media conditions. We generated a reporter PSC line
for isolation and characterization of Pax9(+) AFE cells, which when transplanted 
in vivo, can form several distinct complex AFE-derived epithelia, including
mucosal glands and stratified squamous epithelium. Finally, we show that the
directed differentiation protocol can be used to generate AFE from human PSCs.
Thus, this work both broadens the range of PSC-derived AFE tissues and creates a 
platform enabling the study of AFE disorders.

© 2013.

PMID: 23917481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Respir Res. 2013 Aug 5;14:82. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-82.

Pyocyanin-induced mucin production is associated with redox modification of
FOXA2.

Hao Y(1), Kuang Z, Xu Y, Walling BE, Lau GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 2001,
Lincoln Avenue, Urbana, IL, 61802, United States of America. geelau@illinois.edu.

BACKGROUND: The redox-active pyocyanin (PCN) is a toxic, secondary metabolite
secreted by the respiratory pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA). Previously, we 
have shown that mouse lungs chronically exposed to PCN develop goblet cell
hyperplasia and metaplasia (GCHM) and mucus hypersecretion, fibrosis and
emphysema. These pathological features are commonly found in the airways of
several chronic lung diseases, including cystic fibrosis (CF), as well as in
mouse airways deficient in the forkhead box A2 (FOXA2), a transcriptional
repressor of goblet GCHM and mucus biosynthesis. Furthermore, PCN inhibits FOXA2 
by activating the pro-GCHM signaling pathways Stat6 and EGFR. However, it is not 
known whether PCN-generated reactive oxygen (ROS) and nitrogen (RNS) species
posttranslationally modify and inactivate FOXA2.
METHODS: We examined the posttranslational modifications of FOXA2 by PCN using
specific antibodies against oxidation, nitrosylation, acetylation and
ubiquitination. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) was used to examine
the ability of modified FOXA2 to bind the promoter of MUC5B mucin gene. In
addition, we used quantitative real time PCR, ELISA, immunofluorescence and mouse
lung infection to assess whether the loss of FOXA2 function caused GCHM and mucin
overexpression. Finally, we examined the restoration of FOXA2 function by the
antioxidant glutathione (GSH).
RESULTS: We found that PCN-generated ROS/RNS caused nitrosylation, acetylation,
ubiquitination and degradation of FOXA2. Modified FOXA2 had reduced ability to
bind the promoter of the MUC5B gene. The antioxidant GSH alleviated the
modification of FOXA2 by PCN, and inhibited the overexpression of MUC5AC and
MUC5B mucins.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that PCN-mediated posttranslational
modifications of FOXA2 are positively correlated with GCHM and overexpression of 
airway mucins. Furthermore, antioxidant treatment restores the function of FOXA2 
to attenuate GCHM and mucus hypersecretion.

PMCID: PMC3765780
PMID: 23915402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Nov;11(3):978-89. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.06.005. Epub 2013
Jun 24.

Alginate microcapsule as a 3D platform for the efficient differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells to dopamine neurons.

Kim J(1), Sachdev P, Sidhu K.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Lab, Faculty of Medicine, School of Psychiatry, University of New
South Wales, Australia. Electronic address: jaeminkim85@hotmail.com.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are emerging as an attractive alternative
source for cell replacement therapy since the cells can be expanded in culture
indefinitely and differentiated into any cell types in the body. In order to
optimize cell-to-cell interaction, cell proliferation and differentiation into
specific lineages as well as tissue organization, it is important to provide a
microenvironment for the hESCs which mimics the stem cell niche. One approach is 
to provide a three-dimensional (3D) environment such as encapsulation. We present
an approach to culture and differentiate hESCs into midbrain dopamine (mdDA)
neurons in a 3D microenvironment using alginate microcapsules for the first time.
A detailed gene and protein expression analysis during neuronal differentiation
showed an increased gene and protein expression of various specific DA neuronal
markers, particularly tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) by >100 folds after 2 weeks and
at least 50% higher expression after 4 weeks respectively, compared to cells
differentiated under conventional two-dimensional (2D) platform. The encapsulated
TH(+) cells co-expressed mdDA neuronal markers, forkhead box protein A-2 (FOXA2) 
and pituitary homeobox-3 (PITX3) after 4 weeks and secreted approximately
60pg/ml/10(6) cells higher DA level when induced. We propose that the 3D platform
facilitated an early onset of DA neuronal generation compared to that with
conventional 2D system which also secretes more DA under potassium-induction. It 
is a very useful model to study the proliferation and directed differentiation of
hESCs to various lineages, particularly to mdDA neurons. This 3D system also
allows the separation of feeder cells from hESCs during the process of
differentiation and also has potential for immune-isolation during
transplantation studies.

© 2013.

PMID: 23900167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Tissue Eng Regen Med. 2013 Jul 30. doi: 10.1002/term.1787. [Epub ahead of
print]

Pancreatic islet differentiation of human embryonic stem cells by microRNA
overexpression.

Lahmy R(1), Soleimani M, Sanati MH, Behmanesh M, Kouhkan F, Mobarra N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology Sciences, Tarbiat Modares
University, Tehran, Iran.

Development of stem cell-based therapies for the treatment of type 1 diabetes
would provide a renewable supply of human ß-cells. Human embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) are considered to be one of the stem cell populations with sufficient
proliferative capacity to achieve this goal. Currently, differentiation protocols
directing ESCs toward a pancreatic fate employ a variety of expensive cytokines
and inhibitors. With the known significance of microRNAs in islet development, we
present a novel and cost-effective strategy in which miR-375 overexpression
promotes pancreatic endocrine differentiation in hESCs in the absence of any
extrinsic factors. miR-375 has been shown to be a key regulator of pancreatic
development and function in zebrafish, mouse and human. In this study, hESCs were
transduced with lentiviral vectors containing human miR-375 precursor and
aggregated to form human embryoid bodies (hEBs) for up to 21 days. Morphological 
assessment, immunocytochemistry and DTZ staining confirmed that miR-375-induced
hEBs have similar characteristics to those of mature islets. In addition, the
dynamic expression profile of endodermal marker Foxa2 and endocrine-specific
genes, including HNF4a, Pdx1, Pax6, Nkx6.1, Glut2 and insulin, were detected by
quantitative real-time PCR. Finally, insulin release upon glucose stimulation was
detected in our differentiated clusters. The data presented here demonstrate the 
feasibility of using microRNAs to direct differentiation into the pancreatic
lineage. Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23897763  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


206. Adv Healthc Mater. 2013 Dec;2(12):1644-50. doi: 10.1002/adhm.201200382. Epub 2013
Jul 15.

Nanoscale topography and chemistry affect embryonic stem cell self-renewal and
early differentiation.

Lapointe VL(1), Fernandes AT, Bell NC, Stellacci F, Stevens MM.

Author information: 
(1)National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, TW11 0LW United Kingdom.

Adherent cells respond to a wide range of substrate cues, including chemistry,
topography, hydrophobicity, and surface energy. The cell-substrate interface is
therefore an important design parameter in regenerative medicine and tissue
engineering applications, where substrate cues are used to influence cell
behavior. Thin films comprising 4.5 nm (average diameter) gold nanoparticles
coated with a mixture of two alkanethiols can confer hemispherical topography and
specific chemistry to bulk substrates. The behavior of murine embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) on the thin films can then be compared with their behavior on
self-assembled monolayers of the same alkanethiols on vapor-deposited gold, which
lack the topographical features. Cells cultured both with and without
differentiation inhibitors are characterized by immunofluorescence for Oct4 and
qPCR for Fgf5, Foxa2, Nanog, Pou5f1, and Sox2. Nanoscale chemistry and topography
are found to influence stem cell differentiation, particularly the early
differentiation markers, Fgf5 and Foxa2. Nanoscale topography also affects Oct4
localization, whereas the chemical composition of the substrate does not have an 
effect. It is demonstrated for the first time that ESCs can sense topographical
features established by 4.5 nm particles, and these findings suggest that
nanoscale chemistry and topography can act synergistically to influence stem cell
differentiation. This study furthers the understanding of the effects of these
substrate properties, improving our ability to design materials to control stem
cell fate.

Copyright © 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23852884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Sep;33(18):3594-610. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00280-13. Epub 2013 Jul
8.

Genome-wide analysis of chromatin states reveals distinct mechanisms of
sex-dependent gene regulation in male and female mouse liver.

Sugathan A(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology and
Bioinformatics Program, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Chromatin state maps were developed to elucidate sex differences in chromatin
structure and their impact on sex-differential chromatin accessibility and
sex-biased gene expression in mouse liver. Genes in active, inactive, and poised 
chromatin states exhibited differential responsiveness to ligand-activated
nuclear receptors and distinct enrichments for functional gene categories.
Sex-biased genes were clustered by chromatin environments and mapped to
DNase-hypersensitive sites (DHS) classified by sex bias in chromatin
accessibility and enhancer modifications. Results were integrated with
genome-wide binding data for five transcription factors implicated in growth
hormone-regulated, sex-biased liver gene expression, leading to the following
findings. (i) Sex-biased DHS, but not sex-biased genes, are frequently
characterized by sex-differential chromatin states, indicating distal regulation.
(ii) Trimethylation of histone H3 at K27 (H3K27me3) is a major sex-biased
repressive mark at highly female-biased but not at highly male-biased genes.
(iii) FOXA factors are associated with sex-dependent chromatin opening at
male-biased but not female-biased regulatory sites. (iv) Sex-biased STAT5 binding
is enriched at sex-biased DHS marked as active enhancers and preferentially
targets sex-biased genes with sex-differences in local chromatin marks. (v) The
male-biased repressor BCL6 preferentially targets female-biased genes and
regulatory sites in a sex-independent chromatin state. (vi) CUX2, a
female-specific repressor of male-biased genes, also activates strongly
female-biased genes, in association with loss of H3K27me3 marks. Chromatin states
are thus a major determinant of sex-biased chromatin accessibility and gene
expression, with FOXA pioneer factors proposed to confer sex-dependent chromatin 
opening and STAT5, but not BCL6, regulating sex-biased genes by binding to sites 
in a sex-biased chromatin state.

PMCID: PMC3753870
PMID: 23836885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Dis Model Mech. 2013 Sep;6(5):1236-45. doi: 10.1242/dmm.012591. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

Global gene expression profiling of pancreatic islets in mice during
streptozotocin-induced ß-cell damage and pancreatic Glp-1 gene therapy.

Tonne JM(1), Sakuma T, Deeds MC, Munoz-Gomez M, Barry MA, Kudva YC, Ikeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Streptozotocin (STZ), a glucosamine-nitrosourea compound, has potent genotoxic
effects on pancreatic ß-cells and is frequently used to induce diabetes in
experimental animals. Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) has ß-cell protective
effects and is known to preserve ß-cells from STZ treatment. In this study, we
analyzed the mechanisms of STZ-induced diabetes and GLP-1-mediated ß-cell
protection in STZ-treated mice. At 1 week after multiple low-dose STZ
administrations, pancreatic ß-cells showed impaired insulin expression, while
maintaining expression of nuclear Nkx6.1. This was accompanied by significant
upregulation of p53-responsive genes in islets, including a mediator of cell
cycle arrest, p21 (also known as Waf1 and Cip1). STZ treatment also suppressed
expression of a wide range of genes linked with key ß-cell functions or diabetes 
development, such as G6pc2, Slc2a2 (Glut2), Slc30a8, Neurod1, Ucn3, Gad1, Isl1,
Foxa2, Vdr, Pdx1, Fkbp1b and Abcc8, suggesting global ß-cell defects in
STZ-treated islets. The Tmem229B, Prss53 and Ttc28 genes were highly expressed in
untreated islets and strongly suppressed by STZ, suggesting their potential roles
in ß-cell function. When a pancreas-targeted adeno-associated virus (AAV) vector 
was employed for long-term Glp-1 gene delivery, pancreatic GLP-1 expression
protected mice from STZ-induced diabetes through preservation of the ß-cell mass.
Despite its potent ß-cell protective effects, however, pancreatic GLP-1
overexpression showed limited effects on the global gene expression profiles in
the islets. Network analysis identified the programmed-cell-death-associated
pathways as the most relevant network in Glp-1 gene therapy. Upon pancreatic
GLP-1 expression, upregulation of Cxcl13 and Nptx2 was observed in STZ-damaged
islets, but not in untreated normal islets. Given the pro-ß-cell-survival effects
of Cxcl12 (Sdf-1) in inducing GLP-1 production in a-cells, pancreatic
GLP-1-mediated Cxcl13 induction might also play a crucial role in maintaining the
integrity of ß-cells in damaged islets.

PMCID: PMC3759343
PMID: 23828045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2013 Dec;49(6):960-70. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0122OC.

Foxa2 regulates leukotrienes to inhibit Th2-mediated pulmonary inflammation.

Tang X(1), Liu XJ, Tian C, Su Q, Lei Y, Wu Q, He Y, Whitsett JA, Luo F.

Author information: 
(1)1 Research Center of Regeneration Medicine.

Foxa2 is a member of the Forkhead family of nuclear transcription factors that is
highly expressed in respiratory epithelial cells of the developing and mature
lung. Foxa2 is required for normal airway epithelial differentiation, and its
deletion causes goblet-cell metaplasia and Th2-mediated pulmonary inflammation
during postnatal development. Foxa2 expression is inhibited during aeroallergen
sensitization and after stimulation with Th2 cytokines, when its loss is
associated with goblet-cell metaplasia. Mechanisms by which Foxa2 controls airway
epithelial differentiation and Th2 immunity are incompletely known. During the
first 2 weeks after birth, the loss of Foxa2 increases the production of
leukotrienes (LTs) and Th2 cytokines in the lungs of Foxa2 gene-targeted mice.
Foxa2 expression inhibited 15-lipoxygenase (Alox15) and increased Alox5
transcription, each encoding key lipoxygenases associated with asthma. The
inhibition of the cysteinyl LT (CysLT) signaling pathway by montelukast inhibited
IL-4, IL-5, eotaxin-2, and regulated upon activation normal T cell expressed and 
presumably secreted expression in the developing lungs of Foxa2 gene-targeted
mice. Montelukast inhibited the expression of genes regulating mucus metaplasia, 
including Spdef, Muc5ac, Foxa3, and Arg2. Foxa2 plays a cell-autonomous role in
the respiratory epithelium, and is required for the suppression of Th2 immunity
and mucus metaplasia in the developing lung in a process determined in part by
its regulation of the CysLT pathway.

PMCID: PMC3931118
PMID: 23822876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Hepatol Int. 2013 Jul;7(3):937-44. doi: 10.1007/s12072-013-9432-5. Epub 2013 Mar 
13.

Transdifferentiation of human fibroblasts into hepatocyte-like cells by defined
transcriptional factors.

Kogiso T(1), Nagahara H(2), Otsuka M(3), Shiratori K(4), Dowdy SF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Women's 
Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8666, Japan.
kogiso@ige.twmu.ac.jp. (2)Aoyama Hospital, Tokyo Women's Medical University,
2-7-13 Kita-Aoyama, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 107-0061, Japan. (3)Department of
Gastroenterology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan. (4)Institute of Gastroenterology, Department
of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Women's Medical University, 8-1 Kawada-cho,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo, 162-8666, Japan. (5)Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, UCSD School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0686,
USA.

PURPOSE: Liver transplantation is currently the only curative therapeutic option 
for end-stage liver cirrhosis. However, due to the limitations of donor liver
availability and occasional rejection, it cannot always be successfully applied. 
In this study, we determined whether fibroblasts can be transdifferentiated into 
hepatocyte-like cells by transcription factors that initiate and maintain
hepatocyte differentiation.
METHODS: Fibroblasts were transduced with retrovirus vectors carrying FOXA2,
HNF4a, and C/EBPß. To enhance the efficiency of transdifferentiation, cMyc was
also expressed.
RESULTS: Transdifferentiation was successful using both neonatal fibroblasts and 
human forehead fibroblasts. The transdifferentiated cells produced
hepatocyte-specific proteins such as albumin and cytochrome, and had important
hepatocyte-specific functions, such as glycogen storage and indocyanine green
uptake, suggesting that the cells function at least as partial hepatocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide a novel method of generating differentiated
hepatocyte-like cells, and may represent an alternative source of cells for
future cell-based therapeutics for end-stage liver diseases.

PMID: 26201932  [PubMed]


211. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 26;288(30):21648-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.481424. Epub
2013 Jun 17.

A novel function of Onecut1 protein as a negative regulator of MafA gene
expression.

Yamamoto K(1), Matsuoka TA, Kawashima S, Takebe S, Kubo F, Miyatsuka T, Kaneto H,
Shimomura I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, 565-0871 Suita, Japan.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 25;288(43):31298. Kubo, Noriyo [corrected to Kubo, Fumiyo].

The transcription factor MafA is a key regulator of insulin gene expression and
maturation of islet ß cells. Despite its importance, the regulatory mechanism of 
MafA gene expression is still unclear. To identify the transcriptional regulators
of MafA, we examined various transcription factors, which are potentially
involved in ß cell differentiation. An adenovirus-mediated overexpression study
clearly demonstrated that Onecut1 suppresses the promoter activity of MafA
through the Foxa2-binding cis-element on the MafA enhancer region (named area A).
However, ChIP analysis showed that Foxa2 but not Onecut1 could directly bind to
area A. Furthermore, overexpression of Onecut1 inhibited the binding of Foxa2
onto area A upon ChIP analysis. Importantly, insertion of a mutation in the
Foxa2-binding site of area A significantly decreased the promoter activity of
MafA. These findings suggest that Onecut1 suppresses MafA gene expression through
the Foxa2-binding site. In the mouse pancreas, MafA expression was first detected
at the latest stage of ß cell differentiation and was scarcely observed in
Onecut1-positive cells during pancreas development. In addition, Onecut1
expression was significantly increased in the islets of diabetic db/db mice,
whereas MafA expression was markedly decreased. The improved glucose levels of
db/db mice with insulin injections significantly reduced Onecut1 expression and
rescued the reduction of MafA expression. These in vivo experiments also suggest 
that Onecut1 is a negative regulator of MafA gene expression. This study
implicates the novel role of Onecut1 in the control of normal ß cell
differentiation and its involvement in ß cell dysfunction under diabetic
conditions by suppressing MafA gene expression.

PMCID: PMC3724624
PMID: 23775071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;33(16):3166-79. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00364-13. Epub 2013 Jun 
10.

Program specificity for Ptf1a in pancreas versus neural tube development
correlates with distinct collaborating cofactors and chromatin accessibility.

Meredith DM(1), Borromeo MD, Deering TG, Casey BH, Savage TK, Mayer PR, Hoang C, 
Tung KC, Kumar M, Shen C, Swift GH, Macdonald RJ, Johnson JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas, USA.

The lineage-specific basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor Ptf1a is a
critical driver for development of both the pancreas and nervous system. How one 
transcription factor controls diverse programs of gene expression is a
fundamental question in developmental biology. To uncover molecular strategies
for the program-specific functions of Ptf1a, we identified bound genomic regions 
in vivo during development of both tissues. Most regions bound by Ptf1a are
specific to each tissue, lie near genes needed for proper formation of each
tissue, and coincide with regions of open chromatin. The specificity of Ptf1a
binding is encoded in the DNA surrounding the Ptf1a-bound sites, because these
regions are sufficient to direct tissue-restricted reporter expression in
transgenic mice. Fox and Sox factors were identified as potential
lineage-specific modifiers of Ptf1a binding, since binding motifs for these
factors are enriched in Ptf1a-bound regions in pancreas and neural tube,
respectively. Of the Fox factors expressed during pancreatic development, Foxa2
plays a major role. Indeed, Ptf1a and Foxa2 colocalize in embryonic pancreatic
chromatin and can act synergistically in cell transfection assays. Together,
these findings indicate that lineage-specific chromatin landscapes likely
constrain the DNA binding of Ptf1a, and they identify Fox and Sox gene families
as part of this process.

PMCID: PMC3753895
PMID: 23754747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Nov;114(11):2531-41. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24604.

Induction of hepatocyte-like cells from mouse embryonic stem cells by
lentivirus-mediated constitutive expression of Foxa2/Hnf4a.

Liu T(1), Zhang S, Xiang D, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China; Department of Internal Medicine 3, The Northern
Region of No. 401 Hospital, Qingdao, Shandong, China.

Hepatocytes can be generated from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) using inducers such
as chemical compounds and cytokines, but issues related to low differentiation
efficiencies remain to be resolved. Recent work has shown that overexpression of 
lineage-specific transcription factors can directly cause cells phenotypic
changes, including differentiation, trans-differentiation, and
de-differentiation. We hypothesized that lentivirus-mediated constitutive
expression of forkhead box A2 (Foxa2) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha
(Hnf4a) could promote inducing mouse ESCs to hepatocyte-likes cells. First, ESC
lines that stably expressed Foxa2, Hnf4a, or Foxa2/Hnf4a were constructed via
lentiviral expression vectors. Second, observations of cell morphology changes
were made during the cell culture process, followed by experiments examining
teratoma formation. Then, the effects of constitutive expression of Foxa2 and
Hnf4a on hepatic differentiation and maturation were determined by measuring the 
marker gene expression levels of Albumin, a-fetoprotein, Cytokeratin18, and
a1-antitrypsin. The results indicate that constitutive expression of Foxa2 and
Hnf4a does not affect ESCs culture, teratoma formation, or the expression levels 
of the specific hepatocyte genes under autonomous differentiation. However, with 
some assistance from inducing factors, Foxa2 significantly increased the hepatic 
differentiation of ESCs, whereas the expression of Hnf4a alone or Foxa2/Hnf4a
could not. Differentiated CCE-Foxa2 cells were more superior in expressing
several liver-specific markers and protein, storing glycogen than differentiated 
CCE cells. Therefore, our method employing the transduction of Foxa2 would be a
valuable tool for the efficient generation of functional hepatocytes derived from
ESCs.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23744720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jul 12;288(28):20464-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.473454. Epub
2013 May 31.

Circadian regulation of intestinal lipid absorption by apolipoprotein AIV
involves forkhead transcription factors A2 and O1 and microsomal triglyceride
transfer protein.

Pan X(1), Munshi MK, Iqbal J, Queiroz J, Sirwi AA, Shah S, Younus A, Hussain MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York 
11203, USA. xiaoyue.pan@downstate.edu

We have shown previously that Clock, microsomal triglyceride transfer protein
(MTP), and nocturnin are involved in the circadian regulation of intestinal lipid
absorption. Here, we clarified the role of apolipoprotein AIV (apoAIV) in the
diurnal regulation of plasma lipids and intestinal lipid absorption in mice.
Plasma triglyceride in apoAIV(-/-) mice showed diurnal variations similar to
apoAIV(+/+) mice; however, the increases in plasma triglyceride at night were
significantly lower in these mice. ApoAIV(-/-) mice absorbed fewer lipids at
night and showed blunted response to daytime feeding. To explain reasons for
these lower responses, we measured MTP expression; intestinal MTP was low at
night, and its induction after food entrainment was less in apoAIV(-/-) mice.
Conversely, apoAIV overexpression increased MTP mRNA in hepatoma cells,
indicating transcriptional regulation. Mechanistic studies revealed that
sequences between -204/-775 bp in the MTP promoter respond to apoAIV and that
apoAIV enhances expression of FoxA2 and FoxO1 transcription factors and their
binding to the identified cis elements in the MTP promoter at night. Knockdown of
FoxA2 and FoxO1 abolished apoAIV-mediated MTP induction. Similarly, knockdown of 
apoAIV in differentiated Caco-2 cells reduced MTP, FoxA2, and FoxO1 mRNA levels, 
cellular MTP activity, and media apoB. Moreover, FoxA2 and FoxO1 expression
showed diurnal variations, and their expression was significantly lower in
apoAIV(-/-) mice. These data indicate that apoAIV modulates diurnal changes in
lipid absorption by regulating forkhead transcription factors and MTP and that
inhibition of apoAIV expression might reduce plasma lipids.

PMCID: PMC3711312
PMID: 23729668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Stem Cell Rev. 2013 Oct;9(5):578-85. doi: 10.1007/s12015-013-9447-2.

Effect of a matrigel sandwich on endodermal differentiation of human embryonic
stem cells.

Lawton BR(1), Sosa JA, Roman S, Krause DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA, betty.lawton@yale.edu.

Definitive endoderm can be derived from human embryonic stem cells using low
serum medium with cytokines involved in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition,
including Activin A and Wnt3A. The purpose of this study was to develop an
improved protocol that permits the induction of definitive endoderm while
avoiding the high rate of cell death that often occurs with existing protocols.
By including insulin and other nutrients, we demonstrate that cell viability can 
be preserved throughout differentiation. In addition, modifying a matrigel
sandwich method previously reported to induce precardiac mesoderm allows for
enhanced endodermal differentiation based on expression of endoderm-associated
genes. The morphological and migratory characteristics of cells cultured by the
technique, as well as gene expression patterns, indicate that the protocol can
emulate key events in gastrulation towards the induction of definitive endoderm.

PMID: 23719997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. PLoS One. 2013 May 22;8(5):e64291. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064291. Print 2013.

Secreted cerberus1 as a marker for quantification of definitive endoderm
differentiation of the pluripotent stem cells.

Iwashita H(1), Shiraki N, Sakano D, Ikegami T, Shiga M, Kume K, Kume S.

Author information: 
(1)Dojindo Laboratories, Kumamoto Techno Research Park, Kumamoto, Japan.

To date, CXCR4 and E-cadherin double-positive cells detected by flow cytometry
have been used to identify the differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells or
induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells into definitive endoderm (DE) lineages.
Quantification of DE differentiation from ES/iPS cells by using flow cytometry is
a multi-step procedure including dissociation of the cells, antibody reaction,
and flow cytometry analysis. To establish a quick assay method for quantification
of ES/iPS cell differentiation into the DE without dissociating the cells, we
examined whether secreted Cerberus1 (Cer1) protein could be used as a marker.
Cer1 is a secreted protein expressed first in the anterior visceral endoderm and 
then in the DE. The amount of Cer1 secreted correlated with the proportion of
CXCR4+/E-Cadherin+ cells that differentiated from mouse ES cells. In addition, we
found that human iPS cell-derived DE also expressed the secreted CER1 and that
the expression level correlated with the proportion of SOX17+/FOXA2+ cells
present. Taken together, these results show that Cer1 (or CER1) serves as a good 
marker for quantification of DE differentiation of mouse and human ES/iPS cells.

PMCID: PMC3661443
PMID: 23717584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Genesis. 2013 Aug;51(8):596-604. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22404. Epub 2013 Jun 26.

Foxa2-venus fusion reporter mouse line allows live-cell analysis of
endoderm-derived organ formation.

Burtscher I(1), Barkey W, Lickert H.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration Research,
Neuherberg, Germany.

The Foxa2-winged helix/forkhead box transcription factor (TF) is absolutely
required for endoderm formation and organogenesis. Foxa2 plays essential roles
during lung, liver, pancreas, and gastrointestinal tract development and
regulates cell-type specific programs in the adult organism. To specifically
address Foxa2 function during organ development and homeostasis, we generated a
Foxa2-Venus fusion (FVF) reporter protein by gene targeting in embryonic stem
(ES) cells. The FVF knock-in reporter is expressed under endogenous Foxa2 control
and the fluorescent protein fusion does not interfere with TF function, as
homozygous mice are viable and fertile. Moreover, the FVF protein localizes to
the nucleus, associates with chromatin during mitosis, and reflects the
endogenous Foxa2 protein distribution pattern in several tissues in heterozygous 
animals. Importantly, live-cell imaging on single-cell level of the FVF and
Sox17-Cherry fusion double knock-in reporter ES cell line reveals the dynamics of
endoderm TF accumulation during ES cell differentiation. The FVF reporter also
allowed us to identify the endoderm progenitors during gastrulation and to
visualize the different branching morphogenesis modes of the lung and pancreas
epithelium in ex vivo embryo and organ cultures. In summary, the generation of
the FVF reporter line adds an important new tool to visualize and analyse
endoderm-derived organ development and homeostasis on the cellular and molecular 
level.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23712942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 15;380(2):222-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.05.011. Epub 2013 
May 21.

Wnt signaling regulates left-right axis formation in the node of mouse embryos.

Kitajima K(1), Oki S, Ohkawa Y, Sumi T, Meno C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

The node triggers formation of the left-right axis in mouse embryos by
establishing local asymmetry of Nodal and Cerl2 expression. We found that Wnt3 is
expressed in perinodal crown cells preferentially on the left side. The enhancer 
responsible for Wnt3 expression was identified and found to be regulated by Foxa2
and Rbpj under the control of Notch signaling. Rbpj binding sites suppress
enhancer activity in pit cells of the node, thereby ensuring crown cell-specific 
expression. In addition, we found that the expression of Gdf1 and Cerl2 is also
regulated by Notch signaling, suggesting that such signaling may induce the
expression of genes related to left-right asymmetry as a set. Furthermore, Cerl2 
expression became symmetric in response to inhibition of Wnt-ß-catenin signaling.
Our results suggest that Wnt signaling regulates the asymmetry of Cerl2
expression, which likely generates a left-right difference in Nodal activity at
the node for further amplification in lateral plate mesoderm.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2013 Apr 24;4(2):40. doi: 10.1186/scrt188.

FoxA2 hunting research identifies the early trail of mesenchymal differentiation.

Madeddu P.

Comment on
    Stem Cell Res Ther. 2013;4(2):36.

Epigenetic regulation offers a flexible means to instruct cell functions and
fate. In human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), thousands of genes are targets for
histone modifications leading to activation or suppression of transcription.
Novel research now indicates that, in hESCs, the transcription start site of
FOXA2, encoding a member of the forkhead family of transcription factors, is
bivalently marked with histone modifications for both gene activation and
repression. Moreover, FOXA2 is remarkably upregulated at an early stage of
endothelial differentiation. These discoveries provide better understanding of
the natural program of differentiation and also open up new opportunities for
large scale production of endothelial progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3706786
PMID: 23672958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Stem Cells. 2013 Aug;31(8):1548-62. doi: 10.1002/stem.1415.

Improved cell therapy protocols for Parkinson's disease based on differentiation 
efficiency and safety of hESC-, hiPSC-, and non-human primate iPSC-derived
dopaminergic neurons.

Sundberg M(1), Bogetofte H, Lawson T, Jansson J, Smith G, Astradsson A, Moore M, 
Osborn T, Cooper O, Spealman R, Hallett P, Isacson O.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroregeneration Laboratories, Harvard Medical School/McLean Hospital,
Belmont, Massachusetts, USA.

The main motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease are due to the loss of
dopaminergic (DA) neurons in the ventral midbrain (VM). For the future treatment 
of Parkinson's disease with cell transplantation it is important to develop
efficient differentiation methods for production of human iPSCs and hESCs-derived
midbrain-type DA neurons. Here we describe an efficient differentiation and
sorting strategy for DA neurons from both human ES/iPS cells and non-human
primate iPSCs. The use of non-human primate iPSCs for neuronal differentiation
and autologous transplantation is important for preclinical evaluation of safety 
and efficacy of stem cell-derived DA neurons. The aim of this study was to
improve the safety of human- and non-human primate iPSC (PiPSC)-derived DA
neurons. According to our results, NCAM(+) /CD29(low) sorting enriched VM DA
neurons from pluripotent stem cell-derived neural cell populations. NCAM(+)
/CD29(low) DA neurons were positive for FOXA2/TH and EN1/TH and this cell
population had increased expression levels of FOXA2, LMX1A, TH, GIRK2, PITX3,
EN1, NURR1 mRNA compared to unsorted neural cell populations. PiPSC-derived
NCAM(+) /CD29(low) DA neurons were able to restore motor function of
6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) lesioned rats 16 weeks after transplantation. The
transplanted sorted cells also integrated in the rodent brain tissue, with robust
TH+/hNCAM+ neuritic innervation of the host striatum. One year after autologous
transplantation, the primate iPSC-derived neural cells survived in the striatum
of one primate without any immunosuppression. These neural cell grafts contained 
FOXA2/TH-positive neurons in the graft site. This is an important proof of
concept for the feasibility and safety of iPSC-derived cell transplantation
therapies in the future.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3775937
PMID: 23666606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Cytotherapy. 2013 Aug;15(8):999-1010. doi: 10.1016/j.jcyt.2013.03.006. Epub 2013 
May 7.

Optimizing dopaminergic differentiation of pluripotent stem cells for the
manufacture of dopaminergic neurons for transplantation.

Liu Q(1), Pedersen OZ, Peng J, Couture LA, Rao MS, Zeng X.

Author information: 
(1)Buck Institute for Age Research, Novato, California 94945, USA.

BACKGROUND AIMS: We have previously described a xeno-free scalable system to
generate transplantable dopaminergic neurons from human pluripotent stem cells.
However, several important questions remain to be answered about our cell therapy
efforts. These include determining the exact time at which cells should be
transplanted and whether cells at this stage can be frozen, shipped, thawed and
injected without compromising their ability to mature and survive the
transplantation procedure. We also needed to determine whether further
optimization of the culture process could shorten the development time and reduce
variability and whether a current Good Manufacture Practice (CGMP) facility could
manufacture cells with fidelity.
METHODS: We developed an optimized protocol that included modulating the sonic
hedgehog homolog gradient with bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP2) and addition of
activin to the culture medium, which shortened the time to generate Lmx1A and
FoxA2 immunoreactive cells by 4-6 days.
RESULTS: We showed that cells at this stage could be safely frozen and thawed
while retaining an excellent ability to continue to mature in vitro and survive
transplant in vivo. Importantly, we successfully adapted this process to a CGMP
facility and manufactured two lots of transplant-ready dopaminergic neurons (>250
vials) under CGMP-compatible conditions. In vitro characterization, including
viability/recovery on thawing, whole genome expression as well as expression of
midbrain/dopaminergic markers, showed that the cells manufactured under
GMP-compatible conditions were similar to cells produced at lab scale.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that this optimized protocol can be used to
generate dopaminergic neurons for Investigational New Drug enabling studies.

Copyright © 2013 International Society for Cellular Therapy. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23664011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Monolayer endoderm differentiation from human ESCs.

Cheng X, Ying L, Lu L, Galvão AM, Mills JA, Lin HC, Kotton DN, Shen SS, Nostro
MC, Choi JK, Weiss MJ, French DL, Gadue P.
In: StemBook [Internet]. Cambridge (MA): Harvard Stem Cell Institute; 2008-.
2012 Jun 10.

When embryonic stem cells are differentiated in the presence of activin A in
serum-free conditions, an endoderm progenitor population defined by the
coexpression of either Brachyury, Foxa2 and c-Kit, or c-Kit and Cxcr4 is
generated. Specification of these progenitors with bone morphogenetic protein-4
in combination with basic fibroblast growth factor and activin A results in the
development of hepatic populations highly enriched (4570%) for cells that
express the alpha-fetoprotein and albumin proteins.

PMID: 23658985  [PubMed]


223. Midbrain dopamine neurons from hESCs.

Tomishima M.
In: StemBook [Internet]. Cambridge (MA): Harvard Stem Cell Institute; 2008-.
2012 Jun 10.

The Kriks et al. protocol has finally achieved what we believe are genuine
midbrain, dopamine neurons. Perrier et al. (2004) described a method to make
dopamine neurons that we initially thought were mDA neurons. Later work by
developmental biologists, however, discovered additional markers of these neurons
that the Perrier cells lacked (e.g., FOXA2/TH). The Perrier protocol used neural 
rosettes as a patterning intermediate to make dopamine neurons. Later work in
vivo demonstrated that rodent mDA neurons are derived from the floor plate, a
cell type at the base of the neural tube that is not normally neurogenic  its
usual role is to produce SHH that helps pattern the neural tube. Fasano et al.
(2010) demonstrated a protocol to make floor plate from hESCs but the protocol
was not efficient at making mDA neurons. Floor plate is achieved by very early,
pre-rosette exposure to high levels of SHH. The Kriks et al. protocol modified
this protocol to include early WNT activation, and this turned out to be the key 
for driving the progenitors into mature mDA neurons. Importantly, these neurons
can be transplanted into the brain and retain the mDA neuron phenotype: something
that the Perrier et al. cells could not do.

PMID: 23658980  [PubMed]


224. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2013 Apr;38(4):356-64. doi:
10.3969/j.issn.1672-7347.2013.04.004.

[Molecular mechanism of cardiac differentiation in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells 
regulated by Foxa2].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu H(1), Zhang Z, Liu Y, Chen Y, Tan Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, China.
zhuh6477@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the involvement of transcription factor Foxa2 in
cardiac differentiation in P19 embryonal carcinoma cells and its molecular
mechanism.
METHODS: P19 cells were induced to differentiate into cardiomyocytes by adding
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) into the culture medium of their embryoid bodies (EBs).
The mRNA levels of pluripotency markers of embryonic pluripotent stem cells,
cardiac differentiation related genes, and Foxa2 in the cell samples at different
time points of cardiac differentiation were detected by reverse transcription PCR
(RT-PCR). Differentiated and mature cardiomyocytes were identified by
immunofluorescence. Eukaryotic expression plasmid pCMV-rFoxa2 (rat Foxa2) was
transfected into P19 cells, and clonal populations of P19 cells that stably
expressed green fluorescence protein (GFP)-rFoxa2 were isolated to enhance the
expression levels of Foxa2 in P19 cells. The mRNA and protein levels of
pluripotency markers and cardiac differentiation related genes in the above cell 
samples were detected by RT-PCR and Western blot. The mRNA levels of cardiac
differentiation related genes in EBs differentiation system were also examined.
RESULTS: P19 cells differentiated into cardiomyocytes in the presence of DMSO,
accompanied by stimulated expression of Foxa2. Transfection of pCMV-rFoxa2
plasmids into P19 cells upregulated rFoxa2 expression transiently and activated
the transcription of its downstream cardiac inducer Cerberus1 (Cer1). The
expression of pluripotency marker Nanog was suppressed and the expression of
cardiac inducer Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) was elevated in GFP-rFoxa2 P19 cells. The
expression of Cer1 and cardiac muscle marker actin, alpha cardiac muscle 1
(Actc1) was upregulated in EBs of GFP-rFoxa2 P19 cells.
CONCLUSION: Foxa2 participates in cardiac differentiation in P19 embryonal
carcinoma cells. Foxa2 may inhibit Nanog expression and stimulate the expression 
of Cer1 and Shh directly during cardiac differentiation in P19 cells in the
presence of DMSO.

PMID: 23645235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Neurosci. 2013 May 1;33(18):8022-34. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4774-12.2013.

Foxa1 and foxa2 are required for the maintenance of dopaminergic properties in
ventral midbrain neurons at late embryonic stages.

Stott SR(1), Metzakopian E, Lin W, Kaestner KH, Hen R, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council National Institute for
Medical Research, London NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

The maintained expression of transcription factors throughout the development of 
mesodiencephalic dopaminergic (mDA) neurons suggests multiple roles at various
stages in development. Two members of the forkhead/winged helix transcription
factor family, Foxa1 and Foxa2, have been recently shown to have an important
influence in the early development of mDA neurons. Here we present data
demonstrating that these genes are also involved in the later maintenance of the 
mDA system. We conditionally removed both genes in postmitotic mDA neurons using 
the dopamine transporter-cre mouse. Deletion of both Foxa1 and Foxa2 resulted in 
a significant reduction in the number of tyrosine hydroxylase (TH)-positive mDA
neurons. The decrease was predominantly observed in the substantia nigra region
of the mDA system, which led to a loss of TH+ fibers innervating the striatum.
Further analysis demonstrated that the reduction in the number of TH+ cells in
the mutant mice was not due to apoptosis or cell-fate change. Using reporter
mouse lines, we found that the mDA neurons were still present in the ventral
midbrain, but that they had lost much of their dopaminergic phenotype. The
majority of these neurons remained in the ventral mesencephalon until at least 18
months of age. Chromatin immunoprecipitation suggested that the loss of the mDA
phenotype is due to a reduction in the binding of the nuclear orphan receptor,
Nurr-1 to the promoter region of TH. These results extend previous findings and
demonstrate a later role for Foxa genes in regulating the maintenance of
dopaminergic phenotype in mDA neurons.

PMID: 23637192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Biosci Bioeng. 2013 Sep;116(3):386-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2013.03.014. Epub 
2013 Apr 26.

Major amino acids in collagen hydrolysate regulate the differentiation of mouse
embryoid bodies.

Date Y(1), Hasegawa S, Yamada T, Inoue Y, Mizutani H, Nakata S, Akamatsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratories, Nippon Menard Cosmetic Co., Ltd., 2-7 Torimicho,
Nishi-Ku, Nagoya, Aichi 451-0071, Japan. date.yasushi@menard.co.jp

To take advantage of the therapeutic potential of embryonic stem cells (ESCs), it
is necessary to regulate their differentiation in response to defined factors. In
this study, in order to explore novel molecules that regulate the differentiation
of ESCs, we investigated whether collagen hydrolysate, collagen-characteristic
amino acids, glycine (Gly), l-proline and trans-4-hydroxy-l-proline (l-Hyp); or
dipeptides, proline-hydroxyproline and hydroxyproline-glycine regulate the
differentiation of mouse embryoid bodies (EBs). We identified that treatment with
collagen hydrolysate or Gly repressed the expression of the mesendodermal
markers, Brachyury and Foxa2 in EBs and maintained the undifferentiated state of 
mESCs in a feeder-free monolayer culture. In contrast, l-Hyp promoted the
expression of Brachyury, Mixl1, Gsc and Foxa2 in EBs. And the treatment with
l-Hyp promoted cardiac differentiation within EBs, which was proven by the
spontaneous contraction of cardiomyocytes and the expression of the cardiac
markers, a-MHC, MLC-2v and Nkx2.5. Results suggest that l-Hyp is a promising new 
inducer for reproducible and efficient differentiation of mesendoderm lineages.

Copyright © 2013 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 23623897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 19;8(4):e61848. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061848. Print 2013.

Germline genetic variation modulates tumor progression and metastasis in a mouse 
model of neuroendocrine prostate carcinoma.

Patel SJ(1), Molinolo AA, Gutkind S, Crawford NP.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Genetics Section, Cancer Genetics Branch, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Neuroendocrine (NE) differentiation has gained increased attention as a prostate 
cancer (PC) prognostic marker. The aim of this study is to determine whether host
germline genetic variation influences tumor progression and metastasis in
C57BL/6-Tg(TRAMP)8247Ng/J (TRAMP) mouse model of aggressive NEPC. TRAMP mice were
crossed to the eight progenitor strains of the Collaborative Cross recombinant
inbred panel to address this. Tumor growth and metastasis burden were quantified 
in heterozygous transgene positive F1 male mice at 30 weeks of age. Compared to
wild-type C57BL/6J-Tg(TRAMP)824Ng/J males, TRAMP x CAST/EiJ, TRAMP x NOD/ShiLtJ
and TRAMP x NZO/HlLtJ F1 males displayed significant increases in tumor growth.
Conversely, TRAMP x WSB/EiJ and TRAMP x PWK/PhJ F1 males displayed significant
reductions in tumor growth. Interestingly, despite reduced tumor burden, TRAMP x 
WSB/EiJ males had an increased nodal metastasis burden. Patterns of distant
pulmonary metastasis tended to follow the same patterns as that of local
dissemination in each of the strains. All tumors and metastases displayed
positive staining for NE markers, synaptophysin, and FOXA2. These experiments
conclusively demonstrate that the introduction of germline variation by breeding 
modulates tumor growth, local metastasis burden, and distant metastasis frequency
in this model of NEPC. These strains will be useful as model systems to
facilitate the identification of germline modifier genes that promote the
development of aggressive forms of PC.

PMCID: PMC3631138
PMID: 23620793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 May 7;110(19):7732-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1220603110. Epub 2013 Apr 25.

Hippo-Foxa2 signaling pathway plays a role in peripheral lung maturation and
surfactant homeostasis.

Chung C(1), Kim T, Kim M, Kim M, Song H, Kim TS, Seo E, Lee SH, Kim H, Kim SK,
Yoo G, Lee DH, Hwang DS, Kinashi T, Kim JM, Lim DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National Creative Research Initiatives
Center, Biomedical Research Center, Graduate School of Medical Science and
Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701,
Korea.

Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), which is induced by insufficient production 
of surfactant, is the leading cause of mortality in preterm babies. Although
several transcription factors are known to be involved in surfactant protein
expression, the molecular mechanisms and signaling pathways upstream of these
transcription factors have remained elusive. Here, using mammalian Hippo kinases 
(Mst1/2, mammalian sterile 20-like kinase 1/2) conditional knockout mice, we
demonstrate that Mst1/2 kinases are critical for orchestration of transcription
factors involved in surfactant protein homeostasis and prevention of RDS. Mice
lacking Mst1/2 in the respiratory epithelium exhibited perinatal mortality with
respiratory failure and their lungs contained fewer type I pneumocytes and more
immature type II pneumocytes lacking microvilli, lamellar bodies, and surfactant 
protein expression, pointing to peripheral lung immaturity and RDS. In contrast
to previous findings of YAP (Yes-associated protein)-mediated canonical Hippo
signaling in the liver and intestine, loss of Mst1/2 kinases induced the defects 
in pneumocyte differentiation independently of YAP hyperactivity. We instead
found that Mst1/2 kinases stabilized and phosphorylated the transcription factor 
Foxa2 (forkhead box A2), which regulates pneumocyte maturation and surfactant
protein expression. Taken together, our results suggest that the mammalian Hippo 
kinases play crucial roles in surfactant homeostasis and coordination of
peripheral lung differentiation through regulation of Foxa2 rather than of YAP.

PMCID: PMC3651464
PMID: 23620511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2013 Apr 24;4(2):36. doi: 10.1186/scrt192.

Profiling of transcriptional and epigenetic changes during directed endothelial
differentiation of human embryonic stem cells identifies FOXA2 as a marker of
early mesoderm commitment.

Howard L, Mackenzie RM, Pchelintsev NA, McBryan T, McClure JD, McBride MW, Kane
NM, Adams PD, Milligan G, Baker AH.

Comment in
    Stem Cell Res Ther. 2013;4(2):40.

INTRODUCTION: Differentiation of vascular endothelial cells (ECs) in clinically
relevant numbers for injection into ischaemic areas could offer therapeutic
potential in the treatment of cardiovascular conditions, including myocardial
infarction, peripheral vascular disease and stroke. While we and others have
demonstrated successful generation of functional endothelial-like cells from
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), little is understood regarding the complex
transcriptional and epigenetic changes that occur during differentiation, in
particular during early commitment to a mesodermal lineage.
METHODS: We performed the first gene expression microarray study of hESCs
undergoing directed differentiation to ECs using a monolayer-based, feeder-free
and serum-free protocol. Microarray results were confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR
and immunocytochemistry, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-PCR analysis
was utilised to determine the bivalent status of differentially expressed genes.
RESULTS: We identified 22 transcription factors specific to early mesoderm
commitment. Among these factors, FOXA2 was observed to be the most significantly 
differentially expressed at the hESC-EC day 2 timepoint. ChIP-PCR analysis
revealed that the FOXA2 transcription start site is bivalently marked with
histone modifications for both gene activation (H3K4me3) and repression
(H3K27me3) in hESCs, suggesting the transcription factor may be a key regulator
of hESC differentiation.
CONCLUSION: This enhanced knowledge of the lineage commitment process will help
improve the design of directed differentiation protocols, increasing the yield of
endothelial-like cells for regenerative medicine therapies in cardiovascular
disease.

PMCID: PMC3706826
PMID: 23618383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Mol Cell. 2013 Apr 25;50(2):185-99. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.02.018. Epub 2013 
Mar 21.

Nkx2-1 represses a latent gastric differentiation program in lung adenocarcinoma.

Snyder EL(1), Watanabe H, Magendantz M, Hoersch S, Chen TA, Wang DG, Crowley D,
Whittaker CA, Meyerson M, Kimura S, Jacks T.

Author information: 
(1)Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research and Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2013 May;13(5):291.

Tissue-specific differentiation programs become dysregulated during cancer
evolution. The transcription factor Nkx2-1 is a master regulator of pulmonary
differentiation that is downregulated in poorly differentiated lung
adenocarcinoma. Here we use conditional murine genetics to determine how the
identity of lung epithelial cells changes upon loss of their master cell-fate
regulator. Nkx2-1 deletion in normal and neoplastic lungs causes not only loss of
pulmonary identity but also conversion to a gastric lineage. Nkx2-1 is likely to 
maintain pulmonary identity by recruiting transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2
to lung-specific loci, thus preventing them from binding gastrointestinal
targets. Nkx2-1-negative murine lung tumors mimic mucinous human lung
adenocarcinomas, which express gastric markers. Loss of the gastrointestinal
transcription factor Hnf4a leads to derepression of the embryonal proto-oncogene 
Hmga2 in Nkx2-1-negative tumors. These observations suggest that loss of both
active and latent differentiation programs is required for tumors to reach a
primitive, poorly differentiated state.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3721642
PMID: 23523371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Diabetologia. 2013 Jun;56(6):1306-16. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-2875-3. Epub 2013
Mar 19.

Multiple functional polymorphisms in the G6PC2 gene contribute to the association
with higher fasting plasma glucose levels.

Baerenwald DA(1), Bonnefond A, Bouatia-Naji N, Flemming BP, Umunakwe OC, Oeser
JK, Pound LD, Conley NL, Cauchi S, Lobbens S, Eury E, Balkau B, Lantieri O; MAGIC
Investigators, Dadi PK, Jacobson DA, Froguel P, O'Brien RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medicine, 8415 MRB IV, 2213 Garland Avenue, Nashville, TN 37232-0615,
USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We previously identified the G6PC2 locus as a strong determinant
of fasting plasma glucose (FPG) and showed that a common G6PC2 intronic single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) (rs560887) and two common G6PC2 promoter SNPs
(rs573225 and rs13431652) are highly associated with FPG. However, these promoter
SNPs have complex effects on G6PC2 fusion gene expression, and our data suggested
that only rs13431652 is a potentially causative SNP. Here we examine the effect
of rs560887 on G6PC2 pre-mRNA splicing and the contribution of an additional
common G6PC2 promoter SNP, rs2232316, to the association signal.
METHODS: Minigene analyses were used to characterise the effect of rs560887 on
G6PC2 pre-mRNA splicing. Fusion gene and gel retardation analyses characterised
the effect of rs2232316 on G6PC2 promoter activity and transcription factor
binding. The genetic association of rs2232316 with FPG variation was assessed
using regression adjusted for age, sex and BMI in 4,220 Europeans with normal
FPG.
RESULTS: The rs560887-G allele was shown to enhance G6PC2 pre-mRNA splicing,
whereas the rs2232316-A allele enhanced G6PC2 transcription by promoting Foxa2
binding. Genetic analyses provide evidence for association of the rs2232316-A
allele with increased FPG (ß<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.04 mmol/l; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>4.3<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-3)) as part of the same
signal as rs560887, rs573225 and rs13431652.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: As with rs13431652, the in situ functional data with 
rs560887 and rs2232316 are in accord with the putative function of G6PC2 in
pancreatic islets, and suggest that all three are potentially causative SNPs that
contribute to the association between G6PC2 and FPG.

PMCID: PMC4106008
PMID: 23508304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2013 Feb;154(4):501-4.

Effects of pancragen on the differentiation of pancreatic cells during their
ageing.

[Article in English, Russian]

Khavinson VKh(1), Durnova AO, Polyakova VO, Tolibova GH, Linkova NS, Kvetnoy IM, 
Kvetnaia TV, Tarnovskaya SI.

Author information: 
(1)I. P. Pavlov Institute of Physiology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St.
Petersburg, Russia.

Expression of differentiation markers was found to be reduced during ageing of
pancreatic cells. Tetrapeptide pancragen stimulates the expression of
differentiation factors of acinar (Pdx1, Ptfla) and islet of Langerhans (Pdx1,
Pax6, Pax4, Foxa2, NKx2.2) cells in "young" and " aged" cultures. Differentiation
of acinar and islet pancreatic cells induced by pancragen can be a mechanism
underlying its anti-diabetic and anti-inflammatory effects. Thus, transcription
factors that regulate differentiation of pancreatic cells are a pharmacological
target for pancragen, which allows considering it as an effective tool in the
treatment of diabetes mellitus and pancreatitis.

PMID: 23486591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Biol Chem. 2013 Apr 26;288(17):11705-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.388173. Epub
2013 Mar 7.

Neurogenin3 cooperates with Foxa2 to autoactivate its own expression.

Ejarque M(1), Cervantes S, Pujadas G, Tutusaus A, Sanchez L, Gasa R.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Obesity Laboratory, Institut D'Investigacions Biomèdiques August 
Pi i Sunyer-Hospital Clínic, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.

The transcription factor Neurogenin3 functions as a master regulator of endocrine
pancreas formation, and its deficiency leads to the development of diabetes in
humans and mice. In the embryonic pancreas, Neurogenin3 is transiently expressed 
at high levels for a narrow time window to initiate endocrine differentiation in 
scattered progenitor cells. The mechanisms controlling these rapid and robust
changes in Neurogenin3 expression are poorly understood. In this study, we
characterize a Neurogenin3 positive autoregulatory loop whereby this factor may
rapidly induce its own levels. We show that Neurogenin3 binds to a conserved
upstream fragment of its own gene, inducing deposition of active chromatin marks 
and the activation of Neurog3 transcription. Additionally, we show that the
broadly expressed endodermal forkhead factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 can cooperate
synergistically to amplify Neurogenin3 autoregulation in vitro. However, only
Foxa2 colocalizes with Neurogenin3 in pancreatic progenitors, thus indicating a
primary role for this factor in regulating Neurogenin3 expression in vivo.
Furthermore, in addition to decreasing Neurog3 autoregulation, inhibition of
Foxa2 by RNA interference attenuates Neurogenin3-dependent activation of the
endocrine developmental program in cultured duct mPAC cells. Hence, these data
uncover the potential functional cooperation between the endocrine
lineage-determining factor Neurogenin3 and the widespread endoderm progenitor
factor Foxa2 in the implementation of the endocrine developmental program in the 
pancreas.

PMCID: PMC3636860
PMID: 23471965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Evol Dev. 2013 Mar-Apr;15(2):119-32. doi: 10.1111/ede.12022.

Expression of a lung developmental cassette in the adult and developing zebrafish
swimbladder.

Cass AN(1), Servetnick MD, McCune AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, 14853, USA.

The presence of an air-filled organ (AO), either lungs or a swimbladder, is a
defining character of the Osteichthyes (bony vertebrates, including tetrapods).
Despite the functional and structural diversity of AOs, it was not previously
known whether the same group of developmental regulatory genes are involved in
the early development of both lungs and swimbladders. This study demonstrates
that a suite of genes (Nkx2.1, FoxA2, Wnt7b, GATA6), previously reported to be
co-expressed only in the tetrapod lung, is also co-expressed in the zebrafish
swimbladder. We document the expression pattern of these genes in the adult and
developing zebrafish swimbladder and compare the expression patterns to those in 
the mouse lung. Early-acting genes involved in endoderm specification are
expressed in the same relative location and stage of AO development in both taxa 
(FoxA2 and GATA6), but the order of onset and location of expression are not
completely conserved for the later acting genes (Nkx2.1 and Wnt7b). Co-expression
of this suite of genes in both tetrapod lungs and swimbladders of ray-finned
fishes is more likely due to common ancestry than independent co-option, because 
these genes are not known to be co-expressed anywhere except in the AOs of
Osteichthyes. Any conserved gene product interactions may comprise a character
identity network (ChIN) for the osteichthyan AO.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25098637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Oncol Rep. 2013 May;29(5):1827-34. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2296. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Analysis of genomic aberrations associated with the clinicopathological
parameters of rectal cancer by array-based comparative genomic hybridization.

Liang JW(1), Shi ZZ, Zhang TT, Hao JJ, Wang Z, Wang XM, Yang H, Wang MR, Zhou ZX,
Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Abdominal Surgical Oncology, Cancer Hospital and Institute,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, PR
China.

The aim of the present study was to screen and identify the chromosomal
aberrations that are correlated with clinicopathological characteristics of
rectal cancer using array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH).
Forty-eight fresh frozen tumor tissues of rectal carcinoma were analyzed by
array-CGH. The results showed that most frequent gains included 8q24.3,
20q11.21-q13.32, 20q13.33 and losses in 8p23.3-p12, 17p13.1-p12 and 18q11.2-q23
were noted. Fourteen amplifications and seven homozygous deletions were
identified in the rectal cancer samples. Losses of 4p16.1-p15.31, 8p21.1-p12 and 
gains of 7p12.3-p12.1 and 13q33.1-q34 were associated with positive lymph node
status and advanced clinical stage (stages III and IV). The 17q24.2-25.3 gain was
more frequent in patients with distant metastasis. Integrated analysis indicated 
that overexpression of PDP1, TRIB1, C13orf27, FOXA2, PMEPA1 and PHACTR3 was
associated with gains, and underexpression of FHOD, SMAD4 and BCL2 was associated
with losses. Pathway enrichment analysis showed that pathways of nitrogen
metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, cell cycle, maturity onset diabetes of
young, cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction, MAPK signaling pathway and
dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy were influenced by copy number changes.

PMID: 23440507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013 Feb 15;7:11. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00011. eCollection
2013.

Systemic administration of valproic acid and zonisamide promotes differentiation 
of induced pluripotent stem cell-derived dopaminergic neurons.

Yoshikawa T(1), Samata B, Ogura A, Miyamoto S, Takahashi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Repair, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences,
Kyoto University Kyoto, Japan ; Department of Neurosurgery, Clinical
Neuroscience, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine Kyoto, Japan ;
Department of Neurosurgery, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine Tsu,
Japan.

Erratum in
    Front Cell Neurosci. 2013;7:116.

Cell replacement therapy using embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) is a promising strategy for the treatment of
neurologic diseases such as Parkinson's disease (PD). However, a limiting factor 
for effective cell transplantation is the low survival rate of grafted cells,
especially neurons. In this study, we modified the host environment and
investigated whether the simultaneous administration of soluble factors can
improve the survival and differentiation of murine iPSC-derived dopaminergic (DA)
neurons in host brains. With the goal of applying this technology in clinical
settings in the near future, we selected drugs that were already approved for
clinical use. The drugs included two commonly used anti-convulsants, valproic
acid (VPA) and zonisamide (ZNS), and estradiol (E2), also known as biologically
active estrogen. Following neural induction of murine iPSCs, we collected neural 
progenitor cells (NPCs) by sorting PSA-NCAM(+) cells, then treated the
PSA-NCAM(+) cells with drugs for 4 days. An immunofluorescence study revealed
that 0.01 mM and 0.1 mM of VPA and 10 nM of E2 increased the percentage of
tyrosine hydroxylase(+) (TH: a DA neuron marker) cells in vitro. Furthermore, 0.1
mM of VPA increased the percentage of TH(+) cells that simultaneously express the
midbrain markers FOXA2 and NURR1. Next, in order to determine the effects of the 
drugs in vivo, the iPSC-derived NPCs were transplanted into the striata of intact
SD rats. The animals received intraperitoneal injections of one of the drugs for 
4 weeks, then were subjected to an immunofluorescence study. VPA administration
(150 mg/kg/daily) increased the number of NeuN(+) post-mitotic neurons and TH(+) 
DA neurons in the grafts. Furthermore, VPA (150 mg/kg/daily) and ZNS (30
mg/kg/daily) increased the number of TH(+)FOXA2(+) midbrain DA neurons. These
results suggest that the systemic administration of VPA and ZNS may improve the
efficiency of cell replacement therapy using iPSCs to treat PD.

PMCID: PMC3573719
PMID: 23423767  [PubMed]


237. Cell Metab. 2013 Mar 5;17(3):436-47. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2013.01.014. Epub 2013
Feb 14.

Glucagon-induced acetylation of Foxa2 regulates hepatic lipid metabolism.

von Meyenn F(1), Porstmann T, Gasser E, Selevsek N, Schmidt A, Aebersold R,
Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Health Sciences, ETH Zurich, Schafmattstrasse 22, 8093 
Zurich, Switzerland.

Circulating levels of insulin and glucagon reflect the nutritional state of
animals and elicit regulatory responses in the liver that maintain glucose and
lipid homeostasis. The transcription factor Foxa2 activates lipid metabolism and 
ketogenesis during fasting and is inhibited via insulin-PI3K-Akt
signaling-mediated phosphorylation at Thr156 and nuclear exclusion. Here we show 
that, in addition, Foxa2 is acetylated at the conserved residue Lys259 following 
inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) class I-III and the cofactors p300 and
SirT1 are involved in Foxa2 acetylation and deacetylation, respectively.
Physiologically, fasting states and glucagon stimulation are sufficient to induce
Foxa2 acetylation. Introduction of the acetylation-mimicking (K259Q) or
-deficient (K259R) mutations promotes or inhibits Foxa2 activity, respectively,
and adenoviral expression of Foxa2-K259Q augments expression of genes involved in
fatty acid oxidation and ketogenesis. Our study reveals a molecular mechanism by 
which glucagon signaling activates a fasting response through acetylation of
Foxa2.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23416070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Free Radic Res. 2013 Apr;47(4):325-32. doi: 10.3109/10715762.2013.773589. Epub
2013 Mar 1.

The involvement of epigenetic silencing of Foxa2 in cellular replicative and
premature senescence induced by hydrogen peroxide.

Zhang W(1), Ji W, Yang L, Yao L, Wang G, Xuan A, Zhuang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health and Tropical Medicine,
Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, P. R. China.

Foxa2 is one member of the Foxa subfamily of winged helix/forkhead box (Fox)
transcription factors which has been found to play important roles in multiple
stages of mammalian life, beginning with early development, continuing during
organogenesis, and finally in metabolism and homeostasis in the adult. To explore
the involvement of Foxa2 and its epigenetic regulations in cellular senescence,
we established the premature senescence model induced by hydrogen peroxide in
comparison with replicative senescence. The mRNA level of Foxa2 was downregulated
in both replicative and premature senescent cells. We further found the increased
DNA methylation level and new methylation at CpG sites in the promoter with 43.6%
of methylated CpG islands in premature senescence, while only 5.7% and 17.1% in
young cells and replicative senescence separately. Moreover, we noted the
alterations of histone modifications including decreased histone H3 acetylation, 
increased H4 (Lys-20) trimethylation at the Foxa2 CpG islands in the promoter in 
replicative or premature senescence, while decreased histone H3 (Lys-4)
trimethylation across the transcription start regions in cellular senescence.
Taken together, epigenetic silencing of Foxa2 is associated with an increased DNA
methylation level and histone H4 (Lys-20) trimethylation, decreased histone H3
acetylation and histone H3 (Lys-4) trimethylation, involved in cellular
replicative or premature senescence.

PMID: 23391216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55528. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055528. Epub 2013 Jan 31.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 are required for formation of the intervertebral discs.

Maier JA(1), Lo Y, Harfe BD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Microbiology and the Genetics Institute, University of 
Florida, College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida, United States of America.

The intervertebral disc (IVD) is composed of 3 main structures, the collagenous
annulus fibrosus (AF), which surrounds the gel-like nucleus pulposus (NP), and
hyaline cartilage endplates, which are attached to the vertebral bodies. An IVD
is located between each vertebral body. Degeneration of the IVD is thought to be 
a major cause of back pain, a potentially chronic condition for which there exist
few effective treatments. The NP forms from the embryonic notochord. Foxa1 and
Foxa2, transcription factors in the forkhead box family, are expressed early
during notochord development. However, embryonic lethality and the absence of the
notochord in Foxa2 null mice have precluded the study of potential roles these
genes may play during IVD formation. Using a conditional Foxa2 allele in
conjunction with a tamoxifen-inducible Cre allele (ShhcreER(T2)), we removed
Foxa2 from the notochord of E7.5 mice null for Foxa1.
Foxa1(-/-);Foxa2(c/c);ShhcreER(T2) double mutant animals had a severely deformed 
nucleus pulposus, an increase in cell death in the tail, decreased hedgehog
signaling, defects in the notochord sheath, and aberrant dorsal-ventral
patterning of the neural tube. Embryos lacking only Foxa1 or Foxa2 from the
notochord were indistinguishable from control animals, demonstrating a functional
redundancy for these genes in IVD formation. In addition, we provide in vivo
genetic evidence that Foxa genes are required for activation of Shh in the
notochord.

PMCID: PMC3561292
PMID: 23383217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e50128. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050128. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

PPAR-<U+03B3> activation increases insulin secretion through the up-regulation of the
free fatty acid receptor GPR40 in pancreatic ß-cells.

Kim HS(1), Hwang YC, Koo SH, Park KS, Lee MS, Kim KW, Lee MK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Samsung Biomedical Research
Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: It has been reported that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
(PPAR)-<U+03B3> and their synthetic ligands have direct effects on pancreatic ß-cells.
We investigated whether PPAR-<U+03B3> activation stimulates insulin secretion through
the up-regulation of GPR40 in pancreatic ß-cells.
METHODS: Rat insulinoma INS-1 cells and primary rat islets were treated with
rosiglitazone (RGZ) and/or adenoviral PPAR-<U+03B3> overexpression. OLETF rats were
treated with RGZ.
RESULTS: PPAR-<U+03B3> activation with RGZ and/or adenoviral PPAR-<U+03B3> overexpression
increased free fatty acid (FFA) receptor GPR40 expression, and increased insulin 
secretion and intracellular calcium mobilization, and was blocked by the PLC
inhibitors, GPR40 RNA interference, and GLUT2 RNA interference. As a downstream
signaling pathway of intracellular calcium mobilization, the phosphorylated
levels of CaMKII and CREB, and the downstream IRS-2 and phospho-Akt were
significantly increased. Despite of insulin receptor RNA interference, the levels
of IRS-2 and phospho-Akt was still maintained with PPAR-<U+03B3> activation. In
addition, the ß-cell specific gene expression, including Pdx-1 and FoxA2,
increased in a GPR40- and GLUT2-dependent manner. The levels of GPR40,
phosphorylated CaMKII and CREB, and ß-cell specific genes induced by RGZ were
blocked by GW9662, a PPAR-<U+03B3> antagonist. Finally, PPAR-<U+03B3> activation up-regulated
ß-cell gene expressions through FoxO1 nuclear exclusion, independent of the
insulin signaling pathway. Based on immunohistochemical staining, the GLUT2,
IRS-2, Pdx-1, and GPR40 were more strongly expressed in islets from RGZ-treated
OLETF rats compared to control islets.
CONCLUSION: These observations suggest that PPAR-<U+03B3> activation with RGZ and/or
adenoviral overexpression increased intracellular calcium mobilization, insulin
secretion, and ß-cell gene expression through GPR40 and GLUT2 gene up-regulation.

PMCID: PMC3553172
PMID: 23372643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Target Oncol. 2013 Dec;8(4):271-80. doi: 10.1007/s11523-013-0253-1. Epub 2013 Feb
1.

Gastric cancer (GC) patients with hedgehog pathway activation: PTCH1 and GLI2 as 
independent prognostic factors.

Lee SJ(1), Do IG, Lee J, Kim KM, Jang J, Sohn I, Kang WK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical
Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, 50 Irwon-dong Gangnam-gu,
Seoul, 135-710, South Korea.

Activation of sonic hedgehog (HH) signaling pathway has been implicated in
aggressiveness and progression of gastrointestinal tumors. We planned this study 
to identify a subgroup of gastric cancer (GC) patients with HH activation and to 
assess the effect of a HH inhibitor in HH activated GC in vitro. We surveyed HH
pathway activation among 512 GC specimens for protein expression of various
target genes involved in HH pathway: Indian hedgehog (IHH), patched-1 (PTCH1),
smoothened (SMO), GLI2, and FOXA2. We analyzed the correlations between the
expression of these factors and clinicopathological features and prognosis. In
vitro, ten gastric cancer cell lines were screened for anti-tumoractivity of an
HH inhibitor, GDC-0449. Among the 512 specimens, 105 (20.0 %), 83 (16.3 %), 130
(25.5 %), 61 (12.0 %), and 206 (40.8 %) were positive for IHH, PTCH1, GLI2, SMO, 
and FOXA2 expression, respectively. PTCH1 expression was more frequently observed
in well- or moderately differentiated tubular adenocarcinoma, intestinal type and
low stage GC. GLI2 was correlated with lymphovascular invasion and intestinal
type GC. A high-stage and negative PTCH1 staining were identified as unfavorable 
independent risk factors for overall survival in multivariate analysis
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, 0.045, respectively). For IHH, SMO, and FOXA2, there was no
statistical difference in clinicopathologic variables and survival outcome. An HH
inhibitor had particularly potent effects on GC cell lines with SMO mRNA
overexpression. This is the largest report to analyze the hedgehog pathway in GC.
PTCH1 overexpression was an independent prognostic factor for survival and SMO
overexpression which was found in 12.0 % of GC patients might be the potential
predictive marker of HH inhibitor.

PMID: 23371028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Genesis. 2013 Mar;51(3):210-8. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22376. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Generation of knock-in mice that express nuclear enhanced green fluorescent
protein and tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase in the notochord from Foxa2 and T
loci.

Imuta Y(1), Kiyonari H, Jang CW, Behringer RR, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Fate Control, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

The node and the notochord are important embryonic signaling centers that control
embryonic pattern formation. Notochord progenitor cells present in the node and
later in the posterior end of the notochord move anteriorly to generate the
notochord. To understand the dynamics of cell movement during notochord
development and the molecular mechanisms controlling this event, analyses of cell
movements using time-lapse imaging and conditional manipulation of gene
activities are required. To achieve this goal, we generated two knock-in mouse
lines that simultaneously express nuclear enhanced green fluorescent protein
(EGFP) and tamoxifen-inducible Cre, CreER(T2) , from two notochord gene loci,
Foxa2 and T (Brachury). In Foxa2(nEGFP-CreERT2/+) and T(nEGFP-CreERT2/+) embryos,
nuclei of the Foxa2 or T-expressing cells, which include the node, notochord, and
endoderm (Foxa2) or wide range of posterior mesoderm (T), were labeled with EGFP 
at intensities that can be used for live imaging. Cre activity was also induced
in cells expressing Foxa2 and T 1 day after tamoxifen administration. These mice 
are expected to be useful tools for analyzing the mechanisms of notochord
development.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3632256
PMID: 23359409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Lab Invest. 2013 Apr;93(4):408-21. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2013.2. Epub 2013 Jan
28.

Neural lineage-specific homeoprotein BRN2 is directly involved in TTF1 expression
in small-cell lung cancer.

Sakaeda M(1), Sato H, Ishii J, Miyata C, Kamma H, Shishido-Hara Y, Shimoyamada H,
Fujiwara M, Endo T, Tanaka R, Kondo H, Goya T, Aoki I, Yazawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF1) plays crucial roles in thyroid, lung, and
developing brain morphogenesis. Because TTF1-expressing neoplasms are generated
from organs and tissues that normally express TTF1, such as the thyroid
follicular epithelium and peripheral lung airway epithelium, TTF1 is widely used 
as a cell lineage-specific and diagnostic marker for thyroid carcinomas and for
lung adenocarcinomas with terminal respiratory unit (TRU) differentiation.
However, among lung neuroendocrine tumors, small-cell carcinomas (small-cell lung
cancers (SCLCs)), most of which are generated from the central airway, also
frequently express TTF1 at high levels. To clarify how SCLCs express TTF1, we
investigated the molecular mechanisms of its expression using cultivated lung
cancer cells and focusing upon neural cell-specific transcription factors. Both
SCLC cells and lung adenocarcinoma cells predominantly expressed isoform 2 of
TTF1, and TTF1 promoter assays in SCLC cells revealed that the crucial region for
activation of the promoter, which is adjacent to the transcription start site of 
TTF1 isoform 2, has potent FOX-, LHX-, and BRN2-binding sites. Transfection
experiments using expression vectors for FOXA1, FOXA2, LHX2, LHX6, and BRN2
showed that BRN2 substantially upregulated TTF1 expression, whereas FOXA1/2
weakly upregulated TTF1 expression. BRN2 and FOXA1/2 binding to the TTF1 promoter
was confirmed through chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, and TTF1
expression in SCLC cells was considerably downregulated after BRN2 knockdown.
Furthermore, the TTF1 promoter in SCLC cells was scarcely methylated, and
immunohistochemical examinations using a series of primary lung tumors indicated 
that TTF1 and BRN2 were coexpressed only in SCLC cells. These findings suggest
that TTF1 expression in SCLC is a cell lineage-specific phenomenon that involves 
the developing neural cell-specific homeoprotein BRN2.

PMID: 23358112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Dev Biol. 2013 Apr 1;376(1):62-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.01.012. Epub 2013
Jan 23.

BMP and TGF-ß pathway mediators are critical upstream regulators of Wnt signaling
during midbrain dopamine differentiation in human pluripotent stem cells.

Cai J(1), Schleidt S, Pelta-Heller J, Hutchings D, Cannarsa G, Iacovitti L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Farber Institute for Neurosciences, Thomas
Jefferson University, 900 Walnut Street, Philadelphia, PA. 19107, USA.

Although many laboratories currently use small molecule inhibitors of the BMP
(Dorsomorphin/DM) and TGF-ß (SB431542/SB) signaling pathways in protocols to
generate midbrain dopamine (mDA) neurons from hES and hiPS cells, until now,
these substances have not been thought to play a role in the mDA differentiation 
process. We report here that the transient inhibition of constitutive BMP (pSMADs
1, 5, 8) signaling, either alone or in combination with TGF-ß inhibition (pSMADs 
2, 3), is critically important in the upstream regulation of Wnt1-Lmx1a signaling
in mDA progenitors. We postulate that the mechanism via which DM or DM/SB
mediates these effects involves the up-regulation in SMAD-interacting protein 1
(SIP1), which results in greater repression of the Wnt antagonist, secreted
frizzled related protein 1 (Sfrp1) in stem cells. Accordingly, knockdown of SIP1 
reverses the inductive effects of DM/SB on mDA differentiation while Sfrp1
knockdown/inhibition mimics DM/SB. The rise in Wnt1-Lmx1a levels in
SMAD-inhibited cultures is, however, accompanied by a reciprocal down-regulation 
in SHH-Foxa2 levels leading to the generation of few TH+ neurons that co-express 
Foxa2. If however, exogenous SHH/FGF8 is added along with SMAD inhibitors,
equilibrium in these two important pathways is achieved such that authentic
(Lmx1a+Foxa2+TH+) mDA neuron differentiation is promoted while alternate cell
fates are suppressed in stem cell cultures. These data indicate that
activators/inhibitors of BMP and TGF-ß signaling play a critical upstream
regulatory role in the mDA differentiation process in human pluripotent stem
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3983720
PMID: 23352789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053944. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Association study of 25 type 2 diabetes related Loci with measures of obesity in 
Indian sib pairs.

Gupta V(1), Vinay DG, Sovio U, Rafiq S, Kranthi Kumar MV, Janipalli CS, Evans D, 
Mani KR, Sandeep MN, Taylor A, Kinra S, Sullivan R, Bowen L, Timpson N, Smith GD,
Dudbridge F, Prabhakaran D, Ben-Shlomo Y, Reddy KS, Ebrahim S, Chandak GR; Indian
Migration Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India, New
Delhi, India. udaiig@gmail.com

Obesity is an established risk factor for type 2 diabetes (T2D) and they are
metabolically related through the mechanism of insulin resistance. In order to
explore how common genetic variants associated with T2D correlate with body mass 
index (BMI), we examined the influence of 25 T2D associated loci on obesity risk.
We used 5056 individuals (2528 sib-pairs) recruited in Indian Migration Study and
conducted within sib-pair analysis for six obesity phenotypes. We found
associations of variants in CXCR4 (rs932206) and HHEX (rs5015480) with higher
body mass index (BMI) (ß=0.13, p=0.001) and (ß=0.09, p=0.002), respectively and
weight (ß=0.13, p=0.001) and (ß=0.09, p=0.001), respectively. CXCR4 variant was
also strongly associated with body fat (ß=0.10, p=0.0004). In addition, we
demonstrated associations of CXCR4 and HHEX with overweight/obesity (OR=1.6,
p=0.003) and (OR=1.4, p=0.002), respectively, in 1333 sib-pairs (2666
individuals). We observed marginal evidence of associations between variants at
six loci (TCF7L2, NGN3, FOXA2, LOC646279, FLJ39370 and THADA) and waist hip ratio
(WHR), BMI and/or overweight which needs to be validated in larger set of
samples. All the above findings were independent of daily energy consumption and 
physical activity level. The risk score estimates based on eight significant loci
(including nominal associations) showed associations with WHR and body fat which 
were independent of BMI. In summary, we establish the role of T2D associated loci
in influencing the measures of obesity in Indian population, suggesting common
underlying pathophysiology across populations.

PMCID: PMC3547960
PMID: 23349771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jan 16;14:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-4.

Comprehensive meta-analysis of Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription
(STAT) genomic binding patterns discerns cell-specific cis-regulatory modules.

Kang K(1), Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 8 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892-0822, USA. kangk2@niddk.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Cytokine-activated transcription factors from the STAT (Signal
Transducers and Activators of Transcription) family control common and
context-specific genetic programs. It is not clear to what extent cell-specific
features determine the binding capacity of seven STAT members and to what degree 
they share genetic targets. Molecular insight into the biology of STATs was
gained from a meta-analysis of 29 available ChIP-seq data sets covering
genome-wide occupancy of STATs 1, 3, 4, 5A, 5B and 6 in several cell types.
RESULTS: We determined that the genomic binding capacity of STATs is primarily
defined by the cell type and to a lesser extent by individual family members. For
example, the overlap of shared binding sites between STATs 3 and 5 in T cells is 
greater than that between STAT5 in T cells and non-T cells. Even for the top
1,000 highly enriched STAT binding sites, ~15% of STAT5 binding sites in mouse
female liver are shared by other STATs in different cell types while in T cells
~90% of STAT5 binding sites are co-occupied by STAT3, STAT4 and STAT6. In
addition, we identified 116 cis-regulatory modules (CRM), which are recognized by
all STAT members across cell types defining a common JAK-STAT signature. Lastly, 
in liver STAT5 binding significantly coincides with binding of the cell-specific 
transcription factors HNF4A, FOXA1 and FOXA2 and is associated with cell-type
specific gene transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that genomic binding of STATs is primarily
determined by the cell type and further specificity is achieved in part by
juxtaposed binding of cell-specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3564941
PMID: 23324445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Cell Signal. 2013 Apr;25(4):867-74. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2012.12.012. Epub 2012
Dec 27.

Foxa2 may modulate hepatic apoptosis through the cIAP1 pathway.

Wang K(1), Brems JJ, Gamelli RL, Holterman AX.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Surgery, University of Illinois College of Medicine at Peoria, 
IL 61605, USA. kewang@uic.edu

Hepatocyte apoptosis is a ubiquitous feature of chronic liver injury, but the
molecular mechanism remains to be determined. The liver-enriched Foxa2
transcription factor has been implicated in inflammation and neoplasia. Foxa2 may
play a role in the regulation of apoptosis. This study aimed to investigate the
relationship between Foxa2 and hepatic apoptosis. Apoptosis was induced with
different causative factors as measured by caspase activity and TUNEL assay.
Results showed that the apoptotic injury was associated with a downregulation of 
Foxa2. Foxa2-expressing vectors decreased apoptosis, whereas siRNA silencing of
Foxa2 increased apoptosis in HepG2 cells. Foxa2 was correlated with expression
profiling of anti-apoptotic genes cIAP1, cIAP2, XIAP, and survivin.
Significantly, the cIAP1 expression was decreased by siRNA silencing of Foxa2,
but increased by Foxa2-expressing vectors. The promoter of cIAP1 had specific DNA
sequences that could be bound by Foxa2 nuclear protein as demonstrated by EMSA
and gel supershift assay. The cIAP1 promoter was also occupied by Foxa2 nuclear
factor through ChIP assay. Deletion of putative Foxa2 binding domains in cIAP1
promoter significantly reduced its promoter activity.CONCLUSION: A mechanism by
which Foxa2 transcription factor modulates hepatic apoptosis may be through cIAP1
signaling pathway. Foxa2 can be a potential target for therapeutic intervention
in liver diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23275033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biomed Rep. 2013 Jan;1(1):18-22. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

Single-step protocol for the differentiation of human-induced pluripotent stem
cells into hepatic progenitor-like cells.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F(2), Sugiyama T(3), Yamamoto S(4), Sueishi M(3),
Yoshida T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gastroenterology. (2)Radiology. (3)Rheumatology. (4)Pediatrics 
and. (5)Internal Medicine, National Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital,
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.

Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells are ideal sources of hepatocyte for
transplantation into patients experiencing hepatic failure. Growth and
transcription factors were analyzed to design a single-step protocol for the
differentiation of iPS cells into hepatocytes. The expression of transcription
factors was analyzed using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and compared among iPS cells, as well as fetal and adult liver cells.
iPS cells were cultured with growth factors and RT-PCR was performed to analyze
the expression of transcription factors. iPS cells were introduced with
transcription factors, cultured with growth factors and subjected to real-time
quantitative PCR. Indocyanine green (ICG) was added to the medium as a hepatocyte
marker. Sox17, GATA4, GATA6, FoxA2, HEX, HNF4a and C/EBPa were expressed in fetal
and adult liver cells, but not in iPS cells. Sox17, GATA6 and HNF4a were
expressed after exposure a combination of oncostatin M, epidermal growth factor, 
retinoic acid, dexamethasone and ITS (OERDITS). When iPS cells were introduced
with FoxA2, GATA4, HEX and C/EBPa and cultured with OERDITS for 8 days, the cells
expressed a-fetoprotein, d-like (Dlk)-1 and <U+03B3>-glutamyl transpeptidase (GTP), and 
ICG uptake was observed. Exposure to FoxA2, GATA4, HEX and C/EBPa and culturing
with OERDITS supplementation potentially serves as a single-step inducer for the 
differentiation of iPS cells into hepatic progenitor-like cells within 8 days.

PMCID: PMC3956730
PMID: 24648886  [PubMed]


249. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 8;288(6):3795-803. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.434282. Epub 2012 
Dec 26.

Characterization of an apparently novel ß-cell line-enriched 80-88 kDa
transcriptional activator of the MafA and Pdx1 genes.

Hunter CS(1), Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

MafA and Pdx1 represent critical transcriptional regulators required for the
maintenance of pancreatic islet ß-cell function. The in vivo ß-cell-enriched
expression pattern of these genes is principally directed by islet transcription 
factors binding within conserved Region 3 (base pairs (bp) -8118/-7750) of MafA
and Area II (bp -2153/-1923) of the Pdx1 gene. Comprehensive mutational analysis 
of conserved MafA Region 3 revealed two new ß-cell line-specific cis-activation
elements, termed Site 4 (bp -7997 to -7988) and Site 12 (bp -7835 to -7826). Gel 
mobility and antibody super-shift analysis identified Pdx1 as the Site 4 binding 
factor, while an 80-88 kilodalton (kDa) ß-cell line-enriched protein complex
bound Site 12 and similar aligned nucleotides within Pdx1 Area II. The 80-88 kDa 
activator was also found in adult mouse islet extract. Strikingly, the molecular 
weight, DNA binding, and antibody recognition properties of this activator were
unique when compared with all other key islet transcription factors tested,
including Prox1 (83 kDa), Hnf1a (67 kDa), FoxA2 (48 kDa), MafA (46 kDa), Isl1 (44
kDa), Pdx1 (42 kDa), and Nkx2.2 (30 kDa). Collectively, these data define an
apparently novel MafA Region 3 and Pdx1 Area II activator contributing to
expression in ß-cells.

PMCID: PMC3567634
PMID: 23269676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cell. 2012 Dec 21;151(7):1608-16. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.11.018.

Foxa2 and H2A.Z mediate nucleosome depletion during embryonic stem cell
differentiation.

Li Z(1), Gadue P, Chen K, Jiao Y, Tuteja G, Schug J, Li W, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Feb 7;12(2):143-4.

Nucleosome occupancy is fundamental for establishing chromatin architecture.
However, little is known about the relationship between nucleosome dynamics and
initial cell lineage specification. Here, we determine the mechanisms that
control global nucleosome dynamics during embryonic stem (ES) cell
differentiation into endoderm. Both nucleosome depletion and de novo occupation
occur during the differentiation process, with higher overall nucleosome density 
after differentiation. The variant histone H2A.Z and the winged helix
transcription factor Foxa2 both act to regulate nucleosome depletion and gene
activation, thus promoting ES cell differentiation, whereas DNA methylation
promotes nucleosome occupation and suppresses gene expression. Nucleosome
depletion during ES cell differentiation is dependent on Nap1l1-coupled SWI/SNF
and INO80 chromatin remodeling complexes. Thus, both epigenetic and genetic
regulators cooperate to control nucleosome dynamics during ES cell fate
decisions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3530164
PMID: 23260146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 May 15;22(10):1576-87. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0148. Epub 2013
Feb 27.

Stepwise differentiation of human adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells toward
definitive endoderm and pancreatic progenitor cells by mimicking pancreatic
development in vivo.

Li J(1), Zhu L, Qu X, Li J, Lin R, Liao L, Wang J, Wang S, Xu Q, Zhao RC.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Tissue Engineering, Department of Cell Biology,
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union
Medical College Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Pancreatic progenitor (PP) cells are tissue-committed cells, which can
differentiate into all kinds of pancreatic cells. They are potential candidates
for regeneration of pancreatic tissue. However, it is unfeasible to acquire PP
cells from pancreatic tissues and expand them in vitro. Generation of PP cells
from adipose tissue-derived mesenchymal stem cells (AD-MSCs) would provide an
unlimited source of PP cells. Here we developed a 2-step stepwise protocol, which
induced AD-MSCs to generate FOXA2- or SOX17-positive definitive endoderm (DE) (5 
days) and pancreatic and duodenal homeobox gene 1 (PDX1)-positive PP cells (4-6
days). By mimicking the developmental progress in embryonic development, we
optimized the timing and combination of cytokines to activate the key signaling
pathways during pancreatic development. We found that activating the
Nodal/Activin signal with Activin A could induce differentiation of AD-MSCs
toward DE, which could be further promoted by the Wnt signaling pathway activator
Wnt3a. Besides, transient T (BRACHYURY)(+) mesendodermal cells were observed
during formation of DE from AD-MSCs. Subsequently, the Wnt signaling pathway
inhibitor Dkk1 along with retinoic acid/FGF2 (60<U+2009>ng/mL) further induced
AD-MSC-derived DE cells to differentiate into PDX1-positive PP cells. The derived
PP cells were capable to form pancreatic endocrine or exocrine cells. In
conclusion, we established a stepwise protocol that could derive DE and PP cells 
from AD-MSCs. It might provide an unlimited source of autologous PP cells for
pancreatic diseases.

PMID: 23259909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 May 1;22(9):1433-42. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0620. Epub 2013
Feb 19.

NKX2-1 activation by SMAD2 signaling after definitive endoderm differentiation in
human embryonic stem cell.

Li Y(1), Eggermont K, Vanslembrouck V, Verfaillie CM.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmentaal Stamcelinstituut, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.

Expression of NKX2-1 is required to specify definitive endoderm to respiratory
endoderm. However, the transcriptional regulation of NKX2-1 is not fully
understood. Here we demonstrate that aside from specifying undifferentiated human
embryonic stem cell (hESC) to definitive endoderm, high concentrations of
Activin-A are also necessary and sufficient to induce hESC-derived definitive
endodermal progeny to a FOXA2/NKX2-1/GATA6/PAX9 positive respiratory epithelial
fate. Activin-A directly mediates the induction of NKX2-1 by interacting with
ALK4, leading to phosphorylation of SMAD2, which binds directly to the NKX2-1
promoter and activates its expression. Activin-A can be replaced by GDF11 but not
transforming growth factor ß1. Addition of Wnt3a, SHH, FGF2, or BMP4 failed to
induce NKX2-1. These results suggest that direct binding of Activin-A-responsive 
SMAD2 to the NKX2-1 promoter plays essential role during respiratory endoderm
specification.

PMCID: PMC3629846
PMID: 23259454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Mol Neurosci. 2013 Sep;51(1):13-27. doi: 10.1007/s12031-012-9939-6. Epub 2012
Dec 21.

Nato3 integrates with the Shh-Foxa2 transcriptional network regulating the
differentiation of midbrain dopaminergic neurons.

Nissim-Eliraz E(1), Zisman S, Schatz O, Ben-Arie N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Life Sciences, The 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel.

Mesencephalic dopaminergic (mesDA) neurons originate from the floor plate of the 
midbrain, a transient embryonic organizing center located at the ventral-most
midline. Since the loss of mesDA leads to Parkinson's disease, the molecular
mechanisms controlling the genesis and differentiation of dopaminergic
progenitors are extensively studied and the identification and characterization
of new genes is of interest. Here, we show that the expression of the basic
helix-loop-helix transcription factor Nato3 (Ferd3l) increases in parallel to the
differentiation of SN4741 dopaminergic cells in vitro. Nato3 transcription is
directly regulated by the transcription factor Foxa2, a target and effector of
the Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling cascade. Moreover, pharmacological inhibition 
of Shh signaling downregulated the expression of Nato3, thus defining Nato3 as a 
novel component of one of the major pathways controlling cell patterning and
generation of mesDA. Furthermore, we show that Nato3 regulated Shh and Foxa2
through a novel feed-backward loop. Up- and downregulation of Nato3 further
affected the transcription of Nurr1, implicated in the genesis of mesDA, but not 
of TH. Taken together, these data shed new light on the transcriptional networks 
controlling the generation of mesDA and may be utilized in the efforts to direct 
stem cells towards a dopaminergic fate.

PMID: 23254923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 May 1;22(9):1419-32. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0453. Epub 2013
Feb 1.

Treatment of human embryonic stem cells with different combinations of priming
and inducing factors toward definitive endoderm.

Tahamtani Y(1), Azarnia M, Farrokhi A, Sharifi-Zarchi A, Aghdami N, Baharvand H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Kharazmi University, Tehran, Iran.

Despite the enormous progress in studying definitive endoderm (DE)
differentiation from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), none of the reported
protocols have produced a universal, cost-effective, and competent DE with the
capability to further differentiate into endodermal derivatives. In this study,
by using a 2-step differentiation strategy, we have treated hESCs for 1 day with 
"priming" small molecules (SM), [stauprimide, NSC-308848, rapamycin (Rapa),
and/or CHIR] and for the next 3 days with "inducing" SM (LY294002, cymarin, IDE1,
and/or IDE2) in conjunction with activin A. In the positive control group, we
treated hESCs with Wnt3a (25<U+2009>ng/mL) for 1 day and activin A (100<U+2009>ng/mL;
W/A100-A100) for the next 3 days. Gene expression analysis showed that treatment 
of hESCs with 100<U+2009>nM Rapa and 50<U+2009>ng/mL activin A (Rapa-A50) out of 25
combinations of factors gave rise to higher expressions of 2 DE-specific genes,
SOX17 and FOXA2. Similar results were obtained after treating 2 other hESC lines 
with this regimen. To investigate the competency of Rapa-A50-induced DE for
further differentiation into endodermal derivatives, these cells and
W/A100-A100-induced DE cells (positive control) were further differentiated into 
pancreatic progenitors (PP), then into pancreatic endocrine (PE) cells using 5
previously described differentiation protocols. Gene analysis of differentiated
cells showed that the established protocols were insufficient to enable universal
differentiation into PE, whereas Rapa-A50-induced DE cells were more competent
for PP differentiation in a protocol-dependent manner. Additionally,
Rapa-A50-induced DE had the capability to differentiate into hepatocyte-like
cells (HLCs) as efficiently as W/A100-A100-induced DE. These data have indicated 
that hESCs primed with Rapa, and induced by a lower concentration of activin A,
could lead to DE that had the capability to further differentiate into HLCs and
PP cells, but not PE cells. Thus, current protocols for the differentiation of DE
into PE still need additional study.

PMID: 23249309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Diabetologia. 2013 Mar;56(3):542-52. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2797-5. Epub 2012
Dec 14.

Identification and analysis of murine pancreatic islet enhancers.

Tennant BR(1), Robertson AG, Kramer M, Li L, Zhang X, Beach M, Thiessen N, Chiu
R, Mungall K, Whiting CJ, Sabatini PV, Kim A, Gottardo R, Marra MA, Lynn FC,
Jones SJ, Hoodless PA, Hoffman BG.

Author information: 
(1)Child and Family Research Institute, British Columbia Children's Hospital and 
Sunny Hill Health Centre, Room A4-185, 950 W28th Avenue, Vancouver, BC, Canada
V5Z 4H4.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The paucity of information on the epigenetic barriers that are
blocking reprogramming protocols, and on what makes a beta cell unique, has
hampered efforts to develop novel beta cell sources. Here, we aimed to identify
enhancers in pancreatic islets, to understand their developmental ontologies, and
to identify enhancers unique to islets to increase our understanding of
islet-specific gene expression.
METHODS: We combined H3K4me1-based nucleosome predictions with pancreatic and
duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1), neurogenic differentiation 1 (NEUROD1), v-Maf
musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene family, protein A (MAFA) and forkhead
box A2 (FOXA2) occupancy data to identify enhancers in mouse islets.
RESULTS: We identified 22,223 putative enhancer loci in in vivo mouse islets. Our
validation experiments suggest that nearly half of these loci are active in
regulating islet gene expression, with the remaining regions probably poised for 
activity. We showed that these loci have at least nine developmental ontologies, 
and that islet enhancers predominately acquire H3K4me1 during differentiation. We
next discriminated 1,799 enhancers unique to islets and showed that these
islet-specific enhancers have reduced association with annotated genes, and
identified a subset that are instead associated with novel islet-specific long
non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATIONS: Our results indicate that genes with islet-specific 
expression and function tend to have enhancers devoid of histone methylation
marks or, less often, that are bivalent or repressed, in embryonic stem cells and
liver. Further, we identify a subset of enhancers unique to islets that are
associated with novel islet-specific genes and lncRNAs. We anticipate that these 
data will facilitate the development of novel sources of functional beta cell
mass.

PMCID: PMC4773896
PMID: 23238790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051501. Epub 2012 Dec 7.

The transcription factor Myt3 acts as a pro-survival factor in ß-cells.

Tennant BR(1), Islam R, Kramer MM, Merkulova Y, Kiang RL, Whiting CJ, Hoffman BG.

Author information: 
(1)Child and Family Research Institute, British Columbia Children's Hospital and 
Sunny Hill Health Centre, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We previously identified the transcription factor Myt3 as
specifically expressed in pancreatic islets. Here, we sought to determine the
expression and regulation of Myt3 in islets and to determine its significance in 
regulating islet function and survival.
METHODS: Myt3 expression was determined in embryonic pancreas and adult islets by
qPCR and immunohistochemistry. ChIP-seq, ChIP-qPCR and luciferase assays were
used to evaluate regulation of Myt3 expression. Suppression of Myt3 was used to
evaluate gene expression, insulin secretion and apoptosis in islets.
RESULTS: We show that Myt3 is the most abundant MYT family member in adult islets
and that it is expressed in all the major endocrine cell types in the pancreas
after E18.5. We demonstrate that Myt3 expression is directly regulated by Foxa2, 
Pdx1, and Neurod1, which are critical to normal ß-cell development and function, 
and that Ngn3 induces Myt3 expression through alterations in the Myt3 promoter
chromatin state. Further, we show that Myt3 expression is sensitive to both
glucose and cytokine exposure. Of specific interest, suppressing Myt3 expression 
reduces insulin content and increases ß-cell apoptosis, at least in part, due to 
reduced Pdx1, Mafa, Il-6, Bcl-xl, c-Iap2 and Igfr1 levels, while over-expression 
of Myt3 protects islets from cytokine induced apoptosis.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: We have identified Myt3 as a novel transcriptional
regulator with a critical role in ß-cell survival. These data are an important
step in clarifying the regulatory networks responsible for ß-cell survival, and
point to Myt3 as a potential therapeutic target for improving functional ß-cell
mass.

PMCID: PMC3517555
PMID: 23236509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51082. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051082. Epub 2012 Dec 7.

Fat mass and obesity associated gene (FTO) expression is regulated negatively by 
the transcription factor Foxa2.

Guo J(1), Ren W, Ding Y, Li A, Jia L, Su D, Liu X, Xu K, Yang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China.

Fat mass and obesity associated gene (FTO) is the first gene associated with body
mass index (BMI) and risk for diabetes. FTO is highly expressed in the brain and 
pancreas, and is involved in regulating dietary intake and energy expenditure. To
investigate the transcriptional regulation of FTO expression, we created
5'-deletion constructs of the FTO promoter to determine which transcription
factors are most relevant to FTO expression. The presence of an activation region
at -201/+34 was confirmed by luciferase activity analysis. A potential Foxa2
(called HNF-3ß) binding site and an upstream stimulatory factor (USF)-binding
site was identified in the -100 bp fragment upstream of the transcription start
site (TSS). Furthermore, using mutagenesis, we identified the Foxa2 binding
sequence (-26/-14) as a negative regulatory element to the activity of the human 
FTO promoter. The USF binding site did not affect the FTO promoter activity.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays were performed to confirm Foxa2
binding to the FTO promoter. Overexpression of Foxa2 in HEK 293 cells
significantly down-regulated FTO promoter activity and expression. Conversely,
knockdown of Foxa2 by siRNA significantly up-regulated FTO expression. These
findings suggest that Foxa2 negatively regulates the basal transcription and
expression of the human FTO gene.

PMCID: PMC3517585
PMID: 23236435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Biol Open. 2012 Jul 15;1(7):677-91. doi: 10.1242/bio.20121701. Epub 2012 May 29.

The loss of Hoxa5 function promotes Notch-dependent goblet cell metaplasia in
lung airways.

Boucherat O(1), Chakir J, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec , L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, 9 rue McMahon, Québec QC G1R
2J6 , Canada.

Hox genes encode transcription factors controlling complex developmental
processes in various organs. Little is known, however, about how HOX proteins
control cell fate. Herein, we demonstrate that the goblet cell metaplasia
observed in lung airways from Hoxa5(-/-) mice originates from the
transdifferentiation of Clara cells. Reduced CC10 expression in Hoxa5(-/-)
embryos indicates that altered cell specification occurs prior to birth. The loss
of Hoxa5 function does not preclude airway repair after naphthalene exposure, but
the regenerated epithelium presents goblet cell metaplasia and less CC10-positive
cells, demonstrating the essential role of Hoxa5 for correct differentiation.
Goblet cell metaplasia in Hoxa5(-/-) mice is a FOXA2-independent process.
However, it is associated with increased Notch signaling activity. Consistent
with these findings, expression levels of activated NOTCH1 and the effector gene 
HEY2 are enhanced in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In vivo
administration of a <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor attenuates goblet cell metaplasia in
Hoxa5(-/-) mice, highlighting the contribution of Notch signaling to the
phenotype and suggesting a potential therapeutic strategy to inhibit goblet cell 
differentiation and mucus overproduction in airway diseases. In summary, the loss
of Hoxa5 function in lung mesenchyme impacts on epithelial cell fate by
modulating Notch signaling.

PMCID: PMC3507293
PMID: 23213461  [PubMed]


259. Biol Open. 2012 Mar 15;1(3):173-81. doi: 10.1242/bio.2012040. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

Foxa2 mediates critical functions of prechordal plate in patterning and
morphogenesis and is cell autonomously required for early ventral endoderm
morphogenesis.

Harrelson Z(1), Kaestner KH, Evans SM.

Author information: 
(1)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of
California San Diego , 9500 Gilman Drive MC0613C, La Jolla, CA 92093 , USA.

Axial mesendoderm is comprised of prechordal plate and notochord. Lack of a
suitable Cre driver has hampered the ability to genetically dissect the
requirement for each of these components, or genes expressed within them, to
anterior patterning. Here, we have utilized Isl1-Cre to investigate roles of the 
winged helix transcription factor Foxa2 specifically in prechordal plate and
ventral endoderm. Foxa2(loxP/loxP); Isl1-Cre mutants died at 13.5 dpc, exhibiting
aberrations in anterior neural tube and forebrain patterning, and in ventral
foregut morphogenesis and cardiac fusion. Molecular analysis of Foxa2(loxP/loxP);
Isl1-Cre mutants indicated that Foxa2 is required in Isl1 lineages for expression
of notochord and dorsal foregut endoderm markers, Shh. Brachyury, and Hlxb9. Our 
results support a requirement for Foxa2 in prechordal plate for notochord
morphogenesis, axial patterning, and patterning of dorsal foregut endoderm. Loss 
of Foxa2 in ventral endoderm resulted in reduced expression of Sox17, Gata4, and 
ZO proteins, accounting at least in part for observed lack of foregut fusion,
cardia bifida, and increased apoptosis of ventral endoderm.

PMCID: PMC3507292
PMID: 23213408  [PubMed]


260. Mol Ther. 2013 Jan;21(1):228-39. doi: 10.1038/mt.2012.245. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Intrapatient variations in type 1 diabetes-specific iPS cell differentiation into
insulin-producing cells.

Thatava T(1), Kudva YC, Edukulla R, Squillace K, De Lamo JG, Khan YK, Sakuma T,
Ohmine S, Terzic A, Ikeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota 55905, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Ther. 2013 Jan;21(1):5-7.

Nuclear reprogramming of adult somatic tissue enables embryo-independent
generation of autologous, patient-specific induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells. 
Exploiting this emergent regenerative platform for individualized medicine
applications requires the establishment of bioequivalence criteria across derived
pluripotent lines and lineage-specified derivatives. Here, from individual
patients with type 1 diabetes (T1D) multiple human iPS clones were produced and
prospectively screened using a battery of developmental markers to assess
respective differentiation propensity and proficiency in yielding functional
insulin (INS)-producing progeny. Global gene expression profiles, pluripotency
expression patterns, and the capacity to differentiate into SOX17- and
FOXA2-positive definitive endoderm (DE)-like cells were comparable among
individual iPS clones. However, notable intrapatient variation was evident upon
further guided differentiation into HNF4a- and HNF1ß-expressing primitive gut
tube, and INS- and glucagon (GCG)-expressing islet-like cells. Differential
dynamics of pluripotency-associated genes and pancreatic lineage-specifying genes
underlined clonal variance. Successful generation of glucose-responsive
INS-producing cells required silencing of stemness programs as well as the
induction of stage-specific pancreatic transcription factors. Thus, comprehensive
fingerprinting of individual clones is mandatory to secure homogenous pools
amenable for diagnostic and therapeutic applications of iPS cells from patients
with T1D.

PMCID: PMC3538320
PMID: 23183535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Curr Protoc Stem Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;Chapter 1:Unit 1F.13. doi:
10.1002/9780470151808.sc01f13s23.

Serum-free generation of multipotent mesoderm (Kdr+) progenitor cells in mouse
embryonic stem cells for functional genomics screening.

McKeithan WL(1), Colas AR, Bushway PJ, Ray S, Mercola M.

Author information: 
(1)Sanford Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

This unit describes a robust protocol for producing multipotent Kdr-expressing
mesoderm progenitor cells in serum-free conditions, and for functional genomics
screening using these cells. Kdr-positive cells are able to differentiate into a 
wide array of mesodermal derivatives, including vascular endothelial cells,
cardiomyocytes, hematopoietic progenitors, and smooth muscle cells. The efficient
generation of such progenitor cells is of particular interest because it permits 
subsequent steps in cardiovascular development to be analyzed in detail,
including deciphering the mechanisms that direct differentiation. In addition,
the oligonucleotide transfection protocol used to functionally screen siRNA and
miRNA libraries is a powerful tool to reveal networks of genes, signaling
proteins, and miRNAs that control the diversification of cardiovascular lineages 
from multipotent progenitors. Technical limitations, troubleshooting, and
potential applications of these methods are discussed.

PMCID: PMC3562707
PMID: 23154934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Stem Cells. 2013 Jan;31(1):71-82. doi: 10.1002/stem.1272.

Gata4 blocks somatic cell reprogramming by directly repressing Nanog.

Serrano F(1), Calatayud CF, Blazquez M, Torres J, Castell JV, Bort R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología Experimental, CIBERehd, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria La Fe, Valencia, Spain.

Somatic cells can be reprogrammed to induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells by
ectopic expression of the four factors Oct4, Klf4, Sox2, and Myc. Here, we
investigated the role of Gata4 in the reprogramming process and present evidence 
for a negative role of this family of transcription factors in the induction of
pluripotency. Coexpression of Gata4 with Oct4, Klf4, and Sox2 with or without Myc
in mouse embryonic fibroblasts greatly impaired reprogramming and endogenous
Nanog expression. The lack of Nanog upregulation was associated with a blockade
in the transition from the initiation phase of reprogramming to the full
pluripotent state characteristic of iPS cells. Addition of Nanog to the
reprogramming cocktail blocked the deleterious effects observed with Gata4
expression. Downregulation of endogenous Gata4 by short hairpin RNAs during
reprogramming both accelerated and increased the efficiency of the process and
augmented the mRNA levels of endogenous Nanog. Using comparative genomics, we
identified a consensus binding site for Gata factors in an evolutionary conserved
region located 9 kb upstream of the Nanog gene. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation, gel retardation, and luciferase assays, we found that Gata4 
bound to this region and inhibited Nanog transcription in mouse embryonic stem
cells. Overall, our results describe for first time the negative effect of Gata4 
in the reprogramming of somatic cells and highlight the role of Gata factors in
the transcriptional networks that control cell lineage choices in the early
embryo.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23132827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48019. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048019. Epub 2012 Oct 31.

Forkhead box protein A2 (FOXA2) protein stability and activity are regulated by
sumoylation.

Belaguli NS(1), Zhang M, Brunicardi FC, Berger DH.

Author information: 
(1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, USA. elaguli@bcm.edu

The forkhead box protein A2 (FOXA2) is an important regulator of glucose and
lipid metabolism and organismal energy balance. Little is known about how FOXA2
protein expression and activity are regulated by post-translational
modifications. We have identified that FOXA2 is post-translationally modified by 
covalent attachment of a small ubiquitin related modifier-1 (SUMO-1) and mapped
the sumoylation site to the amino acid lysine 6 (K6). Preventing sumoylation by
mutating the SUMO acceptor K6 to arginine resulted in downregulation of FOXA2
protein but not RNA expression in INS-1E insulinoma cells. K6R mutation also
downregulated FOXA2 protein levels in HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells,
HCT116 colon cancer cells and LNCaP and DU145 prostate cancer cells. Further,
interfering with FOXA2 sumoylation through siRNA mediated knockdown of UBC9, an
essential SUMO E2 conjugase, resulted in downregulation of FOXA2 protein levels. 
Stability of sumoylation deficient FOXA2K6R mutant protein was restored when
SUMO-1 was fused in-frame. FOXA2 sumoylation and FOXA2 protein levels were
increased by PIAS1 SUMO ligase but not a SUMO ligase activity deficient PIAS1
mutant. Although expressed at lower levels, sumoylation deficient FOXA2K6R mutant
protein was detectable in the nucleus indicating that FOXA2 nuclear localization 
is independent of sumoylation. Sumoylation increased the transcriptional activity
of FOXA2 on Pdx-1 area I enhancer. Together, our results show that sumoylation
regulates FOXA2 protein expression and activity.

PMCID: PMC3485284
PMID: 23118920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e47785. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0047785. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

A novel mammal-specific three partite enhancer element regulates node and
notochord-specific Noto expression.

Alten L(1), Schuster-Gossler K, Eichenlaub MP, Wittbrodt B, Wittbrodt J, Gossler 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Germany.

The vertebrate organizer and notochord have conserved, essential functions for
embryonic development and patterning. The restricted expression of developmental 
regulators in these tissues is directed by specific cis-regulatory modules (CRMs)
whose sequence conservation varies considerably. Some CRMs have been conserved
throughout vertebrates and likely represent ancestral regulatory networks, while 
others have diverged beyond recognition but still function over a wide
evolutionary range. Here we identify and characterize a mammalian-specific CRM
required for node and notochord specific (NNC) expression of NOTO, a
transcription factor essential for node morphogenesis, nodal cilia movement and
establishment of laterality in mouse. A 523 bp enhancer region (NOCE) upstream
the Noto promoter was necessary and sufficient for NNC expression from the
endogenous Noto locus. Three subregions in NOCE together mediated full activity
in vivo. Binding sites for known transcription factors in NOCE were functional in
vitro but dispensable for NOCE activity in vivo. A FOXA2 site in combination with
a novel motif was necessary for NOCE activity in vivo. Strikingly, syntenic
regions in non-mammalian vertebrates showed no recognizable sequence
similarities. In contrast to its activity in mouse NOCE did not drive NNC
expression in transgenic fish. NOCE represents a novel, mammal-specific CRM
required for the highly restricted Noto expression in the node and nascent
notochord and thus regulates normal node development and function.

PMCID: PMC3478275
PMID: 23110100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Tissue Eng Regen Med. 2014 Nov;8(11):886-95. doi: 10.1002/term.1595. Epub 2012 
Oct 22.

Hepatic differentiation of human embryonic stem cells on growth factor-containing
surfaces.

Ghaedi M(1), Duan Y, Zern MA, Revzin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of California at Davis, CA,
USA; National Institute for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (NIGEB),
Tehran, Iran.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) hold considerable promise in tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine as a source of tissue-specific cells. Hepatocytes derived
from ESCs will be useful for therapies, bioartificial liver assistance devices
and drug discovery. In traditional stem cell cultivation/differentiation
experiments, growth factors (GFs) are added in soluble form in order to provide
signals for tissue-specific differentiation. In contrast, we investigated
differentiation of hESCs cultured on top of GFs. In these experiments, glass
substrates were imprinted with a mixture of ECM and GF molecules to form 500<U+2009>µm
diameter spots. hESCs were cultured onto these GF-containing ECM spots for up to 
12<U+2009>days to induce differentiation towards the hepatic lineage. The dynamics of
differentiation were examined by quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase
chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and immunocytochemistry. Stem cells cultured on
GF-containing surfaces stained positive for the endoderm markers SOX17 and FOXA2,
as well as early liver markers such as a-fetoprotein and albumin. qRT-PCR
confirmed that pluripotency, endoderm and liver gene expression of hESCs cultured
on GF-containing surfaces was consistent with hepatic differentiation. In
comparison, hESCs cultured on ECM spots without GFs showed less pronounced loss
of pluripotency and lower levels of liver gene expression. In summary, our study 
demonstrates that hESCs receive differentiation-inducing signals from
GF-containing surfaces and may be pushed along the hepatic lineage when cultured 
on such surfaces. Compared to traditional approaches, the advantages of GF
immobilization include reduction in the cost of experiments, stronger and longer 
stimulation and the possibility of screening GF-stem cell interactions in a
multiplexed manner.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23086797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(10):e1002999. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002999. Epub 2012 Oct
11.

Cdon mutation and fetal ethanol exposure synergize to produce midline signaling
defects and holoprosencephaly spectrum disorders in mice.

Hong M(1), Krauss RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is a remarkably common congenital anomaly characterized
by failure to define the midline of the forebrain and midface. HPE is associated 
with heterozygous mutations in Sonic hedgehog (SHH) pathway components, but
clinical presentation is extremely variable and many mutation carriers are
unaffected. It has been proposed that these observations are best explained by a 
multiple-hit model, in which the penetrance and expressivity of an HPE mutation
is enhanced by a second mutation or the presence of cooperating, but otherwise
silent, modifier genes. Non-genetic risk factors are also implicated in HPE, and 
gene-environment interactions may provide an alternative multiple-hit model to
purely genetic multiple-hit models; however, there is little evidence for this
contention. We report here a mouse model in which there is dramatic synergy
between mutation of a bona fide HPE gene (Cdon, which encodes a SHH co-receptor) 
and a suspected HPE teratogen, ethanol. Loss of Cdon and in utero ethanol
exposure in 129S6 mice give little or no phenotype individually, but together
produce defects in early midline patterning, inhibition of SHH signaling in the
developing forebrain, and a broad spectrum of HPE phenotypes. Our findings argue 
that ethanol is indeed a risk factor for HPE, but genetically predisposed
individuals, such as those with SHH pathway mutations, may be particularly
susceptible. Furthermore, gene-environment interactions are likely to be
important in the multifactorial etiology of HPE.

PMCID: PMC3469434
PMID: 23071453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Cell Res. 2013 Jan;23(1):157-61. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.144. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Promotion of the efficient metabolic maturation of human pluripotent stem
cell-derived hepatocytes by correcting specification defects.

Zhao D, Chen S, Duo S, Xiang C, Jia J, Guo M, Lai W, Lu S, Deng H.

PMCID: PMC3541654
PMID: 23070301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Prostate. 2013 May;73(6):582-9. doi: 10.1002/pros.22598. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Mash1 expression is induced in neuroendocrine prostate cancer upon the loss of
Foxa2.

Gupta A(1), Yu X, Case T, Paul M, Shen MM, Kaestner KH, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Stanford
University, Stanford, California, USA.

Neuroendocrine (NE) prostate tumors and neuroendocrine differentiation (NED) in
prostatic adenocarcinomas have been associated with poor prognosis. In this
study, we used the TRAMP mouse model that develops NE prostate tumors to identify
key factors that can lead to NED. We have previously reported that NE tumors
express the forkhead transcription factor, Foxa2, Mash1 (mouse achaete scute
homolog-1), as well as Synaptophysin. In TRAMP, the prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PIN) first expresses Foxa2 and Synaptophysin, which then progresses to
NE cancer. In order to determine if Foxa2 is dispensable for development or
maintenance of NE cancer, a conditional knock-out of Foxa2 in TRAMP mice was
generated by breeding mice with two floxed alleles of Foxa2 and one copy of
Nkx3.1-Cre. Nkx3.1-Cre/Foxa2(loxP/loxP) mice showed loss of Foxa2 expression in
embryonic prostatic buds. No expression of Foxa2 was seen in the adult prostate
in either conditional null or control mice. Foxa2 is universally expressed in all
wild type TRAMP NE tumors, but Mash1 expression is seen only in a few samples in 
a few cells. With the loss of Foxa2 in the NE tumors of the
TRAMP/Nkx3.1-Cre/Foxa2(loxP/loxP) mice, the expression of the pro-neuronal gene
Mash1 is upregulated. NE tumors from both the TRAMP control and Foxa2-deficient
TRAMP prostate express Synaptophysin and SV40 Large T-antigen, and both show a
loss of androgen receptor expression in NE cells. These studies suggest that the 
TRAMP NE tumors can form in the absence of Foxa2 by an up regulation of Mash1.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3714015
PMID: 23060003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Feb;131(2):447-57. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs293. Epub 2012 Oct 5.

Establishment of a molecular embryonic stem cell developmental toxicity assay.

Panzica-Kelly JM(1), Brannen KC, Ma Y, Zhang CX, Flint OP, Lehman-McKeeman LD,
Augustine-Rauch KA.

Author information: 
(1)Discovery Toxicology, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Pennington, NJ 08534, USA.
julie.panzica@bms.com

The mouse embryonic stem cell test (EST) is a 10-day screen for teratogenic
potential developed to reduce animal use for embryotoxicity testing of chemicals 
(Spielmann, 2005; Spielmann et al., 1997). In this study, we used the
cytotoxicity IC(50) values and transcriptional expression changes as primary
endpoints in a shorter 4-day version of the EST, the molecular embryonic stem
cell assay. Mouse D3 embryonic stem cells were used for cytotoxicity assessment
(monolayers) or grown as embryoid bodies in low attachment plates for
transcriptional profiling. Sixty-five compounds with known in vivo teratogenicity
(33 teratogens and 32 nonteratogens) were evaluated to develop a model for
classifying compounds with teratogenic potential. The expression of 12
developmentally regulated gene targets (nanog, fgf5, gsc, cd34, axin2, apln,
chst7, lhx1, fgf8, sox17, foxa2, and cxcr4) was measured following exposure of
embryoid bodies to a single compound concentration (0.1 × the cytotoxicity
IC(20)) for 4 days. In the decision-tree model, compounds with IC(50) values < 22
µM were categorized as teratogens, whereas compounds in the two groups with
IC(50) values between 22-200 µM and > 200 µM were categorized as teratogens if = 
8 and 12 genes, respectively, were deregulated by at least 10%. Forty-seven of 65
compounds of the training set were correctly identified (72% total concordance). 
In a test set of 12 additional compounds (5 teratogens, 7 nonteratogens), 10 were
correctly classified by this approach (83% concordance). The false positive rate 
in the training and test sets was 24 and 0%, respectively, indicating that this
assay has potential to identify teratogens.

PMID: 23042729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Genome Res. 2013 Feb;23(2):352-64. doi: 10.1101/gr.144949.112. Epub 2012 Oct 2.

Spatiotemporal clustering of the epigenome reveals rules of dynamic gene
regulation.

Yu P(1), Xiao S, Xin X, Song CX, Huang W, McDee D, Tanaka T, Wang T, He C, Zhong 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, California 
92093, USA.

Erratum in
    Genome Res. 2013 Apr;23(4):747.

Spatial organization of different epigenomic marks was used to infer functions of
the epigenome. It remains unclear what can be learned from the temporal changes
of the epigenome. Here, we developed a probabilistic model to cluster genomic
sequences based on the similarity of temporal changes of multiple epigenomic
marks during a cellular differentiation process. We differentiated mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells into mesendoderm cells. At three time points during
this differentiation process, we used high-throughput sequencing to measure seven
histone modifications and variants--H3K4me1/2/3, H3K27ac, H3K27me3, H3K36me3, and
H2A.Z; two DNA modifications--5-mC and 5-hmC; and transcribed mRNAs and noncoding
RNAs (ncRNAs). Genomic sequences were clustered based on the spatiotemporal
epigenomic information. These clusters not only clearly distinguished gene
bodies, promoters, and enhancers, but also were predictive of bidirectional
promoters, miRNA promoters, and piRNAs. This suggests specific epigenomic
patterns exist on piRNA genes much earlier than germ cell development. Temporal
changes of H3K4me2, unmethylated CpG, and H2A.Z were predictive of 5-hmC changes,
suggesting unmethylated CpG and H3K4me2 as potential upstream signals guiding
TETs to specific sequences. Several rules on combinatorial epigenomic changes and
their effects on mRNA expression and ncRNA expression were derived, including a
simple rule governing the relationship between 5-hmC and gene expression levels. 
A Sox17 enhancer containing a FOXA2 binding site and a Foxa2 enhancer containing 
a SOX17 binding site were identified, suggesting a positive feedback loop between
the two mesendoderm transcription factors. These data illustrate the power of
using epigenome dynamics to investigate regulatory functions.

PMCID: PMC3561876
PMID: 23033340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cell Transplant. 2013;22(6):1053-60. doi: 10.3727/096368912X657215. Epub 2012 Oct
1.

Differentiation of human adipose tissue-derived stem cells into aggregates of
insulin-producing cells through the overexpression of pancreatic and duodenal
homeobox gene-1.

Lee J(1), Kim SC, Kim SJ, Lee H, Jung EJ, Jung SH, Han DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology and Cell Therapy, Asan Institute for Life
Sciences, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

The pancreatic and duodenal homeobox gene 1 (Pdx-1) plays a key role in normal
pancreas development and is required for maintaining the normal function of
islets. In this study, we examined whether human adipose tissue-derived stem
cells (hASCs) could differentiate into insulin-producing cells by exogenously
expressed Pdx-1. hASCs were infected with recombinant adenovirus encoding the
mouse Pdx-1 gene and differentiated under high-glucose conditions. Insulin
transcript levels and the expression of key transcription factors required for
pancreatic development including FoxA2, Nkx2.2, and NeuroD were significantly
increased by exogenous Pdx-1 overexpression. The expression of Nkx6.1 was found
only in Pdx-1-induced hASCs. In addition to transcripts for transcription factors
involved in pancreatic development, transcripts for the GLP-1 receptor,
glucokinase, and glucose transporter, which are required for maintaining the
function of pancreatic ß-cells, were observed only in Pdx-1-induced hASCs.
Pdx-1-induced hASCs exhibited insulin secretion in response to glucose challenge 
in vitro. When Pdx-1-induced hASCs were transplanted into streptozotocin
(STZ)-induced diabetic mice, they reduced blood glucose levels, although they did
not restore normoglycemia. These results demonstrate that the expression of
exogenous Pdx-1 is sufficient to induce pancreatic differentiation in vitro but
does not induce the fully functional, mature insulin-producing cells that are
required for restoring normoglycemia in vivo.

PMID: 23031216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Nutr. 2012 Nov;142(11):1975-82. doi: 10.3945/jn.112.164764. Epub 2012 Sep 26.

Dietary selenium deficiency partially rescues type 2 diabetes-like phenotypes of 
glutathione peroxidase-1-overexpressing male mice.

Yan X(1), Pepper MP, Vatamaniuk MZ, Roneker CA, Li L, Lei XG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA.

This study was conducted to determine whether dietary Se deficiency precluded
overproduction of glutathione peroxidase-1 (GPX1) activity in mice overexpressing
(OE) this gene and thus rescued their type 2 diabetes-like phenotypes. A total of
20 male OE and wild-type (WT) mice were fed an Se-deficient (<0.02 mg/kg) diet or
an Se-supplemented (0.3 mg/kg as sodium selenite) diet from 1 to 5 mo of age.
Dietary Se deficiency eliminated or attenuated (P < 0.05) genotype differences in
concentrations of blood glucose, plasma insulin, and/or hepatic lipids, insulin
sensitivity, and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion at the end of the study.
Dietary Se deficiency decreased (P < 0.05) OE islet mRNA levels of 2 key
transcriptional activators (Beta2 and Foxa2) and removed genotype differences in 
islet mRNA levels of 7 genes (Beta2, Cfos, Foxa2, Pregluc, Ins1, p53, and Sur1)
related to insulin synthesis and secretion. Compared with those of the
Se-adequate OE mice, the Se-deficient OE mice had lower (P < 0.05) hepatic mRNA
levels of 2 key rate-limiting enzymes for lipogenesis (Acc1) and glycolysis
(Gk1), along with lower (P < 0.05) activities of hepatic glucokinase and muscle
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase. Dietary Se deficiency also decreased (P <
0.05) blood glucose and hepatic lipid concentrations in the WT mice. In
conclusion, dietary Se deficiency precluded the overproduction of GPX1 in
full-fed OE mice and partially rescued their metabolic syndromes. This
alleviation resulted from modulating the expression and/or function of proinsulin
genes, lipogenesis rate-limiting enzyme genes, and key glycolysis and
gluconeogenesis enzymes in islets, liver, and muscle.

PMCID: PMC3497934
PMID: 23014491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Seikagaku. 2012 Aug;84(8):675-9.

[Identification of master regulators for induction of hepatocyte
differentiation].

[Article in Japanese]

Suzuki A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organogenesis and Regeneration, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582,
Japan.

PMID: 23012878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Gene. 2012 Dec 1;510(2):126-32. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.09.002. Epub 2012 Sep
10.

The genomic structure and the expression profile of the Xenopus laevis
transthyretin gene.

Ishihara A(1), Nishiyama N, Makita Y, Yamauchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Shizuoka University, 836
Oya, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.

Transthyretin (TTR) is a major thyroid hormone-binding protein in the amphibian
tadpole whose plasma mRNA and protein levels are altered during metamorphosis.
While the temporal and spatial expression patterns and genomic structure of the
TTR gene are well studied in higher vertebrates, detailed expression pattern in
the extrahepatic tissues, the transcriptional regulation, and the genomic
structure have not yet been identified in amphibians. In this study, we attempted
to elucidate these mechanisms. Here, we determined the genomic structure of the
Xenopus laevis TTR gene including 5'-flanking regions, and examined TTR
expression patterns in several tissues. The TTR gene of X. laevis is composed of 
4 exons and 3 introns, and the nucleotide sequence of intron 1 is not similar to 
that previously reported. This suggests that the TTR gene of X. laevis was
duplicated and the gene cloned in this study was the other copy of previously
reported gene. We also found that TTR was primarily transcribed in the liver of
both tadpoles and adults. In the adult liver, TTR transcripts were more abundant 
in males than females. In higher vertebrates, the expression of TTR is controlled
by several transcription factors including forkhead box A2 (FoxA2). However, in
the X. laevis liver, FoxA2 expression patterns were not similar to TTR. We also
found that exogenous FoxA2 increased the X. laevis TTR promoter-driven luciferase
activity. These results suggest that, in amphibian, the expression of TTR is
regulated partially by FoxA2, and that another system may exist to control TTR
expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22975210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Dev Biol. 2012 Nov 15;371(2):170-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.08.008. Epub 2012
Aug 31.

Loss of Oct4 expression during the development of murine embryoid bodies.

Sajini AA(1), Greder LV, Dutton JR, Slack JM.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute, University of Minnesota, 2001 Sixth Street SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

We describe the internal organization of murine embryoid bodies (EBs) in terms of
the structures and cell types formed as Oct4 expression becomes progressively
lost. This is done by making the EBs from iPS cells carrying a novel Oct4
reporter (Oct4-MerCreMer;mTmG) which is inducible, sensitive, and permanent in
all cellular progeny. When these EBs are treated with tamoxifen, the Oct4
expressing cells switch from a red to a green fluorescence color, and this is
maintained thereafter by all their progeny. We show that there is no specific
pattern in which Oct4 is downregulated, rather it appears to be spatially random.
Many of the earliest cells to lose Oct4 expression stain positive for markers of 
visceral endoderm (DAB2, a-fetoprotein (AFP), HNF4). These are randomly located, 
although if endoderm differentiation is allowed to commence before EB formation
then an external layer is formed. This is true both of EBs made from the reporter
iPS cells, or from an embryo-derived mouse ES line (R1 cells). Markers of the
early body axis, Brachyury (BRA) and FOXA2, usually showed a concentration of
positive cells in one region of the EB, but the morphology is not predictable and
there are also scattered cells expressing these markers. These patterns are
similar in R1 cells. Use of the Oct4 reporter showed a difference between BRA and
FOXA2. BRA, which marks the early mesoderm, node and notochord, arises in Oct4
expressing cells on days 3-4. FOXA2, which marks the floor plate of the neural
tube and definitive endoderm, as well as the node and notochord, arises at the
same time but mostly in cells that have already lost Oct4 expression. Several
clumps of cardiomyocytes are visible by days 7-8 of EB development, both in our
iPS cells and in R1 cells. Using the Oct4 reporter we show that the cells forming
these clumps lose Oct4 expression between days 3 and 5. Overall, our results
indicate that EBs recapitulate normal development quite well in terms of the
tempo of events and the appearance of specific markers, but they do not resemble 
embryos in terms of their morphology.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3477512
PMID: 22960235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2013 Aug;23(8):978-87. doi:
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2012.08.015. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

Insight into mechanism of in vitro insulin secretion increase induced by
antipsychotic clozapine: role of FOXA1 and mitochondrial citrate carrier.

Menga A(1), Infantino V, Iacobazzi F, Convertini P, Palmieri F, Iacobazzi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, Biotechnology and Pharmacological Sciences,
University of Bari, Via Orabona 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.

The use of clozapine and other antipsychotic drugs is known to be associated with
a number of adverse metabolic side effects, including diabetes mellitus. These
side effects could be, at least in part, the result of impaired islet cell
function and abnormal insulin secretion, although the underlying mechanisms are
unknown. The aim of this study is the identification of targets for clozapine
related to the abnormal insulin secretion. We identify a specific activation of
the transcriptional factor FOXA1, but not FOXA2 and FOXA3, by clozapine in HepG2 
cells. Clozapine enhances FOXA1 DNA-binding and its transcriptional activity,
increasing mitochondrial citrate carrier gene expression, which contains a FOXA1 
site in its promoter. Haloperidol, a conventional antipsychotic drug, does not
determine any increase of FOXA1 gene expression. We also demonstrate that
clozapine upregulates FOXA1 and CIC gene expression in INS-1 cells only at basal 
glucose concentration. In addition, we find that abnormal insulin secretion in
basal glucose conditions could be completely abolished by FOXA1 silencing in
INS-1 cells treated with clozapine. The identification of FOXA1 as a novel target
for clozapine may shed more light to understand molecular mechanism of abnormal
insulin secretion during clozapine treatment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22959654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Genome Biol. 2012 Sep 26;13(9):R52. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-9-r52.

Cell type-specific binding patterns reveal that TCF7L2 can be tethered to the
genome by association with GATA3.

Frietze S(1), Wang R, Yao L, Tak YG, Ye Z, Gaddis M, Witt H, Farnham PJ, Jin VX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

BACKGROUND: The TCF7L2 transcription factor is linked to a variety of human
diseases, including type 2 diabetes and cancer. One mechanism by which TCF7L2
could influence expression of genes involved in diverse diseases is by binding to
distinct regulatory regions in different tissues. To test this hypothesis, we
performed ChIP-seq for TCF7L2 in six human cell lines.
RESULTS: We identified 116,000 non-redundant TCF7L2 binding sites, with only
1,864 sites common to the six cell lines. Using ChIP-seq, we showed that many
genomic regions that are marked by both H3K4me1 and H3K27Ac are also bound by
TCF7L2, suggesting that TCF7L2 plays a critical role in enhancer activity.
Bioinformatic analysis of the cell type-specific TCF7L2 binding sites revealed
enrichment for multiple transcription factors, including HNF4alpha and FOXA2
motifs in HepG2 cells and the GATA3 motif in MCF7 cells. ChIP-seq analysis
revealed that TCF7L2 co-localizes with HNF4alpha and FOXA2 in HepG2 cells and
with GATA3 in MCF7 cells. Interestingly, in MCF7 cells the TCF7L2 motif is
enriched in most TCF7L2 sites but is not enriched in the sites bound by both
GATA3 and TCF7L2. This analysis suggested that GATA3 might tether TCF7L2 to the
genome at these sites. To test this hypothesis, we depleted GATA3 in MCF7 cells
and showed that TCF7L2 binding was lost at a subset of sites. RNA-seq analysis
suggested that TCF7L2 represses transcription when tethered to the genome via
GATA3.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies demonstrate a novel relationship between GATA3 and
TCF7L2, and reveal important insights into TCF7L2-mediated gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3491396
PMID: 22951069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Oncogene. 2013 Jul 18;32(29):3477-82. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.376. Epub 2012 Sep 3.

ß-Catenin signaling regulates Foxa2 expression during endometrial hyperplasia
formation.

Villacorte M(1), Suzuki K, Hirasawa A, Ohkawa Y, Suyama M, Maruyama T, Aoki D,
Ogino Y, Miyagawa S, Terabayashi T, Tomooka Y, Nakagata N, Yamada G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama
Medical University, Wakayama, Kansai, Japan.

The Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is essential for various organogenesis and is often
implicated during tumorigenesis. Dysregulated ß-catenin signaling is associated
with the formation of endometrial adenocarcinomas (EACs), which is considered as 
the common form of endometrial cancer in women. In the current study, we
investigate the downstream target of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in the uterine
epithelia and the mechanism leading to the formation of endometrial hyperplasia. 
We report that conditional ablation and activation of ß-catenin in the uterine
epithelia lead to aberrant epithelial structures and endometrial hyperplasia
formation, respectively. We demonstrate that ß-catenin regulates Foxa2 with its
candidate upstream region for the uterine epithelia. Furthermore, knockdown of
Foxa2 leads to defects in cell cycle regulation, suggesting a possible function
of Foxa2 in the control of cell proliferation. We also observe that ß-catenin and
Foxa2 expression levels are augmented in the human specimens of complex atypical 
endometrial hyperplasia, which is considered to have a greater risk of
progression to EACs. Thus, our study indicates that ß-catenin regulates Foxa2
expression, and this interaction is possibly essential to control cell cycle
progression during endometrial hyperplasia formation. Altogether, the augmented
expression levels of ß-catenin and Foxa2 are essential features during the
formation of endometrial hyperplasia.

PMID: 22945641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Curr Med Chem. 2012;19(26):4523-33.

A liver-derived rat epithelial cell line from biliary origin acquires hepatic
functions upon sequential exposure to hepatogenic growth factors and cytokines.

De Kock J(1), Snykers S, Branson S, Jagtap S, Gaspar JA, Sachinidis A, Vanhaecke 
T, Rogiers V.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Toxicology, Center for Pharmaceutical Research, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103, B-1090 Brussels, Belgium. jdekock@vub.ac.be

Withdrawal of promising drug candidates is often due to the detection of liver
toxicity. In particular the parenchymal liver cells or hepatocytes are targeted
since they are the major sites of drug transport and of metabolite formation and 
thus also the place where not only detoxification, but also activation of new
chemical (NCE) and biological (NBE) entities may occur. Therefore, primary
hepatocyte- based cultures are currently the preferred in vitro model to screen
for liver toxicity. However, within a few days, they undergo dedifferentiation
with loss of liver-specific functionality, including xenobiotic biotransformation
capacity, making them only suitable for short-term applications. A plausible
alternative to primary hepatocyte cultures that can be maintained for longer
periods of time could be the use of liver-derived epithelial cell lines and their
optimized derivatives. Therefore, in the present study, we evaluated the
stability and the hepatic differentiation potential of a neonatal liver-derived
rat epithelial cell line from biliary origin (rLEC). Undifferentiated rLEC stably
express the hepatic progenitor markers CEBPA, FOXA2, GJA1, ONECUT1, KRT18 and
KRT19 for at least 15 consecutive passages after cryopreservation. Upon
sequential exposure to hepatogenic growth factors and cytokines, rLEC generate
functional hepatic progeny, expressing mature hepatic markers including Alb, Ahr,
Car, C/ebpa, Cx32, Foxa2, Hnf1a, Hnf1ß and Onecut1. Furthermore, an active
polarization is observed for the hepatic drug transporters Oatp4 and Ntcp.
rLEC-derived hepatic cells also acquire the ability to store glycogen, express
genes encoding for key hepatic enzymes as shown by Affymetrix microarray data,
and display stable CYP1A1/2- and CYP2B1/2-dependent activities for several weeks 
at levels comparable to those observed in cultured primary rat hepatocytes. The
acquisition of such a stable and active biotransformation capacity is key for the
applicability of liver-based in vitro models for long-term toxicity testing.

PMID: 22934771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Results Probl Cell Differ. 2012;55:303-19. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-30406-4_17.

Differentiation of definitive endoderm from mouse embryonic stem cells.

Kim PT(1), Ong CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Efficient production of definitive endoderm from embryonic stem (ES) cells opens 
doors to the possibilities of differentiation of endoderm-derived tissues such as
the intestines, pancreas, and liver that could address the needs of people with
chronic diseases involving these organs. The lessons learned from developmental
biology have contributed significantly to in vitro differentiation of definitive 
endoderm. Gastrulation, a process that results in the production of all three
embryonic germ cell layers, definitive endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm, is an
important step in embryonic development. Gastrulation occurs as a result of the
events that are orchestrated by the signaling pathways involving Nodal, FGF, Wnt,
and BMP. Understanding these signaling pathways has led to the introduction of
key ingredients such as Activin A, FGF, Wnt, and BMP to the differentiation
protocols that have been able to produce definitive endoderm from ES cells.
Efficient production of definitive endoderm needs to meet the specific criteria
that include (a) increase in the production of markers of definitive endoderm
such as Sox 17, FOXA2, GSC, and Mixl1; (b) decrease in the production of markers 
of primitive/visceral/parietal endoderm, Sox 7 and OCT4; and (c) decrease in the 
mesoderm markers (Brachyury, MEOX) and ectoderm markers (Sox1 and ZIC1).

PMID: 22918814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Stem Cells. 2012 Nov;30(11):2400-11. doi: 10.1002/stem.1204.

Glycogen synthase kinase 3ß and activin/nodal inhibition in human embryonic stem 
cells induces a pre-neuroepithelial state that is required for specification to a
floor plate cell lineage.

Denham M(1), Bye C, Leung J, Conley BJ, Thompson LH, Dottori M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroscience Research, Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience,
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia. mark.denham@unimelb.edu.au

The floor plate is one of the major organizers of the developing nervous system
through its secretion of sonic hedgehog (Shh). Although the floor plate is
located within the neural tube, the derivation of the floor plate during
development is still debatable and some studies suggest that floor plate cells
are specified by Shh in a temporarily restricted window different to
neuroepithelial cells. Using human embryonic stem cells (hESC) as a model of
neurogenesis, we sought to determine how floor plate cells may be temporarily
specified by SHH signaling during human embryogenesis. We found that inhibition
of both GSK3ß and activin/nodal pathways in hESC induces a cellular state of
SOX2+/PAX6- expression, we describe as "pre-neuroepithelial." Exposure of SHH
during this pre-neuroepithelial period causes the expression of GLI transcription
factors to function as activators and consequently upregulate expression of the
floor plate marker, FOXA2, while also supressing PAX6 expression to inhibit
neuroepithelial fate. FOXA2+ cells were able to efficiently generate
mesencephalic dopaminergic neurons, a floor plate derivative. Overall, this study
demonstrates a highly efficient system for generating floor plate cells from hESC
and, most importantly, reveals that specification of floor plate cells is
temporally dependent, whereby it occurs prior to the onset of PAX6 expression,
within a pre-neuroepithelial stage.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3533765
PMID: 22911885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Cytotherapy. 2012 Nov;14(10):1193-202. doi: 10.3109/14653249.2012.706708. Epub
2012 Aug 17.

Tonsil-derived mesenchymal stromal cells: evaluation of biologic, immunologic and
genetic factors for successful banking.

Ryu KH(1), Cho KA, Park HS, Kim JY, Woo SY, Jo I, Choi YH, Park YM, Jung SC,
Chung SM, Choi BO, Kim HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul,
Korea.

BACKGROUND AIMS: Although mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) from human palatine
tonsils (tonsillar MSC, T-MSC) have been isolated, whether T-MSC isolated from
multiple donors are feasible for cell banking has not been studied.
METHODS: T-MSC before and after a standard protocol of cryopreservation and
thawing were assessed regarding several basic characteristics, including
colony-forming unit-fibroblast features, MSC-specific surface antigen profiles,
and inhibition of alloreactive T-cell proliferation. In vitro mesodermal
differentiation potentials to adipocytes, osteocytes and chondrocytes were
detected by staining with either cell-specific dyes or antibody after incubation 
with each appropriate differentiation medium. Expression of mesoderm-specific
genes was also quantified by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay.
Expression profiles of endoderm-specific genes were identified by reverse
transcription PCR assay. The feasibility of T-MSC in future engraftment was
tested by short tandem repeat (STR) analysis using genomic DNA isolated randomly 
from three independent subjects.
RESULTS: Both fresh and cryopreserved-thawed T-MSC showed a similar high
proliferation capacity and expressed primitive cell-surface markers.
Hematopoietic cell markers, HLA-DR, co-stimulatory molecules and follicular
dendritic cell markers were not detected. In addition to mesodermal
differentiation, fresh and cryopreserved-thawed cells also underwent endodermal
differentiation, as evidenced by the expression of endoderm-specific genes
including forkhead box A2 (FoxA2), SIX homeobox 1 (Six1) and chemokine (C-C
motif) ligand 21 (CCL21). Both cells significantly decreased phorbol 12-
myristate 13-acetate (PMA)-induced T-cell proliferation. T-MSC from three
independent donors formed chimerism in STR analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate for the first time that T-MSC are a
potentially good source for MSC banking.

PMID: 22900958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Stem Cells. 2012 Apr;30(4):631-42. doi: 10.1002/stem.1022.

Activin and BMP4 synergistically promote formation of definitive endoderm in
human embryonic stem cells.

Teo AK(1), Ali Y, Wong KY, Chipperfield H, Sadasivam A, Poobalan Y, Tan EK, Wang 
ST, Abraham S, Tsuneyoshi N, Stanton LW, Dunn NR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research,
#06-06 Immunos, Singapore 138648.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) herald tremendous promise for the production
of clinically useful cell types for the treatment of injury and disease. Numerous
reports demonstrate their differentiation into definitive endoderm (DE) cells,
the germ layer from which pancreatic ß cells and hepatocytes arise, solely from
exposure to a high dose of recombinant Activin/Nodal. We show that combining a
second related ligand, BMP4, in combination with Activin A yields 15%-20% more DE
as compared with Activin A alone. The addition of recombinant BMP4 accelerates
the downregulation of pluripotency genes, particularly SOX2, and results in
upregulation of endogenous BMP2 and BMP4, which in turn leads to elevated levels 
of phospho-SMAD1/5/8. Combined Activin A and BMP4 treatment also leads to an
increase in the expression of DE genes CXCR4, SOX17, and FOXA2 when compared with
Activin A addition alone. Comparative microarray studies between DE cells
harvested on day 3 of differentiation further reveal a novel set of genes
upregulated in response to initial BMP4 exposure. Several of these, including
APLNR, LRIG3, MCC, LEPREL1, ROR2, and LZTS1, are expressed in the mouse primitive
streak, the site of DE formation. Thus, this synergism between Activin A and BMP4
during the in vitro differentiation of hESC into DE suggests a complex interplay 
between BMP and Activin/Nodal signaling during the in vivo allocation and
expansion of the endoderm lineage.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 22893457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Rejuvenation Res. 2012 Aug;15(4):423-34. doi: 10.1089/rej.2011.1295.

Vascular endothelial growth factor downregulates apolipoprotein M expression by
inhibiting Foxa2 in a Nur77-dependent manner.

Hu YW(1), Zheng L, Wang Q, Zhong TY, Yu X, Bao J, Cao NN, Li B, Si-Tu B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Medicine Center, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate whether vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) influences apolipoprotein M (ApoM) expression and pre-ß-high-density
lipoprotin (HDL) formation, and whether forkhead box A2 (Foxa2) and Nur77 are
involved in this process.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analyzed the serum VEGF concentrations of 264 adults who 
underwent a medical checkup and found that VEGF concentration was positively
correlated with serum triglyceride, total cholesterol, LDL cholesterol (LDL-C),
very-low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (VLDL-C), and ApoB concentrations, but
was negatively correlated with serum high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C)
and ApoM concentrations. We further investigated the effects of VEGF on ApoM
expression and pre-ß-HDL formation, and the mechanisms responsible, in HepG2
cells and mouse primary hepatocytes. VEGF markedly downregulated ApoM expression 
and pre-ß-HDL formation. At the same time, expression of Foxa2 was also
inhibited, whereas expression of Nur77 was increased by treatment with VEGF.
Furthermore, small interfering (si) RNA knockdown of Foxa2 made the
downregulation of VEGF on ApoM expression and pre-ß-HDL formation even more
obvious. In addition, siRNA knockdown of Nur77 significantly compensated for the 
inhibitory effect of VEGF on Foxa2 expression, whereas the Nur77 agonist
cytosporone B led to the downregulation of Foxa2 expression more significantly
than VEGF. Moreover, overexpression of a Nur77 transgene in C57BL/6 mice resulted
in decreased serum ApoM and pre-ß-HDL levels, whereas si-Nur77-treated mice
displayed upregulated serum ApoM and pre-ß-HDL levels.
CONCLUSION: These results provide evidence that VEGF may first downregulate
expression of Foxa2 by enhancing Nur77 activity and then decrease expression of
ApoM and pre-ß-HDL formation. Therefore, our study may be useful in understanding
the critical effect of VEGF in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis.

PMID: 22877565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Dec;4(6):420-2. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mjs037. Epub 2012 Jun 28.

Genome-wide roles of Foxa2 in directing liver specification.

Xu C, Lu X, Chen EZ, He Z, Uyunbilig B, Li G, Ma Y, Hui L, Xie B, Gao Y, Ding X, 
Hu Y, Hu P, Han JD, Wang X.

PMCID: PMC3612007
PMID: 22750789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Dev Biol. 2012 Sep 1;369(1):32-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.06.018. Epub 2012
Jun 27.

A novel role for FOXA2 and SHH in organizing midbrain signaling centers.

Bayly RD(1), Brown CY, Agarwala S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712-0248, USA.

The floor plate (FP) is a midline signaling center, known to direct ventral cell 
fates and axon guidance in the neural tube. The recent identification of midbrain
FP as a source of dopaminergic neurons has renewed interest in its specification 
and organization, which remain poorly understood. In this study, we have examined
the chick midbrain and spinal FP and show that both can be partitioned into
medial (MFP) and lateral (LFP) subdivisions. Although Hedgehog (HH) signaling is 
necessary and sufficient for LFP specification, it is not sufficient for MFP
induction. By contrast, the transcription factor FOXA2 can execute the full
midbrain and spinal cord FP program via HH-independent and dependent mechanisms. 
Interestingly, although HH-independent FOXA2 activity is necessary and sufficient
for inducing MFP-specific gene expression (e.g., LMX1B, BMP7), it cannot confer
ventral identity to midline cells without also turning on Sonic hedgehog (SHH).
We also note that the signaling centers of the midbrain, the FP, roof plate (RP) 
and the midbrain-hindbrain boundary (MHB) are physically contiguous, with each
expressing LMX1B and BMP7. Possibly as a result, SHH or FOXA2 misexpression can
transform the MHB into FP and also suppress RP induction. Conversely, HH or FOXA2
knockdown expands the endogenous RP and transforms the MFP into a RP and/or MHB
fate. Finally, combined HH blockade and FOXA2 misexpression in ventral midbrain
induces LMX1B expression, which triggers the specification of the RP, rather than
the MFP. Thus we identify HH-independent and dependent roles for FOXA2 in
specifying the FP. In addition, we elucidate for the first time, a novel role for
SHH in determining whether a midbrain signaling center will become the FP, MHB or
RP.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3423079
PMID: 22750257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(6):e1002770. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002770. Epub 2012 Jun 
21.

Genome-wide location analysis reveals distinct transcriptional circuitry by
paralogous regulators Foxa1 and Foxa2.

Bochkis IM(1), Schug J, Ye DZ, Kurinna S, Stratton SA, Barton MC, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United
States of America.

Gene duplication is a powerful driver of evolution. Newly duplicated genes
acquire new roles that are relevant to fitness, or they will be lost over time. A
potential path to functional relevance is mutation of the coding sequence leading
to the acquisition of novel biochemical properties, as analyzed here for the
highly homologous paralogs Foxa1 and Foxa2 transcriptional regulators. We
determine by genome-wide location analysis (ChIP-Seq) that, although Foxa1 and
Foxa2 share a large fraction of binding sites in the liver, each protein also
occupies distinct regulatory elements in vivo. Foxa1-only sites are enriched for 
p53 binding sites and are frequently found near genes important to cell cycle
regulation, while Foxa2-restricted sites show only a limited match to the
forkhead consensus and are found in genes involved in steroid and lipid
metabolism. Thus, Foxa1 and Foxa2, while redundant during development, have
evolved divergent roles in the adult liver, ensuring the maintenance of both
genes during evolution.

PMCID: PMC3380847
PMID: 22737085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Development. 2012 Jul;139(14):2625-34. doi: 10.1242/dev.081034. Epub 2012 Jun 13.

Genome-wide characterization of Foxa2 targets reveals upregulation of floor plate
genes and repression of ventrolateral genes in midbrain dopaminergic progenitors.

Metzakopian E(1), Lin W, Salmon-Divon M, Dvinge H, Andersson E, Ericson J,
Perlmann T, Whitsett JA, Bertone P, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, NIMR, The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA,
UK.

The transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 promote the specification of midbrain
dopaminergic (mDA) neurons and the floor plate. Whether their role is direct has 
remained unclear as they also regulate the expression of Shh, which has similar
roles. We characterized the Foxa2 cis-regulatory network by chromatin
immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing of mDA progenitors.
This identified 9160 high-quality Foxa2 binding sites associated with 5409 genes,
providing mechanistic insights into Foxa2-mediated positive and negative
regulatory events. Foxa2 regulates directly and positively key determinants of
mDA neurons, including Lmx1a, Lmx1b, Msx1 and Ferd3l, while negatively inhibiting
transcription factors expressed in ventrolateral midbrain such as Helt, Tle4,
Otx1, Sox1 and Tal2. Furthermore, Foxa2 negatively regulates extrinsic and
intrinsic components of the Shh signaling pathway, possibly by binding to the
same enhancer regions of co-regulated genes as Gli1. Foxa2 also regulates the
expression of floor plate factors that control axon trajectories around the
midline of the embryo, thereby contributing to the axon guidance function of the 
floor plate. Finally, this study identified multiple Foxa2-regulated enhancers
that are active in the floor plate of the midbrain or along the length of the
embryo in mouse and chick. This work represents the first comprehensive
characterization of Foxa2 targets in mDA progenitors and provides a framework for
elaborating gene regulatory networks in a functionally important progenitor
population.

PMCID: PMC3383233
PMID: 22696295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Stem Cells. 2012 Aug;30(8):1655-63. doi: 10.1002/stem.1152.

Specification of midbrain dopamine neurons from primate pluripotent stem cells.

Xi J(1), Liu Y, Liu H, Chen H, Emborg ME, Zhang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Institutes of Biomedical
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

By sequentially applying sonic hedgehog (C25II) and CHIR99021 (GSK3ß inhibitor)
to induce the midbrain floor plate (FP) progenitors and fibroblast growth factor 
8 (FGF8) to promote dopaminergic differentiation in a chemically defined medium, 
we have established a robust system for the generation of midbrain dopamine (DA) 
neurons from human and rhesus monkey embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent
stem cells (PSCs). We found that CHIR99021 specifies diencephalon to hind brain
fates in a concentration-dependent manner and only a narrow concentration range
of CHIR99021 at a particular window is necessary to induce the midbrain FP
progenitors, expressing Corin, En1, FoxA2, and Lmx1a. FGF8 enhances the
dopaminergic fate of the progenitors, thus generating DA neurons with midbrain
characteristics, including expression of tyrosine hydroxylase, Lmx1a/b, FoxA2,
FoxP1, Nurr1, and En1 as well as typical electrophysiological properties. More
than half of these DA neurons expressed A9 DA neuron markers Girk2 and ALDH1a1.
The new strategy will allow generation of enriched populations of functional
midbrain DA neurons from both human and monkey PSCs for disease modeling, drug
testing, and potential cell therapy.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3405174
PMID: 22696177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Hepatol. 2012 Sep;57(3):628-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.04.038. Epub 2012 May 
29.

Generation of metabolically functioning hepatocytes from human pluripotent stem
cells by FOXA2 and HNF1a transduction.

Takayama K(1), Inamura M, Kawabata K, Sugawara M, Kikuchi K, Higuchi M, Nagamoto 
Y, Watanabe H, Tashiro K, Sakurai F, Hayakawa T, Furue MK, Mizuguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatocyte-like cells differentiated from human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) can be utilized as a
tool for screening for hepatotoxicity in the early phase of pharmaceutical
development. We have recently reported that hepatic differentiation is promoted
by sequential transduction of SOX17, HEX, and HNF4a into hESC- or hiPSC-derived
cells, but further maturation of hepatocyte-like cells is required for widespread
use of drug screening.
METHODS: To screen for hepatic differentiation-promoting factors, we tested the
seven candidate genes related to liver development.
RESULTS: The combination of two transcription factors, FOXA2 and HNF1a, promoted 
efficient hepatic differentiation from hESCs and hiPSCs. The expression profile
of hepatocyte-related genes (such as genes encoding cytochrome P450 enzymes,
conjugating enzymes, hepatic transporters, and hepatic nuclear receptors)
achieved with FOXA2 and HNF1a transduction was comparable to that obtained in
primary human hepatocytes. The hepatocyte-like cells generated by FOXA2 and HNF1a
transduction exerted various hepatocyte functions including albumin and urea
secretion, and the uptake of indocyanine green and low density lipoprotein.
Moreover, these cells had the capacity to metabolize all nine tested drugs and
were successfully employed to evaluate drug-induced cytotoxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our method employing the transduction of FOXA2 and HNF1a represents 
a useful tool for the efficient generation of metabolically functional
hepatocytes from hESCs and hiPSCs, and the screening of drug-induced
cytotoxicity.

Copyright © 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22659344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Oral Pathol Med. 2013 Jan;42(1):37-46. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.2012.01170.x.
Epub 2012 May 29.

Organotypic culture of normal, dysplastic and squamous cell carcinoma-derived
oral cell lines reveals loss of spatial regulation of CD44 and p75 NTR in
malignancy.

Dalley AJ(1), AbdulMajeed AA, Upton Z, Farah CS.

Author information: 
(1)UQ Centre for Clinical Research, The University of Queensland, Herston, Qld,
Australia.

Oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) often arise from dysplastic lesions. The
role of cancer stem cells in tumour initiation is widely accepted, yet the
potential existence of pre-cancerous stem cells in dysplastic tissue has received
little attention. Cell lines from oral diseases ranging in severity from
dysplasia to malignancy provide opportunity to investigate the involvement of
stem cells in malignant progression from dysplasia. Stem cells are functionally
defined by their ability to generate hierarchical tissue structures in consortium
with spatial regulation. Organotypic cultures readily display tissue hierarchy in
vitro; hence, in this study, we compared hierarchical expression of stem
cell-associated markers in dermis-based organotypic cultures of oral epithelial
cells from normal tissue (OKF6-TERT2), mild dysplasia (DOK), severe dysplasia
(POE-9n) and OSCC (PE/CA P J15). Expression of CD44, p75(NTR), CD24 and ALDH was 
studied in monolayers by flow cytometry and in organotypic cultures by
immunohistochemistry. Spatial regulation of CD44 and p75(NTR) was evident for
organotypic cultures of normal (OKF6-TERT2) and dysplasia (DOK and POE-9n) but
was lacking for OSCC (PE/CA PJ15)-derived cells. Spatial regulation of CD24 was
not evident. All monolayer cultures exhibited CD44, p75(NTR), CD24 antigens and
ALDH activity (ALDEFLUOR(®) assay), with a trend towards loss of population
heterogeneity that mirrored disease severity. In monolayer, increased FOXA1 and
decreased FOXA2 expression correlated with disease severity, but OCT3/4, Sox2 and
NANOG did not. We conclude that dermis-based organotypic cultures give
opportunity to investigate the mechanisms that underlie loss of spatial
regulation of stem cell markers seen with OSCC-derived cells.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22643025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Nov 20;21(17):3220-32. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0492. Epub 2012
Jun 25.

GATA6 and FOXA2 regulate Wnt6 expression during extraembryonic endoderm
formation.

Hwang JT(1), Kelly GM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Department of Biology, Child Health Research
Institute, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.

One of the earliest epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions in mouse embryogenesis 
involves the differentiation of inner cell mass cells into primitive and then
into parietal endoderm. These processes can be recapitulated in vitro using F9
teratocarcinoma cells, which differentiate into primitive endoderm when treated
with retinoic acid (RA) and into parietal endoderm with subsequent treatment with
dibutyryl cyclic adenosine monophosphate (db-cAMP). Our previous work on how
primitive endoderm develops revealed that the Wnt6 gene is upregulated by RA,
leading to the activation of the canonical WNT-ß-catenin pathway. The mechanism
by which Wnt6 is regulated was not determined, but in silico analysis of the
human WNT6 promoter region had suggested that the GATA6 and FOXA2 transcription
factors might be involved [1]. Subsequent analysis determined that both Gata6 and
Foxa2 mRNA are upregulated in F9 cells treated with RA or RA and db-cAMP. More
specifically, overexpression of Gata6 or Foxa2 alone induced molecular and
morphological markers of primitive endoderm, which occurred concomitantly with
the upregulation of the Wnt6 gene. Gata6- or Foxa2-overexpressing cells were also
found to have increased levels in T-cell factor (TCF)-dependent transcription,
and when these cells were treated with db-cAMP, they developed into parietal
endoderm. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that GATA6 and FOXA2
were bound to the Wnt6 promoter, and overexpression studies showed that these
transcription factors were sufficient to switch on the gene expression of a Wnt6 
reporter construct. Together, these results provide evidence for the direct
regulation of Wnt6 that leads to the activation of the canonical WNT-ß-catenin
pathway and subsequent induction of primitive extraembryonic endoderm.

PMID: 22607194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Dev Cell. 2012 May 15;22(5):927-39. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.03.011.

FoxA family members are crucial regulators of the hypertrophic chondrocyte
differentiation program.

Ionescu A(1), Kozhemyakina E, Nicolae C, Kaestner KH, Olsen BR, Lassar AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

During endochondral ossification, small, immature chondrocytes enlarge to form
hypertrophic chondrocytes, which express collagen X. In this work, we demonstrate
that FoxA factors are induced during chondrogenesis, bind to conserved binding
sites in the collagen X enhancer, and can promote the expression of a collagen
X-luciferase reporter in both chondrocytes and fibroblasts. In addition, we
demonstrate by both gain- and loss-of-function analyses that FoxA factors play a 
crucial role in driving the expression of both endogenous collagen X and other
hypertrophic chondrocyte-specific genes. Mice engineered to lack expression of
both FoxA2 and FoxA3 in their chondrocytes display defects in chondrocyte
hypertrophy, alkaline phosphatase expression, and mineralization in their
sternebrae and, in addition, exhibit postnatal dwarfism that is coupled to
significantly decreased expression of both collagen X and MMP13 in their growth
plates. Our findings indicate that FoxA family members are crucial regulators of 
the hypertrophic chondrocyte differentiation program.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3356573
PMID: 22595668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 8;109(19):7356-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1203605109. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Mind bomb 1 is required for pancreatic ß-cell formation.

Horn S(1), Kobberup S, Jørgensen MC, Kalisz M, Klein T, Kageyama R, Gegg M,
Lickert H, Lindner J, Magnuson MA, Kong YY, Serup P, Ahnfelt-Rønne J, Jensen JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, DK-2820
Gentofte, Denmark.

During early pancreatic development, Notch signaling represses differentiation of
endocrine cells and promotes proliferation of Nkx6-1(+)Ptf1a(+) multipotent
progenitor cells (MPCs). Later, antagonistic interactions between Nkx6
transcription factors and Ptf1a function to segregate MPCs into distal
Nkx6-1(-)Ptf1a(+) acinar progenitors and proximal Nkx6-1(+)Ptf1a(-) duct and
ß-cell progenitors. Distal cells are initially multipotent, but evolve into
unipotent, acinar cell progenitors. Conversely, proximal cells are bipotent and
give rise to duct cells and late-born endocrine cells, including the insulin
producing ß-cells. However, signals that regulate proximodistal (P-D) patterning 
and thus formation of ß-cell progenitors are unknown. Here we show that Mind bomb
1 (Mib1) is required for correct P-D patterning of the developing pancreas and
ß-cell formation. We found that endoderm-specific inactivation of Mib1 caused a
loss of Nkx6-1(+)Ptf1a(-) and Hnf1ß(+) cells and a corresponding loss of
Neurog3(+) endocrine progenitors and ß-cells. An accompanying increase in
Nkx6-1(-)Ptf1a(+) and amylase(+) cells, occupying the proximal domain, suggests
that proximal cells adopt a distal fate in the absence of Mib1 activity. Impeding
Notch-mediated transcriptional activation by conditional expression of dominant
negative Mastermind-like 1 (Maml1) resulted in a similarly distorted P-D
patterning and suppressed ß-cell formation, as did conditional inactivation of
the Notch target gene Hes1. Our results reveal iterative use of Notch in
pancreatic development to ensure correct P-D patterning and adequate ß-cell
formation.

PMCID: PMC3358874
PMID: 22529374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2011 Dec;33(6):675-8.

[Virus free induction of umbilical cord derived mesenchymal stem cells into
islet-like cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Li J(1), Zhu L, Zhao CH.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Excellence in Tissue Engineering, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, CAMS and PUMC, Beijing 100005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the feasibility of using a virus-free system in the
induction of umbilical cord derived mesenchymal stem cells (UC-MSCs) into
insulin-secreting cells.
METHODS: MSCs were isolated from human umbilical cord and induced into
insulin-secreting cells with a three-stage method. The mRNA expression levels of 
foxa2, sox17, pdx1, ngn3, pax4, insulin, and glut-2 were compared between induced
and non-induced groups by RT-PCR in each stage. The distribution pattern of
insulin and c-peptide were detected by immunofluorescence staining and observed
by fluorescence microscopy. Insulin and c-peptide secretion and glucose
responsiveness were detected by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Transcription factors foxa2, sox17, pdx1, ngn3, pax4, insulin, and
glut-2 were expressed in the induced cells. The mRNA expression levels of foxa2
and sox17 were significantly higher in the induced group than those in
non-induced group in the first stage (all P < 0.05), pdx1, ngn3, and pax4 were
significantly higher in the induced cells than those in non-induced cells in the 
second stage (all P < 0.05), and insulin and glut-2 expressions were
significantly up-regulated in the induced group at last stage (all P < 0.05).
Immunofluorescence staining showed that insulin and c-peptide were located in the
cytoplasm of more than 90% of induced cells. ELISA showed that total
intracellular insulin content of the induced cells contained up to (346.3 739 +/-
32.5 149) microU/ml, which was significantly higher than insulin in non-induced
cells (17.69 +/- 1.46) microU/ml (P < 0.01). C-peptide content of the induced
cells measured up to (195.10 +/- 8.88) pmol/L/h (P < 0.01), when exposed to 5.5
mmol/L glucose (P < 0.01). When stimulated with 22 mmol/L glucose, the c-peptide 
content of the induced cells increased to (340.99 +/- 7.91) pmol/L/h (P < 0.01 ).
CONCLUSION: The umbilical cord derived MSCs can be efficiently induced into
insulin-secreting cells via a virus-free system.

PMID: 22509554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Stem Cells. 2012 Jul;30(7):1349-61. doi: 10.1002/stem.1105.

Lmx1a allows context-specific isolation of progenitors of GABAergic or
dopaminergic neurons during neural differentiation of embryonic stem cells.

Nefzger CM(1), Su CT, Fabb SA, Hartley BJ, Beh SJ, Zeng WR, Haynes JM, Pouton CW.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Biology, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash
University (Parkville Campus), 381 Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3052,
Australia. John.haynes@monash.edu

LIM homeobox transcription factor 1 alpha (Lmx1a) is required for the development
of midbrain dopaminergic neurons, roof plate formation, and cortical hem
development. We generated a reporter embryonic stem cell (ESC) line for Lmx1a and
used it to track differentiation and extract neural progenitors from
differentiating mouse ESCs. Lmx1a(+) cells gave rise to functional cortical upper
layer GABAergic neurons or dopaminergic neurons depending on the culture
conditions used for differentiation. Under chemically defined neurobasal
conditions, ESC differentiation resulted in widespread and transient expression
of Lmx1a, without the addition of exogenous factors such as sonic hedgehog (Shh),
Wnts, and/or bone morphogenic proteins (BMPs). Under neutral conditions, Lmx1a(+)
cells express genes known to be downstream of Lmx1a and cortical hem markers
Wnt3a and p73. The majority of these cells did not express the ventral midbrain
dopaminergic marker Foxa2 or dorsal roof plate marker BMP-2. Lmx1a(+) -Foxa2(-)
cells were primed to become SatB2(+) GABAergic neurons and appeared to be
resistant to dopaminergic patterning cues. PA6 coculture produced a substantial
population of Lmx1a(+) progenitors that also expressed Foxa2 and on further
differentiation gave rise to dopaminergic neurons at high frequency. We conclude 
that Lmx1a is a useful marker for the extraction of progenitors of GABAergic or
dopaminergic neurons. We caution against the assumption that it indicates
dopaminergic commitment during in vitro differentiation of ESCs. Indeed, in
monolayer culture under neurobasal conditions, with or without the addition of
Shh and fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8), Lmx1a(+) cells were predominantly
progenitors of forebrain GABAergic neurons. We obtained dopaminergic cells in
large numbers only by coculture with PA6 cells.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 22495882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e33542. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033542. Epub 2012 Apr 2.

Gene expression profile of adult human olfactory bulb and embryonic neural stem
cell suggests distinct signaling pathways and epigenetic control.

Marei HE(1), Ahmed AE, Michetti F, Pescatori M, Pallini R, Casalbore P,
Cenciarelli C, Elhadidy M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytology and Histology, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Mansoura
University, Mansoura, Egypt. hany800@mans.edu.eg

Global gene expression profiling was performed using RNA from human embryonic
neural stem cells (hENSC), and adult human olfactory bulb-derived neural stem
cells (OBNSCs), to define a gene expression pattern and signaling pathways that
are specific for each cell lineage. We have demonstrated large differences in the
gene expression profile of human embryonic NSC, and adult human OBNSCs, but less 
variability between parallel cultures. Transcripts of genes involved in neural
tube development and patterning (ALDH1A2, FOXA2), progenitor marker genes (LMX1a,
ALDH1A1, SOX10), proliferation of neural progenitors (WNT1 and WNT3a),
neuroplastin (NPTN), POU3F1 (OCT6), neuroligin (NLGN4X), MEIS2, and NPAS1 were
up-regulated in both cell populations. By Gene Ontology, 325 out of 3875
investigated gene sets were scientifically different. 41 out of the 307
investigated Cellular Component (CC) categories, 45 out of the 620 investigated
Molecular Function (MF) categories, and 239 out of the 2948 investigated
Biological Process (BP) categories were significant. KEGG Pathway Class
Comparison had revealed that 75 out of 171 investigated gene sets passed the
0.005 significance threshold. Levels of gene expression were explored in three
signaling pathways, Notch, Wnt, and mTOR that are known to be involved in NS cell
fates determination. The transcriptional signature also deciphers the role of
genes involved in epigenetic modifications. SWI/SNF DNA chromatin remodeling
complex family, including SMARCC1 and SMARCE1, were found specifically
up-regulated in our OBNSC but not in hENSC. Differences in gene expression
profile of transcripts controlling epigenetic modifications, and signaling
pathways might indicate differences in the therapeutic potential of our examined 
two cell populations in relation to in cell survival, proliferation, migration,
and differentiation following engraftments in different CNS insults.

PMCID: PMC3317670
PMID: 22485144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Jun;32(6):1535-44. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.245639. Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Potential role of upstream stimulatory factor 1 gene variant in familial combined
hyperlipidemia and related disorders.

Auer S(1), Hahne P, Soyal SM, Felder T, Miller K, Paulmichl M, Krempler F,
Oberkofler H, Patsch W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Paracelsus Medical University, Strubergasse
21, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.

OBJECTIVE: Genetic studies implicated upstream stimulatory factor 1 (USF1) in
familial combined hyperlipidemia because the rs2073658 minor allele was
associated with reduced risk of familial combined hyperlipidemia and related
disorders. The molecular mechanisms whereby rs2073658 influences trait expression
have remained elusive.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Plasma lipids, rs2073658 genotypes (N=372), and hepatic
transcript levels (N=96) of USF1 and genes involved in hepatic lipoprotein
production were determined in obese subjects. The rs2073658 minor allele was
associated with reduced plasma triglycerides (TGs) (P<0.001), hepatic USF1
(P<0.01), and microsomal TG transfer protein transcript levels (P<0.05).
Functional studies in human hepatocellular carcinoma cells showed that rs2073658 
is located in a forkhead box A2 (FOXA2) binding site and that major allele
constructs displayed higher transcriptional activity than minor allele
constructs. Knockdown of FOXA2 reduced the activity of major, but not minor
allele constructs. Furthermore, an interaction between hepatic FOXA2 transcript
levels and rs2073658 minor allele carrier status on hepatic USF1 transcript
levels was observed in vivo (P<0.05). USF1 activated the transcription of FOXA2
and FOXA2 strongly activated the transcription of microsomal TG transfer protein.
CONCLUSIONS: A feed-forward loop comprising activation of USF1 transcription by
FOXA2 and activation of FOXA2 transcription by USF1, driving microsomal TG
transfer protein expression, is modulated by rs2073658. Hence, rs2073658 likely
influences hepatic TG secretion.

PMID: 22460558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Endocrinology. 2012 May;153(5):2514-25. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1365. Epub 2012 Mar 
27.

Thyroid regeneration: characterization of clear cells after partial
thyroidectomy.

Ozaki T(1), Matsubara T, Seo D, Okamoto M, Nagashima K, Sasaki Y, Hayase S,
Murata T, Liao XH, Hanson J, Rodriguez-Canales J, Thorgeirsson SS, Kakudo K,
Refetoff S, Kimura S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Although having the capacity to grow in response to a stimulus that perturbs the 
pituitary-thyroid axis, the thyroid gland is considered not a regenerative organ.
In this study, partial thyroidectomy (PTx) was used to produce a condition for
thyroid regeneration. In the intact thyroid gland, the central areas of both
lobes served as the proliferative centers where microfollicles, and
bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU)-positive and/or C cells, were localized. Two weeks after
PTx, the number of BrdU-positive cells and cells with clear or faintly
eosinophilic cytoplasm were markedly increased in the central area and continuous
to the cut edge. Clear cells were scant in the cytoplasm, as determined by
electron microscopy; some retained the characteristics of calcitonin-producing C 
cells by having neuroendocrine granules, whereas others retained follicular
cell-specific features, such as the juxtaposition to a lumen with microvilli.
Some cells were BrdU-positive and expressed Foxa2, the definitive endoderm
lineage marker. Serum TSH levels drastically changed due to the
thyroidectomy-induced acute reduction in T(4)-generating tissue, resulting in a
goitrogenesis setting. Microarray followed by pathway analysis revealed that the 
expression of genes involved in embryonic development and cancer was affected by 
PTx. The results suggest that both C cells and follicular cells may be altered by
PTx to become immature cells or immature cells that might be derived from
stem/progenitor cells on their way to differentiation into C cells or follicular 
cells. These immature clear cells may participate in the repair and/or
regeneration of the thyroid gland.

PMCID: PMC3339649
PMID: 22454152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Biomaterials. 2012 Jun;33(18):4526-34. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2012.03.011.
Epub 2012 Mar 23.

The promotion of hepatic maturation of human pluripotent stem cells in 3D
co-culture using type I collagen and Swiss 3T3 cell sheets.

Nagamoto Y(1), Tashiro K, Takayama K, Ohashi K, Kawabata K, Sakurai F, Tachibana 
M, Hayakawa T, Furue MK, Mizuguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Hepatocyte-like cells differentiated from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) or
human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) are known to be a useful cell
source for drug screening. We recently developed an efficient hepatic
differentiation method from hESCs and hiPSCs by sequential transduction of FOXA2 
and HNF1a. It is known that the combination of three-dimensional (3D) culture and
co-culture, namely 3D co-culture, can maintain the functions of primary
hepatocytes. However, hepatic maturation of hESC- or hiPSC-derived
hepatocyte-like cells (hEHs or hiPHs, respectively) by 3D co-culture systems has 
not been examined. Therefore, we utilized a cell sheet engineering technology to 
promote hepatic maturation. The gene expression levels of hepatocyte-related
markers (such as cytochrome P450 enzymes and conjugating enzymes) and the amount 
of albumin secretion in the hEHs or hiPHs, which were 3D co-cultured with the
Swiss 3T3 cell sheet, were significantly up-regulated in comparison with those in
the hEHs or hiPHs cultured in a monolayer. Furthermore, we found that type I
collagen synthesized in Swiss 3T3 cells plays an important role in hepatic
maturation. The hEHs or hiPHs that were 3D co-cultured with the Swiss 3T3 cell
sheet would be powerful tools for medical applications, such as drug screening.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22445253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2012 Aug;27(8):1362-70. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1746.2012.07137.x.

Therapeutic potential of mesenchymal stem cells overexpressing human forkhead box
A2 gene in the regeneration of damaged liver tissues.

Cho JW(1), Lee CY, Ko Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Korea University, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Although a liver transplantation is considered to be the only
effective long-term treatment in many cases of liver diseases, it is limited by a
lack of donor organs and immune rejection. As an autologous stem cell approach,
this study was conducted to assess whether forkhead box A2 (Foxa2) gene
overexpression in bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) could protect 
the liver from hepatic diseases by stimulating tissue regeneration after cell
transplantation.
METHODS: Rat MSC (rMSC) were isolated, characterized, and induced to hepatocytes 
that expressed liver-specific markers. Four different treatments (control
[phosphate-buffered saline], rMSC alone, rMSC/pIRES-enhanced green fluorescent
protein (EGFP) vector, and rMSC/pIRES-EGFP/human Foxa2) were injected into the
spleen of carbon tetrachloride-injured rats. Biochemical and histological
analyses on days 30, 60, and 90 post-transplantation were performed to evaluate
the therapeutic capacities of MSC overexpressing hFoxa2.
RESULTS: rMSC transfected with hFoxa2 were induced into hepatogenic linage and
expressed several liver-specific genes, such as, Foxa2, a-fetoprotein,
cytokeratin-18, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a, and hepatocyte growth factor. A
group of animals treated with MSC/hFoxa2 showed significant recovery of
liver-specific enzyme expressions to normal levels at the end of the study (90
days). Furthermore, when compared to the fibrotic areas of the samples treated
with MSC alone or MSC/vector, the fibrotic area of the samples treated with
rMSC/hFoxa2 for 90 days significantly decreased, until they were completely gone.
CONCLUSIONS: Human Foxa2 efficiently promoted the incorporation of MSC into liver
grafts, suggesting that hFoxa2 genes could be used for the structural or
functional recovery of damaged liver cells.

© 2012 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Blackwell
Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3492917
PMID: 22432472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32095. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032095. Epub 2012 Feb 29.

Probabilistic inference for nucleosome positioning with MNase-based or sonicated 
short-read data.

Zhang X(1), Robertson G, Woo S, Hoffman BG, Gottardo R.

Author information: 
(1)Statistics Department, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

We describe a model-based method, PING, for predicting nucleosome positions in
MNase-Seq and MNase- or sonicated-ChIP-Seq data. PING compares favorably to NPS
and TemplateFilter in scalability, accuracy and robustness to low read density.
To demonstrate that PING predictions from widely available sonicated data can
have sufficient spatial resolution to be to be useful for biological inference,
we use Illumina H3K4me1 ChIP-seq data to detect changes in nucleosome positioning
around transcription factor binding sites due to tamoxifen stimulation, to
discriminate functional and non-functional transcription factor binding sites
more effectively than with enrichment profiles, and to confirm that the pioneer
transcription factor Foxa2 associates with the accessible major groove of
nucleosomal DNA.

PMCID: PMC3290535
PMID: 22393380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Eur Cell Mater. 2012 Feb 23;23:135-46.

Changes in embryonic stem cell colony morphology and early differentiation
markers driven by colloidal crystal topographical cues.

Ji L(1), LaPointe VL, Evans ND, Stevens MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials, Prince Consort Road, Imperial College London, London,
SW7 2AZ, UK.

The use of materials properties to guide cell behaviour is an attractive option
for regenerative medicine, where controlling stem cell behaviour is important for
the establishment of a functioning cell population. A wide range of materials
properties have been shown to influence many types of cells but little is known
about the effects of topography on embryonic stem cells (ESCs). In order to
advance this knowledge, we synthesised and characterised substrates formed of
silica colloidal crystal (SCC) microspheres to present highly ordered and
reproducible topographical features from 120-600 nm in diameter. We found that,
compared to cells cultured on flat glass, cells cultured on the SCC substrates
retained transcription of stem cell (Dppa5a, Nanog, and Pou5f1) and endoderm
(Afp, Gata4, Sox17, and Foxa2) markers more similar to undifferentiated ESCs,
suggesting the substrates are restricting differentiation, particularly towards
the endoderm lineage. Additionally, five days after seeding, we observed
strikingly different colony morphology, with cells on the SCC substrates growing 
in spherical colonies approximately ten cells thick, while cells on glass were
growing in flat monolayers. Colonies on the SCC substrates developed a central
pit, which was never observed in cells cultured on glass, and expressed proteins 
related to epithelialisation. Together, these data demonstrate the potential of
using topographical cues to control stem cell behaviour in vitro.

PMID: 22370796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Lung Cancer. 2012 Jul;77(1):31-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.01.011. Epub 2012
Feb 16.

Frequent downregulation of the transcription factor Foxa2 in lung cancer through 
epigenetic silencing.

Basseres DS(1), D'Alò F, Yeap BY, Löwenberg EC, Gonzalez DA, Yasuda H, Dayaram T,
Kocher ON, Godleski JJ, Richards WG, Meyerson M, Kobayashi S, Tenen DG, Halmos B,
Costa DB.

Author information: 
(1)Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA;
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, Brazil.

PURPOSE: We sought to determine the mechanisms of downregulation of the airway
transcription factor Foxa2 in lung cancer and the expression status of Foxa2 in
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: A series of 25 lung cancer cell lines were evaluated for Foxa2 protein
expression, FOXA2 mRNA levels, FOXA2 mutations, FOXA2 copy number changes and for
evidence of FOXA2 promoter hypermethylation. In addition, 32 NSCLCs were
sequenced for FOXA2 mutations and 173 primary NSCLC tumors evaluated for Foxa2
expression using an immunohistochemical assay.
RESULTS: Out of the 25 cell lines, 13 (52%) had undetectable FOXA2 mRNA. The
expression of FOXA2 mRNA and Foxa2 protein were congruent in 19/22 cells (p =
0.001). FOXA2 mutations were not identified in primary NSCLCs and were infrequent
in cell lines. Focal or broad chromosomal deletions involving FOXA2 were not
present. The promoter region of FOXA2 had evidence of hypermethylation, with an
inverse correlation between FOXA2 mRNA expression and presence of CpG
dinucleotide methylation (p < 0.0001). In primary NSCLC tumor specimens, there
was a high frequency of either absence (42/173, 24.2%) or no/low expression
(96/173, 55.4%) of Foxa2. In 130 patients with stage I NSCLC there was a trend
towards decreased survival in tumors with no/low expression of Foxa2 (HR of 1.6, 
95%CI 0.9-3.1; p = 0.122).
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of expression of Foxa2 is frequent in lung cancer cell lines
and NSCLCs. The main mechanism of downregulation of Foxa2 is epigenetic silencing
through promoter hypermethylation. Further elucidation of the involvement of
Foxa2 and other airway transcription factors in the pathogenesis of lung cancer
may identify novel therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3368092
PMID: 22341411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Diabetes Investig. 2012 Feb 20;3(1):41-51. doi:
10.1111/j.2040-1124.2011.00136.x.

Analysis of the transcription factor cascade that induces endocrine and exocrine 
cell lineages from pancreatic progenitor cells using a polyoma-based episomal
vector system.

Yamato E(1), Bamba Y(1), Kamiya Y(2), Yagi K(3), Miyazaki J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Regulation Research, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine.
(2)Stem Cell Regulation Research, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine ; 
Bio-functional Molecular Chemistry, Osaka University Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Suita, Japan. (3)Bio-functional Molecular Chemistry,
Osaka University Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Suita, Japan.

Aims/Introduction:  We recently established a strategy for isolating
multipotential duct-like cells, called pdx-1-positive pancreatic cell-derived
(PPPD) cells, from the pancreas. To analyze the molecular mechanisms of
pancreatic cell differentiation, we introduced a polyoma-based episomal vector
system into PPPD cells.MATERIALS AND METHODS:   PPPD cells were stably
transfected with a polyoma large T (PLT)-expressing plasmid vector, which
included the polyoma origin of replication, to generate PLT-PPPD cells. Various
cDNA for pancreas-related transcription factors were subcloned into the
expression plasmid pPyCAG, which included the polyoma origin of replication.
PLT-PPPD cells were stably transfected with the resulting plasmid vectors and
then subjected to gene and protein expression analyses.
RESULTS:   The coexpression of Mafa, Neurod1 and Ipf1 induced Ins1 and Ins2
expression in PLT-PPPD cells. The forced expression of Pax6 alone induced the
expression of glucagon. The coexpression of Neurod1 and Isl1 induced Ins2 and Sst
expression. In contrast, the expression of Ptf1a and Foxa2 induced the expression
of exocrine markers Cpa1 and Amy2. Transfections with multiple transcription
factors showed that Isl1 is required for the differentiation of both
insulin-positive cells and somatostatin-positive cells. In addition, Foxa2
induced the differentiation of glucagon-positive cells and inhibited the
differentiation of insulin-positive and somatostatin-positive cells. PLT-PPPD
cells allow episomal vector-based gene expression and should be useful for
studying the transcription factor cascades involved in the differentiation of
pancreatic cell types in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS:   Our coexpression study showed novel critical roles for Isl1 and
Foxa2 in the differentiation of PPPD cells into endocrine cells. (J Diabetes
Invest, doi: 10.1111/j.2040-1124.2011.00136.x, 2012).

PMCID: PMC4014932
PMID: 24843545  [PubMed]


306. BMC Med Genet. 2012 Feb 12;13:10. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-13-10.

The effect of FOXA2 rs1209523 on glucose-related phenotypes and risk of type 2
diabetes in Danish individuals.

Banasik K(1), Hollensted M, Andersson E, Sparsø T, Sandbaek A, Lauritzen T,
Jørgensen T, Witte DR, Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Section of
Metabolic Genetics, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark. Karina.Banasik@sund.ku.dk

BACKGROUND: Variations within the FOXA family have been studied for a putative
contribution to the risk of type 2 diabetes (T2D), and recently the minor
T-allele of FOXA2 rs1209523 was reported to associate with decreased fasting
plasma glucose levels in a study using a weighted false discovery rate control
procedure to enhance the statistical power of genome wide association studies in 
detecting associations between low-frequency variants and a given trait.Thus, the
primary aim of this study was to investigate whether the minor T-allele of
rs1205923 in FOXA2 associated with 1) decreased fasting plasma glucose and 2) a
lower risk of developing T2D. Secondly, we investigated whether rs1205923 in
FOXA2 associated with other glucose-related phenotypes.
METHODS: The variant was genotyped in Danish individuals from four different
study populations using KASPar(®) PCR SNP genotyping system. We examined for
associations of the FOXA2 genotype with fasting plasma glucose and estimates of
insulin release and insulin sensitivity following an oral glucose tolerance test 
in 6,162 Danish individuals from the population-based Inter99 study while
association with T2D risk was assessed in 10,196 Danish individuals including
four different study populations.
RESULTS: The FOXA2 rs1209523 was not associated with fasting plasma glucose
(effect size (ß) = -0.03 mmol/l (95%CI: -0.07; 0.01), p = 0.2) in
glucose-tolerant individuals from the general Danish population. Furthermore,
when employing a case-control setting the variant showed no association with T2D 
(odds ratio (OR) = 0.82 (95%CI: 0.62-1.07), p = 0.1) among Danish individuals.
However, when we performed the analysis in a subset of 6,022 non-obese
individuals (BMI < 30 kg/m(2)) an association with T2D was observed (OR = 0.68
(95%CI: 0.49-0.94), p = 0.02). Also, several indices of insulin release and
ß-cell function were associated with the minor T-allele of FOXA2 rs1209523 in
non-obese individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: We failed to replicate association of the minor T-allele of FOXA2
rs1209523 with fasting plasma glucose in a population based sample of glucose
tolerant individuals. More extensive studies are needed in order to fully
elucidate the potential role of FOXA2 in glucose homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3344680
PMID: 22325233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2012 Apr 15;302(8):L746-54. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00319.2011. Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Allele-specific transactivation of matrix metalloproteinase 7 by FOXA2 and
correlation with plasma levels in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Richards TJ(1), Park C, Chen Y, Gibson KF, Peter Di Y, Pardo A, Watkins SC, Choi 
AM, Selman M, Pilewski J, Kaminski N, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, PA 15213, USA.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a complex disease with poorly understood
etiology. Previously, we reported upregulation of matrix metalloproteinase 7
(MMP7) in both lung and peripheral blood of IPF patients. Here we report evidence
for genetic correlation of plasma levels and promoter polymorphisms (rs11568818
and rs11568819) of MMP7 in a well-characterized IPF cohort. Both the AA genotype 
of rs11568818 and the CT genotype of rs11568819 were found to be significantly
associated with higher MMP7 plasma levels. These associations were observed only 
in IPF patients and not in healthy controls. The G-to-A transition of rs11568818 
resulted in a novel binding site for the forkhead box A2 (FOXA2) transcription
factor, a key regulator of embryonic lung development and proper function of the 
mature lung. In vitro, this transition led to increased sensitivity of the MMP7
promoter to FOXA2. In IPF lungs, FOXA2 was localized in the nucleus of epithelial
cells that expressed MMP7 in the cytoplasm. These results suggest that increased 
sensitivity of the polymorphic MMP7 promoter to FOXA2 provides one of the genetic
bases for the upregulation of MMP7 in IPF.

PMCID: PMC3331579
PMID: 22268124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Cell. 2012 Jan 20;148(1-2):72-83. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.11.026.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 are essential for sexual dimorphism in liver cancer.

Li Z(1), Tuteja G, Schug J, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2012 Aug;57(2):453-4.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is sexually dimorphic in both rodents and humans, 
with significantly higher incidence in males, an effect that is dependent on sex 
hormones. The molecular mechanisms by which estrogens prevent and androgens
promote liver cancer remain unclear. Here, we discover that sexually dimorphic
HCC is completely reversed in Foxa1- and Foxa2-deficient mice after
diethylnitrosamine-induced hepatocarcinogenesis. Coregulation of target genes by 
Foxa1/a2 and either the estrogen receptor (ERa) or the androgen receptor (AR) was
increased during hepatocarcinogenesis in normal female or male mice,
respectively, but was lost in Foxa1/2-deficient mice. Thus, both
estrogen-dependent resistance to and androgen-mediated facilitation of HCC depend
on Foxa1/2. Strikingly, single nucleotide polymorphisms at FOXA2 binding sites
reduce binding of both FOXA2 and ERa to their targets in human liver and
correlate with HCC development in women. Thus, Foxa factors and their targets are
central for the sexual dimorphism of HCC.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3266536
PMID: 22265403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Expert Opin Ther Pat. 2012 Feb;22(2):181-4. doi: 10.1517/13543776.2012.655269.
Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Compositions and methods for treatment of Parkinson's disease: a patent
evaluation of WO2011/102847A1.

Chiurchiù V(1), Maccarrone M, Orlacchio A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Neurochimica dei Lipidi, Centro Europeo di Ricerca sul
Cervello-Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico Santa Lucia, Via del
Fosso di Fiorano 64, 00143 Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The application (WO2011/102847A1) deals with methods useful for the
treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD).
OBJECTIVE: It aims at producing mature and functional midbrain dopaminergic (mDA)
neurons useful for the treatment of PD.
METHODS: mDA neurons were produced from neural progenitor cells or stem cells by 
activating both the Wnt-Lmx1a/Lmx1b and the SHH-FoxA2 signaling pathways.
RESULTS: The level of the proteins of these two synergic pathways is increased,
as well as their biological activity.
CONCLUSION: The invention provides a method for treating or preventing PD by
increasing the level of at least one protein involved in an autoregulatory
pathway, which is fundamental during mDA neurons differentiation.

PMID: 22251081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30014. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030014. Epub 2012 Jan 6.

Foxa1 reduces lipid accumulation in human hepatocytes and is down-regulated in
nonalcoholic fatty liver.

Moya M(1), Benet M, Guzmán C, Tolosa L, García-Monzón C, Pareja E, Castell JV,
Jover R.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Hepatology Unit, University Hospital La Fe, Valencia, Spain.

Triglyceride accumulation in nonalcoholic fatty liver (NAFL) results from
unbalanced lipid metabolism which, in the liver, is controlled by several
transcription factors. The Foxa subfamily of winged helix/forkhead box (Fox)
transcription factors comprises three members which play important roles in
controlling both metabolism and homeostasis through the regulation of multiple
target genes in the liver, pancreas and adipose tissue. In the mouse liver, Foxa2
is repressed by insulin and mediates fasting responses. Unlike Foxa2 however, the
role of Foxa1 in the liver has not yet been investigated in detail. In this
study, we evaluate the role of Foxa1 in two human liver cell models, primary
cultured hepatocytes and HepG2 cells, by adenoviral infection. Moreover, human
and rat livers were analyzed to determine Foxa1 regulation in NAFL. Results
demonstrate that Foxa1 is a potent inhibitor of hepatic triglyceride synthesis,
accumulation and secretion by repressing the expression of multiple target genes 
of these pathways (e.g., GPAM, DGAT2, MTP, APOB). Moreover, Foxa1 represses the
fatty acid transporter protein FATP2 and lowers fatty acid uptake. Foxa1 also
increases the breakdown of fatty acids by inducing peroxisomal fatty acid
ß-oxidation and ketone body synthesis. Finally, Foxa1 is able to largely
up-regulate UCP1, thereby dissipating energy and consistently decreasing the
mitochondria membrane potential. We also report that human and rat NAFL have a
reduced Foxa1 expression, possibly through a protein kinase C-dependent pathway. 
We conclude that Foxa1 is an antisteatotic factor that coordinately tunes several
lipid metabolic pathways to block triglyceride accumulation in hepatocytes.
However, Foxa1 is down-regulated in human and rat NAFL and, therefore, increasing
Foxa1 levels could protect from steatosis. Altogether, we suggest that Foxa1
could be a novel therapeutic target for NAFL disease and insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC3253125
PMID: 22238690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Biol Reprod. 2012 May 10;86(5):146, 1-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.097089.
Print 2012 May.

Progesterone inhibits uterine gland development in the neonatal mouse uterus.

Filant J(1), Zhou H, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology, Department of Animal Sciences, Washington
State University, Pullman, Washington, USA.

Uterine glands and their secretions are required for conceptus (embryo/fetus and 
associated placenta) survival and development. In most mammals, uterine gland
morphogenesis or adenogenesis is a uniquely postnatal event; however, little is
known about the mechanisms governing the developmental event. In sheep, progestin
treatment of neonatal ewes permanently ablated differentiation of the endometrial
glands. Similarly, progesterone (P4) inhibits adenogenesis in neonatal mouse
uterus. Thus, P4 can be used as a tool to discover mechanisms regulating
endometrial adenogenesis. Female pups were treated with sesame vehicle alone as a
control or P4 from Postnatal Day 2 (PD 2) to PD 10, and reproductive tracts were 
examined on PD 5, 10, or 20. Endometrial glands were fully developed in control
mice by PD 20 but not in P4-treated mice. All other uterine cell types appeared
normal. Treatment with P4 stimulated proliferation of the stroma but suppressed
proliferation of the luminal epithelium. Microarray analysis revealed that
expression of genes were reduced (Car2, Fgf7, Fgfr2, Foxa2, Fzd10, Met, Mmp7,
Msx1, Msx2, Wnt4, Wnt7a, Wnt16) and increased (Hgf, Ihh, Wnt11) by P4 in the
neonatal uterus. These results support the idea that P4 inhibits endometrial
adenogenesis in the developing neonatal uterus by altering expression of
morphoregulatory genes and consequently disrupting normal patterns of cell
proliferation and development.

PMCID: PMC3364926
PMID: 22238285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mech Dev. 2012 Jan-Feb;128(11-12):597-609. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.12.004. Epub
2011 Dec 30.

Fate maps of ventral and dorsal pancreatic progenitor cells in early somite stage
mouse embryos.

Miki R(1), Yoshida T, Murata K, Oki S, Kume K, Kume S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Honjo 2-2-1, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan.

The origins of liver progenitor cells have been extensively studied, but evidence
on the origin of pancreatic precursor cells is currently limited. Pancreatic and 
duodenal homeobox gene 1 (Pdx1) is one of the earliest known markers for the
pancreas. A transgenic mouse line expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP)
under the control of the Pdx1 promoter showed that Pdx1/GFP expression was first 
observed in the mid-region of the anterior intestinal portal (AIP) lip at
embryonic day (E) 8.5 at the 5-6 somite stage (ss). The liver progenitors were
confirmed to originate from separate domains at the lateral endoderm and the
inner part of the medial AIP as previously reported (Tremblay and Zaret, 2005),
which turned out to lie caudally to the Pdx1/GFP-expressing domain. To confirm if
the early Pdx1/GFP-positive cells give rise to the pancreatic bud, we labeled the
cells on the lip of the AIP using the carbocyanine dye CM-DiI and traced their
fates in 1-4 ss, 5-6 ss and 7-9 ss E8.5 embryos using an ex utero whole embryo
culture method. At 1 ss, the ventral pancreas progenitors were observed in the
lateral endoderm, not yet being segregated from the liver or gut progenitors.
Cells that contributed solely to the ventral pancreas first appeared at the AIP
lip from 5 ss. At 5-6 ss, cells from the medial of the AIP lip contributed to the
ventral pancreas. The pancreas fate region become narrower as development
progresses. At 7-9 ss, the cells contributing to the ventral pancreas resided in 
a narrow region of the AIP lip. From 5 ss, the right flanking region contributes 
to the posterior gut, and the left flanking region contributes to the anterior
gut. Dorsal pancreatic progenitors originate from the dorsal endoderm at the 3-6 
somite level at 7-9 ss, though they have not yet diverged from the dorsal gut
progenitors at this stage.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22230751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2012 Mar;159B(2):236-42. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.b.32020. Epub 2012 Jan 5.

Clinical improvement of the aggressive neurobehavioral phenotype in a patient
with a deletion of PITX3 and the absence of L-DOPA in the cerebrospinal fluid.

Derwinska K(1), Mierzewska H, Goszczanska A, Szczepanik E, Xia Z, Kusmierska K,
Tryfon J, Kutkowska-Kazmierczak A, Bocian E, Mazurczak T, Obersztyn E,
Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.

The development of midbrain dopamine (DA) neurons is regulated by several
transcription factors, including Nurr1, Wnt1, Lmx1a/1b, En1, En2, Foxa1, Foxa2,
and Pitx3. PITX3 is an upstream co-activator of the TH (tyrosine hydroxylase)
promoter. Pitx3(-/-) mice have a selective loss of dopaminergic neurons in the
substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, leading to the significantly reduced
DA levels in the nigrostriatal pathway and in the dorsal striatum and manifest
anomalous striatum-dependent cognitive impairment and neurobehavioral activity.
Treatment with L-DOPA, dopamine, or dopamine receptor agonists in these mice
reversed several of their sensorimotor impairments. Heterozygous missense
mutations in PITX3 have been reported in patients with autosomal dominant
congenital cataract and anterior segment (ocular) mesenchymal dysgenesis (ASMD)
whereas homozygous missense mutations have been found in patients with
microphthalmia and neurological impairment. Using a clinical oligonucleotide
array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), we have identified an ~317 kb
hemizygous deletion in 10q24.32, involving PITX3 in a 17-year-old male with a
Smith-Magenis syndrome-like phenotype, including mild intellectual impairment,
sleep disturbance, hyperactivity, and aggressive and self-destructive behavior.
Interestingly, no eye anomalies were found in our patient. Analysis of
neurotransmitters in his cerebrospinal fluid revealed an absence of L-DOPA and
significantly decreased levels of catecholamine metabolites. Importantly, L-DOPA 
treatment of our patient has led to mild mitigation of his aggressive behavior
and mild improvement of his attention span, extended time periods of
concentration, and better sleep.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22223473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Mol Cell. 2012 Jan 27;45(2):171-84. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.11.018. Epub 2011 
Dec 22.

IKKa activation of NOTCH links tumorigenesis via FOXA2 suppression.

Liu M(1), Lee DF, Chen CT, Yen CJ, Li LY, Lee HJ, Chang CJ, Chang WC, Hsu JM, Kuo
HP, Xia W, Wei Y, Chiu PC, Chou CK, Du Y, Dhar D, Karin M, Chen CH, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Proinflammatory cytokine TNFa plays critical roles in promoting malignant cell
proliferation, angiogenesis, and tumor metastasis in many cancers. However, the
mechanism of TNFa-mediated tumor development remains unclear. Here, we show that 
IKKa, an important downstream kinase of TNFa, interacts with and phosphorylates
FOXA2 at S107/S111, thereby suppressing FOXA2 transactivation activity and
leading to decreased NUMB expression, and further activates the downstream NOTCH 
pathway and promotes cell proliferation and tumorigenesis. Moreover, we found
that levels of IKKa, pFOXA2 (S107/111), and activated NOTCH1 were significantly
higher in hepatocellular carcinoma tumors than in normal liver tissues and that
pFOXA2 (S107/111) expression was positively correlated with IKKa and activated
NOTCH1 expression in tumor tissues. Therefore, dysregulation of NUMB-mediated
suppression of NOTCH1 by TNFa/IKKa-associated FOXA2 inhibition likely contributes
to inflammation-mediated cancer pathogenesis. Here, we report a
TNFa/IKKa/FOXA2/NUMB/NOTCH1 pathway that is critical for inflammation-mediated
tumorigenesis and may provide a target for clinical intervention in human cancer.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3268914
PMID: 22196886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Transgenic Res. 2012 Aug;21(4):843-53. doi: 10.1007/s11248-011-9579-6. Epub 2011 
Dec 18.

Altered glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in a mouse line with activated
polyamine catabolism.

Cerrada-Gimenez M(1), Tusa M, Casellas A, Pirinen E, Moya M, Bosch F, Alhonen L.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology and Molecular Medicine, A.I. Virtanen Institute, Biocenter
Kuopio, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio Campus, P.O.Box 1627, 70211 Kuopio,
Finland. Marc.CerradaGimenez@uef.fi

Ubiquitous activation of polyamine catabolism has been demonstrated to have
protective effects in mice on fat accumulation and insulin sensitivity/glucose
tolerance in, both, normal conditions and after a high fat diet. We have analyzed
the endocrine pancreas functionality in four months-old male mice overexpressing 
the rate limiting enzyme in the polyamine catabolism, spermidine/spermine
N¹-acetyltransferase (SSAT). The pancreatic SSAT activity was 37-fold elevated in
the transgenic mice, which reduced the total pancreatic and islet pools of
spermidine (71%) and spermine (69%), and increased putrescine and N¹-acetyl
spermidine. Reduction in the islet ATP levels (65%) was accompanied with
increased transcription of 5'-AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) (1.5-fold) and 
Foxa2 (2.7-fold), and reduced HNF4a (67%) and HNF1a (92%), insulin 1 (47%),
insulin 2 (50%), and Glut2 (57%). Moreover, the SSAT transgenic mice also
presented increased beta cell area, decreased insulin production, and altered
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. It has been hypothesized that the acute
activation of the polyamine catabolism produces a futile cycle that greatly
decreases the energy reserves of the cell. The lower energy status would activate
the energy expenditure regulator, AMPK, which would consequently repress the
PI3K/Akt pathway, and activate the transcription factor Foxa2.

PMID: 22180015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Curr Med Chem. 2011;18(36):5519-27.

Left-right asymmetry in embryonic development and breast cancer: common molecular
determinants?

Wilting J(1), Hagedorn M.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Anatomy, Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University Medicine
Goettingen, Goettingen, Germany. joerg.wilting@med.uni-goettingen.de

At the first glance the vertebrate body appears to be symmetric, however, left
and right sides are different. This is tightly controlled during embryonic
development, and may as well affect the spatial occurrence of diseases. In the
embryo, determination of the left and right sides takes place before and during
gastrulation. Its failure results in heterotaxia, a diverse group of congenital
laterality disorders characterized by left-right displacement of organs. In
recent years, our knowledge about the molecular control of left-right asymmetry
during embryonic development has grown considerably. However, almost nothing is
known about the etiology of cancer laterality. Mammary carcinoma is 5 - 10% more 
likely to arise in the left breast. The left side of the body is also 10% more
prone to melanoma development. Whereas the right predominance of lung, ovarian
and testicular cancer might be explained by the greater organ mass on that side, 
possible reasons for left predominance of mammary carcinoma and melanoma are
highly speculative. Sleeping behavior, handedness, nursing behavior and
asymmetric sun exposure were named. A possible interrelation between the
molecular control of left-right asymmetry and cancer has not yet been discussed
in detail. Here we present an overview of molecules involved in both processes,
focusing on laterality of breast cancer. Several secreted and membrane-bound
growth factors such as Nodal, Lefty, FGF, HB-EGF and HGF as well as transcription
factors (e.g. Pitx2, FoxA2) may be candidates with such overlapping functions.
Studies on cancer laterality in transgenic mice are needed to make progress in
this neglected research field.

PMID: 22172062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Differentiation. 2012 Feb;83(2):S105-13. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2011.11.003. Epub
2011 Dec 6.

Fltp(T2AiCre): a new knock-in mouse line for conditional gene targeting in
distinct mono- and multiciliated tissues.

Lange A(1), Gegg M, Burtscher I, Bengel D, Kremmer E, Lickert H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Diabetes and Regeneration Research, Germany.

We recently identified Flattop (Fltp; 1700009p17Rik) in a screen for potential
Foxa2 target and novel mouse organizer genes. Besides its expression in the
embryonic node, we found that Fltp is active in other monociliated tissues such
as the sensory organs of the inner ear, duct and islets of the pancreas as well
as in testis. Additionally, Fltp mRNA is expressed in multiciliated epithelial
cells of the lung and of the choroid plexi in the brain. To genetically lineage
trace these cells during development and injury as well as to conditionally
inactivate genes in these tissues, we generated a Cre recombinase knock-in mouse 
line using the Fltp gene locus. By homologous recombination we have fused the
Fltp open-reading frame to a tandem affinity purification (TAP) tag followed by
an intervening viral T2A sequence for co-translational cleavage and an improved
Cre recombinase (iCre). This strategy allows both the analysis of the tagged
Fltp-TAP-T2A protein and the usage of the iCre recombinase for conditional
targeting approaches. Using the ROSA26 reporter mouse line we show that
Fltp(T2AiCre) is first active in the monociliated cells of the node, notochord,
floorplate and prechordal plate, consistent with the Fltp-TAP-T2A protein
production in the node progenitor cells. Furthermore iCre recombinase activity is
detected in multiciliated tissues such as choroid plexi of the brain and
epithelial cells of the lung with the onset at E10.5 and E13.5, respectively. In 
the pancreas, ß-galactosidase activity is seen in the monociliated cells of the
pancreatic duct and islet of Langerhans. Intercrossing Fltp(T2AiCre) mice with
the CAG-CAT-EGFP reporter mouse line further confirms iCre activity in
multiciliated cells of the lung and brain on a cellular level. Thus, the
Fltp(T2AiCre) line is a powerful tool to conditionally inactivate genes in
distinct mono- and multiciliated tissues and to analyze the tagged Fltp protein
in vivo.

Copyright © 2011 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22153975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Steroids. 2012 Aug;77(10):943-50. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2011.11.005. Epub 2011 
Nov 26.

Interplay of estrogen receptors and GPR30 for the regulation of early membrane
initiated transcriptional effects: A pharmacological approach.

Notas G(1), Kampa M, Pelekanou V, Castanas E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Endocrinology, University of Crete, School of
Medicine, Greece. gnotas@med.uoc.gr

Estrogens exert their effect through ERa and ERß intracellular transcription
factors and rapid, usually membrane-initiated receptors, influencing cytosolic
signaling and transcription. The nature of extranuclear estrogen elements has not
been elucidated so far; classical or alternatively transcribed ER isoforms
(ERa36, ERa46) anchored to the plasma membrane and GPR30 (GPER1) have been
reported to exert early estrogen actions. Here, we used E2-BSA, an impermeable
estradiol analog for a transcriptome analysis in four GREP1 positive breast
cancer cell lines with different estrogen receptor profiles (T47D, MCF-7,
MDA-MB-231 and SKBR3) in order to evaluate GPER1 transcriptional effects. Early
effects of E2-BSA were assayed after 3h of incubation, in the absence/presence of
ICI182,780 (ER-inhibitor) or G15 (GREP1-specific inhibitor). E2-BSA specifically 
modified 277-549 transcripts in the different cell lines. Two different clusters 
of transcripts could be identified: (1) the majority of transcripts were
inhibited by both ICI182,780 and G15, suggesting an interaction of E2-BSA with a 
common ER-related element, or a direct ER-GPER1 interaction; (2) a small number
of G15-only modified transcripts, in two cell lines (T47D and SKBR3 cells),
indicative of specific GPER1-related effects. The latter transcripts were
significantly related to pathways including FOXA2/FOXA3 transcription factor
networks, RNA-Polymerases Transcription Regulation and lipid metabolism, while
ICI/G15 inhibited transcripts affected pathways related to apoptosis,
erythropoietin signaling, metabolic effects through the citric acid cycle, IL-4
and IL-5 mediated events and homologous DNA recombination. Finally, we review the
current literature of GPER1 actions, in view of our results of ER-dependent and
independent GPER1-modified pathways.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22138208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27965. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027965. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Involvement of histone acetylation of Sox17 and Foxa2 promoters during mouse
definitive endoderm differentiation revealed by microRNA profiling.

Fu S(1), Fei Q, Jiang H, Chuai S, Shi S, Xiong W, Jiang L, Lu C, Atadja P, Li E, 
Shou J.

Author information: 
(1)China Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Shanghai, China.

Generation of hepatocyte from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) holds great promise for
hepatocyte replacement therapy to treat liver diseases. Achieving high efficiency
of directed differentiation of ESCs to hepatocyte is of critical importance.
Previously, Wnt3a has been reported to promote Activin A-induced human definitive
endoderm (DE) differentiation, the early stage of hepatocyte differentiation.
However, the underlying molecular mechanisms are not clear. Growing evidence
demonstrated that microRNAs (miRNAs) are key regulators involved in various
important biological processes including the regulation of stem cell
differentiation. In the present study, we profiled genome wide miRNA expression
during Wnt3a and Activin A induced mouse DE differentiation. We uncovered
distinct miRNA expression patterns during DE differentiation with the
identification of a subset of miRNAs whose expression is synergistically
regulated by Wnt3a/Activin A treatment at different stages of DE differentiation.
Forced expression of a pool of such synergistically regulated miRNAs alone could 
partially promote DE differentiation, indicating a regulatory role of them. Using
TargetScan and GeneGO pathway analyses, the synergistically regulated miRNAs are 
predicted to regulate key pathways involved in DE differentiation; among them
includes the regulation of histone acetylation. Consistently, Wnt3a and Activin A
treatment increased global histone acetylation which can be partially mimicked by
over expression of the pooled miRNAs. Chromatin IP (ChIP) experiments
demonstrated that the promoter regions of Sox17 and Foxa2 are subjected to
histone acetylation regulation. Administration of Hdac inhibitors greatly
augmented DE differentiation. Our data uncovered a novel epigenetic mechanism of 
Wnt3a and Activin A induced DE differentiation, whereby the treatment of growth
factors induced histone acetylation at least in part by the regulation of miRNA
expression.

PMCID: PMC3223193
PMID: 22132182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Cells Tissues Organs. 2012;195(6):507-23. doi: 10.1159/000329864. Epub 2011 Nov
25.

Induction and selection of Sox17-expressing endoderm cells generated from murine 
embryonic stem cells.

Schroeder IS(1), Sulzbacher S, Nolden T, Fuchs J, Czarnota J, Meisterfeld R,
Himmelbauer H, Wobus AM.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research Gatersleben,
Germany.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells offer a valuable source for generating
insulin-producing cells. However, current differentiation protocols often result 
in heterogeneous cell populations of various developmental stages. Here we show
the activin A-induced differentiation of mouse ES cells carrying a homologous
dsRed-IRES-puromycin knock-in within the Sox17 locus into the endoderm lineage.
Sox17-expressing cells were selected by fluorescence-assisted cell sorting (FACS)
and characterized at the transcript and protein level. Treatment of ES cells with
high concentrations of activin A for 10 days resulted in up to 19% Sox17-positive
cells selected by FACS. Isolated Sox17-positive cells were characterized by
defini- tive endoderm-specific Sox17/Cxcr4/Foxa2 transcripts, but lacked
pluripotency-associated Oct4 mRNA and protein. The Sox17-expressing cells showed 
downregulation of extraembryonic endoderm (Sox7, Afp, Sdf1)-, mesoderm (Foxf1,
Meox1)- and ectoderm (Pax6, NeuroD6)-specific transcripts. The presence of Hnf4a,
Hes1 and Pdx1 mRNA demonstrated the expression of primitive gut/foregut
cell-specific markers. Ngn3, Nkx6.1 and Nkx2.2 transcripts in Sox17-positive
cells were determined as properties of pancreatic endocrine progenitors.
Immunocytochemistry of activin A-induced Sox17-positive embryoid bodies revealed 
coexpression of Cxcr4 and Foxa2. Moreover, the histochemical demonstration of
E-cadherin-, Cxcr4-, Sox9-, Hnf1ß- and Ngn3-positive epithelial-like structures
underlined the potential of Sox17-positive cells to further differentiate into
the pancreatic lineage. By reducing the heterogeneity of the ES cell progeny,
Sox17-expressing cells are a suitable model to evaluate the effects of growth and
differentiation factors and of culture conditions to delineate the
differentiation process for the generation of pancreatic cells in vitro.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22123608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Cell Microbiol. 2012 Mar;14(3):401-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2011.01727.x.
Epub 2011 Dec 28.

Pseudomonas aeruginosa pyocyanin causes airway goblet cell hyperplasia and
metaplasia and mucus hypersecretion by inactivating the transcriptional factor
FoxA2.

Hao Y(1), Kuang Z, Walling BE, Bhatia S, Sivaguru M, Chen Y, Gaskins HR, Lau GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
Urbana, IL, USA.

The redox-active exotoxin pyocyanin (PCN) can be recovered in 100 µM
concentrations in the sputa of bronchiectasis patients chronically infected with 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (PA). However, the importance of PCN within bronchiectatic
airways colonized by PA remains unrecognized. Recently, we have shown that PCN is
required for chronic PA lung infection in mice, and that chronic instillation of 
PCN induces goblet cell hyperplasia (GCH), pulmonary fibrosis, emphysema and
influx of immune cells in mouse airways. Many of these pathological features are 
strikingly similar to the mouse airways devoid of functional FoxA2, a
transcriptional repressor of GCH and mucus biosynthesis. In this study, we
postulate that PCN causes and exacerbates GCH and mucus hypersecretion in
bronchiectatic airways chronically infected by PA by inactivating FoxA2. We
demonstrate that PCN represses the expression of FoxA2 in mouse airways and in
bronchial epithelial cells cultured at an air-liquid interface or conventionally,
resulting in GCH, increased MUC5B mucin gene expression and mucus hypersecretion.
Immunohistochemical and inhibitor studies indicate that PCN upregulates the
expression of Stat6 and EGFR, both of which in turn repress the expression of
FoxA2. These studies demonstrate that PCN induces GCH and mucus hypersecretion by
inactivating FoxA2.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22103442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Eur J Neurosci. 2011 Nov;34(10):1553-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07910.x.

Development of raphe serotonin neurons from specification to guidance.

Kiyasova V(1), Gaspar P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR-S 839, 17 rue du Fer à Moulin, 75005 Paris, France.

The main features of the development of the serotonin (5-HT) raphe neurons have
been known for many years but more recent molecular studies, using mouse
genetics, have since unveiled several intriguing aspects of the specification of 
the raphe serotonergic system. These studies indicated that, although all 5-HT
neurons in the raphe follow the same general program for their specification,
there are also clear regional differences in the way that these neurons are
specified and are guided towards different brain targets. Here we overview recent
progress made in the understanding of the developmental programming of
serotonergic neurons in the mouse raphe, emphasizing data showing how
heterogeneous subsets of 5-HT neurons may be generated. Serotonergic progenitors 
are produced in the brainstem in different rhombomeres under the influence of a
set of secreted factors, sonic hedgehog and fibroblast growth factors, which
determine their position in the neural tube. Two main transcriptional gene
networks are involved in the specification of 5-HT identity, with Lmx1b and Pet1 
transcription factors as main players. A differential requirement for Pet1 was,
however, revealed, which underlies an anatomical and functional diversity.
Transcriptional programs controlling 5-HT identity could also impact axon
guidance mechanisms directing 5-HT neurons to their targets. Although no direct
links have yet been established, a large set of molecular determinants have
already been shown to be involved in the growth, axon guidance and targeting of
5-HT raphe neurons, particularly within the forebrain. Alterations in the
molecular mechanisms involved in 5-HT development are likely to have significant 
roles in mood disease predisposition.

© 2011 The Authors. European Journal of Neuroscience © 2011 Federation of
European Neuroscience Societies and Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22103413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Hepatology. 2012 Apr;55(4):1193-203. doi: 10.1002/hep.24790. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Rapid generation of mature hepatocyte-like cells from human induced pluripotent
stem cells by an efficient three-step protocol.

Chen YF(1), Tseng CY, Wang HW, Kuo HC, Yang VW, Lee OK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research and Education, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Liver transplantation is the only definitive treatment for end-stage cirrhosis
and fulminant liver failure, but the lack of available donor livers is a major
obstacle to liver transplantation. Recently, induced pluripotent stem cells
(iPSCs) derived from the reprogramming of somatic fibroblasts, have been shown to
resemble embryonic stem (ES) cells in that they have pluripotent properties and
the potential to differentiate into all cell lineages in vitro, including
hepatocytes. Thus, iPSCs could serve as a favorable cell source for a wide range 
of applications, including drug toxicity testing, cell transplantation, and
patient-specific disease modeling. Here, we describe an efficient and rapid
three-step protocol that is able to rapidly generate hepatocyte-like cells from
human iPSCs. This occurs because the endodermal induction step allows for more
efficient and definitive endoderm cell formation. We show that hepatocyte growth 
factor (HGF), which synergizes with activin A and Wnt3a, elevates the expression 
of the endodermal marker Foxa2 (forkhead box a2) by 39.3% compared to when HGF is
absent (14.2%) during the endodermal induction step. In addition, iPSC-derived
hepatocytes had a similar gene expression profile to mature hepatocytes.
Importantly, the hepatocyte-like cells exhibited cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4)
enzyme activity, secreted urea, uptake of low-density lipoprotein (LDL), and
possessed the ability to store glycogen. Moreover, the hepatocyte-like cells
rescued lethal fulminant hepatic failure in a nonobese diabetic severe combined
immunodeficient mouse model.CONCLUSION: We have established a rapid and efficient
differentiation protocol that is able to generate functional hepatocyte-like
cells from human iPSCs. This may offer an alternative option for treatment of
liver diseases.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3779307
PMID: 22095466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Nat Protoc. 2011 Nov 10;6(12):1920-8. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2011.410.

Generating human intestinal tissue from pluripotent stem cells in vitro.

McCracken KW(1), Howell JC, Wells JM, Spence JR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Here we describe a protocol for generating 3D human intestinal tissues (called
organoids) in vitro from human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs). To generate
intestinal organoids, pluripotent stem cells are first differentiated into
FOXA2(+)SOX17(+) endoderm by treating the cells with activin A for 3 d. After
endoderm induction, the pluripotent stem cells are patterned into CDX2(+) mid-
and hindgut tissue using FGF4 and WNT3a. During this patterning step, 3D mid- or 
hindgut spheroids bud from the monolayer epithelium attached to the tissue
culture dish. The 3D spheroids are further cultured in Matrigel along with
prointestinal growth factors, and they proliferate and expand over 1-3 months to 
give rise to intestinal tissue, complete with intestinal mesenchyme and
epithelium comprising all of the major intestinal cell types. To date, this is
the only method for efficiently directing the differentiation of hPSCs into 3D
human intestinal tissue in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3896236
PMID: 22082986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Circ Res. 2012 Jan 6;110(1):34-46. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.249847. Epub 2011 
Nov 10.

Integration of repulsive guidance cues generates avascular zones that shape
mammalian blood vessels.

Meadows SM(1), Fletcher PJ, Moran C, Xu K, Neufeld G, Chauvet S, Mann F, Krieg
PA, Cleaver O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, NA8.300, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

RATIONALE: Positive signals, such as vascular endothelial growth factor, direct
endothelial cells (ECs) to specific locations during blood vessel formation. Less
is known about repulsive signal contribution to shaping vessels. Recently,
"neuronal guidance cues" have been shown to influence EC behavior, particularly
in directing sprouting angiogenesis by repelling ECs. However, their role during 
de novo blood vessel formation remains unexplored.
OBJECTIVE: To identify signals that guide and pattern the first mammalian blood
vessels.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using genetic mouse models, we show that blood vessels are
sculpted through the generation of stereotyped avascular zones by EC-repulsive
cues. We demonstrate that Semaphorin3E (Sema3E) is a key factor that shapes the
paired dorsal aortae in mouse, as sema3E(-/-) embryos develop an abnormally
branched aortic plexus with a markedly narrowed avascular midline. In vitro
cultures and avian grafting experiments show strong repulsion of ECs by
Sema3E-expressing cells. We further identify the mouse notochord as a rich source
of multiple redundant neuronal guidance cues. Mouse embryos that lack notochords 
fail to form cohesive aortic vessels because of loss of the avascular midline,
yet maintain lateral avascular zones. We demonstrate that lateral avascular zones
are directly generated by the lateral plate mesoderm, a critical source of
Sema3E.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that Sema3E-generated avascular zones are
critical regulators of mammalian cardiovascular patterning and are the first to
identify a repulsive role for the lateral plate mesoderm. Integration of
multiple, and in some cases redundant, repulsive cues from various tissues is
critical to patterning the first embryonic blood vessels.

PMCID: PMC3253216
PMID: 22076636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Endocrinology. 2012 Jan;153(1):492-500. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1310. Epub 2011 Nov 
8.

Forkhead box A1 (FOXA1) and A2 (FOXA2) oppositely regulate human type 1
iodothyronine deiodinase gene in liver.

Kanamoto N(1), Tagami T, Ueda-Sakane Y, Sone M, Miura M, Yasoda A, Tamura N, Arai
H, Nakao K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, 54 Shogoin Kawahara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
kyotetsu@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Type 1 iodothyronine deiodinase (D1), a selenoenzyme that catalyzes the
bioactivation of thyroid hormone, is expressed mainly in the liver. Its
expression and activity are modulated by several factors, but the precise
mechanism of its transcriptional regulation remains unclear. In the present
study, we have analyzed the promoter of human D1 gene (hDIO1) to identify factors
that prevalently increase D1 activity in the human liver. Deletion and mutation
analyses demonstrated that a forkhead box (FOX)A binding site and an E-box site
within the region between nucleotides -187 and -132 are important for hDIO1
promoter activity in the liver. EMSA demonstrated that FOXA1 and FOXA2
specifically bind to the FOXA binding site and that upstream stimulatory factor
(USF) specifically binds to the E-box element. Overexpression of FOXA2 decreased 
hDIO1 promoter activity, and short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of FOXA2
increased the expression of hDIO1 mRNA. In contrast, overexpression of USF1/2
increased hDIO1 promoter activity. Short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of
FOXA1 decreased the expression of hDIO1 mRNA, but knockdown of both FOXA1 and
FOXA2 restored it. The response of the hDIO1 promoter to USF was greatly
attenuated in the absence of FOXA1. Taken together, these results indicate that a
balance of FOXA1 and FOXA2 expression modulates hDIO1 expression in the liver.

PMID: 22067325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. PLoS Biol. 2011 Oct;9(10):e1001181. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001181. Epub 2011 
Oct 25.

Multifactorial origins of heart and gut defects in nipbl-deficient zebrafish, a
model of Cornelia de Lange Syndrome.

Muto A(1), Calof AL, Lander AD, Schilling TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, California, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Biol. 2011 Oct;9(10):e1001180.

Cornelia de Lange Syndrome (CdLS) is the founding member of a class of
multi-organ system birth defect syndromes termed cohesinopathies, named for the
chromatin-associated protein complex cohesin, which mediates sister chromatid
cohesion. Most cases of CdLS are caused by haploinsufficiency for Nipped-B-like
(Nipbl), a highly conserved protein that facilitates cohesin loading. Consistent 
with recent evidence implicating cohesin and Nipbl in transcriptional regulation,
both CdLS cell lines and tissues of Nipbl-deficient mice show changes in the
expression of hundreds of genes. Nearly all such changes are modest,
however--usually less than 1.5-fold--raising the intriguing possibility that, in 
CdLS, severe developmental defects result from the collective action of many
otherwise innocuous perturbations. As a step toward testing this hypothesis, we
developed a model of nipbl-deficiency in zebrafish, an organism in which we can
quantitatively investigate the combinatorial effects of gene expression changes. 
After characterizing the structure and embryonic expression of the two zebrafish 
nipbl genes, we showed that morpholino knockdown of these genes produces a
spectrum of specific heart and gut/visceral organ defects with similarities to
those in CdLS. Analysis of nipbl morphants further revealed that, as early as
gastrulation, expression of genes involved in endodermal differentiation (sox32, 
sox17, foxa2, and gata5) and left-right patterning (spaw, lefty2, and dnah9) is
altered. Experimental manipulation of the levels of several such genes--using RNA
injection or morpholino knockdown--implicated both additive and synergistic
interactions in causing observed developmental defects. These findings support
the view that birth defects in CdLS arise from collective effects of quantitative
changes in gene expression. Interestingly, both the phenotypes and gene
expression changes in nipbl morphants differed from those in mutants or morphants
for genes encoding cohesin subunits, suggesting that the transcriptional
functions of Nipbl cannot be ascribed simply to its role in cohesin loading.

PMCID: PMC3201921
PMID: 22039349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Br J Dermatol. 2011 Dec;165(6):1293-302. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2011.10708.x.

Susceptibility variants on chromosome 7p21.1 suggest HDAC9 as a new candidate
gene for male-pattern baldness.

Brockschmidt FF(1), Heilmann S, Ellis JA, Eigelshoven S, Hanneken S, Herold C,
Moebus S, Alblas MA, Lippke B, Kluck N, Priebe L, Degenhardt FA, Jamra RA,
Meesters C, Jöckel KH, Erbel R, Harrap S, Schumacher J, Fröhlich H, Kruse R,
Hillmer AM, Becker T, Nöthen MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn,
Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, D-53127 Bonn, Germany. felix.brockschmidt@uni-bonn.de

BACKGROUND: Male-pattern baldness (androgenetic alopecia, AGA) is the most common
form of hair loss among humans. Research has shown that it is caused by genetic
factors. Numerous studies have unequivocally identified two major genetic risk
loci for AGA: the X-chromosomal AR/EDA2R locus, and the PAX1/FOXA2 locus on
chromosome 20.
OBJECTIVES: To identify further candidate genes for AGA, and thus gain further
insights into this phenotype.
METHODS: A German sample of 581 severely affected cases and 617 controls was used
to perform a genome-wide association study. The identified associated locus was
further analysed by fine-mapping, and then independently replicated in an
Australian sample. Expression and pathway analyses were performed to characterize
the susceptibility gene identified.
RESULTS: The most significant association signal was obtained for rs756853 (P =
1·64 × 10(-7) ), which is located intronically in the histone deacetylase 9
(HDAC9) gene. Fine-mapping and a family-based analysis revealed that rs756853 and
the 6-kb distal rs2249817 were the most highly associated single nucleotide
polymorphisms. The association finding was replicated in an independent
Australian sample, when the analysis was restricted to severely affected cases
and unaffected controls (P = 0·026). Analysis of rs2249817 in a combined sample
of severely affected German and Australian cases and unaffected controls revealed
a strong association signal (P = 9·09 × 10(-8) ). Tissue expression studies
demonstrated HDAC9 expression in various tissues, including tissues of relevance 
to AGA. No strong genotypic effects were observed in genotype-specific expression
or splice studies. Pathway analyses supported the hypothesis that HDAC9 plays a
functional role in AGA via interaction with the AR gene.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study suggests that HDAC9 is the third AGA
susceptibility gene.

© 2011 The Authors. BJD © 2011 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 22032556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Exp Mol Med. 2012 Jan 31;44(1):26-35. doi: 10.3858/emm.2012.44.1.002.

Differentiation of human labia minora dermis-derived fibroblasts into
insulin-producing cells.

Kim B(1), Yoon BS, Moon JH, Kim J, Jun EK, Lee JH, Kim JS, Baik CS, Kim A, Whang 
KY, You S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Function Regulation College of Life Sciences and
Biotechnology Korea University Seoul, Korea.

Recent evidence has suggested that human skin fibroblasts may represent a novel
source of therapeutic stem cells. In this study, we report a 3-stage method to
induce the differentiation of skin fibroblasts into insulin- producing cells
(IPCs). In stage 1, we establish the isolation, expansion and characterization of
mesenchymal stem cells from human labia minora dermis- derived fibroblasts
(hLMDFs) (stage 1: MSC expansion). hLMDFs express the typical mesenchymal stem
cell marker proteins and can differentiate into adipocytes, osteoblasts,
chondrocytes or muscle cells. In stage 2, DMEM/F12 serum-free medium with ITS mix
(insulin, transferrin, and selenite) is used to induce differentiation of hLMDFs 
into endoderm-like cells, as determined by the expression of the endoderm markers
Sox17, Foxa2, and PDX1 (stage 2: mesenchymal-endoderm transition). In stage 3,
cells in the mesenchymal- endoderm transition stage are treated with nicotinamide
in order to further differentiate into self-assembled, 3-dimensional islet
cell-like clusters that express multiple genes related to pancreatic ß-cell
development and function (stage 3: IPC). We also found that the transplantation
of IPCs can normalize blood glucose levels and rescue glucose homeostasis in
streptozotocin- induced diabetic mice. These results indicate that hLMDFs have
the capacity to differentiate into functionally competent IPCs and represent a
potential cell-based treatment for diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC3277895
PMID: 22020533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 20;11:63. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-63.

Conserved and non-conserved enhancers direct tissue specific transcription in
ancient germ layer specific developmental control genes.

Chatterjee S(1), Bourque G, Lufkin T.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 60
Biopolis Street, 138672, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Identifying DNA sequences (enhancers) that direct the precise spatial
and temporal expression of developmental control genes remains a significant
challenge in the annotation of vertebrate genomes. Locating these sequences,
which in many cases lie at a great distance from the transcription start site,
has been a major obstacle in deciphering gene regulation. Coupling of comparative
genomics with functional validation to locate such regulatory elements has been a
successful method in locating many such regulatory elements. But most of these
studies looked either at a single gene only or the whole genome without focusing 
on any particular process. The pressing need is to integrate the tools of
comparative genomics with knowledge of developmental biology to validate
enhancers for developmental transcription factors in greater detail
RESULTS: Our results show that near four different genes (nkx3.2, pax9, otx1b and
foxa2) in zebrafish, only 20-30% of highly conserved DNA sequences can act as
developmental enhancers irrespective of the tissue the gene expresses in. We find
that some genes also have multiple conserved enhancers expressing in the same
tissue at the same or different time points in development. We also located
non-conserved enhancers for two of the genes (pax9 and otx1b). Our modified
Bacterial artificial chromosome (BACs) studies for these 4 genes revealed that
many of these enhancers work in a synergistic fashion, which cannot be captured
by individual DNA constructs and are not conserved at the sequence level. Our
detailed biochemical and transgenic analysis revealed Foxa1 binds to the otx1b
non-conserved enhancer to direct its activity in forebrain and otic vesicle of
zebrafish at 24 hpf.
CONCLUSION: Our results clearly indicate that high level of functional
conservation of genes is not necessarily associated with sequence conservation of
its regulatory elements. Moreover certain non conserved DNA elements might have
role in gene regulation. The need is to bring together multiple approaches to
bear upon individual genes to decipher all its regulatory elements.

PMCID: PMC3210094
PMID: 22011226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Dev Biol. 2011 Dec 15;360(2):415-25. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.002. Epub 2011 
Oct 8.

Integrated microarray and ChIP analysis identifies multiple Foxa2 dependent
target genes in the notochord.

Tamplin OJ(1), Cox BJ, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Research Institute, The
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
otamplin@enders.tch.harvard.edu

The node and notochord are key tissues required for patterning of the vertebrate 
body plan. Understanding the gene regulatory network that drives their formation 
and function is therefore important. Foxa2 is a key transcription factor at the
top of this genetic hierarchy and finding its targets will help us to better
understand node and notochord development. We performed an extensive
microarray-based gene expression screen using sorted embryonic notochord cells to
identify early notochord-enriched genes. We validated their specificity to the
node and notochord by whole mount in situ hybridization. This provides the
largest available resource of notochord-expressed genes, and therefore candidate 
Foxa2 target genes in the notochord. Using existing Foxa2 ChIP-seq data from
adult liver, we were able to identify a set of genes expressed in the notochord
that had associated regions of Foxa2-bound chromatin. Given that Foxa2 is a
pioneer transcription factor, we reasoned that these sites might represent
notochord-specific enhancers. Candidate Foxa2-bound regions were tested for
notochord specific enhancer function in a zebrafish reporter assay and 7 novel
notochord enhancers were identified. Importantly, sequence conservation or
predictive models could not have readily identified these regions. Mutation of
putative Foxa2 binding elements in two of these novel enhancers abrogated
reporter expression and confirmed their Foxa2 dependence. The combination of
highly specific gene expression profiling and genome-wide ChIP analysis is a
powerful means of understanding developmental pathways, even for small cell
populations such as the notochord.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22008794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Jan;44(1):72-83. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2011.09.008.
Epub 2011 Sep 29.

SOX9 regulates endocrine cell differentiation during human fetal pancreas
development.

McDonald E(1), Li J, Krishnamurthy M, Fellows GF, Goodyer CG, Wang R.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Health Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London,
ON, Canada.

The transition of pancreatic progenitor cells to mature endocrine cells is
regulated by the sequential activation and interaction of several transcription
factors. In mice, the transcription factor Sox9 has been shown to support
endocrine cell differentiation. However, the functional role of SOX9 during
pancreas development in the human has yet to be determined. The present study was
to characterize SOX9 expression during human fetal pancreas development and
examine its functional role by transfection with SOX9 siRNA or SOX9 expression
vectors. Here we report that SOX9 was most frequently expressed in PDX1(+) cells 
(60-83%) and least in mature endocrine cells (<1-14%). The proliferation of
SOX9(+) cells was significantly higher at 8-10 weeks than at 14-21 weeks (p<0.05)
or 20-21 weeks (p<0.01). SOX9 frequently co-localized with FOXA2, NGN3 and
transcription factors linked to NGN3 (NKX2.2, NKX6.1, PAX6). siRNA knockdown of
SOX9 significantly decreased islet-epithelial cell proliferation, NGN3, NKX6.1,
PAX6 and INS mRNA levels and the number of NGN3(+) and insulin(+) cells (p<0.05) 
while increasing GCG mRNA and glucagon(+) cells (p<0.05). Examination of SOX9
associated signaling pathways revealed a decrease in phospho-Akt (p<0.01),
phospho-GSK3ß (p<0.01) and cyclin D1 (p<0.01) with a decrease in nuclear
ß-catenin(+) (p<0.05) cells following SOX9 siRNA knockdown. In contrast,
over-expression of SOX9 significantly increased the number of islet cells
proliferating, NGN3, NKX6.1, PAX6 and INS mRNA levels, the phospho-Akt/GSK3ß
cascade and the number of insulin(+) cells. Our results demonstrated that SOX9 is
important for the expression of NGN3 and molecular markers of endocrine cell
differentiation in the human fetal pancreas.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21983268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cell Metab. 2011 Oct 5;14(4):516-27. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.09.001.

Postprandial hepatic lipid metabolism requires signaling through Akt2 independent
of the transcription factors FoxA2, FoxO1, and SREBP1c.

Wan M(1), Leavens KF, Saleh D, Easton RM, Guertin DA, Peterson TR, Kaestner KH,
Sabatini DM, Birnbaum MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Under conditions of obesity and insulin resistance, the serine/threonine protein 
kinase Akt/PKB is required for lipid accumulation in liver. Two forkhead
transcription factors, FoxA2 and FoxO1, have been suggested to function
downstream of and to be negatively regulated by Akt and are proposed as key
determinants of hepatic triglyceride content. In this study, we utilize genetic
loss of function experiments to show that constitutive activation of neither
FoxA2 nor FoxO1 can account for the protection from steatosis afforded by
deletion of Akt2 in liver. Rather, another downstream target positively regulated
by Akt, the mTORC1 complex, is required in vivo for de novo lipogenesis and
Srebp1c expression. Nonetheless, activation of mTORC1 and SREBP1c is not
sufficient to drive postprandial lipogenesis in the absence of Akt2. These data
show that insulin signaling through Akt2 promotes anabolic lipid metabolism
independent of Foxa2 or FoxO1 and through pathways additional to the
mTORC1-dependent activation of SREBP1c.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3190164
PMID: 21982711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cell Metab. 2011 Oct 5;14(4):439-40. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2011.09.006.

Of fat, ß cells, and diabetes.

Thorens B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Genomics, University of Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland. bernard.thorens@unil.ch

Comment on
    Nat Med. 2011 Sep;17(9):1067-75.

The molecular mechanisms linking diet, obesity, and type 2 diabetes are still
poorly understood. In a recent paper, Ohtsubo et al. (2011) show that high lipid 
levels induce nuclear exclusion of Foxa2 and HNF1a in ß cells, leading to
impaired expression and glycosylation of proteins controlling glucose-stimulated 
insulin secretion.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21982703  [PubMed]


335. PLoS Genet. 2011 Sep;7(9):e1002277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002277. Epub 2011 
Sep 15.

Study of FoxA pioneer factor at silent genes reveals Rfx-repressed enhancer at
Cdx2 and a potential indicator of esophageal adenocarcinoma development.

Watts JA(1), Zhang C, Klein-Szanto AJ, Kormish JD, Fu J, Zhang MQ, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Understanding how silent genes can be competent for activation provides insight
into development as well as cellular reprogramming and pathogenesis. We performed
genomic location analysis of the pioneer transcription factor FoxA in the adult
mouse liver and found that about one-third of the FoxA bound sites are near
silent genes, including genes without detectable RNA polymerase II. Virtually all
of the FoxA-bound silent sites are within conserved sequences, suggesting
possible function. Such sites are enriched in motifs for transcriptional
repressors, including for Rfx1 and type II nuclear hormone receptors. We found
one such target site at a cryptic "shadow" enhancer 7 kilobases (kb) downstream
of the Cdx2 gene, where Rfx1 restricts transcriptional activation by FoxA. The
Cdx2 shadow enhancer exhibits a subset of regulatory properties of the upstream
Cdx2 promoter region. While Cdx2 is ectopically induced in the early metaplastic 
condition of Barrett's esophagus, its expression is not necessarily present in
progressive Barrett's with dysplasia or adenocarcinoma. By contrast, we find that
Rfx1 expression in the esophageal epithelium becomes gradually extinguished
during progression to cancer, i.e, expression of Rfx1 decreased markedly in
dysplasia and adenocarcinoma. We propose that this decreased expression of Rfx1
could be an indicator of progression from Barrett's esophagus to adenocarcinoma
and that similar analyses of other transcription factors bound to silent genes
can reveal unanticipated regulatory insights into oncogenic progression and
cellular reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC3174211
PMID: 21935353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Dec;124(2):370-7. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr245. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Development of a neural teratogenicity test based on human embryonic stem cells: 
response to retinoic acid exposure.

Colleoni S(1), Galli C, Gaspar JA, Meganathan K, Jagtap S, Hescheler J,
Sachinidis A, Lazzari G.

Author information: 
(1)Avantea, Laboratory of Reproductive Technologies, 26100 Cremona, Italy.
silviacolleoni@avantea.it

The aim of this study was the development of an alternative testing method based 
on human embryonic stem cells for prenatal developmental toxicity with particular
emphasis on early neural development. To this purpose, we designed an in vitro
protocol based on the generation of neural rosettes, representing the in vitro
counterpart of the developing neural plate and neural tube, and we challenged
this complex cell model with retinoic acid (RA), a well-known teratogenic agent. 
The cells were exposed to different concentrations of RA during the process of
rosettes formation. Morphological and molecular parameters were evaluated in
treated as compared with untreated cells to detect both cytotoxicity and specific
neural toxicity. Transcriptomic analysis was performed with microarray Affymetrix
platform and validated by quantitative real-time PCR for genes relevant to early 
neural development such as HoxA1, HoxA3, HoxB1, HoxB4, FoxA2, FoxC1, Otx2, and
Pax7. The results obtained demonstrated that neural rosette forming cells respond
to RA with clear concentration-dependent morphological, and gene expression
changes remarkably similar to those induced in vivo, in the developing neural
tube, by RA exposure. This strict correspondence indicates that the neural
rosette protocol described is capable of detecting specific teratogenic
mechanisms causing perturbations of early neural development and therefore
represents a promising alternative test for human prenatal developmental
toxicity.

PMID: 21934132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Gastroenterology. 2012 Jan;142(1):119-29. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.09.001. Epub
2011 Sep 12.

A feedback loop between the liver-enriched transcription factor network and
miR-122 controls hepatocyte differentiation.

Laudadio I(1), Manfroid I, Achouri Y, Schmidt D, Wilson MD, Cordi S, Thorrez L,
Knoops L, Jacquemin P, Schuit F, Pierreux CE, Odom DT, Peers B, Lemaigre FP.

Author information: 
(1)De Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatocyte differentiation is controlled by liver-enriched
transcription factors (LETFs). We investigated whether LETFs control microRNA
expression during development and whether this control is required for hepatocyte
differentiation.
METHODS: Using in vivo DNA binding assays, we identified miR-122 as a direct
target of the LETF hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 6. The role and mechanisms of 
the HNF6-miR-122 gene cascade in hepatocyte differentiation were studied in vivo 
and in vitro by gain-of-function and loss-of-function experiments, using
developing mice and zebrafish as model organisms.
RESULTS: HNF6 and its paralog Onecut2 are strong transcriptional stimulators of
miR-122 expression. Specific levels of miR-122 were required for proper
progression of hepatocyte differentiation; miR-122 stimulated the expression of
hepatocyte-specific genes and most LETFs, including HNF6. This indicates that
HNF6 and miR-122 form a positive feedback loop. Stimulation of hepatocyte
differentiation by miR-122 was lost in HNF6-null mice, revealing that a
transcription factor can mediate microRNA function. All hepatocyte-specific genes
whose expression was stimulated by miR-122 bound HNF6 in vivo, confirming their
direct regulation by this factor.
CONCLUSIONS: Hepatocyte differentiation is directed by a positive feedback loop
that includes a transcription factor (HNF6) and a microRNA (miR-122) that are
specifically expressed in liver. These findings could lead to methods to induce
differentiation of hepatocytes in vitro and improve our understanding of liver
cell dedifferentiation in pathologic conditions.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21920465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Development. 2011 Oct;138(20):4363-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.066746. Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Temporally controlled modulation of FGF/ERK signaling directs midbrain
dopaminergic neural progenitor fate in mouse and human pluripotent stem cells.

Jaeger I(1), Arber C, Risner-Janiczek JR, Kuechler J, Pritzsche D, Chen IC,
Naveenan T, Ungless MA, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Neurogenesis, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College, London W12 0NN, UK.

Effective induction of midbrain-specific dopamine (mDA) neurons from stem cells
is fundamental for realizing their potential in biomedical applications relevant 
to Parkinson's disease. During early development, the Otx2-positive neural
tissues are patterned anterior-posteriorly to form the forebrain and midbrain
under the influence of extracellular signaling such as FGF and Wnt. In the
mesencephalon, sonic hedgehog (Shh) specifies a ventral progenitor fate in the
floor plate region that later gives rise to mDA neurons. In this study, we
systematically investigated the temporal actions of FGF signaling in mDA neuron
fate specification of mouse and human pluripotent stem cells and mouse induced
pluripotent stem cells. We show that a brief blockade of FGF signaling on exit of
the lineage-primed epiblast pluripotent state initiates an early induction of
Lmx1a and Foxa2 in nascent neural progenitors. In addition to inducing ventral
midbrain characteristics, the FGF signaling blockade during neural induction also
directs a midbrain fate in the anterior-posterior axis by suppressing
caudalization as well as forebrain induction, leading to the maintenance of
midbrain Otx2. Following a period of endogenous FGF signaling, subsequent
enhancement of FGF signaling by Fgf8, in combination with Shh, promotes mDA
neurogenesis and restricts alternative fates. Thus, a stepwise control of FGF
signaling during distinct stages of stem cell neural fate conversion is crucial
for reliable and highly efficient production of functional, authentic
midbrain-specific dopaminergic neurons. Importantly, we provide evidence that
this novel, small-molecule-based strategy applies to both mouse and human
pluripotent stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3177308
PMID: 21880784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2011 Nov;515(1-2):80-8. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2011.08.002.
Epub 2011 Aug 16.

AMP-activated protein kinase modulates the gene expression of aquaporin 9 via
forkhead box a2.

Yokoyama Y(1), Iguchi K, Usui S, Hirano K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmaceutics, Department of Medical Pharmaceutics, Gifu
Pharmaceutical University, 1-25-4 Daigaku-nishi, Gifu, Japan.

Aquaporin 9 (AQP9) is permeable to glycerol, which is a source material in
lipogenesis and gluconeogenesis in the liver. We investigated the transcriptional
regulation of the AQP9 gene by AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), known as an
energy sensor in cells since AMPK contributes to the metabolism of carbohydrate, 
lipid, and protein by regulating the expression of many enzymes and transcription
factors in metabolic pathways. An AMPK activator,
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-ß-d-ribonucleoside (AICAR), was observed to
suppress the expression of the AQP9 gene in HepG2 cells by promoting the
phosphorylation of AMPK and AKT/PKB. Forkhead box a2 (Foxa2) was speculated to be
one of the transcriptional regulators of AQP9 gene expression repressed by AICAR 
from the results of a reporter gene assay with a plasmid containing the promoter 
region of the AQP9 gene and knock-down of the Foxa2 gene by a specific siRNA.
AICAR was determined to induce the phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion of
Foxa2. Leptomycin B, inhibiting the binding of the nuclear exclusion signal
sequence and chromosome region maintenance 1, prevented nuclear export of Foxa2
triggered by AICAR. These results suggest that the activated AMPK by AICAR causes
suppression of the gene expression of AQP9 through transcriptional regulation by 
Foxa2.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21867676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Biochimie. 2012 Feb;94(2):384-92. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2011.08.006. Epub 2011
Aug 16.

Human liver fatty acid binding protein (hFABP1) gene is regulated by
liver-enriched transcription factors HNF3ß and C/EBPa.

Wu YL(1), Peng XE, Wang D, Chen WN, Lin X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Ministry of Education for Gastrointestinal Cancer, Research 
Center of Molecular Medicine, Fujian Medical University, Fuzhou City 350004, PR
China.

The human liver fatty acid binding protein (hFABP1) participates in cellular
long-chain fatty acid trafficking and regulation of lipid metabolism and changes 
in hFABP1 are associated with an increased risk for type 2 diabetes,
cardiovascular disease (CVD), and metabolic syndromes. Gene regulation of hFABP1 
is not fully understood. Therefore, in the present study, the full length hFABP1 
promoter (nucleotides -2125 to +51) and a series of truncated promoter regions
were cloned. A luciferase reporter assay revealed that nucleotides -255 to +50 in
the promoter region contained full of maximum hFABP1 promoter activity compared
with the full length promoter. Furthermore high activity was shown when the
plasmid was transfected into liver-derived cells such as the human hepatoblastoma
cell line HepG2 and the hepatoma cell line Huh7. TFSEARCH and TESS programs were 
used to predict potential transcription factor binding sites. Two putative
binding sites for the liver-enriched transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3ß (HNF3ß) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein a (C/EBPa) were identified
in the -255 nt to -155 nt hFABP1 promoter region. Site-directed mutagenesis of
these two sites reduced dramatically hFABP1 promoter activity. In addition, the
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay (ChIP) revealed that these binding sites were recognized by HNF3ß and
C/EBPa respectively. Overexpression of HNF3ß and C/EBPa enhanced the
transcription of hFABP1 and consequently improved the protein level of hFABP1
in HepG2 cells, while knockdown of HNF3ß and C/EBPa showed the inverse effects.
Taken together, the hFABP1 gene is highly transcribed in liver-derived cells, and
regulated predominantly by liver-enriched transcription factors HNF3ß and C/EBPa.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21856370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mech Dev. 2011 Sep-Dec;128(7-10):412-27. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2011.08.001. Epub
2011 Aug 10.

Activin, BMP and FGF pathways cooperate to promote endoderm and pancreatic
lineage cell differentiation from human embryonic stem cells.

Xu X(1), Browning VL, Odorico JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Transplantation, University of
Wisconsin-Madison School of Medicine and Public Health, Wisconsin Institute of
Medical Research, 600 Highland Ave., Madison, WI 53792, USA. xxu@surgery.wisc.edu

The study of how human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) differentiate into
insulin-producing beta cells has twofold significance: first, it provides an in
vitro model system for the study of human pancreatic development, and second, it 
serves as a platform for the ultimate production of beta cells for
transplantation into patients with diabetes. The delineation of growth factor
interactions regulating pancreas specification from hESCs in vitro is critical to
achieving these goals. In this study, we describe the roles of growth factors
bFGF, BMP4 and Activin A in early hESC fate determination. The entire
differentiation process is carried out in serum-free chemically-defined media
(CDM) and results in reliable and robust induction of pancreatic endoderm cells, 
marked by PDX1, and cell clusters co-expressing markers characteristic of beta
cells, including PDX1 and insulin/C-peptide. Varying the combinations of growth
factors, we found that treatment of hESCs with bFGF, Activin A and BMP4 (FAB)
together for 3-4days resulted in strong induction of primitive-streak and
definitive endoderm-associated genes, including MIXL1, GSC, SOX17 and FOXA2.
Early proliferative foregut endoderm and pancreatic lineage cells marked by PDX1,
FOXA2 and SOX9 expression are specified in EBs made from FAB-treated hESCs, but
not from Activin A alone treated cells. Our results suggest that important tissue
interactions occur in EB-based suspension culture that contribute to the complete
induction of definitive endoderm and pancreas progenitors. Further
differentiation occurs after EBs are embedded in Matrigel and cultured in
serum-free media containing insulin, transferrin, selenium, FGF7, nicotinamide,
islet neogenesis associated peptide (INGAP) and exendin-4, a long acting GLP-1
agonist. 21-28days after embedding, PDX1 gene expression levels are comparable to
those of human islets used for transplantation, and many PDX1(+) clusters are
formed. Almost all cells in PDX1(+) clusters co-express FOXA2, HNF1ß, HNF6 and
SOX9 proteins, and many cells also express CPA1, NKX6.1 and PTF1a. If cells are
then switched to medium containing B27 and nicotinamide for 7-14days, then the
number of insulin(+) cells increases markedly. Our study identifies a new
chemically defined culture protocol for inducing endoderm- and pancreas-committed
cells from hESCs and reveals an interplay between FGF, Activin A and BMP
signaling in early hESC fate determination.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3225072
PMID: 21855631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Radiat Res. 2011 Nov;176(5):553-64. Epub 2011 Aug 19.

Expression of genes involved in mouse lung cell differentiation/regulation after 
acute exposure to photons and protons with or without low-dose preirradiation.

Tian J(1), Zhao W, Tian S, Slater JM, Deng Z, Gridley DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Radiation Research Laboratories, Loma Linda 
University, Loma Linda, California 92354, USA. jtian@dominion.llumc.edu

The goal of this study was to compare the effects of acute 2 Gy irradiation with 
photons (0.8 Gy/min) or protons (0.9 Gy/min), both with and without pre-exposure 
to low-dose/low-dose-rate <U+03B3> rays (0.01 Gy at 0.03 cGy/h), on 84 genes involved in
stem cell differentiation or regulation in mouse lungs on days 21 and 56. Genes
with a =1.5-fold difference in expression and P < 0.05 compared to 0 Gy controls 
are emphasized. Two proteins specific for lung stem cells/progenitors responsible
for local tissue repair were also compared. Overall, striking differences were
present between protons and photons in modulating the genes. More genes were
affected by protons than by photons (22 compared to 2 and 6 compared to 2 on day 
21 and day 56, respectively) compared to 0 Gy. Preirradiation with low-dose-rate 
<U+03B3> rays enhanced the acute photon-induced gene modulation on day 21 (11 compared
to 2), and all 11 genes were significantly downregulated on day 56. On day 21,
seven genes (aldh2, bmp2, cdc2a, col1a1, dll1, foxa2 and notch1) were upregulated
in response to most of the radiation regimens. Immunoreactivity of Clara cell
secretory protein was enhanced by all radiation regimens. The number of alveolar 
type 2 cells positive for prosurfactant protein C in irradiated groups was higher
on day 56 (12.4-14.6 cells/100) than on day 21 (8.5-11.2 cells/100) (P < 0.05).
Taken together, these results showed that acute photons and protons induced
different gene expression profiles in the lungs and that pre-exposure to
low-dose-rate <U+03B3> rays sometimes had modulatory effects. In addition, proteins
associated with lung-specific stem cells/progenitors were highly sensitive to
radiation.

PMID: 21854213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Vis. 2011;17:2102-17. Epub 2011 Aug 10.

A comparison of stem cell-related gene expression in the progenitor-rich limbal
epithelium and the differentiating central corneal epithelium.

Nieto-Miguel T(1), Calonge M, de la Mata A, López-Paniagua M, Galindo S, de la
Paz MF, Corrales RM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Applied Ophthalmobiology (IOBA), University of Valladolid,
Valladolid, Spain. tnietom@ioba.med.uva.es

PURPOSE: Corneal epithelium is maintained by a population of stem cells (SCs)
that have not been identified by specific molecular markers. The objective of
this study was to find new putative markers for these SCs and to identify
associated molecular pathways.
METHODS: Real time PCR (rt-PCR) was performed in 24 human limbal and central
corneal epithelial samples to evaluate the gene expression profile of known
corneal epithelial SC-associated markers. A pool of those samples was further
analyzed by a rt-PCR array (RT²-PCR-A) for 84 genes related to the
identification, growth, maintenance, and differentiation of SCs.
RESULTS: Cells from the corneal epithelium SC niche showed significant expression
of ATP-binding cassette sub-family G member 2 (ABCG2) and cytokeratin (KRT)15,
KRT14, and KRT5 genes. RT²-PCR-A results indicated an increased or decreased
expression in 21 and 24 genes, respectively, in cells from the corneal SC niche
compared to cells from the central corneal epithelium. Functional analysis by
proprietary software found 4 different associated pathways and a novel network
with the highest upregulated genes in the corneal SC niche. This led to the
identification of specific molecules, chemokine (C-X-C motif) ligand 12 (CXCL12),
islet-1 transcription factor LIM/homeodomain (ISL1), collagen-type II alpha 1
(COL2A), neural cell adhesion molecule 1 (NCAM1), aggrecan (ACAN), forkhead box
A2 (FOXA2), Gap junction protein beta 1/connexin 32 (GJB1/Cnx32), and Msh
homeobox 1 (MSX1), that could be used to recognize putative corneal epithelial
SCs grown in culture and intended for transplantation. Other molecules, NCAM1 and
GJB1/Cnx32, potentially could be used to positively purify them, and Par-6
partitioning defective 6 homolog alpha (PARD6A) to negatively purify them.
CONCLUSIONS: Knowledge of these gene and molecular pathways has provided a better
understanding of the signaling molecular pathways associated with progenitor-rich
limbal epithelium. This knowledge potentially could give support to the design
and development of innovative therapies with the potential to reverse corneal
blindness arising from ocular surface failure.

PMCID: PMC3156782
PMID: 21850186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2011 Oct;13 Suppl 1:31-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1463-1326.2011.01445.x.

Glucagon gene expression in the endocrine pancreas: the role of the transcription
factor Pax6 in a-cell differentiation, glucagon biosynthesis and secretion.

Gosmain Y(1), Cheyssac C, Heddad Masson M, Dibner C, Philippe J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University Hospital Geneva,
Rue Gabrielle-Perret-Gentil 4, 1211 Geneva 14, Switzerland. yvan.gosmain@hcuge.ch

The glucagon gene is expressed in a-cells of the pancreas, L cells of the
intestine and the hypothalamus. The determinants of the a-cell-specific
expression of the glucagon gene are not fully characterized, although Arx, Pax6
and Foxa2 are critical for a-cell differentiation and glucagon gene expression;
in addition, the absence of the ß-cell-specific transcription factors Pdx1, Pax4 
and Nkx6.1 may allow for the glucagon gene to be expressed. Pax6, along with cMaf
and MafB, binds to the DNA control element G(1) which confers a-cell specificity 
to the promoter and to G(3) and potently activates glucagon gene transcription.
In addition, to its direct role on the transcription of the glucagon gene, Pax6
controls several transcription factors involved in the activation of the glucagon
gene such as cMaf, MafB and NeuroD1/Beta2 as well as different steps of glucagon 
biosynthesis and secretion. We conclude that Pax6 independently of Arx and Foxa2 
is critical for a-cell function by coordinating glucagon gene expression as well 
as glucagon biosynthesis and secretion.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21824254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2011 Oct;13 Suppl 1:13-20. doi:
10.1111/j.1463-1326.2011.01440.x.

Transcriptional regulation of a-cell differentiation.

Bramswig NC(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The development of the endocrine pancreas and the differentiation of its five
cell types, a, ß, d, e and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) cells, are a highly
complex and tightly regulated process. Proper differentiation and function of a- 
and ß-cells are critical for blood glucose homeostasis. These processes are
governed by multiple transcription factors and other signalling systems, and its 
dysregulation results in diabetes. The differentiation of a-cells and the
maintenance of a-cell function can be influenced at several stages during
development and in the maturing islet. Many transcription factors, such as
neurogenin 3 (Ngn3), pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1 (Pdx1) and regulatory factor 
x6 (Rfx6), play a crucial role in the determination of the endocrine cell fate,
while other transcription factors, such as aristaless-related homeobox (Arx) and 
forkhead box A2 (Foxa2), are implicated in the initial or terminal
differentiation of a-cells. In vivo and in vitro studies have shown that
preproglucagon transcription, and therefore the maintenance of a-cell function,
is regulated by several factors, including forkhead box A1 (Foxa1), paired box 6 
(Pax6), brain4 (Brn4) and islet-1 (Isl-1). Detailed information about the
regulation of normal and abnormal a-cell differentiation gives insight into the
pathogenesis of diabetes, identifies further targets for diabetes treatment and
provides clues for the reprogramming of a- to ß-cells for replacement therapy.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21824252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Nat Med. 2011 Aug 14;17(9):1067-75. doi: 10.1038/nm.2414.

Pathway to diabetes through attenuation of pancreatic beta cell glycosylation and
glucose transport.

Ohtsubo K(1), Chen MZ, Olefsky JM, Marth JD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nanomedicine, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute,
University of California-Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2011 Oct 5;14(4):439-40.

A connection between diet, obesity and diabetes exists in multiple species and is
the basis of an escalating human health problem. The factors responsible provoke 
both insulin resistance and pancreatic beta cell dysfunction but remain to be
fully identified. We report a combination of molecular events in human and mouse 
pancreatic beta cells, induced by elevated levels of free fatty acids or by
administration of a high-fat diet with associated obesity, that comprise a
pathogenic pathway to diabetes. Elevated concentrations of free fatty acids
caused nuclear exclusion and reduced expression of the transcription factors
FOXA2 and HNF1A in beta cells. This resulted in a deficit of GnT-4a
glycosyltransferase expression in beta cells that produced signs of metabolic
disease, including hyperglycemia, impaired glucose tolerance, hyperinsulinemia,
hepatic steatosis and diminished insulin action in muscle and adipose tissues.
Protection from disease was conferred by enforced beta cell-specific GnT-4a
protein glycosylation and involved the maintenance of glucose transporter
expression and the preservation of glucose transport. We observed that this
pathogenic process was active in human islet cells obtained from donors with type
2 diabetes; thus, illuminating a pathway to disease implicated in the diet- and
obesity-associated component of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC3888087
PMID: 21841783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23131. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023131. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Sox9-haploinsufficiency causes glucose intolerance in mice.

Dubois CL(1), Shih HP, Seymour PA, Patel NA, Behrmann JM, Ngo V, Sander M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Cellular & Molecular Medicine, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, California, United States of America.

The HMG box transcription factor Sox9 plays a critical role in progenitor cell
expansion during pancreas organogenesis and is required for proper endocrine cell
development in the embryo. Based on in vitro studies it has been suggested that
Sox9 controls expression of a network of important developmental regulators,
including Tcf2/MODY5, Hnf6, and Foxa2, in pancreatic progenitor cells. Here, we
sought to: 1) determine whether Sox9 regulates this transcriptional network in
vivo and 2) investigate whether reduced Sox9 gene dosage leads to impaired
glucose homeostasis in adult mice. Employing two genetic models of
temporally-controlled Sox9 inactivation in pancreatic progenitor cells, we
demonstrate that contrary to in vitro findings, Sox9 is not required for Tcf2,
Hnf6, or Foxa2 expression in vivo. Moreover, our analysis revealed a novel role
for Sox9 in maintaining the expression of Pdx1/MODY4, which is an important
transcriptional regulator of beta-cell development. We further show that reduced 
beta-cell mass in Sox9-haploinsufficient mice leads to glucose intolerance during
adulthood. Sox9-haploinsufficient mice displayed 50% reduced beta-cell mass at
birth, which recovered partially via a compensatory increase in beta-cell
proliferation early postnatally. Endocrine islets from mice with reduced Sox9
gene dosage exhibited normal glucose stimulated insulin secretion. Our findings
show Sox9 plays an important role in endocrine development by maintaining Ngn3
and Pdx1 expression. Glucose intolerance in Sox9-haploinsufficient mice suggests 
that mutations in Sox9 could play a role in diabetes in humans.

PMCID: PMC3149078
PMID: 21829703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Hepatology. 2011 Dec;54(6):2159-72. doi: 10.1002/hep.24590.

Multipotent stem/progenitor cells in human biliary tree give rise to hepatocytes,
cholangiocytes, and pancreatic islets.

Cardinale V(1), Wang Y, Carpino G, Cui CB, Gatto M, Rossi M, Berloco PB,
Cantafora A, Wauthier E, Furth ME, Inverardi L, Dominguez-Bendala J, Ricordi C,
Gerber D, Gaudio E, Alvaro D, Reid L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Biomedical Engineering, Program
in Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, UNC School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC
27599, USA.

Multipotent stem/progenitors are present in peribiliary glands of extrahepatic
biliary trees from humans of all ages and in high numbers in hepato-pancreatic
common duct, cystic duct, and hilum. They express endodermal transcription
factors (e.g., Sox9, SOX17, FOXA2, PDX1, HES1, NGN3, PROX1) intranuclearly,
stem/progenitor surface markers (EpCAM, NCAM, CD133, CXCR4), and sometimes weakly
adult liver, bile duct, and pancreatic genes (albumin, cystic fibrosis
transmembrane conductance regulator [CFTR], and insulin). They clonogenically
expand on plastic and in serum-free medium, tailored for endodermal progenitors, 
remaining phenotypically stable as undifferentiated cells for months with a cell 
division initially every 36 hours and slowing to one every 2-3 days. Transfer
into distinct culture conditions, each comprised of a specific mix of hormones
and matrix components, yields either cords of hepatocytes (express albumin,
CYP3A4, and transferrin), branching ducts of cholangiocytes (expressing anion
exchanger-2-AE2 and CFTR), or regulatable C-peptide secreting neoislet-like
clusters (expressing glucagon, insulin) and accompanied by changes in gene
expression correlating with the adult fate. Transplantation into quiescent livers
of immunocompromised mice results in functional human hepatocytes and
cholangiocytes, whereas if into fat pads of streptozocin-induced diabetic mice,
results in functional islets secreting glucose-regulatable human
C-peptide.CONCLUSION: The phenotypes and availability from all age donors suggest
that these stem/progenitors have considerable potential for regenerative
therapies of liver, bile duct, and pancreatic diseases including diabetes.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 21809358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Bioinformatics. 2011 Oct 1;27(19):2625-32. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr397.
Epub 2011 Jul 19.

coMOTIF: a mixture framework for identifying transcription factor and a
coregulator motif in ChIP-seq data.

Xu M(1), Weinberg CR, Umbach DM, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
NIH, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

MOTIVATION: ChIP-seq data are enriched in binding sites for the protein
immunoprecipitated. Some sequences may also contain binding sites for a
coregulator. Biologists are interested in knowing which coregulatory factor
motifs may be present in the sequences bound by the protein ChIP'ed.
RESULTS: We present a finite mixture framework with an expectation-maximization
algorithm that considers two motifs jointly and simultaneously determines which
sequences contain both motifs, either one or neither of them. Tested on 10
simulated ChIP-seq datasets, our method performed better than repeated
application of MEME in predicting sequences containing both motifs. When applied 
to a mouse liver Foxa2 ChIP-seq dataset involving ~ 12 000 400-bp sequences,
coMOTIF identified co-occurrence of Foxa2 with Hnf4a, Cebpa, E-box, Ap1/Maf or
Sp1 motifs in ~6-33% of these sequences. These motifs are either known as
liver-specific transcription factors or have an important role in liver function.
AVAILABILITY: Freely available at
http://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/resources/software/comotif/.
CONTACT: li3@niehs.nih.gov
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMCID: PMC3179653
PMID: 21775309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Exp Cell Res. 2011 Oct 1;317(16):2288-98. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2011.06.020. Epub 
2011 Jul 8.

Downregulation of tight junction-associated MARVEL protein marvelD3 during
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human pancreatic cancer cells.

Kojima T(1), Takasawa A, Kyuno D, Ito T, Yamaguchi H, Hirata K, Tsujiwaki M,
Murata M, Tanaka S, Sawada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan. ktakashi@sapmed.ac.jp

The novel tight junction protein marvelD3 contains a conserved MARVEL (MAL and
related proteins for vesicle trafficking and membrane link) domain like occludin 
and tricellulin. However, little is yet known about the detailed role and
regulation of marvelD3 in normal epithelial cells and cancer cells, including
pancreatic cancer. In the present study, we investigated marvelD3 expression in
well and poorly differentiated human pancreatic cancer cell lines and normal
pancreatic duct epithelial cells in which the hTERT gene was introduced into
human pancreatic duct epithelial cells in primary culture, and the changes of
marvelD3 during Snail-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) under
hypoxia, TGF-ß treatment and knockdown of FOXA2 in well differentiated pancreatic
cancer HPAC cells. MarvelD3 was transcriptionally downregulated in poorly
differentiated pancreatic cancer cells and during Snail-induced EMT of pancreatic
cancer cells in which Snail was highly expressed and the fence function
downregulated, whereas it was maintained in well differentiated human pancreatic 
cancer cells and normal pancreatic duct epithelial cells. Depletion of marvelD3
by siRNAs in HPAC cells resulted in downregulation of barrier functions indicated
as a decrease in transepithelial electric resistance and an increase of
permeability to fluorescent dextran tracers, whereas it did not affect fence
function of tight junctions. In conclusion, marvelD3 is transcriptionally
downregulated in Snail-induced EMT during the progression for the pancreatic
cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21763689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Stem Cells. 2011 Feb;29(2):217-28. doi: 10.1002/stem.576.

An endothelial cell niche induces hepatic specification through dual repression
of Wnt and Notch signaling.

Han S(1), Dziedzic N, Gadue P, Keller GM, Gouon-Evans V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene and Cell Medicine, Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

Complex cross-talk between endoderm and the microenvironment is an absolute
requirement to orchestrate hepatic specification and expansion. In the mouse, the
septum transversum and cardiac mesoderm, through secreted bone morphogenetic
proteins (BMP) and fibroblast growth factors (FGF), respectively, instruct the
adjacent ventral endoderm to become hepatic endoderm. Consecutively, endothelial 
cells promote expansion of the specified hepatic endoderm. By using a mouse
reporter embryonic stem cell line, in which hCD4 and hCD25 were targeted to the
Foxa2 and Foxa3 loci, we reconstituted an in vitro culture system in which
committed endoderm cells coexpressing hCD4-Foxa2 and hCD25-Foxa3 were isolated
and cocultured with endothelial cells in the presence of BMP4 and bFGF. In this
culture setting, we provide mechanistic evidence that endothelial cells function 
not only to promote hepatic endoderm expansion but are also required at an
earlier step for hepatic specification, at least in part through regulation of
the Wnt and Notch pathways. Activation of Wnt and Notch by chemical or genetic
approaches increases endoderm cell numbers but inhibits hepatic specification,
and conversely, chemical inhibition of both pathways enhances hepatic
specification and reduces proliferation. By using identical coculture conditions,
we defined a similar dependence of endoderm harvested from embryos on endothelial
cells to support their growth and hepatic specification. Our findings (1) confirm
a conserved role of Wnt repression for mouse hepatic specification, (2) uncover a
novel role for Notch repression in the hepatic fate decision, and (3) demonstrate
that repression of Wnt and Notch signaling in hepatic endoderm is controlled by
the endothelial cell niche.

Copyright © 2010 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3437666
PMID: 21732480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Nature. 2011 Jun 29;475(7356):390-3. doi: 10.1038/nature10263.

Direct conversion of mouse fibroblasts to hepatocyte-like cells by defined
factors.

Sekiya S(1), Suzuki A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organogenesis and Regeneration, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582,
Japan.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2012 Jan;55(1):316-8.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Aug 5;9(2):89-91.
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Sep;8(9):474.

The location and timing of cellular differentiation must be stringently
controlled for proper organ formation. Normally, hepatocytes differentiate from
hepatic progenitor cells to form the liver during development. However, previous 
studies have shown that the hepatic program can also be activated in non-hepatic 
lineage cells after exposure to particular stimuli or fusion with hepatocytes.
These unexpected findings suggest that factors critical to hepatocyte
differentiation exist and become activated to induce hepatocyte-specific
properties in different cell types. Here, by screening the effects of twelve
candidate factors, we identify three specific combinations of two transcription
factors, comprising Hnf4a plus Foxa1, Foxa2 or Foxa3, that can convert mouse
embryonic and adult fibroblasts into cells that closely resemble hepatocytes in
vitro. The induced hepatocyte-like (iHep) cells have multiple hepatocyte-specific
features and reconstitute damaged hepatic tissues after transplantation. The
generation of iHep cells may provide insights into the molecular nature of
hepatocyte differentiation and potential therapies for liver diseases.

PMID: 21716291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 8;410(3):608-13. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.06.036. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Pancreatic exocrine enzyme-producing cell differentiation via embryoid bodies
from human embryonic stem cells.

Shirasawa S(1), Yoshie S, Yue F, Ichikawa H, Yokoyama T, Nagai M, Tomotsune D,
Hirayama M, Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Health Sciences, Bourbon Institutes of Health, Bourbon
Corporation, 4-2-14 Matsunami, Kashiwazaki, Niigata 945-8611, Japan.
shirasawa-sak@bourbon.co.jp

Mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) can be induced to form pancreatic exocrine
enzyme-producing cells in vitro in a stepwise fashion that recapitulates the
development in vivo. However, there is no protocol for the differentiation of
pancreatic-like cells from human ESCs (hESCs). Based upon the mouse ESC model, we
have induced the in vitro formation of pancreatic exocrine enzyme-producing cells
from hESCs. The protocol took place in four stages. In Stage 1, embryoid bodies
(EBs) were formed from dissociated hESCs and then treated with the growth factor 
activin A, which promoted the expression of Foxa2 and Sox17 mRNAs, markers of
definitive endoderm. In Stage 2, the cells were treated with all-trans retinoic
acid which promoted the transition to cells that expressed gut tube endoderm mRNA
marker HNF1b. In Stage 3, the cells were treated with fibroblast growth factor 7 
(FGF7), which induced expression of Pdx1 typical of pancreatic progenitor cells. 
In Stage 4, treatment with FGF7, glucagon-like peptide 1, and nicotinamide
induced the expression amylase (AMY) mRNA, a marker for mature pancreatic
exocrine cells. Immunohistochemical staining showed the expression of AMY protein
at the edges of cell clusters. These cells also expressed other exocrine
secretory proteins including elastase, carboxypeptidase A, chymotrypsin, and
pancreatic lipase in culture. Production of these hESC-derived pancreatic
enzyme-producing cells represents a critical step in the study of pancreatic
organogenesis and in the development of a renewable source of human
pancreatic-like exocrine cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21684256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Respir Res. 2011 Jun 17;12:82. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-82.

Immunohistochemical detection and regulation of a5 nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor (nAChR) subunits by FoxA2 during mouse lung organogenesis.

Porter JL(1), Bukey BR, Geyer AJ, Willnauer CP, Reynolds PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Brigham Young University, 
Provo, UT 84602, USA.

BACKGROUND: a5 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subunits structurally
stabilize functional nAChRs in many non-neuronal tissue types. The expression of 
a5 nAChR subunits and cell-specific markers were assessed during lung
morphogenesis by co-localizing immunohistochemistry from embryonic day (E) 13.5
to post natal day (PN) 20. Transcriptional control of a5 nAChR expression by
FoxA2 and GATA-6 was determined by reporter gene assays.
RESULTS: Steady expression of a5 nAChR subunits was observed in distal lung
epithelial cells during development while proximal lung expression significantly 
alternates between abundant prenatal expression, absence at PN4 and PN10, and a
return to intense expression at PN20. a5 expression was most abundant on luminal 
edges of alveolar type (AT) I and ATII cells, non-ciliated Clara cells, and
ciliated cells in the proximal lung at various periods of lung formation.
Expression of a5 nAChR subunits correlated with cell differentiation and reporter
gene assays suggest expression of a5 is regulated in part by FoxA2, with possible
cooperation by GATA-6.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal a highly regulated temporal-spatial pattern of a5
nAChR subunit expression during important periods of lung morphogenesis. Due to
specific regulation by FoxA2 and distinct identification of a5 in alveolar
epithelium and Clara cells, future studies may identify possible mechanisms of
cell differentiation and lung homeostasis mediated at least in part by
a5-containing nAChRs.

PMCID: PMC3127772
PMID: 21682884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Tissue Eng Part A. 2011 Nov;17(21-22):2651-61. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0587.
Epub 2011 Sep 6.

New simple and rapid method for purification of mesenchymal stem cells from the
human umbilical cord Wharton jelly.

Montanucci P(1), Basta G, Pescara T, Pennoni I, Di Giovanni F, Calafiore R.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Internal Medicine and Endocrine and Metabolic Sciences (Di.M.I.),
Department of Internal Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

We have developed a simple and rapid method for isolation of human umbilical cord
matrix stem cells (hUCMS). The umbilical cord contains a virtual inexhaustible
source of adult stem cells. We have substantially modified, simplified, and
improved previously reported hUCMS isolation procedures in terms of either used
enzyme type, or digestion time, and substantially enhanced the final product
yield and purity. The isolated hUCMS were positive for CD90, CD117, and SCF, and 
negative for CD31 and CD45 surface markers. mRNA and related proteins (i.e.,
Sox2, Oct4a, Nanog, ABCG2, and c-Myc) that coincide with an uncommitted cell
status also were detected. hUCMS express genes and proteins for CD90 and Nestin
that are associated with mesenchymal stem cells, as well as other genes that
specifically relate to different embryonic germ layers, namely, Vimentin, Sox7,
Sox17, FoxA2, E-cadherin, and N-cadherin. hUCMS showed multilineage cell
differentiation potential into adipogenic, osteogenic, and neural cell
phenotypes, under the influence of lineage-specific, differentiation culture
media. Moreover, the basal expression of endocrine cell markers makes these cells
seemingly suitable for endocrine cell phenotype differentiation. Noteworthy,
Activin A induced hUCMS to acquire definitive endoderm cell markers.

PMID: 21679124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Metabolism. 2011 Dec;60(12):1790-6. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2011.05.005. Epub 2011
Jun 12.

Nicotinic acid induces apolipoprotein A-I gene expression in HepG2 and Caco-2
cell lines.

Haas MJ(1), Alamir AR, Sultan S, Chehade JM, Wong NC, Mooradian AD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Jacksonville, FL 32209, USA.

The objective was to test the effect of nicotinic acid on apolipoprotein A-I (apo
A-I) gene expression in hepatic (HepG2) and intestinal (Caco-2) cell lines. HepG2
and Caco-2 cells were treated with 0.1, 0.3, 1.0, 3.0, and 10 mmol/L of nicotinic
acid; and apo A-I concentrations in conditioned media were measured with Western 
blots. Relative apo A-I messenger RNA (mRNA) levels, normalized to
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase mRNA, were measured with quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction method. The nicotinic acid response element
in the apo A-I promoter was identified using a series of apo A-I reporter
plasmids containing deletion constructs of the promoter. In other experiments,
HepG2 cells were also transfected with the apo A-I reporter plasmid and the
hepatocyte nuclear factors 3a and ß expression plasmids. The apo A-I levels in
conditioned media from HepG2 cells, apo A-I mRNA levels, and apo A-I promoter
activity increased significantly following treatment with 1.0, 3.0, and 10 mmol/L
nicotinic acid. Nicotinic acid-induced promoter activity required a region of the
apo A-I gene located between -170 and -186 base pairs. Exogenous overexpression
of the hepatocyte nuclear factors 3a and ß had no additive effect on apo A-I
promoter. Apolipoprotein A-I concentrations in conditioned media and the apo A-I 
promoter activity were also significantly increased in Caco-2 intestinal cells.
Nicotinic acid may increase apo A-I protein synthesis in the liver and small
intestine. Induction of apo A-I gene by nicotinic acid requires a nicotinic acid 
responsive element in the apo A-I promoter.

PMID: 21664629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Nature. 2011 Jun 8;474(7350):225-9. doi: 10.1038/nature10106.

Direct reprogramming of somatic cells is promoted by maternal transcription
factor Glis1.

Maekawa M(1), Yamaguchi K, Nakamura T, Shibukawa R, Kodanaka I, Ichisaka T,
Kawamura Y, Mochizuki H, Goshima N, Yamanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan.

Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are generated from somatic cells by the
transgenic expression of three transcription factors collectively called OSK:
Oct3/4 (also called Pou5f1), Sox2 and Klf4. However, the conversion to iPSCs is
inefficient. The proto-oncogene Myc enhances the efficiency of iPSC generation by
OSK but it also increases the tumorigenicity of the resulting iPSCs. Here we show
that the Gli-like transcription factor Glis1 (Glis family zinc finger 1) markedly
enhances the generation of iPSCs from both mouse and human fibroblasts when it is
expressed together with OSK. Mouse iPSCs generated using this combination of
transcription factors can form germline-competent chimaeras. Glis1 is enriched in
unfertilized oocytes and in embryos at the one-cell stage. DNA microarray
analyses show that Glis1 promotes multiple pro-reprogramming pathways, including 
Myc, Nanog, Lin28, Wnt, Essrb and the mesenchymal-epithelial transition. These
results therefore show that Glis1 effectively promotes the direct reprogramming
of somatic cells during iPSC generation.

PMID: 21654807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jun 21;108(25):10343-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1105135108. Epub 2011 Jun 6.

Direct conversion of human fibroblasts to dopaminergic neurons.

Pfisterer U(1), Kirkeby A, Torper O, Wood J, Nelander J, Dufour A, Björklund A,
Lindvall O, Jakobsson J, Parmar M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science, Wallenberg Neuroscience Center,
Lund University, SE-221 84 Lund, Sweden.

Comment in
    Regen Med. 2011 Nov;6(6):685-7.

Recent reports demonstrate that somatic mouse cells can be directly converted to 
other mature cell types by using combined expression of defined factors. Here we 
show that the same strategy can be applied to human embryonic and postnatal
fibroblasts. By overexpression of the transcription factors Ascl1, Brn2, and
Myt1l, human fibroblasts were efficiently converted to functional neurons. We
also demonstrate that the converted neurons can be directed toward distinct
functional neurotransmitter phenotypes when the appropriate transcriptional cues 
are provided together with the three conversion factors. By combining expression 
of the three conversion factors with expression of two genes involved in dopamine
neuron generation, Lmx1a and FoxA2, we could direct the phenotype of the
converted cells toward dopaminergic neurons. Such subtype-specific induced
neurons derived from human somatic cells could be valuable for disease modeling
and cell replacement therapy.

PMCID: PMC3121829
PMID: 21646515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011 Aug 15;184(4):401-6. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201103-0495PP.

Intersections between pulmonary development and disease.

Whitsett JA(1), Haitchi HM, Maeda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Institute, Divisions of Neonatology, Perinatal, and Pulmonary
Biology, Cincinnati Childrens Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA. jeff.whitsett@cchmc.org

Recent advances in cellular, molecular, and developmental biology have
revolutionized our concepts regarding the process of organogenesis that have
important implications for our understanding of both lung formation and pulmonary
disease pathogenesis. Pulmonary investigators have long debated whether
developmental processes are recapitulated during normal repair of the lung or in 
the setting of chronic pulmonary diseases. Although the cellular events involved 
in lung morphogenesis and those causing pulmonary disease are likely to include
processes that are distinct, there is increasing evidence that the pathogenesis
of many lung disorders involves the same genetic machinery that regulates cell
growth,specification, and differentiation during normal lung development.

PMCID: PMC3175542
PMID: 21642246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20319. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020319. Epub 2011 May 20.

High throughput determination of TGFß1/SMAD3 targets in A549 lung epithelial
cells.

Zhang Y(1), Handley D, Kaplan T, Yu H, Bais AS, Richards T, Pandit KV, Zeng Q,
Benos PV, Friedman N, Eickelberg O, Kaminski N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine, Richard P. and
Dorothy P. Simmons Center for Interstitial Lung Disease, University of Pittsburgh
School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
zhangy@upmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGFß1) plays a major role in many 
lung diseases including lung cancer, pulmonary hypertension, and pulmonary
fibrosis. TGFß1 activates a signal transduction cascade that results in the
transcriptional regulation of genes in the nucleus, primarily through the
DNA-binding transcription factor SMAD3. The objective of this study is to
identify genome-wide scale map of SMAD3 binding targets and the molecular
pathways and networks affected by the TGFß1/SMAD3 signaling in lung epithelial
cells.
METHODOLOGY: We combined chromatin immunoprecipitation with human promoter region
microarrays (ChIP-on-chip) along with gene expression microarrays to study global
transcriptional regulation of the TGFß1/SMAD3 pathway in human A549 alveolar
epithelial cells. The molecular pathways and networks associated with TGFß1/SMAD3
signaling were identified using computational approaches. Validation of selected 
target gene expression and direct binding of SMAD3 to promoters were performed by
quantitative real time RT-PCR and electrophoretic mobility shift assay on A549
and human primary lung epithelial cells.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Known TGFß1 target genes such as SERPINE1, SMAD6, SMAD7,
TGFB1 and LTBP3, were found in both ChIP-on-chip and gene expression analyses as 
well as some previously unrecognized targets such as FOXA2. SMAD3 binding of
FOXA2 promoter and changed expression were confirmed. Computational approaches
combining ChIP-on-chip and gene expression microarray revealed multiple target
molecular pathways affected by the TGFß1/SMAD3 signaling. Identification of
global targets and molecular pathways and networks associated with TGFß1/SMAD3
signaling allow for a better understanding of the mechanisms that determine
epithelial cell phenotypes in fibrogenesis and carcinogenesis as does the
discovery of the direct effect of TGFß1 on FOXA2.

PMCID: PMC3098871
PMID: 21625455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2011 Jun;18(6):742-6. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.2060. Epub 2011 May 
29.

The nucleosome map of the mammalian liver.

Li Z(1), Schug J, Tuteja G, White P, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Binding to nucleosomal DNA is critical for 'pioneer' transcription factors such
as the winged-helix transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 to regulate chromatin
structure and gene activation. Here we report the genome-wide map of nucleosome
positions in the mouse liver, with emphasis on transcriptional start sites, CpG
islands, Foxa2 binding sites and their correlation with gene expression. Despite 
the heterogeneity of liver tissue, we could clearly discern the nucleosome
pattern of the predominant liver cell, the hepatocyte. By analyzing nucleosome
occupancy and the distributions of heterochromatin protein 1 (Hp1), CBP (also
known as Crebbp) and p300 (Ep300) in Foxa1- and Foxa2-deficient livers, we find
that the maintenance of nucleosome position and chromatin structure surrounding
Foxa2 binding sites is independent of Foxa1 and Foxa2.

PMCID: PMC3148658
PMID: 21623366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jun 7;108(23):9703-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1016443108. Epub 2011 May 23.

ES cell-derived renewable and functional midbrain dopaminergic progenitors.

Chung S(1), Moon JI, Leung A, Aldrich D, Lukianov S, Kitayama Y, Park S, Li Y,
Bolshakov VY, Lamonerie T, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory and Department of Psychiatry and Program in 
Neuroscience, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, McLean Hospital/Harvard Medical
School, Belmont, MA 02478, USA. schung@mclean.harvard.edu

During early development, midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neuronal progenitors (NPs) 
arise from the ventral mesencephalic area by the combined actions of secreted
factors and their downstream transcription factors. These mDA NPs proliferate,
migrate to their final destinations, and develop into mature mDA neurons in the
substantia nigra and the ventral tegmental area. Here, we show that such
authentic mDA NPs can be efficiently isolated from differentiated ES cells (ESCs)
using a FACS method combining two markers, Otx2 and Corin. Purified
Otx2(+)Corin(+) cells coexpressed other mDA NP markers, including FoxA2, Lmx1b,
and Glast. Using optimized culture conditions, these mDA NPs continuously
proliferated up to 4 wk with almost 1,000-fold expansion without significant
changes in their phenotype. Furthermore, upon differentiation, Otx2(+)Corin(+)
cells efficiently generated mDA neurons, as evidenced by coexpression of mDA
neuronal markers (e.g., TH, Pitx3, Nurr1, and Lmx1b) and physiological functions 
(e.g., efficient DA secretion and uptake). Notably, these mDA NPs differentiated 
into a relatively homogenous DA population with few serotonergic neurons. When
transplanted into PD model animals, aphakia mice, and 6-OHDA-lesioned rats, mDA
NPs differentiated into mDA neurons in vivo and generated well-integrated DA
grafts, resulting in significant improvement in motor dysfunctions without tumor 
formation. Furthermore, grafted Otx2(+)Corin(+) cells exhibited significant
migratory function in the host striatum, reaching >3.3 mm length in the entire
striatum. We propose that functional and expandable mDA NPs can be efficiently
isolated by this unique strategy and will serve as useful tools in regenerative
medicine, bioassay, and drug screening.

PMCID: PMC3111266
PMID: 21606375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. FASEB J. 2011 Sep;25(9):2898-910. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-181958. Epub 2011 May 18.

Pten ablation in adult dopaminergic neurons is neuroprotective in Parkinson's
disease models.

Domanskyi A(1), Geissler C, Vinnikov IA, Alter H, Schober A, Vogt MA, Gass P,
Parlato R, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg, Germany.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive age-related movement disorder that
results primarily from the selective loss of midbrain dopaminergic (DA) neurons. 
Symptoms of PD can be induced by genetic mutations or by DA neuron-specific
toxins. A specific ablation of an essential factor controlling ribosomal RNA
transcription, TifIa, in adult mouse DA neurons represses mTOR signaling and
leads to progressive neurodegeneration and PD-like phenotype. Using an inducible 
Cre system in adult mice, we show here that the specific ablation of Pten in
adult mouse DA neurons leads to activation of mTOR pathway and is neuroprotective
in genetic (TifIa deletion) and neurotoxin-induced (MPTP or 6OHDA) mouse models
of PD. Adult mice with DA neuron-specific Pten deletion exhibit elevated
expression of tyrosine hydroxylase, a rate-limiting enzyme in the dopamine
biosynthesis pathway, associated with increased striatal dopamine content, and
increased mRNA levels of Foxa2, Pitx3, En1, Nurr1, and Lmx1b-the essential
factors for maintaining physiological functions of adult DA neurons. Pten
deletion attenuates the loss of tyrosine hydroxylase-positive cells after 6OHDA
treatment, restores striatal dopamine in TifIa-knockout and MPTP-treated mice,
and rescues locomotor impairments caused by TifIa loss. Inhibition of
Pten-dependent functions in adult DA neurons may represent a promising PD
therapy.

PMID: 21593433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011 Aug 15;184(4):421-9. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201101-0106OC.

Airway epithelial transcription factor NK2 homeobox 1 inhibits mucous cell
metaplasia and Th2 inflammation.

Maeda Y(1), Chen G, Xu Y, Haitchi HM, Du L, Keiser AR, Howarth PH, Davies DE,
Holgate ST, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Perinatal Institute, Divisions of Neonatology, Perinatal, and Pulmonary
Biology, Cincinnati Childrens Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011 Aug 15;184(4):390-2.

RATIONALE: Airway mucous cell metaplasia and chronic inflammation are
pathophysiological features that influence morbidity and mortality associated
with asthma and other chronic pulmonary disorders. Elucidation of the molecular
mechanisms regulating mucous metaplasia and hypersecretion provides the
scientific basis for diagnostic and therapeutic opportunities to improve the care
of chronic pulmonary diseases.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the role of the airway epithelialspecific transcription
factor NK2 homeobox 1 (NKX2-1, also known as thyroid transcription factor-1
[TTF-1]) in mucous cell metaplasia and lung inflammation.
METHODS: Expression of NKX2-1 in airway epithelial cells from patients with
asthma was analyzed. NKX2-1 +/-gene targeted or transgenic mice expressing NKX2-1
in conducting airway epithelial cells were sensitized to the aeroallergen
ovalbumin. In vitro studies were used to identify mechanisms by which NKX2-1
regulates mucous cell metaplasia and inflammation.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: NKX2-1 was suppressed in airway epithelial cells
from patients with asthma. Reduced expression of NKX2-1 in heterozygous NKX2-1
+/- gene targeted mice increased mucous metaplasia in the small airways after
pulmonary sensitization to ovalbumin. Conversely, mucous cell metaplasia induced 
by aeroallergen was inhibited by expression of NKX2-1 in the respiratory
epithelium in vivo. Genome-wide mRNA analysis of lung tissue from
ovalbumin-treated mice demonstrated that NKX2-1 inhibited mRNAs associated with
mucous metaplasia and Th2-regulated inflammation,including Spdef, Ccl17, and
Il13. In vitro, NKX2-1 inhibited SPDEF, a critical regulator of airway mucous
cell metaplasia,and the Th2 chemokine CCL26.
CONCLUSIONS: The present data demonstrate a novel function for NKX2-1 in a gene
network regulating mucous cell metaplasia and allergic inflammation in the
respiratory epithelium.

PMCID: PMC3175541
PMID: 21562130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Biol Reprod. 2011 Aug;85(2):386-96. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.091769. Epub 2011
Apr 20.

Postnatal deletion of Wnt7a inhibits uterine gland morphogenesis and compromises 
adult fertility in mice.

Dunlap KA(1), Filant J, Hayashi K, Rucker EB 3rd, Song G, Deng JM, Behringer RR, 
DeMayo FJ, Lydon J, Jeong JW, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.

The success of postnatal uterine morphogenesis dictates, in part, the
embryotrophic potential and functional capacity of the adult uterus. The
definitive role of Wnt7a in postnatal uterine development and adult function
requires a conditional knockout, because global deletion disrupts müllerian duct 
patterning, specification, and cell fate in the fetus. The Wnt7a-null uterus
appears to be posteriorized because of developmental defects in the embryo, as
evidenced by the stratified luminal epithelium that is normally found in the
vagina and the presence of short and uncoiled oviducts. To understand the
biological role of WNT7A after birth and allow tissue-selective deletion of
Wnt7a, we generated loxP-flanked exon 2 mice and conditionally deleted Wnt7a
after birth in the uterus by crossing them with Pgr(Cre) mice. Morphological
examination revealed no obvious differences in the vagina, cervix, oviduct, or
ovary. The uteri of Wnt7a mutant mice contained no endometrial glands, whereas
all other uterine cell types appeared to be normal. Postnatal differentiation of 
endometrial glands was observed in control mice, but not in mutant mice, between 
Postnatal Days 3 and 12. Expression of morphoregulatory genes, particularly
Foxa2, Hoxa10, Hoxa11, Msx1, and Wnt16, was disrupted in the Wnt7a mutant uteri. 
Conditional Wnt7a mutant mice were not fertile. Although embryos were present in 
uteri of mutant mice on Day 3.5 of pregnancy, blastocyst implantation was not
observed on Day 5.5. Furthermore, expression of several genes (Foxa2, Lif, Msx1, 
and Wnt16) was reduced or absent in adult Wnt7a-deleted uteri on Day 3.5
postmating. These results indicate that WNT7A plays a critical role in postnatal 
uterine gland morphogenesis and function, which are important for blastocyst
implantation and fertility in the adult uterus.

PMCID: PMC3142262
PMID: 21508348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Cell Cycle. 2011 Apr 15;10(8):1312-21. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

p53-dependent regulation of growth, epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
stemness in normal pancreatic epithelial cells.

Pinho AV(1), Rooman I, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Patología Molecular, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 1;10(11):1715.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Aug 15;10(16):2616-7.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 1;10(11):1717.

Pancreatic acinar cells acquire in vitro a pancreatic progenitor phenotype
associated with activation of p53, growth arrest and senescence. A similar
program is also activated in chronic pancreatitis. To assess the mechanisms
involved in this process, we cultured pancreatic acinar cells from wild-type,
p53(-/-), p16(-/-) and p21(-/-) mice. Cultures from p53(-/-) mice, but not those 
from p16(-/-) or p21(-/-) mice, display an enhanced proliferation and can be
expanded continuously for more than 20 passages. p53(-/-) cells also display
features of stemness such as enhanced sphere formation, increased expression of
pancreatic multipotent progenitor markers (Ptf1a, Pdx1, Cpa1, c-myc, Sox9 and
Hnf1b), and of the stemness regulators Bmi1 and Klf4. Upon subculture, p53(-/-)
cells undergo an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and express high levels 
of vimentin and of the transcriptional regulators Snai1, Snai2, Twist, Zeb1 and
Zeb2. Genetic lineage tracing unequivocally demonstrates the epithelial origin of
the cells with mesenchymal phenotype. These cells express the endodermal markers 
Hhex, Pdx1, Sox9, Hnf1b, Foxa2, Gata6 and Sox17, and the stem cell markers c-myc,
Bmi1 and Klf4. Cultures from p53(+/-) mice display intermediate levels of the
transcription factors involved in EMT but do not surpass the growth arrest. Our
findings support the notion that p53 controls both growth and epithelial cell
differentiation in the pancreas. These observations have important implications
regarding the mechanisms through which p53 inactivation in tumors may be
associated with aggressive biological behavior.

PMID: 21490434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Stem Cell Res. 2011 May;6(3):251-61. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2011.02.002. Epub 2011
Feb 24.

Induction of a mature hepatocyte phenotype in adult liver derived progenitor
cells by ectopic expression of transcription factors.

Iacob R(1), Rüdrich U, Rothe M, Kirsch S, Maasoumy B, Narain N, Verfaillie CM,
Sancho-Bru P, Iken M, Popescu I, Schambach A, Manns MP, Bock M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: By ectopic expression of a distinct combination of transcription
factors we aimed to induce a mature hepatocyte phenotype in an adult liver
derived progenitor cell population (ALDPC).
METHODS: The open reading frames encoding murine Foxa2, Hnf4a and C/ebpa were
cloned into lentivirus vectors and sequentially expressed in target cells. After 
seven days of culture, cells were analysed for expression of liver specific
genes, and functional assays were performed. Fresh primary hepatocytes, twenty
four hours in culture, served as positive controls.
RESULTS: Untransduced ALDPC under established differentiation conditions
exhibited moderate signs of maturation, in particular in comparison with fresh
hepatocyte controls. In transcription factor transduced cells, fifteen mRNA´s
coding for secreted proteins, cytochrome p450 isoenzymes, liver metabolic enzymes
were detected by RT-qPCR at levels close to controls. Albumin secretion increased
incrementally in single (Foxa2), double (Foxa2, Hnf4a) and triple-transduced
cells (Foxa2, Hnf4a, C/ebpa) and reached levels observed in primary hepatocytes. 
Glycogen storage as determined by PAS staining was detectable in double and
triple transduced cells, comparable to controls. Ureagenesis was also induced in 
triple transduced cells, but at lower levels compared to primary hepatocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: Sequential expression of Foxa2, Hnf4a and C/ebpa induces a mature
hepatocyte phenotype in an expandable liver derived progenitor cell line.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21474405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Stem Cells. 2011 Jun;29(6):928-39. doi: 10.1002/stem.640.

Directed expression of Gata2, Mash1, and Foxa2 synergize to induce the
serotonergic neuron phenotype during in vitro differentiation of embryonic stem
cells.

Nefzger CM(1), Haynes JM, Pouton CW.

Author information: 
(1)Medicinal Chemistry and Drug Action, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Monash University (Parkville Campus), Melbourne, Australia.

Investigation of serotonergic neuronal activity and its relationship to disease
has been limited by a lack of physiologically relevant in vitro cell models.
Serotonergic neurons derived from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) could provide a
platform for such studies and provide models for use in drug discovery. Here, we 
report enhancement of serotonergic differentiation using a genetic approach.
Expression of Gata2 increased the yield of serotonergic neurons. Enhancement was 
only achieved when Gata2 was expressed under the control of the tissue-specific
promoter of the transcription factor Nkx6.1. High levels of Gata2 expression in
ESCs compromised pluripotency and induced non-neuronal differentiation. Combined 
directed expression of Gata2, proneural gene Mash1, and forkhead transcription
factor Foxa2 further enhanced serotonergic neural differentiation, resulting in a
10-fold increase in serotonin content. These neurons were also capable of
depolarization (KCl, 30 mM)-induced elevations of intracellular Ca(2+) . The
presence of sonic hedgehog during differentiation produced a further modest
increase in numbers (1.5-fold). Transgene expression did not influence the number
of tyrosine hydroxylase positive neurons in the cultures after 20 days, implying 
that Gata2, Mash1, and Foxa2 modulate in vitro differentiation at a time beyond
the decision-point for dopaminergic or nondopaminergic commitment. This study
demonstrates that the directed expression of specific transcription factors
enhances serotonergic neuron differentiation in vitro and highlights the
importance of transgene expression at the right stage of ESC differentiation to
effect the generation of a desired neural subtype.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21472823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mol Med Rep. 2011 Mar-Apr;4(2):301-5. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2011.409. Epub 2011 Jan 3.

Differentially expressed genes in Men1 knockout and wild-type embryoid bodies for
pancreatic islet development.

Zhang HL(1), Li WY, Zhang CP, Zhu YX, Wu L, Long HM, Li G, Luo M.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Shanghai Clinical
Center for Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Department of Endocrinology, Ruijin 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, 200025 Shanghai, P.R. 
China.

The Men1 gene has been identified as the gene responsible for MEN-1, a hereditary
syndrome transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait. Disruption of the Men1 gene 
results in defects in the development of multiple organs, including pancreatic
islets. Homozygous disruption of Men1 in mice causes embryonic lethality, making 
it difficult to determine the genes involved in defects of pancreatic islets
during embryonic development. In this study, embryoid bodies formed from null
mutant (Men1-/-) and wild-type (Men1+/+) embryonic stem cells were used as a
model system to investigate the effects of the Men1 gene on pancreatic islet
development. Using RT-PCR, SOX17, FOXA2 and NKX2.2 were found to be
differentially expressed between the two embryoid bodies. Additionally, the gene 
expression profile of these Men1-/- embryoid bodies was characterized in detail
by DNA microarray techniques, and a series of putative menin-targeted genes was
identified. Our study suggests a critical role for Men1 in pancreatic islet
development, and indicates that genes such as SOX17, FOXA2, NKX2.2 and SOX4 are
potential targets of Men1.

PMID: 21468568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Apr 29;408(1):160-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.04.001. Epub 2011 Apr 3.

Epigenetic regulation of the transcription factor Foxa2 directs differential
elafin expression in melanocytes and melanoma cells.

Yu KS(1), Jo JY, Kim SJ, Lee Y, Bae JH, Chung YH, Koh SS.

Author information: 
(1)Therapeutic Antibody Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience
and Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806, South Korea.

Elafin, a serine protease inhibitor, induces the intrinsic apoptotic pathway in
human melanoma cells, where its expression is transcriptionally silenced.
However, it remains unknown how the elafin gene is repressed in melanoma cells.
We here demonstrate that elafin expression is modulated via epigenetically
regulated expression of the transcription factor Foxa2. Treatment of melanoma
cells with a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor induced elafin expression, which was
specifically responsible for reduced proliferation and increased apoptosis.
Suppression of Foxa2 transcription, mediated by DNA hypermethylation in its
promoter region, was released in melanoma cells upon treatment with the
demethylating agent. Luciferase reporter assays indicated that the Foxa2 binding 
site in the elafin promoter was critical for the activation of the promoter.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays further showed that Foxa2 bound to the
elafin promoter in vivo. Analyses of melanoma cells with varied levels of Foxa2
revealed a correlated expression between Foxa2 and elafin and the ability of
Foxa2 to induce apoptosis. Our results collectively suggest that, in melanoma
cells, Foxa2 expression is silenced and therefore elafin is maintained
unexpressed to facilitate cell proliferation in the disease melanoma.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21466784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Stem Cell Res Ther. 2011 Apr 4;2(2):16. doi: 10.1186/scrt57.

Stimulation of Activin A/Nodal signaling is insufficient to induce definitive
endoderm formation of cord blood-derived unrestricted somatic stem cells.

Filby CE(1), Williamson R, van Kooy P, Pébay A, Dottori M, Elwood NJ, Zaibak F.

Author information: 
(1)Early Development and Disease, Murdoch Childrens' Research Institute, Royal
Children's Hospital, Flemington Rd, Parkville, VIC 3052, Australia.
filby@wehi.EDU.AU

INTRODUCTION: Unrestricted somatic stem cells (USSC) derived from umbilical cord 
blood are an attractive alternative to human embryonic stem cells (hESC) for
cellular therapy. USSC are capable of forming cells representative of all three
germ line layers. The aim of this study was to determine the potential of USSC to
form definitive endoderm following induction with Activin A, a protein known to
specify definitive endoderm formation of hESC.
METHODS: USSC were cultured for (1) three days with or without 100 ng/ml Activin 
A in either serum-free, low-serum or serum-containing media, (2) three days with 
or without 100 ng/ml Activin A in combination with 10 ng/ml FGF4 in pre-induction
medium, or (3) four days with or without small molecules Induce Definitive
Endoderm (IDE1, 100 nM; IDE2, 200 nM) in serum-free media. Formation of
definitive endoderm was assessed using RT-PCR for gene markers of endoderm
(Sox17, FOXA2 and TTF1) and lung epithelium (surfactant protein C; SPC) and
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; CFTR). The differentiation
capacity of Activin A treated USSC was also assessed.
RESULTS: Activin A or IDE1/2 induced formation of Sox17+ definitive endoderm from
hESC but not from USSC. Activin A treated USSC retained their capacity to form
cells of the ectoderm (nerve), mesoderm (bone) and endoderm (lung). Activin A in 
combination with FGF4 did not induce formation of Sox17+ definitive endoderm from
USSC. USSC express both Activin A receptor subunits at the mRNA and protein
level, indicating that these cells are capable of binding Activin A.
CONCLUSIONS: Stimulation of the Nodal signaling pathway with Activin A or IDE1/2 
is insufficient to induce definitive endoderm formation from USSC, indicating
that USSC differ in their stem cell potential from hESC.

PMCID: PMC3226287
PMID: 21463501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Tissue Eng Part A. 2011 Aug;17(15-16):1901-9. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0563.
Epub 2011 Apr 25.

Geometric control of cardiomyogenic induction in human pluripotent stem cells.

Bauwens CL(1), Song H, Thavandiran N, Ungrin M, Massé S, Nanthakumar K, Seguin C,
Zandstra PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Although it has been observed that aggregate size affects cardiac development, an
incomplete understanding of the cellular mechanisms underlying human pluripotent 
stem cell-derived cardiomyogenesis has limited the development of robust
defined-condition cardiac cell generation protocols. Our objective was thus to
elucidate cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the endogenous control of 
human embryonic stem cell (hESC) cardiac tissue development, and to test the
hypothesis that hESC aggregate size influences extraembryonic endoderm (ExE)
commitment and cardiac inductive properties. hESC aggregates were generated with 
100, 1000, or 4000 cells per aggregate using microwells. The frequency of
endoderm marker (FoxA2 and GATA6)-expressing cells decreased with increasing
aggregate size during early differentiation. Cardiogenesis was maximized in
aggregates initiated from 1000 cells, with frequencies of 0.49±0.06 cells
exhibiting a cardiac progenitor phenotype (KDR(low)/C-KIT(neg)) on day 5 and
0.24±0.06 expressing cardiac Troponin T on day 16. A direct relationship between 
ExE and cardiac differentiation efficiency was established by forming aggregates 
with varying ratios of SOX7 (a transcription factor required for ExE development)
overexpressing or knockdown hESCs to unmanipulated hESCs. We demonstrate, in a
defined, serum-free cardiac induction system, that robust and efficient cardiac
differentiation is a function of endogenous ExE cell concentration, a parameter
that can be directly modulated by controlling hESC aggregate size.

PMID: 21417693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Jun;50(6):456-65. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20870. Epub
2011 Mar 15.

Genome profiling of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Birnbaum DJ(1), Adélaïde J, Mamessier E, Finetti P, Lagarde A, Monges G, Viret F,
Gonçalvès A, Turrini O, Delpero JR, Iovanna J, Giovannini M, Birnbaum D,
Chaffanet M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Laboratoire d'Oncologie
Moléculaire, UMR891 Inserm, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is one of the most aggressive human cancers. It
displays many different chromosomal abnormalities and mutations. By using 244 K
high-resolution array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) we studied the
genome alterations of 39 fine-needle aspirations from pancreatic adenocarcinoma
and eight human adenocarcinoma pancreatic cell lines. Using both visual
inspection and GISTIC analysis, recurrent losses were observed on 1p, 3p, 4p, 6, 
8p, 9, 10, 11q, 15q, 17, 18, 19p, 20p, 21, and 22 and comprised several known or 
suspected tumor suppressor genes such as ARHGEF10, ARID1A, CDKN2A/B, FHIT, PTEN, 
RB1, RUNX1-3, SMAD4, STK11/LKB1, TP53, and TUSC3. Heterozygous deletion of the
1p35-p36 chromosomal region was identified in one-third of the tumors and three
of the cell lines. This region, commonly deleted in human cancers, contains
several tumor suppressor genes including ARID1A and RUNX3. We identified frequent
genetic gains on chromosome arms 1q, 3q, 5p, 6p, 7q, 8q, 12q, 15q, 18q, 19q, and 
20q. Amplifications were observed in 16 tumors. AKT2, CCND3, CDK4, FOXA2, GATA6, 
MDM2, MYC, and SMURF1 genes were gained or amplified. The most obvious
amplification was located at 18q11.2 and targeted the GATA6 gene, which plays a
predominant role in the initial specification of the pancreas and in pancreatic
cell type differentiation. In conclusion, we have identified novel biomarkers and
potential therapeutic targets in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21412932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Dev Dyn. 2011 Apr;240(4):890-7. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22602. Epub 2011 Mar 10.

Three-dimensional immunohistochemical characterization of lineage commitment by
localization of T and FOXA2 in porcine peri-implantation embryos.

Wolf XA(1), Serup P, Hyttel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Denmark.

Gene expression during gastrulation in porcine embryos has been sparsely studied,
but there are indications that species-specific patterns exist. Here, we
investigated the three-dimensional (3D) expression of the T-box transcription
factor Brachyury (T) and the forkhead box transcription factor FOXA2 by
immunocytochemistry in porcine peri-gastrulation embryos. The first T(+) cells
were detected in posterior epiblast of ovoid blastocysts. Later T(+) FOXA2(-)
cells were found in the posterior primitive streak (PS) and nascent mesoderm,
T(+) FOXA2(+) cells in the anterior PS, probably identifying the organizer
region, and T(-) FOXA2(+) cells anterior to this region. In embryos with a neural
groove, T and FOXA2 were co-expressed in the node and notochord, FOXA2 was
expressed in the floor plate and posteriorly T was expressed in the streak. In
all developmental stages, FOXA2 was expressed in the entire hypoblast/definitive 
endoderm. We conclude that the expression pattern of T and FOXA2 is largely
conserved between pig and mouse.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21394824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Thromb Haemost. 2011 May;9(5):969-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2011.04256.x.

High levels of protein C are determined by PROCR haplotype 3.

Pintao MC(1), Roshani S, de Visser MC, Tieken C, Tanck MW, Wichers IM, Meijers
JC, Rosendaal FR, Middeldorp S, Reitsma PH.

Author information: 
(1)Einthoven Laboratory for Experimental Vascular Medicine, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Genetic determinants of plasma levels of protein C (PC) are poorly
understood. Recently, we identified a locus on chromosome 20 determining high PC 
levels in a large Dutch pedigree with unexplained thrombophilia. Candidate genes 
in the LOD-1 support interval included FOXA2, THBD and PROCR.
OBJECTIVES: To examine these candidate genes and their influence on plasma levels
of PC.
PATIENTS/METHODS: Exons, promoter and 3'UTR of the candidate genes were sequenced
in 12 family members with normal to high PC levels. Four haplotypes of PROCR, two
SNPs in the neighboring gene EDEM2 and critical SNPs encountered during
resequencing were genotyped in the family and in a large group of healthy
individuals (the Leiden Thrombophilia Study (LETS) controls). Soluble endothelial
protein C receptor (sEPCR) and soluble thrombomodulin (sTM) plasma levels were
measured in the family.
RESULTS: PROCR haplotype 3 (H3) and FOXA2 rs1055080 were associated with PC
levels in the family but only PROCR H3 was also associated with plasma levels in 
the healthy individuals. Carriers of both variants had higher PC levels than
carriers of only PROCR H3 in the family but not in healthy individuals,
suggesting that a second determinant is present. EDEM2 SNPs were associated with 
PC levels, but their effect was small. PC and sEPCR levels were associated in
both studies. sTM was not associated with variations of THBD or PC levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Chromosome 20 harbors genetic determinants of PC and sEPCR levels
and the analysis of candidate genes suggests that the PROCR locus is responsible.

© 2011 International Society on Thrombosis and Haemostasis.

PMID: 21392254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Endocrinology. 2011 May;152(5):1779-88. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1048. Epub 2011 Mar 
8.

Dynamic regulation of PDX-1 and FoxO1 expression by FoxA2 in
dexamethasone-induced pancreatic ß-cells dysfunction.

Chen F(1), Zhu Y, Tang X, Sun Y, Jia W, Sun Y, Han X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of Jiangsu Province, Clinical
Diabetes Centre of Jiangsu Province, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, 
China. hanxiao@njmu.edu.cn

Transcription factors forkhead box (Fox)O1 and pancreatic and duodenal homeobox-1
(PDX-1) are involved in dexamethasone (DEX)-induced dysfunction in pancreatic
ß-cells. However, the molecular mechanism underlying the regulation of FoxO1 and 
PDX-1 expression in ß-cells treated with DEX is not fully understood. In this
study, we found that DEX markedly increased FoxO1 mRNA and protein expression,
whereas it decreased PDX-1 mRNA and protein expression in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Further study showed that FoxA2 was involved in regulation
of FoxO1 and PDX-1 expression in DEX-induced pancreatic ß-cells dysfunction.
Interestingly, we demonstrated for the first time that FoxA2 could bind to the
FoxO1 gene promoter and positively regulate FoxO1 expression. Moreover, we found 
that DEX increased the activity of FoxA2 binding to the FoxO1 promoter but
decreased the activity of FoxA2 binding to the PDX-1 promoter of RINm5F cells.
Knockdown of FoxA2 by RNA interference inhibited FoxO1 expression and restored
PDX-1 expression in pancreatic ß-cells treated with DEX. However, DEX had no
effect on the expression of FoxA2. Together, the results of the present study
demonstrated that FoxA2 could dynamically regulate FoxO1 and PDX-1 expression in 
pancreatic ß-cells treated with DEX, which provides new important information on 
the transcriptional regulation of FoxO1 and PDX-1 in DEX-induced pancreatic
ß-cells. Inhibition of FoxA2 can effectively protect ß-cells against DEX-induced 
dysfunction.

PMID: 21385937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Nov;20(11):1817-27. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0042. Epub 2011
Apr 6.

Isolation and characterization of node/notochord-like cells from mouse embryonic 
stem cells.

Winzi MK(1), Hyttel P, Dale JK, Serup P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte,
Denmark.

The homeobox gene Noto is expressed in the node and its derivative the notochord.
Here we use a targeted Noto-GFP reporter to isolate and characterize
node/notochord-like cells derived from mouse embryonic stem cells. We find very
few Noto-expressing cells after spontaneous differentiation. However, the number 
of Noto-expressing cells was increased when using Activin A to induce a Foxa2-
and Brachyury-expressing progenitor population, whose further differentiation
into Noto-expressing cells was improved by simultaneous inhibition of BMP, Wnt,
and retinoic acid signaling. Noto-GFP(+) cells expressed the node/notochord
markers Noto, Foxa2, Shh, Noggin, Chordin, Foxj1, and Brachyury; showed a
vacuolarization characteristic of notochord cells; and can integrate into midline
structures when grafted into Hensen's node of gastrulating chicken embryos. The
ability to generate node/notochord-like cells in vitro will aid the biochemical
characterization of these developmentally important structures.

PMCID: PMC3928718
PMID: 21351873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Cells. 2011 Feb;31(2):123-32. doi: 10.1007/s10059-011-0016-8. Epub 2011 Jan
18.

Biochemical and morphological effects of hypoxic environment on human embryonic
stem cells in long-term culture and differentiating embryoid bodies.

Lim HJ(1), Han J, Woo DH, Kim SE, Kim SK, Kang HG, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul, Korea.

The mammalian reproductive tract is known to contain 1.5-5.3% oxygen (O(2)), but 
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) derived from preimplantation embryos are
typically cultured under 21% O(2) tension. The aim of this study was to
investigate the effects of O(2) tension on the long-term culture of hESCs and on 
cell-fate determination during early differentiation. hESCs and embryoid bodies
(EBs) were grown under different O(2) tensions (3, 12, and 21% O(2)). The
expression of markers associated with pluripotency, embryonic germ layers, and
hypoxia was analyzed using RTPCR, immunostaining, and Western blotting.
Proliferation, apoptosis, and chromosomal aberrations were examined using BrdU
incorporation, caspase-3 immunostaining, and karyotype analysis, respectively.
Structural and morphological changes of EBs under different O(2) tensions were
comparatively examined using azan- and hematoxylineosin staining, and scanning
and transmission electron microscopy. Mild hypoxia (12% O(2)) increased the
number of cells expressing Oct4/Nanog and reduced BrdU incorporation and
aneuploidy. The percentage of cells positive for active caspase-3, which was high
during normoxia (21% O(2)), gradually decreased when hESCs were continuously
cultured under mild hypoxia. EBs subjected to hypoxia (3% O(2)) exhibited
well-differentiated microvilli on their surface, secreted high levels of
collagen, and showed enhanced differentiation into primitive endoderm. These
changes were associated with increased expression of Foxa2, Sox17, AFP, and GATA4
on the EB periphery. Our data suggest that mild hypoxia facilitates the slow
mitotic division of hESCs in long-term culture and reduces the frequency of
chromosomal abnormalities and apoptosis. In addition, hypoxia promotes the
differentiation of EBs into extraembryonic endoderm.

PMCID: PMC3932683
PMID: 21347709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Apr;25(4):694-706. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0454. Epub 2011 Feb 
3.

Species-specific strategies underlying conserved functions of metabolic
transcription factors.

Soccio RE(1), Tuteja G, Everett LJ, Li Z, Lazar MA, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104-6149, USA.

The winged helix protein FOXA2 and the nuclear receptor peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> (PPAR<U+03B3>) are highly conserved, regionally
expressed transcription factors (TFs) that regulate networks of genes controlling
complex metabolic functions. Cistrome analysis for Foxa2 in mouse liver and PPAR<U+03B3>
in mouse adipocytes has previously produced consensus-binding sites that are
nearly identical to those used by the corresponding TFs in human cells. We report
here that, despite the conservation of the canonical binding motif, the great
majority of binding regions for FOXA2 in human liver and for PPAR<U+03B3> in human
adipocytes are not in the orthologous locations corresponding to the mouse
genome, and vice versa. Of note, TF binding can be absent in one species despite 
sequence conservation, including motifs that do support binding in the other
species, demonstrating a major limitation of in silico binding site prediction.
Whereas only approximately 10% of binding sites are conserved, gene-centric
analysis reveals that about 50% of genes with nearby TF occupancy are shared
across species for both hepatic FOXA2 and adipocyte PPAR<U+03B3>. Remarkably, for both
TFs, many of the shared genes function in tissue-specific metabolic pathways,
whereas species-unique genes fail to show enrichment for these pathways.
Nonetheless, the species-unique genes, like the shared genes, showed the expected
transcriptional regulation by the TFs in loss-of-function experiments. Thus,
species-specific strategies underlie the biological functions of metabolic TFs
that are highly conserved across mammalian species. Analysis of factor binding in
multiple species may be necessary to distinguish apparent species-unique noise
and reveal functionally relevant information.

PMCID: PMC3386547
PMID: 21292830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Am J Pathol. 2011 Feb;178(2):652-61. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.10.023.

DNA methylation suppresses expression of the urea cycle enzyme carbamoyl
phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Liu H(1), Dong H, Robertson K, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida, Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Carbamoyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1) is a liver-specific, intramitochondrial, 
rate-limiting enzyme in the urea cycle. A previous study showed that CPS1 is the 
antigen for hepatocyte paraffin 1 antibody, a commonly used antibody in surgical 
pathology practice; and CPS1 expression appears to be down-regulated in liver
cancer tissue and cell lines. The aim of this study is to understand how the CPS1
gene is regulated in liver carcinogenesis. In this report, we show that human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells do not express CPS1, whereas cultured human 
primary hepatocytes express abundant levels. In addition, CPS1 was silenced or
down-regulated in liver tumor tissues compared with the matched noncancerous
tissues. The expression of CPS1 in HCC cells was restored with a demethylation
agent, 5-azacytidine. We show that two CpG dinucleotides, located near the
transcription start site, and a CpG-rich region in the first intron were
hypermethylated in HCC cells. The hypermethylation of the two CpG dinucleotides
was also detected in HCC tumor tissues compared with noncancerous tissues.
Further molecular analysis with mutagenesis indicated that the two CpG
dinucleotides play a role in promoter activity of the CPS1 gene. In conclusion,
our study demonstrates that DNA methylation is a key mechanism of silencing CPS1 
expression in human HCC cells, and CPS1 gene hypermethylation of the two CpG
dinucleotides is a potential biomarker for HCC.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3069978
PMID: 21281797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Cell Commun Adhes. 2010 Aug;17(4-6):83-92. doi: 10.3109/15419061.2010.551682.
Epub 2011 Jan 28.

Interleukin-13 induces mucin 5AC production involving STAT6/SPDEF in human airway
epithelial cells.

Yu H(1), Li Q, Kolosov VP, Perelman JM, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Respiratory Medicine, Second Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing
Medical University, Chongqing, China.

Mucus hypersecretion is commonly observed in many chronic airway inflammatory
diseases. Mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) is a major airway mucin because of its high
expression in goblet cells. Here, the authors identified a gene called SAM
domain-containing prostate-derived Ets factor (SPDEF) that was induced by
interleukin (IL)-13. Their results showed that specific knockdown of SPDEF
reduced IL-13-induced MUC5AC expression in human airway epithelial cells. This
finding was associated with decreased expression of anterior gradient 2 (AGR2)
and Ca(2+)-activated Cl(-) channel (CLCA1), which regulate IL-13-mediated MUC5AC 
overproduction. Furthermore, transfection with SPDEF siRNA enhanced expression of
forkhead box a2 (Foxa2), a key transcription factor that is known to prevent
mucus production. The authors also demonstrated that the repression of STAT6
inhibited expression of SPDEF and MUC5AC induced by IL-13. These results show
that SPDEF plays a critical role in regulating a transcriptional network
mediating IL-13-induced MUC5AC synthesis dependent on STAT6.

PMID: 21275604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2011 Jan;31(1):73-6.

[Molecular mechanism of interleukin-13-induced mucus hypersecretion in rat
airway].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang DP(1), Kolosov VP, Perelman JM, Zhou XD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400010, China. gdp116@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of interleukin-13 (IL-13) on mucus secretion
in vivo and the possible mechanism.
METHODS: The SD rats were randomly divided into control group, IL-13 group and
IL-13 plus SP600125 group. The phosphorylation of extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2), c-Jun N-terminal kinase 1/2 (JNK1/2) and the level of MUC5AC
in the lung tissues were examined using Western blotting. RT-PCR was performed to
examine the mRNA level of STAT4 and STAT6, and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays (EMSA) was used to detect the DNA-binding activities of Forkhead box a2
(FOXA2) and activator protein-1 (AP-1).
RESULTS: IL-13 caused a significant increase in MUC5AC and p-JNK1/2 expression,
but did not affect the phosphorylation of ERK1/2. The expression of MUC5AC was
attenuated after treatment with SP600125. A significant increase in STAT6 was
observed in IL-13 group compared with that in the control group, whereas the
expression of STAT4 mRNA was not significantly affected. The DNA-binding activity
of FOXA2 was down-regulated after IL-13 exposure, which did not affect the
DNA-binding activity of AP-1.
CONCLUSION: IL-13 down-regulates mucus secretion via STAT6-FOXA2 pathway in
vitro.

PMID: 21269961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Korean J Intern Med. 2010 Dec;25(4):399-407. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2010.25.4.399.
Epub 2010 Nov 27.

Microarray analysis of papillary thyroid cancers in Korean.

Kim HS(1), Kim do H, Kim JY, Jeoung NH, Lee IK, Bong JG, Jung ED.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Catholic University of Daegu School of
Medicine, Daegu, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) is the most common malignancy of 
the thyroid gland. It involves several molecular mechanisms. The BRAF V600E
mutation has been identified as the most common genetic abnormality in PTC.
Moreover, it is known to be more prevalent in Korean PTC patients than in
patients from other countries. We investigated distinct genetic profiles in
Korean PTC through cDNA microarray analysis.
METHODS: Transcriptional profiles of five PTC samples and five paired normal
thyroid tissue samples were generated using cDNA microarrays. The tumors were
genotyped for BRAF mutations. The results of the cDNA microarray gene expression 
analysis were confirmed by real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry analysis of 35 
PTC patients.
RESULTS: Four of the five patients whose PTC tissues were subjected to microarray
analysis were found to carry the BRAF V600E mutation. Microarrays analysis of the
five PTC tissue samples showed the expression of 96 genes to be increased and
that of 16 genes decreased. Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) confirmed increased expression of SLC34A2, TM7SF4, COMP, KLK7, 
and KCNJ2 and decreased expression of FOXA2, SLC4A4, LYVE-1, and TFCP2L1 in PTC
compared with normal tissue. Of these genes, TFCP2L1, LYVE-1, and KLK7 were
previously unidentified in PTC microarray analysis. Notably, Foxa2 activity in
PTC was reduced, as shown by its cytoplasmic localization, in immunohistochemical
analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate both similarities and differences between
our results and previous reports. In Korean cases of PTC, Foxa2 activity was
reduced with its cytoplasmic accumulation. Further studies are needed to confirm 
the relationship between FOXA2 and BRAF mutations in Korean cases of PTC.

PMCID: PMC2997969
PMID: 21179278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 15;350(2):484-95. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.018. Epub 2010 
Dec 21.

FoxA transcription factors are essential for the development of dorsal axial
structures.

Dal-Pra S(1), Thisse C, Thisse B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia, Health Sciences Center,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA.

In vertebrates, embryonic structures present at the dorsal midline, prechordal
plate, notochord, hypochord and floor plate share a common embryonic origin. In
zebrafish, they derive from a pool of progenitors located within the embryonic
shield at the onset of gastrulation. The molecular mechanisms responsible for the
common development of these structures remain unknown. Based on their spatial and
temporal expression, transcription factors of the Forkhead box A (FoxA) family
appeared to be good candidates to play such a role. In agreement with this
hypothesis, we found that simultaneous knockdown of FoxA2 and FoxA3 abolish the
formation of all axial derivatives, while overexpression of these transcription
factors strongly enlarges dorsal mesodermal territories. We establish that, in
FoxA2-FoxA3 double morphants, precursors of axial tissues are correctly induced
at early gastrula stage, but their dorsal midline identity is not maintained
during development and we found that progenitors of these tissues are
cell-autonomously re-specified to form muscle fibers as well as cells of the
ventral neural tube. Our study provides the first example of a specific loss of
all dorsal midline tissues and demonstrates that members of the FoxA family have 
redundant functions essential to maintain the axial identity of prechordal plate,
notochord, floor plate and hypochord progenitors during gastrulation.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21172337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 30;5(11):e14146. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014146.

Differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells into endoderm without embryoid body
formation.

Kim PT(1), Hoffman BG, Plesner A, Helgason CD, Verchere CB, Chung SW, Warnock GL,
Mui AL, Ong CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Pluripotent embryonic stem cells hold a great promise as an unlimited source of
tissue for treatment of chronic diseases such as Type 1 diabetes. Herein, we
describe a protocol using all-trans-retinoic acid, basic fibroblast growth factor
and dibutyryl cAMP (DBcAMP) in the absence of embryoid body formation, for
differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells into definitive endoderm that may 
serve as pancreatic precursors. The produced cells were analyzed by quantitative 
PCR, immunohistochemistry and static insulin release assay for markers of
trilaminar embryo, and pancreas. Differentiated cells displayed increased Sox17
and Foxa2 expression consistent with definitive endoderm production. There was
minimal production of Sox7, an extraembryonic endoderm marker, and Oct4, a marker
of pluripotency. There was minimal mesoderm or neuroectoderm formation based on
expression levels of the markers brachyury and Sox1, respectively. Various assays
revealed that the cell clusters generated by this protocol express markers of the
pancreatic lineage including insulin I, insulin II, C-peptide, PDX-1,
carboxypeptidase E, pan-cytokeratin, amylase, glucagon, PAX6, Ngn3 and Nkx6.1.
This protocol using all-trans-retinoic acid, DBcAMP, in the absence of embryoid
bodies, generated cells that have features of definitive endoderm that may serve 
as pancreatic endocrine precursors.

PMCID: PMC2994751
PMID: 21152387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Oncogene. 2011 Apr 21;30(16):1868-79. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.560. Epub 2010 Dec
13.

Wnt/ß-catenin activation promotes prostate tumor progression in a mouse model.

Yu X(1), Wang Y, DeGraff DJ, Wills ML, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, TN, USA.

Our previous studies have found that activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
resulted in mouse prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (mPIN). In the large
probasin promoter directed SV40-large T-antigen (LPB-Tag) expressing mouse
prostate, mPIN forms with rare areas of adenocarcinoma. Combining expression of
both Wnt-signaling and Tag expression in the mouse prostate, we have studied the 
role of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in the progression from mPIN to adenocarcinoma.
Our results show that the prostates of mice expressing Tag alone or nuclear
ß-catenin alone developed mPIN, whereas the activation of both Tag and the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway resulted in invasive prostate adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, 
Foxa2, a forkhead transcription factor, was induced by active Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling, and the expression of Foxa2 was associated with the invasive phenotype
in the primary prostate cancer. In the LPB-Tag/dominant active (DA) ß-catenin
prostates, MMP7, a Wnt/ß-catenin target gene, was upregulated. Furthermore, we
also assessed AR and AR signaling pathway in these LPB-Tag/DA ß-catenin mice.
Although ß-catenin is a well-known AR co-activator in vitro, our study provides
strong in vivo evidences indicating that both AR protein and the AR pathway were 
downregulated in the prostate of LPB-Tag/DA ß-catenin mice. Histological analysis
shows that prostate sections derived from the LPB-Tag/DA ß-catenin mice display
neuroendocrine differentiation (NED), but NE cancer does not develop. Together,
our findings indicate that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling has an important role in the
progression of mPIN to prostate adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3081383
PMID: 21151173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 7;404(1):376-81. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.11.126. Epub 2010 Dec 3.

Role of FOXA and Sp1 in mitochondrial acylcarnitine carrier gene expression in
different cell lines.

Convertini P(1), Infantino V, Bisaccia F, Palmieri F, Iacobazzi V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaco-Biology, Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

This study investigates the transcriptional role of the human mitochondrial
carnitine/acylcarnitine carrier (CAC) proximal promoter. Through deletion
analysis, an activation domain (-334/-80 bp) was identified which contains FOXA
and Sp1 active sites. The wild-type (but not mutated) -334/-80 bp region of the
CAC gene conferred 74% LUC transgene activity in HepG2 cells, 17% in HEK293 cells
and 14% in SK-N-SH cells as compared to that observed with the entire -1503/+3 bp
proximal promoter. Overexpression and silencing of FOXA2 or Sp1 in HepG2 cells
enhanced and diminished, respectively, LUC activity, CAC transcript and CAC
protein. In HEK293 and SK-N-SH cells, which do not contain FOXA1-3, LUC activity 
was increased by FOXA2 overexpression to a greater extent than in HepG2 cells.
Both FOXA2 and Sp1 in HepG2, and only Sp1 in HEK293 and SK-N-SH cells, were found
to be bound to the CAC proximal promoter. These results show that FOXA and Sp1
sites in HepG2 cells and only the Sp1 site in HEK293 and SK-N-SH cells have a
critical role in the transcriptional regulation of the CAC proximal promoter.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21130740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Islets. 2010 Mar-Apr;2(2):65-71. doi: 10.4161/isl.2.2.10580.

Intracranial ectopic pancreatic tissue.

Heller RS(1), Tsugu H, Nabeshima K, Madsen OD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Beta Cell Regeneration, Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte,
Denmark. shll@hagedorn.dk

In 2007 a young Japanese female was reported to suffer from a congenital brain
malformation with a non-functioning pancreatic endocrine tumor arising from
intracranial ectopic pancreatic tissue. Ectopic pancreas is normally confined to 
other endodermally-derived organs and not previously reported to be found in the 
brain. Therefore, we sought to better understand the true pancreatic nature of
the tissue and to further understand the mechanism by which ectopic pancreas
could appear in the brain. A detailed immunohistochemical analysis for pancreatic
hormones, transcription factors, ductal/exocrine markers and stem cell markers on
sections from the resected tumor tissue was performed. All five endocrine cell
types are observed but pancreatic polypeptide cells are quite rare and ghrelin
and glucagon cells are more numerous than in normal human pancreas. Insulin
immunoreactive cells stain for c-peptide. The ß-cell specific transcription
factor, Nkx6.1, is expressed only in the insulin immunoreactive cells while
neither Ptf1a or PDX-1 immunoreactive cells can be observed. Duct-like structures
stain strongly for pan-cytokeratin and E-cahderin. The exocrine like tissue
stains strongly for pancreatic amylase, lipase and chymotrypsin. Ngn-3 cells were
very rare and not in the pancreatic area. Examining for endodermal markers we
observed Sox17 had a weak staining in some areas of the pancreatic tissue but was
much less widely expressed than FoxA2. The tumor tissue did not stain for the
stem cell markers, Oct-4 and Sox2. It is speculated that the ectopic pancreas
domain may arise from misexpression of homeodomain transcription factors related 
to Pdx1 within a domain of Ptf1a expression.

PMID: 21099298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Mech Dev. 2011 Jan-Feb;128(1-2):90-103. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2010.11.002. Epub 2010
Nov 17.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 positively and negatively regulate Shh signalling to specify
ventral midbrain progenitor identity.

Mavromatakis YE(1), Lin W, Metzakopian E, Ferri AL, Yan CH, Sasaki H, Whisett J, 
Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Foxa2, a member of the Foxa family of forkhead/winged helix family of
transcription factors, has previously been shown to be an upstream positive
regulator of Shh expression in many different tissues. Recent studies also
strongly suggest that Foxa2 specify cell fate by inhibiting the expression of
cell fate determinants such as Helt1 and Nkx2.2. In this paper, phenotypic
analyses of Wnt1cre; Foxa2flox/flox embryos in the midbrain have demonstrated a
novel role for Foxa2 and its related family member, Foxa1, to attenuate Shh
signalling by inhibiting the expression of its intracellular transducer, Gli2, at
the transcriptional level. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments indicate
that Foxa2 binds to genomic regions of Gli2 and likely regulates its expression
in a direct manner. Our studies, involving loss and gain of function studies in
mice, also provided further insights into the gene regulatory interactions among 
Foxa1, Foxa2 and Shh in ventral midbrain progenitors that contribute to midbrain 
patterning. Altogether, these data indicate that Foxa1 and Foxa2 contribute to
the specification of ventral midbrain progenitor identity by regulating Shh
signalling in a positive and negative manner.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21093585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Islets. 2009 Jul-Aug;1(1):55-61. doi: 10.4161/isl.1.1.8993.

Effect of upregulation of NeuroD in insulin-producing liver cells.

Appavoo M(1), Tuch B.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Transplant Unit, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, New South Wales,
Australia.

NeuroD (BETA2), a bHLH transcription factor is known to be involved in early
pancreatic endocrine as well as neuronal differentiation. NeuroD is known to
regulate distinct sets of molecules that are important for survival and
differentiation of pancreatic cells. We assessed whether forced expression of
NeuroD, can induce maturation of FAO-ins liver cells to ß-like cells. To test
this we stably transfected NeuroD into these cells that constitutively secrete
insulin. Transfected cells showed enhanced expression of preproinsulin mRNA,
elevated insulin content and cumulative insulin secretion. There was an
up-regulation of expression of the genes for the transcription factor Foxa2,
L-type Ca2+ channels subunit a 1C and a 1D and secretory granular protein
chromogranin A. These FAO-ins-hNd cells show increased insulin secretion in
response to calcium and theophylline, but not glucose. However, secretion of
insulin remained constitutive rather than regulated. These studies demonstrate
that NeuroD alone may not be sufficient to induce regulated insulin release in
insulin-producing liver cells.

PMID: 21084850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Dev Biol. 2011 Jan 15;349(2):192-203. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.11.003. Epub 2010
Nov 9.

Telencephalic neural precursor cells show transient competence to interpret the
dopaminergic niche of the embryonic midbrain.

Baizabal JM(1), Valencia C, Guerrero-Flores G, Covarrubias L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics and Molecular Physiology, Instituto de
Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, AP 510-3, Cuernavaca,
Mor. 62250, Mexico.

Neural Precursor Cells (NPCs) generate complex stereotypic arrays of neuronal
subtypes in the brain. This process involves the integration of patterning cues
that progressively restrict the fate of specific NPCs. Yet the capacity of NPCs
to interpret foreign microenvironments during development remains poorly defined.
The aim of this work was to test the competence of mouse telencephalic NPCs to
respond to the dopaminergic niche of the mesencephalon. Telencephalic NPCs
isolated from midgestation mouse embryos (E10.5) and transplanted to age-matched 
mesencephalic explants efficiently differentiated into neurons but were largely
unable to produce midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons. Instead, E10.5
telencephalic NPCs behaved as restricted gabaergic progenitors that maintained
ectopic expression of Foxg1 and Pax6. In contrast, E8.5 telencephalic NPCs were
able to differentiate into Lmx1a(+)/Foxa2(+)/TH(+) neurons in the dopaminergic
niche of the mesencephalic explants. In addition, these early telencephalic NPCs 
showed region-dependent expression of Nkx6.1, Nkx2.2 and site-specific
differentiation into gabaergic neurons within the mesencephalic tissue.
Significant dopaminergic differentiation of E8.5 telencephalic NPCs was not
observed after transplantation to E12.5 mesencephalic explants, suggesting that
inductive signals in the dopaminergic niche rapidly decay after midgestation.
Moreover, we employed transplantation of embryonic stem cells-derived precursors 
to demonstrate that extinction of inductive signals within the telencephalon lags
behind the commitment of residing NPCs. Our data indicate that the plasticity to 
interpret multiple instructive niches is an early and ephemeral feature of the
telencephalic neural lineage.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21070763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Rev Diabet Stud. 2010 Summer;7(2):158-67. doi: 10.1900/RDS.2010.7.158. Epub 2010 
Aug 10.

Turning human epidermis into pancreatic endoderm.

Santamaria P(1), Rodriguez-Piza I, Clemente-Casares X, Yamanouchi J, Mulero-Perez
L, Aasen T, Raya A, Izpisua Belmonte JC.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Regenerative Medicine in Barcelona, Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003
Barcelona, Spain. psantama@ucalgary.ca

OBJECTIVE: Human embryonic stem (hES) cells can be differentiated into pancreatic
endoderm structures in vitro. The study was performed to determine whether
induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells can be differentiated into similar
structures with comparable efficiency.
METHODS: We compared the ability of hES cells and iPS cells derived from human
epidermal keratinocytes to progressively differentiate into pancreatic endoderm. 
Human foreskin keratinocytes were reprogrammed to pluripotency by transduction
with retroviruses encoding Oct4, Sox2, and Klf4. The resulting
keratinocyte-derived iPS (KiPS) cell lines and a hES cell line were subjected to 
a modified pancreatic endoderm differentiation protocol. Cells and embryoid-body 
structures derived from both hES and KiPS cells were compared at different stages
of development for expression of stem cell and differentiation markers, including
Sox2, Oct4, Mixl1, Brachyury, Gsc, FoxA2, Sox17, Hnf4a, Hnf1ß, Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1,
Hex, Isl1, Pdx1, and Slc2A, via Taqman real-time PCR, flow-cytometry, and/or
immunocytochemistry.
RESULTS: hES cells and KiPS cells expressed similar levels of the stem cell
factors Sox2 and Oct4. Upon differentiation, both cell types underwent remarkably
similar changes in gene expression. They acquired the definitive endoderm markers
Sox17 and FoxA2. Most Sox17+ and FoxA2+ cells co-expressed Hnf4a and Hnf1ß, found
in the primitive gut tube, a pancreas precursor. Most FoxA2+ cells were also
Pdx1+, and many expressed Nkx2.2, Nkx6.1, and Isl1.
CONCLUSIONS: Keratinocyte-derived iPS cells can be differentiated into pancreatic
endoderm, and the efficiency of this process is comparable to that seen for hES
cells. Thus keratinocytes have the potential to serve as a source of
patient-specific pancreatic endoderm for transplantation.

PMCID: PMC2989788
PMID: 21060974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Oncotarget. 2010 Sep;1(5):379-85.

The Siah2-HIF-FoxA2 axis in prostate cancer  new markers and therapeutic
opportunities.

Qi J(1), Pellecchia M, Ronai ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Recent studies indicate the importance of the ubiquitin ligase Siah2 in control
of more aggressive prostate tumors  namely, neuroendocrine (NE) prostate tumors 
and prostate adenocarcinoma (PCa) harboring neuroendocrine lesions.
Siah2-dependent expression and activity of HIF-1a regulate its availability to
form a transcriptional complex with FoxA2, resulting in expression of specific
target genes, including Hes6, Sox9 and Jmjd1a, whose co-expression is sufficient 
for formation of NE tumors and NE lesions in PCa. These studies provide novel
markers to diagnose and monitor formation of NE lesions and NE tumors.
Furthermore, defining the regulatory axis consisting of Siah2 and HIF-1a/FoxA2
cooperation suggests novel therapeutic modalities to treat these most aggressive 
forms of prostate cancer. Here we review current understanding of Siah role in
control of hypoxia and prostate tumor development and highlight potential
approaches for targeting components along Siah-regulated pathways.

PMCID: PMC2964873
PMID: 21037926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 13;5(10):e13344. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013344.

Inhibition of the liver enriched protein FOXA2 recovers HNF6 activity in human
colon carcinoma and liver hepatoma cells.

Lehner F(1), Kulik U, Klempnauer J, Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany.

Recently, we demonstrated that the transcription factors HNF6 and FOXA2 function 
as key regulators in human colorectal liver metastases. To better understand
their proposed inhibitory crosstalk, the consequences of functional knockdown of 
FOXA2 on HNF6 and C/EBPa activity were investigated in the human colon Caco-2 and
HepG2 carcinoma cell lines. Specifically, siRNA-mediated gene silencing of FOXA2 
repressed transcript expression by >80%. This resulted in a statistically
significant 6-, 3-, 4-, and 8-fold increase in mRNA expression of HNF6 and of
genes targeted by this transcription factor, e.g., HSP105B, CYP51, and C/EBPa, as
determined by qRT-PCR. Thus, functional knockdown of FOXA2 recovered HNF6
activity. Furthermore, with nuclear extracts of Caco-2 cells no HNF6 DNA binding 
was observed, but expression of HNF1a, FOXA2, FOXA3, and HNF4a protein was
abundant. We therefore transfected a plasmid encoding HNF6 into Caco-2 cells but 
also employed a retroviral vector to transfect HNF6 into HepG2 cells. This
resulted in HNF6 protein expression with DNA binding activity being recovered as 
determined by EMSA band shift assays. Furthermore, by flow cytometry the
consequences of HNF6 expression on cell cycle regulation in transfected cells was
studied. Essentially, HNF6 inhibited cell cycle progression in the G2/M and G1
phase in Caco-2 and HepG2 cell lines, respectively. Here, proliferation was
reduced by 80% and 50% in Caco-2 and HepG2 cells, respectively, as determined by 
the BrdU labeling assay. Therefore functional knockdown of FOXA2 recovered HNF6
activity and inhibited growth of tumor-cells and may possibly represent a novel
therapeutic target in primary and secondary liver malignancies.

PMCID: PMC2954183
PMID: 20967225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Cell Adh Migr. 2011 Jan-Feb;5(1):73-82. Epub 2011 Jan 1.

Fibronectin-mediated upregulation of a5ß1 integrin and cell adhesion during
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Pimton P(1), Sarkar S, Sheth N, Perets A, Marcinkiewicz C, Lazarovici P, Lelkes
PI.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Engineering, Science and Health Systems, Drexel
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells have a broad potential application in regenerative
medicine and can be differentiated into cells of all three germ layers. Adhesion 
of ES cells to extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins is essential for the
differentiation pathway; Cell-ECM adhesion is mediated by integrins that have the
ability to activate many intracellular signaling pathways. Therefore, we
hypothesize that the expression and function of integrin receptors is a critical 
step in ES differentiation. Using functional cell adhesion assays, our study
demonstrates that a5ß1 is a major functional integrin receptor expressed on the
cell surface of undifferentiated mouse ES-D3 cells, which showed significantly
higher binding to fibronectin as compared to collagens. This adhesion was
specific mediated by integrin a5ß1 as evident from the inhibition with a
disintegrin selective for this particular integrin. Differentiation of ES-D3
cells on fibronectin or on a collagen type1/fibronectin matrix, caused further
selective up-regulation of the a5ß1 integrin. Differentiation of the cells, as
evaluated by immunofluorescence, FACS analysis and quantitative RT-PCR, was
accompanied by the upregulation of mesenchymal (Flk1, isolectin B4, a-SMA,
vimentin) and endodermal markers (FoxA2, SOX 17, cytokeratin) in parallel to
increased expression of a5ß1 integrin. Taken together, the data indicate that
fibronectin-mediated, upregulation of a5ß1 integrin and adhesion of ES-D3 cells
to specific ECM molecules are linked to early stages of mouse embryonic stem
cells commitment to meso-endodermal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3038102
PMID: 20962574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Cell Transplant. 2010;19(6):831-9. doi: 10.3727/096368910X508951.

Comparative analysis of endoderm formation efficiency between mouse ES cells and 
iPS cells.

Iwamuro M(1), Komaki T, Kubota Y, Seita M, Kawamoto H, Yuasa T, Shahid JM, Hassan
RA, Hassan WA, Nakaji S, Nishikawa Y, Kondo E, Yamamoto K, Kobayashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
iwamuromasaya@yahoo.co.jp

Definitive endoderm (DE) derived from stem cells holds potential to differentiate
into hepatocytes. Stem cell therapy using those cells has potential for a
treatment of liver disease. To date, various ways of inducing hepatocytes from
embryonic stem (ES) cells have been reported by researchers. However, it has not 
been proved enough that induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells behave in the same
manner as ES cells in endoderm differentiation. The purpose of this study was to 
establish an efficient method to induce DE from iPS cells, through comparatively 
analyzing the efficacy of endoderm formation from mouse ES cells. Furthermore,
the efficiency of a serum-free medium in the differentiation into DE was
investigated. Mouse ES cells and iPS cells were floated in culture medium for 2
or 5 days and embryoid bodies (EB) were formed. Subsequently, DE was induced with
100 ng/ml activin A and 100 ng/ml basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF). RT-PCR
and real-time PCR analyses were carried out at each step to determine the gene
expression of EB markers. The difference in cellular proliferation between
serum-containing and serum-free media was examined by an MTS assay in EB and DE
induction. iPS cells showed the paralleled mRNA expression to ES cells in each
step of differentiation into EB, but the levels of expression of Sox17 and Foxa2 
were relatively higher in ES cell-derived DE, whereas Cxcr4 expression was higher
in iPS cell-derived DE. The utilization of serum-free medium for iPS cells showed
significantly favorable cellular proliferation during EB formation and subsequent
DE induction. Forming EB for 5 days and subsequently DE induction with activin A 
and bFGF with serum-free medium was an appropriate protocol in iPS cells. This
may represent an important step for generating hepatocytes from iPS cells for the
development of cell therapy.

PMID: 20955658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Differentiation. 2011 Jan;81(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2010.09.182. Epub 2010 
Oct 8.

Intestinal lineage commitment of embryonic stem cells.

Cao L(1), Gibson JD, Miyamoto S, Sail V, Verma R, Rosenberg DW, Nelson CE,
Giardina C.

Author information: 
(1)University of Connecticut, Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 91 North 
Eagleville Road, Unit 3125 Storrs, CT 06269-3125, USA.

Generating lineage-committed intestinal stem cells from embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) could provide a tractable experimental system for understanding intestinal
differentiation pathways and may ultimately provide cells for regenerating
damaged intestinal tissue. We tested a two-step differentiation procedure in
which ESCs were first cultured with activin A to favor formation of definitive
endoderm, and then treated with fibroblast-conditioned medium with or without
Wnt3A. The definitive endoderm expressed a number of genes associated with
gut-tube development through mouse embryonic day 8.5 (Sox17, Foxa2, and Gata4
expressed and Id2 silent). The intestinal stem cell marker Lgr5 gene was also
activated in the endodermal cells, whereas the Msi1, Ephb2, and Dcamkl1
intestinal stem cell markers were not. Exposure of the endoderm to
fibroblast-conditioned medium with Wnt3A resulted in the activation of Id2, the
remaining intestinal stem cell markers and the later gut markers Cdx2, Fabp2, and
Muc2. Interestingly, genes associated with distal gut-associated mesoderm (Foxf2,
Hlx, and Hoxd8) were also simulated by Wnt3A. The two-step differentiation
protocol generated gut bodies with crypt-like structures that included regions of
Lgr5-expressing proliferating cells and regions of cell differentiation. These
gut bodies also had a smooth muscle component and some underwent peristaltic
movement. The ability of the definitive endoderm to differentiate into intestinal
epithelium was supported by the vivo engraftment of these cells into mouse
colonic mucosa. These findings demonstrate that definitive endoderm derived from 
ESCs can carry out intestinal cell differentiation pathways and may provide cells
to restore damaged intestinal tissue.

Copyright © 2010 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20934799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Jun;20(6):1071-8. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0185. Epub 2010 Nov 
4.

A novel stepwise differentiation of functional pancreatic exocrine cells from
embryonic stem cells.

Shirasawa S(1), Yoshie S, Yokoyama T, Tomotsune D, Yue F, Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Health Sciences, Bourbon Institutes of Health, BOURBON
Corporation, Kashiwazaki, Niigata, Japan. shirasawa-sak@bourbon.co.jp

Cultivation of functional pancreatic cells isolated from adult mammalian pancreas
remains difficult. We developed a differentiation protocol that gradually induced
the formation of mouse pancreatic exocrine cells from embryonic stem cells
(ESCs). This process mimicked in vivo pancreatic development by directing cells
through definitive endoderm (DE), gut tube endoderm, and pancreatic progenitor
cells to differentiated cells that expressed pancreatic exocrine enzymes. Mouse
ESCs were cultured in hanging drops to form embryoid bodies. Treatment of
embryoid bodies with activin A induced the formation of DE cells that expressed
marker mRNAs Goosecoid and Mixl1 and that were double-positive with Foxa2 and
Sox17 proteins. Subsequent treatment of the DE cells by retinoic acid induced the
formation of gut tube endoderm cells that expressed the specific marker Hnf1b.
Expression of Goosecoid and Mixl1 was downregulated during this period.
Fibroblast growth factor 7 (FGF7) promoted differentiation of PDX1-expressing
pancreatic progenitor cells that also expressed Foxa2 mRNA, an endodermal marker,
suggesting derivation from the DE cells. Exocrine cell differentiation was
induced with FGF7, glucagon-like peptide-1, and nicotinamide. The differentiated 
cells expressed mature pancreatic exocrine cell mRNAs, such as Amylase, Elastase,
and Carboxypeptidase A. Additionally, they produced pancreatic elastase, amylase,
carboxypeptidase A, and chymotrypsin proteins that were identified in cytoplasmic
granules by immunocytochemistry. Active amylase was released into the medium.
Moreover, FGF7 was associated with differentiation of pancreatic exocrine cells. 
The findings reported here offer a novel and effective process to develop
pancreatic exocrine cells from ESCs.

PMID: 20887097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 12;285(46):35245-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C110.175851. Epub 2010
Sep 29.

FoxOs function synergistically to promote glucose production.

Haeusler RA(1), Kaestner KH, Accili D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.

Hepatic glucose production (HGP) plays a vital role in maintaining the supply of 
glucose to the body, and transcription factor FoxO1 is known to confer hormone
responsiveness onto HGP. Mice with a liver-specific FoxO1 deletion (L-FoxO1) show
reduced HGP and reduced expression of glucose production genes. To determine the 
contribution of additional transcription factors to HGP, we created double and
triple liver-specific knock-outs lacking FoxO1, FoxO3, and FoxO4 or the related
protein FoxA2. We show that, when compared with single knock-out of FoxO1, triple
ablation of FoxO genes causes more pronounced fasting hypoglycemia, increased
glucose tolerance, and enhanced insulin sensitivity, with decreased plasma
insulin levels. In contrast, combined ablation of FoxO1 and FoxA2 phenocopied the
single knock-out of FoxO1. These data indicate that FoxOs work in concert to
regulate multiple aspects of hepatic glucose metabolism.

PMCID: PMC2975147
PMID: 20880840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Nov 29;42A(4):290-300. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00107.2010. Epub 2010 Sep 28.

Actions and interactions of progesterone and estrogen on transcriptome profiles
of the bovine endometrium.

Shimizu T(1), Krebs S, Bauersachs S, Blum H, Wolf E, Miyamoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Animal and Food Hygiene, Obihiro University of Agriculture 
and Veterinary Medicine, Obihiro, Japan.

The aim of our study was to analyze endometrial gene expression profiles in
ovariectomized cows treated with estradiol and/or progesterone by using
microarray analysis. Clustering of differentially expressed genes allowed
separation into distinct hormone response patterns. These patterns could be
classified into independent and interdependent actions of the steroid hormones
estrogen and progesterone. The use of ovariectomized cows and external
administration of hormones identified a set of genes whose regulation depends on 
a progesterone priming effect. The progesterone-primed estrogen response
comprises gene functions such as migration, cell differentiation, and cell
adhesion and therefore may play a crucial role in tissue remodeling, as one of
its key regulators in the endometrium, TGFB2, is among this group of
progesterone-primed genes. Functional annotation analysis of the
estrogen-responsive gene clusters shows a clear dominance of functions such as
cell cycle, morphogenesis, and differentiation. The functional profile of the
progesterone-responsive clusters is less clear but nevertheless shows some
important fertility-related terms like luteinization, oocyte maturation, and
catecholamine metabolism. We looked for putative regulators of the steroid
hormone response in endometrium by searching for enriched transcription factor
binding sites in the promoter regions of the genes with similar hormone response 
profile. This analysis identified transcription factors such as SP1, NFYA, FOXA2,
IRF2, ESR1, and NOBOX as candidate regulators of gene expression in bovine
endometrium treated with steroid hormones. Taken together, our data provide novel
insights into the regulation of bovine endometrial physiology by steroid
hormones.

PMID: 20876846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2011 Jan;46(1):187-99. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.09.002. Epub
2010 Sep 16.

Foxa2 regulates the expression of Nato3 in the floor plate by a novel
evolutionarily conserved promoter.

Mansour AA(1), Nissim-Eliraz E, Zisman S, Golan-Lev T, Schatz O, Klar A, Ben-Arie
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Institute of Life Sciences,
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

The development of the neural tube into a complex central nervous system involves
morphological, cellular and molecular changes, all of which are tightly
regulated. The floor plate (FP) is a critical organizing center located at the
ventral-most midline of the neural tube. FP cells regulate dorsoventral
patterning, differentiation and axon guidance by secreting morphogens. Here we
show that the bHLH transcription factor Nato3 (Ferd3l) is specifically expressed 
in the spinal FP of chick and mouse embryos. Using in ovo electroporation to
understand the regulation of the FP-specific expression of Nato3, we have
identified an evolutionarily conserved 204 bp genomic region, which is necessary 
and sufficient to drive expression to the chick FP. This promoter contains two
Foxa2-binding sites, which are highly conserved among distant phyla. The two
sites can bind Foxa2 in vitro, and are necessary for the expression in the FP in 
vivo. Gain and loss of Foxa2 function in vivo further emphasize its role in Nato3
promoter activity. Thus, our data suggest that Nato3 is a direct target of Foxa2,
a transcription activator and effector of Sonic hedgehog, the hallmark regulator 
of FP induction and spinal cord development. The identification of the
FP-specific promoter is an important step towards a better understanding of the
molecular mechanisms through which Nato3 transcription is regulated and for
uncovering its function during nervous system development. Moreover, the promoter
provides us with a powerful tool for conditional genetic manipulations in the FP.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20849957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Cell Res. 2011 Feb;21(2):316-26. doi: 10.1038/cr.2010.126. Epub 2010 Sep 7.

FOXA2 functions as a suppressor of tumor metastasis by inhibition of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in human lung cancers.

Tang Y(1), Shu G, Yuan X, Jing N, Song J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

The forkhead box transcription factor A2 (FOXA2) is an important regulator in
animal development and body homeostasis. However, whether FOXA2 is involved in
transforming growth factor ß1 (TGF-ß1)-mediated epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and tumor metastasis remains unknown. The present study showed
that in human lung cancer cell lines, the abundance of FOXA2 positively
correlates with epithelial phenotypes and negatively correlates with the
mesenchymal phenotypes of cells, and TGF-ß1 treatment decreased FOXA2 protein
level. Consistently, knockdown of FOXA2 promoted EMT and invasion of lung cancer 
cells, whereas overexpression of FOXA2 reduced the invasion and suppressed
TGF-ß1-induced EMT. In addition, knockdown of FOXA2 induced slug expression, and 
ectopic expression of FOXA2 inhibited slug transcription. Furthermore, we
identified that FOXA2 can bind to slug promoter through a conserved binding site,
and that the DNA-binding region and transactivation region II of FOXA2 are
required for repression of the slug promoter. These data demonstrate that FOXA2
functions as a suppressor of tumor metastasis by inhibition of EMT.

PMCID: PMC3193444
PMID: 20820189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Stem Cells. 2010 Oct;28(10):1805-15. doi: 10.1002/stem.510.

Gli1 is an inducing factor in generating floor plate progenitor cells from human 
embryonic stem cells.

Denham M(1), Thompson LH, Leung J, Pébay A, Björklund A, Dottori M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuroscience, University of Melbourne, Parkville, Australia.
mark.denham@unimelb.edu.au

Generation of mesencephalic dopamine (mesDA) neurons from human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) requires several stages of signaling from various extrinsic and
intrinsic factors. To date, most methods incorporate exogenous treatment of Sonic
hedgehog (SHH) to derive mesDA neurons. However, we and others have shown that
this approach is inefficient for generating FOXA2+ cells, the precursors of mesDA
neurons. As mesDA neurons are derived from the ventral floor plate (FP) regions
of the embryonic neural tube, we sought to develop a system to derive FP cells
from hESC. We show that forced expression of the transcription factor GLI1 in
hESC at the earliest stage of neural induction, resulted in their commitment to
FP lineage. The GLI1+ cells coexpressed FP markers, FOXA2 and Corin, and
displayed exocrine SHH activity by ventrally patterning the surrounding neural
progenitors. This system results in 63% FOXA2+ cells at the neural progenitor
stage of hESC differentiation. The GLI1-transduced cells were also able to
differentiate to neurons expressing tyrosine hydroxylase. This study demonstrates
that GLI1 is a determinant of FP specification in hESC and describes a highly
robust and efficient in vitro model system that mimics the ventral neural tube
organizer.

PMCID: PMC2996857
PMID: 20799336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. BMC Genomics. 2010 Aug 19;11:481. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-481.

DNA methylation status of nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes underlies the
tissue-dependent mitochondrial functions.

Takasugi M(1), Yagi S, Hirabayashi K, Shiota K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Animal Resource
Science/Veterinary Medical Sciences, the University of Tolyo, Tokyo 113-8657,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mitochondria are semi-autonomous, semi-self-replicating organelles
harboring their own DNA (mitochondrial DNA, mtDNA), and their dysregulation is
involved in the development of various diseases. While mtDNA does not generally
undergo epigenetic modifications, almost all mitochondrial proteins are encoded
by nuclear DNA. However, the epigenetic regulation of nuclear-encoded
mitochondrial genes (nuclear mt genes) has not been comprehensively analyzed.
RESULTS: We analyzed the DNA methylation status of 899 nuclear mt genes in the
liver, brain, and heart tissues of mouse, and identified 636 nuclear mt genes
carrying tissue-dependent and differentially methylated regions (T-DMRs). These
nuclear mt genes are involved in various mitochondrial functions and they also
include genes related to human diseases. T-DMRs regulate the expression of
nuclear mt genes. Nuclear mt genes with tissue-specific hypomethylated T-DMRs
were characterized by enrichment of the target genes of specific transcription
factors such as FOXA2 in the liver, and CEBPA and STAT1 in the brain.
CONCLUSIONS: A substantial proportion of nuclear mt genes contained T-DMRs, and
the DNA methylation status of numerous T-DMRs should underlie tissue-dependent
mitochondrial functions.

PMCID: PMC2996977
PMID: 20723256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. World J Gastroenterol. 2010 Aug 21;16(31):3919-27.

Mapping of liver-enriched transcription factors in the human intestine.

Lehner F(1), Kulik U, Klempnauer J, Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Research and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology
and Experimental Medicine, Nikolai-Fuchs-Strasse, Hannover, Germany.

AIM: To investigate the gene expression pattern of hepatocyte nuclear factor 6
(HNF6) and other liver-enriched transcription factors in various segments of the 
human intestine to better understand the differentiation of the gut epithelium.
METHODS: Samples of healthy duodenum and jejunum were obtained from patients with
pancreatic cancer whereas ileum and colon was obtained from patients undergoing
right or left hemicolectomy or (recto)sigmoid or rectal resection. All surgical
specimens were subjected to histopathology. Excised tissue was shock-frozen and
analyzed for gene expression of liver-enriched transcription factors by
semiquantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain and compared to the human
colon carcinoma cell line Caco-2. Protein expression of major liver-enriched
transcription factors was determined by Western blotting while the DNA binding of
HNF6 was investigated by electromobility shift assays.
RESULTS: The gene expression patterning of liver-enriched transcription factors
differed in the various segments of the human intestine with HNF6 gene expression
being most abundant in the duodenum (P < 0.05) whereas expression of the zinc
finger protein GATA4 and of the HNF6 target gene ALDH3A1 was most abundant in the
jejunum (P < 0.05). Likewise, expression of FOXA2 and the splice variants 2 and 4
of HNF4alpha were most abundantly expressed in the jejunum (P < 0.05).
Essentially, expression of transcription factors declined from the duodenum
towards the colon with the most abundant expression in the jejunum and less in
the ileum. The expression of HNF6 and of genes targeted by this factor, i.e.
neurogenin 3 (NGN3) was most abundant in the jejunum followed by the ileum and
the colon while DNA binding activity of HNF4alpha and of NGN3 was confirmed by
electromobility shift assays to an optimized probe. Furthermore, Western blotting
provided evidence of the expression of several liver-enriched transcription
factors in cultures of colon epithelial cells, albeit at different levels.
CONCLUSION: We describe significant local and segmental differences in the
expression of liver-enriched transcription factors in the human intestine which
impact epithelial cell biology of the gut.

PMCID: PMC2923766
PMID: 20712053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. J Aerosol Med Pulm Drug Deliv. 2010 Aug;23(4):219-31. doi:
10.1089/jamp.2009.0802.

New pharmacotherapy for airway mucus hypersecretion in asthma and COPD: targeting
intracellular signaling pathways.

Lai H(1), Rogers DF.

Author information: 
(1)Airway Disease, National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom.

Airway mucus hypersecretion is a pathophysiological feature of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). The hypersecretion is associated with
phenotypic changes in the airways, notably, increases in the number of surface
epithelial goblet cells (hyperplasia) and in the size of the submucosal glands
(hypertrophy). The hyperplasia and hypertrophy are associated with increased
production of mucin, the gel-forming component of mucus. The excess mucus
production contributes to morbidity and mortality in many patients, particularly 
in those with more severe disease. Although current pharmacotherapy is effective 
in clinical management of patients with stable asthma, severe asthma is poorly
treated and there is no current drug treatment for COPD. In neither disease is
there specific, effective pharmacotherapy for the hypersecretion. Consequently,
identification of potential drug targets for treatment of hypersecretion in
asthma and COPD is warranted. The inflammatory mediators and the associated
intracellular signaling pathways underlying upregulation of mucin synthesis and
development of goblet cell hyperplasia are gradually being elucidated. These
include Th2 cytokines (predominantly IL-9 and IL-13), and IL-1 beta, tumor
necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and cyclooxygenase (COX)-2. IL-9 may act
predominantly via calcium-activated chloride channels (CLCA), IL-13 via STAT-6
and FOXA2, TNF-alpha via NF-kappaB, and IL-1 beta via COX-2. Epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGF-R) signaling and FOXA2 appear to be convergent intracellular
pathways for a number of inflammatory mediators, with EGF-R upregulated in the
airways of asthmatic and COPD patients. Thus, preclinical studies have clearly
identified a number of intracellular signaling pathways as possible targets for
pharmacotherapy of airway mucus hypersecretion in asthma and COPD. Of these, the 
EGF-R and Th2 cytokine pathways may have the greatest potential for inhibition of
excessive mucus production. However, because these targets are so often
intimately involved with different aspects of airway (and systemic) homeostasis, 
there is potential for development of unwanted side effects with drug
intervention. Thus, translation of the promising preclinical studies to the
clinic will depend on development of drug moieties with low off-target activity. 
This may be accomplished by maximizing airway selectivity, which may be
facilitated by appropriate delivery device design.

PMID: 20695774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Zhongguo Xiu Fu Chong Jian Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Jul;24(7):838-42.

[Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into hepatocyte-like cells in an
adherent culture system with single-step induction].

[Article in Chinese]

Hu Z(1), Luo M, Liang D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kunming Medical University, Kunming Yunnan,
650031, P R China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish a new induction method from human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) differentiating into hepatocyte-like cells using an adherent culture
system with single-step induction.
METHODS: Undifferentiated hESCs were cultured on Matrigel-coated culture plates
for 4 days, hepatic differentiation was initiated at 60%-70% confluence by adding
Activin A for 5 days. Then the induction medium was replaced by hepatocyte
induction medium (HIM) supplemented with fibroblast growth factor 1 (FGF-1) and
bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP-4) for another 6 days. Finally, the cells were 
treated with HIM adding hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and Oncostatin M (OSM) for
5-7 days. The characteristics of differentiated cells were determined by
morphology, immunofluorescence staining, RT-PCR, and Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)
test.
RESULTS: Differentiated cells treated with Activin A, FGF-1, BMP-4, HGF, and OSM 
sequentially were morphologically larger and became spherical, oval or polygon.
Some cells had 2 or 3 nuclei, suggesting that the cells have a hepatocyte-like
morphology. Differentiated cells at first induction stage could be stained
positive by SOX17 and Forkhead (FOX)A2 after induction by Activin A. Then they
turned to be a fetoprotein (AFP) and al antitrypsin positive cells at second
induction stage after induction by FGF-1 and BMP-4. Finally, the differentiated
cells treated with HGF and OSM showed PAS positive for glycogen detection. The
differentiated cells at various stages also expressed at early (SOX17, FOXA2, and
GATA-4), middle (AFP, albumin, and cytokeratin 18), and mature (alcohol
dehydrogenase 1C and Cytochrome P4501B1) stage hepatic genes, respectively.
CONCLUSION: Using a simple-step induction method and by supplied with cytokines
consequently, hESCs can be induced to differentiate into hepatocyte-like cells.
The differentiation method can provide seed cells for hepatic tissue engineering 
or cell-therapy.

PMID: 20695382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Dev Biol. 2010 Oct 15;346(2):346-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.032. Epub 2010 
Aug 6.

Direct transcriptional regulation of Gata4 during early endoderm specification is
controlled by FoxA2 binding to an intronic enhancer.

Rojas A(1), Schachterle W, Xu SM, Martín F, Black BL.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa-CIBERDEM,
Sevilla, Spain. anabel.rojas@cabimer.es

The embryonic endoderm is a multipotent progenitor cell population that gives
rise to the epithelia of the digestive and respiratory tracts, the liver and the 
pancreas. Among the transcription factors that have been shown to be important
for endoderm development and gut morphogenesis is GATA4. Despite the important
role of GATA4 in endoderm development, its transcriptional regulation is not well
understood. In this study, we identified an intronic enhancer from the mouse
Gata4 gene that directs expression to the definitive endoderm in the early
embryo. The activity of this enhancer is initially broad in all endodermal
progenitors, as demonstrated by fate mapping analysis using the Cre/loxP system, 
but becomes restricted to the dorsal foregut and midgut, and associated organs
such as dorsal pancreas and stomach. The function of the intronic Gata4 enhancer 
is dependent upon a conserved Forkhead transcription factor-binding site, which
is bound by recombinant FoxA2 in vitro. These studies identify Gata4 as a direct 
transcriptional target of FoxA2 in the hierarchy of the transcriptional
regulatory network that controls the development of the definitive endoderm.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2945415
PMID: 20692247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. BMC Genomics. 2010 Jul 26;11:451. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-451.

A systems approach to mapping transcriptional networks controlling surfactant
homeostasis.

Xu Y(1), Zhang M, Wang Y, Kadambi P, Dave V, Lu LJ, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, USA. Yan.Xu@cchmc.org

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary surfactant is required for lung function at birth and
throughout life. Lung lipid and surfactant homeostasis requires regulation among 
multi-tiered processes, coordinating the synthesis of surfactant proteins and
lipids, their assembly, trafficking, and storage in type II cells of the lung.
The mechanisms regulating these interrelated processes are largely unknown.
RESULTS: We integrated mRNA microarray data with array independent knowledge
using Gene Ontology (GO) similarity analysis, promoter motif searching, protein
interaction and literature mining to elucidate genetic networks regulating lipid 
related biological processes in lung. A Transcription factor (TF)-target gene
(TG) similarity matrix was generated by integrating data from different analytic 
methods. A scoring function was built to rank the likely TF-TG pairs. Using this 
strategy, we identified and verified critical components of a transcriptional
network directing lipogenesis, lipid trafficking and surfactant homeostasis in
the mouse lung.
CONCLUSIONS: Within the transcriptional network, SREBP, CEBPA, FOXA2, ETSF, GATA6
and IRF1 were identified as regulatory hubs displaying high connectivity. SREBP, 
FOXA2 and CEBPA together form a common core regulatory module that controls
surfactant lipid homeostasis. The core module cooperates with other factors to
regulate lipid metabolism and transport, cell growth and development, cell death 
and cell mediated immune response. Coordinated interactions of the TFs influence 
surfactant homeostasis and regulate lung function at birth.

PMCID: PMC3091648
PMID: 20659319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Oct 15;19(20):3936-47. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq308. Epub 2010 Jul
22.

Application of statistical and functional methodologies for the investigation of 
genetic determinants of coronary heart disease biomarkers: lipoprotein lipase
genotype and plasma triglycerides as an exemplar.

Smith AJ(1), Palmen J, Putt W, Talmud PJ, Humphries SE, Drenos F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Genetics, Department of Medicine, University
College London, 5 University Street, London WC1E 6JF, UK.

Genome-wide association studies have proved very successful in identifying novel 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with disease or traits, but the
related, functional SNP is usually unknown. In this paper, we describe a
methodology to locate and validate candidate functional SNPs using lipoprotein
lipase (LPL), a gene previously associated with triglyceride levels, as an
exemplar. Two thousand seven hundred and eighty-six healthy middle-aged men from 
the NPHSII UK prospective study (with up to six measures of plasma lipid levels) 
were genotyped for 20 LPL tagging (t)SNPs using Illumina Bead technology. Using
model-selection procedures and haplotypes, we identified eight SNPs that
consistently maximized the fit of the model to the phenotype. Fifteen SNPs in
high linkage disequilibrium with these were identified, and functional assays
were carried out on all 23 SNPs. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) was 
used to identify SNPs that had the potential to alter DNA-protein interactions,
reducing the number to eight possible candidate SNPs. These were examined for
ability to alter expression using a luciferase reporter assay, and two regulatory
SNPs, showing genotype differences, rs327 and rs3289, were identified. Finally,
multiplexed-competitor-EMSA (MC-EMSA) and supershift EMSA identified FOXA2 to
rs327T, and CREB-binding protein (CBP) and CCAAT displacement protein (CDP) to
rs3289C as the factors responsible for transcription binding. We have identified 
two novel candidate functional SNPs in LPL and presented a procedure aimed to
efficiently detect SNPs potentially causal to genetic association. We believe
that this methodology could be successfully applied to future re-sequencing data.

PMCID: PMC2947402
PMID: 20650961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Dec;45(4):324-34. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.07.004. Epub
2010 Jul 14.

Characterization of axon guidance cue sensitivity of human embryonic stem
cell-derived dopaminergic neurons.

Cord BJ(1), Li J, Works M, McConnell SK, Palmer T, Hynes MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.

Dopaminergic neurons derived from human embryonic stem cells will be useful in
future transplantation studies of Parkinson's disease patients. As newly
generated neurons must integrate and reconnect with host cells, the ability of
hESC-derived neurons to respond to axon guidance cues will be critical. Both
Netrin-1 and Slit-2 guide rodent embryonic dopaminergic (DA) neurons in vitro and
in vivo, but very little is known about the response of hESC-derived DA neurons
to any axonal guidance cues. Here we examined the ability of Netrin-1 and Slit-2 
to affect human ESC DA axons in vitro. hESC DA neurons mature over time in
culture with the developmental profile of DA neurons in vivo, including
expression of the DA neuron markers FoxA2, En-1 and Nurr-1, and receptors for
both Netrin and Slit. hESC DA neurons respond to exogenous Netrin-1 and Slit-2,
showing an increased responsiveness to Netrin-1 as the neurons mature in culture.
These responses were maintained in the presence of pro-inflammatory cytokines
that might be encountered in the diseased brain. These studies are the first to
evaluate and confirm that suitably matured human ES-derived DA neurons can
respond appropriately to axon guidance cues.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20637284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Dev Biol. 2010 Oct 1;346(1):25-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.07.008. Epub 2010
Jul 14.

O-fucosylation of thrombospondin type 1 repeats restricts epithelial to
mesenchymal transition (EMT) and maintains epiblast pluripotency during mouse
gastrulation.

Du J(1), Takeuchi H, Leonhard-Melief C, Shroyer KR, Dlugosz M, Haltiwanger RS,
Holdener BC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute for Cell and
Developmental Biology, Center for Developmental Genetics, Stony Brook University,
Stony Brook, NY 11794-5215, USA.

Thrombospondin type 1 repeat (TSR) superfamily members regulate diverse
biological activities ranging from cell motility to inhibition of angiogenesis.
In this study, we verified that mouse protein O-fucosyltransferase-2 (POFUT2)
specifically adds O-fucose to TSRs. Using two Pofut2 gene-trap lines, we
demonstrated that O-fucosylation of TSRs was essential for restricting epithelial
to mesenchymal transition in the primitive streak, correct patterning of
mesoderm, and localization of the definitive endoderm. Although Pofut2 mutant
embryos established anterior/posterior polarity, they underwent extensive
mesoderm differentiation at the expense of maintaining epiblast pluripotency.
Moreover, mesoderm differentiation was biased towards the vascular endothelial
cell lineage. Localization of Foxa2 and Cer1 expressing cells within the interior
of Pofut2 mutant embryos suggested that POFUT2 activity was also required for the
displacement of the primitive endoderm by definitive endoderm. Notably, Nodal,
BMP4, Fgf8, and Wnt3 expression were markedly elevated and expanded in Pofut2
mutants, providing evidence that O-fucose modification of TSRs was essential for 
modulation of growth factor signaling during gastrulation. The ability of Pofut2 
mutant embryos to form teratomas comprised of tissues from all three germ layer
origins suggested that defects in Pofut2 mutant embryos resulted from
abnormalities in the extracellular environment. This prediction is consistent
with the observation that POFUT2 targets are constitutive components of the
extracellular matrix (ECM) or associate with the ECM. For this reason, the Pofut2
mutants represent a valuable tool for studying the role of O-fucosylation in ECM 
synthesis and remodeling, and will be a valuable model to study how
post-translational modification of ECM components regulates the formation of
tissue boundaries, cell movements, and signaling.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2937101
PMID: 20637190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Diabetes. 2010 Oct;59(10):2662-71. doi: 10.2337/db10-0389. Epub 2010 Jul 9.

Genetic and functional assessment of the role of the rs13431652-A and rs573225-A 
alleles in the G6PC2 promoter that are strongly associated with elevated fasting 
glucose levels.

Bouatia-Naji N(1), Bonnefond A, Baerenwald DA, Marchand M, Bugliani M, Marchetti 
P, Pattou F, Printz RL, Flemming BP, Umunakwe OC, Conley NL, Vaxillaire M,
Lantieri O, Balkau B, Marre M, Lévy-Marchal C, Elliott P, Jarvelin MR, Meyre D,
Dina C, Oeser JK, Froguel P, O'Brien RM.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UMR-8199, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France.

OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide association studies have identified a single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP), rs560887, located in a G6PC2 intron that is highly correlated
with variations in fasting plasma glucose (FPG). G6PC2 encodes an islet-specific 
glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit. This study examines the contribution of 
two G6PC2 promoter SNPs, rs13431652 and rs573225, to the association signal.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped 9,532 normal FPG participants (FPG <6.1
mmol/l) for three G6PC2 SNPs, rs13431652 (distal promoter), rs573225 (proximal
promoter), rs560887 (3rd intron). We used regression analyses adjusted for age,
sex, and BMI to assess the association with FPG and haplotype analyses to assess 
comparative SNP contributions. Fusion gene and gel retardation analyses
characterized the effect of rs13431652 and rs573225 on G6PC2 promoter activity
and transcription factor binding.
RESULTS: Genetic analyses provide evidence for a strong contribution of the
promoter SNPs to FPG variability at the G6PC2 locus (rs13431652: ß = 0.075, P =
3.6 × 10(-35); rs573225 ß = 0.073 P = 3.6 × 10(-34)), in addition to rs560887 (ß 
= 0.071, P = 1.2 × 10(-31)). The rs13431652-A and rs573225-A alleles promote
increased NF-Y and Foxa2 binding, respectively. The rs13431652-A allele is
associated with increased FPG and elevated promoter activity, consistent with the
function of G6PC2 in pancreatic islets. In contrast, the rs573225-A allele is
associated with elevated FPG but reduced promoter activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic and in situ functional data support a potential role for
rs13431652, but not rs573225, as a causative SNP linking G6PC2 to variations in
FPG, though a causative role for rs573225 in vivo cannot be ruled out.

PMCID: PMC3279535
PMID: 20622168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):23-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.05.024.

Siah2-dependent concerted activity of HIF and FoxA2 regulates formation of
neuroendocrine phenotype and neuroendocrine prostate tumors.

Qi J(1), Nakayama K, Cardiff RD, Borowsky AD, Kaul K, Williams R, Krajewski S,
Mercola D, Carpenter PM, Bowtell D, Ronai ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Asian J Androl. 2013 Jul;15(4):447-8.
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):3-4.

Neuroendocrine (NE) phenotype, seen in >30% of prostate adenocarcinomas (PCa),
and NE prostate tumors are implicated in aggressive prostate cancer. Formation of
NE prostate tumors in the TRAMP mouse model was suppressed in mice lacking the
ubiquitin ligase Siah2, which regulates HIF-1alpha availability. Cooperation
between HIF-1alpha and FoxA2, a transcription factor expressed in NE tissue,
promotes recruitment of p300 to transactivate select HIF-regulated genes, Hes6,
Sox9, and Jmjd1a. These HIF-regulated genes are highly expressed in metastatic
PCa and required for hypoxia-mediated NE phenotype, metastasis in PCa, and the
formation of NE tumors. Tissue-specific expression of FoxA2 combined with
Siah2-dependent HIF-1alpha availability enables a transcriptional program
required for NE prostate tumor development and NE phenotype in PCa.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2919332
PMID: 20609350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):3-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.06.007.

HIF-1alpha partners with FoxA2, a neuroendocrine-specific transcription factor,
to promote tumorigenesis.

Eisinger-Mathason TS(1), Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):23-38.

In this issue of Cancer Cell, Qi et al. report a novel mechanism by which
HIF-1alpha synergizes with a tissue-specific transcription factor, FoxA2, to
promote a transcriptional program that supports prostate tumor formation and
progression.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3144028
PMID: 20609346  [PubMed]


416. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2010 Nov;45(3):258-66. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2010.06.017. Epub
2010 Jul 24.

Differentiation of human ES and Parkinson's disease iPS cells into ventral
midbrain dopaminergic neurons requires a high activity form of SHH, FGF8a and
specific regionalization by retinoic acid.

Cooper O(1), Hargus G, Deleidi M, Blak A, Osborn T, Marlow E, Lee K, Levy A,
Perez-Torres E, Yow A, Isacson O.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroregeneration Laboratories, Harvard Medical School/McLean Hospital, NINDS 
Udall Parkinson's Disease Research Center of Excellence, 115 Mill Street,
Belmont, MA 02478, USA. ocooper@mclean.harvard.edu

The cardinal motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD) are caused by the
vulnerability to dysfunction and degeneration of ventral midbrain (VM)
dopaminergic (DA) neurons. A major limitation for experimental studies of current
ES/iPS cell differentiation protocols is the lack of VM DA neurons with a stable 
phenotype as defined by an expression marker code of FOXA2/TH/ß-tubulin. Here we 
demonstrate a combination of three modifications that were required to produce VM
DA neurons. Firstly, early and specific exposure to 10(-)(8)M (low dose) retinoic
acid improved the regional identity of neural progenitor cells derived from human
ES cells, PD or healthy subject-specific iPS cells. Secondly, a high activity
form of human sonic hedgehog established a sizeable FOXA2(+) neural progenitor
cell population in vitro. Thirdly, early exposure to FGF8a, rather than Fgf8b,
and WNT1 was required for robust differentiation of the FOXA2(+) floor plate-like
human neural progenitor cells into FOXA2(+) DA neurons. FOXA2(+) DA neurons were 
also generated when this protocol was adapted to feeder-free conditions. In
summary, this new human ES and iPS cell differentiation protocol using FGF8a,
WNT1, low dose retinoic acid and a high activity form of SHH can generate human
VM DA neurons that are required for relevant new bioassays, drug discovery and
cell based therapies for PD.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2945816
PMID: 20603216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Biol Chem. 2010 Oct 22;285(43):33381-93. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.147215. Epub
2010 Jun 30.

Pax6 controls the expression of critical genes involved in pancreatic {alpha}
cell differentiation and function.

Gosmain Y(1), Marthinet E, Cheyssac C, Guérardel A, Mamin A, Katz LS, Bouzakri K,
Philippe J.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Unit, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University
Hospital, University Medical Center, University of Geneva, 1211 Geneva 4,
Switzerland.

The paired box homeodomain Pax6 is crucial for endocrine cell development and
function and plays an essential role in glucose homeostasis. Indeed, mutations of
Pax6 are associated with diabetic phenotype. Importantly, homozygous mutant mice 
for Pax6 are characterized by markedly decreased ß and d cells and absent a
cells. To better understand the critical role that Pax6 exerts in
glucagon-producing cells, we developed a model of primary rat a cells. To study
the transcriptional network of Pax6 in adult and differentiated a cells, we
generated Pax6-deficient primary rat a cells and glucagon-producing cells, using 
either specific siRNA or cells expressing constitutively a dominant-negative form
of Pax6. In primary rat a cells, we confirm that Pax6 controls the transcription 
of the Proglucagon and processing enzyme PC2 genes and identify three new target 
genes coding for MafB, cMaf, and NeuroD1/Beta2, which are all critical for
Glucagon gene transcription and a cell differentiation. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that Pax6 directly binds and activates the promoter region of the
three genes through specific binding sites and that constitutive expression of a 
dominant-negative form of Pax6 in glucagon-producing cells (InR1G9) inhibits the 
activities of the promoters. Finally our results suggest that the critical role
of Pax6 action on a cell differentiation is independent of those of Arx and
Foxa2, two transcription factors that are necessary for a cell development. We
conclude that Pax6 is critical for a cell function and differentiation through
the transcriptional control of key genes involved in glucagon gene transcription,
proglucagon processing, and a cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2963382
PMID: 20592023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2010 Oct;20(5):527-32. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2010.06.005. Epub 
2010 Jun 28.

The FoxA factors in organogenesis and differentiation.

Kaestner KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics & Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6145,
United States. kaestner@mail.med.upenn.edu

The genetic analysis of the Foxa genes in both total and conditional mutant mice 
has clearly established that organogenesis of multiple systems is controlled by
this subfamily of winged helix transcription factors. These discoveries followed 
the establishment of the conceptional framework of the mechanism of action of the
FoxA proteins as 'pioneer factors' that can engage chromatin before other
transcription factors. Recent molecular and genomic studies have also shown that 
FoxA proteins can facilitate binding of several nuclear receptors to their
respective targets in a context-dependent manner, greatly increasing the range
and importance of FoxA factors in biology.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2943037
PMID: 20591647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2011 Feb 1;14(3):391-401. doi: 10.1089/ars.2010.3302. Epub
2010 Sep 29.

Knockouts of SOD1 and GPX1 exert different impacts on murine islet function and
pancreatic integrity.

Wang X(1), Vatamaniuk MZ, Roneker CA, Pepper MP, Hu LG, Simmons RA, Lei XG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York 14853, USA.

Metabolic subtlety and clinical relevance of different forms of reactive oxygen
species in diabetes remain unclear. Using single knockout of Cu,Zn-superoxide
dismutase (SOD1(-/-)) or Se-glutathione peroxidase-1 (GPX1(-/-)) and their
double-knockout (DKO) mouse models, we determined if elevating
endogenously-derived superoxide and hydroperoxide exerted distinct impacts and
mechanisms on body glucose homeostasis. Whereas the three knockout groups
displayed decreased plasma insulin concentrations and islet ß-cells mass, only
SOD1(-/-) showed decreased body weight, increased blood glucose, and blocked
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Null of SOD1 and GPX1 elevated respective
islet superoxide and hydroperoxide production, and upregulated p53
phosphorylation. Knockout of SOD1 downregulated the foxhead box A2/pancreatic and
duodenal homeobox 1 pathway in a superoxide-dependent fashion at epigenetic,
mRNA, and protein levels in islets, but improved insulin signaling in liver and
muscle. The SOD1(-/-) mice showed more apparent pancreatitis than the GPX1(-/-)
mice that were more susceptible to the cerulein-induced amylase increase.
Knockout of SOD1 impaired islet function, pancreas integrity, and body glucose
homeostasis more than that of GPX1. Simultaneous ablation of both enzymes did not
result in additive or aggravated metabolic outcomes.

PMCID: PMC3026657
PMID: 20586612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):G769-77. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00237.2010. Epub 2010 Jun 24.

Differential transcriptional characteristics of small and large biliary
epithelial cells derived from small and large bile ducts.

Glaser S(1), Wang M, Ueno Y, Venter J, Wang K, Chen H, Alpini G, Holterman A.

Author information: 
(1)Scott and White Digestive Disease Research Center, Temple, Texas, USA.

Biliary epithelial cells (BEC) are morphologically and functionally
heterogeneous. To investigate the molecular mechanism for their diversities, we
test the hypothesis that large and small BEC have disparity in their target gene 
response to their transcriptional regulator, the biliary cell-enriched hepatocyte
nuclear factor HNF6. The expression of the major HNF (HNF6, OC2, HNF1b, HNF1a,
HNF4a, C/EBPb, and Foxa2) and representative biliary transport target genes that 
are HNF dependent were compared between SV40-transformed BEC derived from large
(SV40LG) and small (SV40SM) ducts, before and after treatment with recombinant
adenoviral vectors expressing HNF6 (AdHNF6) or control LacZ cDNA (AdLacZ). Large 
and small BEC were isolated from mouse liver treated with growth hormone, a known
transcriptional activator of HNF6, and the effects on selected target genes were 
examined. Constitutive Foxa2, HNF1a, and HNF4a gene expression were 2.3-, 12.4-, 
and 2.6-fold, respectively, higher in SV40SM cells. This was associated with 2.7-
and 4-fold higher baseline expression of HNF1a- and HNF4a-regulated ntcp and
oatp1 genes, respectively. Following AdHNF6 infection, HNF6 gene expression was
1.4-fold higher (P = 0.02) in AdHNF6 SV40SM relative to AdHNF6 SV40LG cells, with
a corresponding higher Foxa2 (4-fold), HNF1a (15-fold), and HNF4a (6-fold) gene
expression in AdHNF6-SV40SM over AdHNF6-SV40LG. The net effects were upregulation
of HNF6 target gene glucokinase and of Foxa2, HNF1a, and HNF4a target genes
oatp1, ntcp, and mrp2 over AdLacZ control in both cells, but with higher levels
in AdH6-SV40SM over AdH6-SV40LG of glucokinase, oatp1, ntcp, and mrp2 (by 1.8-,
3.4-, 2.4-, and 2.5-fold, respectively). In vivo, growth hormone-mediated
increase in HNF6 expression was associated with similar higher upregulation of
glucokinase and mrp2 in cholangiocytes from small vs. large BEC. Small and large 
BEC have a distinct profile of hepatocyte transcription factor and cognate target
gene expression, as well as differential strength of response to transcriptional 
regulation, thus providing a potential molecular basis for their divergent
function.

PMCID: PMC2950684
PMID: 20576918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Biol Reprod. 2010 Sep;83(3):319-21. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.086694. Epub 2010
Jun 23.

Uterine adenogenesis and pregnancy: multiple roles for Foxa2 in mice.

Bazer FW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics, Department of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, USA. fbazer@cvm.tamu.edu

Comment on
    Biol Reprod. 2010 Sep;83(3):396-403.

PMID: 20574051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Genome Res. 2010 Aug;20(8):1037-51. doi: 10.1101/gr.104356.109. Epub 2010 Jun 15.

Locus co-occupancy, nucleosome positioning, and H3K4me1 regulate the
functionality of FOXA2-, HNF4A-, and PDX1-bound loci in islets and liver.

Hoffman BG(1), Robertson G, Zavaglia B, Beach M, Cullum R, Lee S, Soukhatcheva G,
Li L, Wederell ED, Thiessen N, Bilenky M, Cezard T, Tam A, Kamoh B, Birol I, Dai 
D, Zhao Y, Hirst M, Verchere CB, Helgason CD, Marra MA, Jones SJ, Hoodless PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Endocrinology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver,
British Columbia V5Z 1L3, Canada. brad.hoffman@ubc.ca

The liver and pancreas share a common origin and coexpress several transcription 
factors. To gain insight into the transcriptional networks regulating the
function of these tissues, we globally identify binding sites for FOXA2 in adult 
mouse islets and liver, PDX1 in islets, and HNF4A in liver. Because most
eukaryotic transcription factors bind thousands of loci, many of which are
thought to be inactive, methods that can discriminate functionally active binding
events are essential for the interpretation of genome-wide transcription factor
binding data. To develop such a method, we also generated genome-wide H3K4me1 and
H3K4me3 localization data in these tissues. By analyzing our binding and histone 
methylation data in combination with comprehensive gene expression data, we show 
that H3K4me1 enrichment profiles discriminate transcription factor occupied loci 
into three classes: those that are functionally active, those that are poised for
activation, and those that reflect pioneer-like transcription factor activity.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the regulated presence of H3K4me1-marked
nucleosomes at transcription factor occupied promoters and enhancers controls
their activity, implicating both tissue-specific transcription factor binding and
nucleosome remodeling complex recruitment in determining tissue-specific gene
expression. Finally, we apply these approaches to generate novel insights into
how FOXA2, PDX1, and HNF4A cooperate to drive islet- and liver-specific gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC2909568
PMID: 20551221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Aug;24(8):1594-604. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0513. Epub 2010 Jun
9.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 maintain the metabolic and secretory features of the mature
beta-cell.

Gao N(1), Le Lay J, Qin W, Doliba N, Schug J, Fox AJ, Smirnova O, Matschinsky FM,
Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6145, USA.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 play both redundant and distinct roles in early pancreas
development. We demonstrate here that inducible ablation of both transcription
factors in mature mouse beta-cells leads to impaired glucose homeostasis and
insulin secretion. The defects in both glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and
intracellular calcium oscillation are more pronounced than those in beta-cells
lacking only Foxa2. Unexpectedly, in contrast to the severe reduction of
beta-cell-enriched factors contributing to metabolic and secretory pathways,
expression of a large number of genes that are involved in neural differentiation
and function is significantly elevated. We further demonstrate that expression of
carbohydrate response element-binding protein (ChREBP or Mlxipl), an important
transcriptional regulator of carbohydrate metabolism, is significantly affected
in compound Foxa1/a2 mutant beta-cells. ChREBP expression is directly controlled 
by Foxa1 and Foxa2 in both the fetal endocrine pancreas as well as mature islets.
These data demonstrate that Foxa1 and Foxa2 play crucial roles in the development
and maintenance of beta-cell-specific secretory and metabolic pathways.

PMCID: PMC2940470
PMID: 20534694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Biol Reprod. 2010 Sep;83(3):396-403. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.083154. Epub
2010 May 19.

Foxa2 is essential for mouse endometrial gland development and fertility.

Jeong JW(1), Kwak I, Lee KY, Kim TH, Large MJ, Stewart CL, Kaestner KH, Lydon JP,
DeMayo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2010 Sep;83(3):319-21.

During embryonic development, Foxa2 is required for the formation of the node and
notochord, and ablation of this gene results in defects in gastrulation, neural
tube patterning, and gut morphogenesis. Foxa2 has been shown to be expressed
specifically in the glandular epithelium of the murine uterus. To study the
uterine function of Foxa2, this gene was conditionally ablated in the mouse
uterus by crossing mice with floxed Foxa2 alleles, Foxa2(loxP/loxP), with the
Pgr(cre) mouse model. Pgr(cre/+) Foxa2(loxP/loxP) mice showed significantly
reduced fertility. Analysis of the uterus on Day 5.5 of pregnancy showed
disrupted blastocyst implantation. Pgr(cre/+) Foxa2(loxP/loxP) mice also showed a
severe impairment of the uterus to respond to the artificial induction of the
decidual response. Morphological examination of the uteri of these mice showed a 
severe reduction in the number of endometrial glands. The loss of endometrial
glands resulted in the reduction of leukemia inhibitory factor (Lif) expression. 
The lack of a decidual response could be partially rescued by an intrauterine
injection of LIF before the initiation of the decidual response. This analysis
demonstrates that Foxa2 regulates endometrial gland development and that mice
with a loss of endometrial glands cannot support implantation in part due to the 
loss of LIF, which is a requisite for fertility in the mouse.

PMCID: PMC2924802
PMID: 20484741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. J Immunol. 2010 Jun 1;184(11):6133-41. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1000223. Epub 2010
May 5.

Foxa2 programs Th2 cell-mediated innate immunity in the developing lung.

Chen G(1), Wan H, Luo F, Zhang L, Xu Y, Lewkowich I, Wills-Karp M, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary Biology, Perinatal Institute, 
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

After birth, the respiratory tract adapts to recurrent exposures to pathogens,
allergens, and toxicants by inducing the complex innate and acquired immune
systems required for pulmonary homeostasis. In this study, we show that Foxa2,
expressed selectively in the respiratory epithelium, plays a critical role in
regulating genetic programs influencing Th2 cell-mediated pulmonary inflammation.
Deletion of the Foxa2 gene, encoding a winged helix/forkhead box transcription
factor that is selectively expressed in respiratory epithelial cells, caused
spontaneous pulmonary eosinophilic inflammation and goblet cell metaplasia. Loss 
of Foxa2 induced the recruitment and activation of myeloid dendritic cells and
Th2 cells in the lung, causing increased production of Th2 cytokines and
chemokines. Loss of Foxa2-induced expression of genes regulating Th2
cell-mediated inflammation and goblet cell differentiation, including IL-13,
IL-4, eotaxins, thymus and activation-regulated chemokine, Il33, Ccl20, and SAM
pointed domain-containing Ets transcription factor. Pulmonary inflammation and
goblet cell differentiation were abrogated by treatment of neonatal
Foxa2(Delta/Delta) mice with mAb against IL-4Ralpha subunit. The respiratory
epithelium plays a central role in the regulation of Th2-mediated inflammation
and innate immunity in the developing lung in a process regulated by Foxa2.

PMID: 20483781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Mol Cancer. 2010 May 11;9:104. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-104.

The promoter for intestinal cell kinase is head-to-head with F-Box 9 and contains
functional sites for TCF7L2 and FOXA factors.

Sturgill TW(1), Stoddard PB, Cohn SM, Mayo MW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Internal Medicine, University of Virginia,
1300 Jefferson Park Avenue, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.
tws7w@virginia.edu

BACKGROUND: Intestinal cell kinase (ICK; GeneID 22858) is a conserved MAPK and
CDK-like kinase that is widely expressed in human tissues. Data from the Cancer
Genome Anatomy Project indicated ICK mRNA is increased in cancer, and that its
expression correlated with expression of mRNA for an uncharacterized F-box
protein, FBX9 (GeneID: 26268). ICK and FBX9 genes are arranged head-to-head on
opposite strands, with start sites for transcription separated by approximately
3.3 kb. We hypothesized ICK and FBX9 are potentially important genes in cancer
controlled by a bidirectional promoter.
RESULTS: We assessed promoter activity of the intergenic region in both
orientations in cancer cell lines derived from breast (AU565, SKBR3), colon
(HCT-15, KM12), and stomach (AGS) cancers, as well as in embryonic human kidney
(HEK293T) cells. The intergenic segment was active in both orientations in all of
these lines, and ICK promoter activity was greater than FBX9 promoter activity.
Results from deletions and truncations defined a minimal promoter for ICK, and
revealed that repressors and enhancers differentially regulate ICK versus FBX9
promoter activity. The ICK promoter contains consensus motifs for several
FOX-family transcription factors that align when mouse and human are compared
using EMBOSS. FOXA1 and FOXA2 increase luciferase activity of a minimal promoter 
10-20 fold in HEK293T cells. Consensus sites for TCF7L2 (TCF4) (Gene Id: 6934)
are also present in both mouse and human. The expression of beta-catenin
increased activity of the minimal promoter approximately 10 fold. ICK reference
mRNAs (NM_014920.3, NM_016513) are expressed in low copy number and increased in 
some breast cancers, using a ten base tag 5'-TCAACCTTAT-3' specific for both ICK 
transcripts.
CONCLUSION: ICK and FBX9 are divergently transcribed from a bidirectional
promoter that is GC-rich and contains a CpG island. A minimal promoter for ICK
contains functional sites for beta-catenin/TCF7L2 and FOXA. These data are
consistent with functions that have been proposed for ICK in development and in
proliferation or survival of some breast and colon cancers.

PMCID: PMC2876993
PMID: 20459822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Nov;225(2):545-54. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22237.

In vitro differentiation of unrestricted somatic stem cells into functional
hepatic-like cells displaying a hepatocyte-like glucose metabolism.

Waclawczyk S(1), Buchheiser A, Flögel U, Radke TF, Kögler G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell Therapeutics, Heinrich
Heine University Medical Center, Düsseldorf, Germany.

The hepatic-like phenotype resulting from in vitro differentiation of
unrestricted somatic stem cells (USSC) derived from human umbilical cord blood
(CB) was analyzed with regard to functional and metabolic aspects. USSC can be
differentiated into cells of all three germ layers in vitro and in vivo and,
although they share many features with mesenchymal stroma cells (MSC), can be
distinguished from these by their expression of DLK1 as well as a restricted
adipogenic differentiation potential. For the differentiation procedure described
herein, a novel three-stage differentiation protocol resembling embryonic
developmental processes of hepatic endoderm was applied. Hepatic pre-induction
was performed by activinA and FGF4 resulting in enhanced SOX17 and FOXA2
expression. Further differentiation was achieved sequentially by retinoic acid,
FGF4, HGF, EGF, and OSM resulting in a hepatic endodermal identity, characterized
by the expression of AFP and HNF1alpha. Thereafter, expression of G6PC, ARG1,
FBP1, and HNF4alpha was observed, thus indicating progressive differentiation.
Functional studies concerning albumin secretion, urea formation, and
cytochrome-p450-3A4 (CYP3A4) enzyme activity confirmed the hepatic-like
phenotype. In order to characterize the differentiated cells at a metabolic
level, USSC were incubated with [1-(13)C]glucose. By tracing the fate of the
molecule's label via isotopomer analysis using (13)C NMR spectroscopy, formation 
of both glycogen and some gluconeogenetic activity could be observed providing
evidence of a hepatocyte-like glucose metabolism in differentiated USSC. In
conclusion, the results of the present study indicate that USSC represent a stem 
cell source with a substantial hepatic differentiation capacity which hold the
potential for clinical applications.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20458755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 May 14;395(4):465-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.04.023. Epub 2010 Apr 9.

Foxa2 (HNF-3beta) regulates expression of hepatotrophic factor ALR in liver
cells.

Dayoub R(1), Groitl P, Dobner T, Bosserhoff AK, Schlitt HJ, Weiss TS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Liver Cell Research, University Medical Center Regensburg, Germany.

Liver regeneration is a multistep and well-orchestrated process which is
initiated by injuries such as tissue loss, infectious or toxic insults. Augmenter
of liver regeneration (ALR) is a hepatotrophic growth factor which has been shown
to stimulate hepatic regeneration after partial hepatectomy and therefore seems
to be regulated during the regenerative process in the liver. Our aim was to
analyze how ALR is regulated in hepatic tissues and which transcription factors
might regulate its tissue-specific expression. Promoter studies of ALR (-733/+527
bp) revealed potential regulatory elements for various transcription factors like
Foxa2, IL-6 RE-BP and C/EBPbeta. Analysis of the promoter activity by performing 
luciferase assays revealed that co-transfection with Foxa2 significantly induced 
the activity of ALR promoter in HepG2 cells. EMSA and Supershift analysis using
anti-Foxa2 antibody confirmed the specific binding of Foxa2 to ALR promoter and
this binding was inducible when the cells were simultaneously stimulated with
IL-6. The increased binding after activation with IL-6 and/or Foxa2 was confirmed
by elevated ALR protein levels using Western blot technique. In addition, we
could not detect any binding of C/EBPbeta and IL-6 RE-BP to the promoter of ALR. 
In conclusion, these results indicate that ALR is regulated by Foxa2, and this
regulation may be amplified by IL-6.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20382118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Apr 2;6(4):336-47. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2010.03.001.

Efficient derivation of functional floor plate tissue from human embryonic stem
cells.

Fasano CA(1), Chambers SM, Lee G, Tomishima MJ, Studer L.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Ave., New 
York, NY 10065, USA. chrisfasano@nynsci.org

The floor plate (FP) is a critical signaling center during neural development
located along the ventral midline of the embryo. Little is known about human FP
development because of the lack of tissue accessibility. Here we report the
efficient derivation of human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived FP tissue
capable of secreting Netrin-1 and SHH and patterning primary and hESC derived
tissues. FP induction in hESCs is dependent on early SHH exposure and occurs at
the expense of anterior neurectoderm (AN). Global gene expression and functional 
studies identify SHH-mediated inhibition of Dkk-1 as key factor in FP versus AN
specification. hESC-derived FP tissue is shown to be of anterior SIX6+ character 
but is responsive to caudalizing factors suppressing SIX6 expression and inducing
a shift in usage of region-specific SHH enhancers. These data define the early
signals that drive human FP versus AN specification and determine regional
identity in hESC-derived FP.

Copyright c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4336800
PMID: 20362538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Virol. 2010 Jun;84(12):5936-46. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02344-09. Epub 2010 Mar 31.

Hepatitis C virus differentially modulates activation of forkhead transcription
factors and insulin-induced metabolic gene expression.

Banerjee A(1), Meyer K, Mazumdar B, Ray RB, Ray R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA.

Chronic hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection is often associated with insulin
resistance and hepatic steatosis. Insulin regulates gene expression of key
enzymes in glucose and lipid metabolism by modulating the activity of specific
Forkhead box transcriptional regulators (FoxO1 and FoxA2) via the
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt signaling pathway in the liver. In this 
study, we observed that HCV infection of human hepatocytes impaired
insulin-induced FoxO1 translocation from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and
significantly reduced accumulation of FoxA2 in the nucleus. Phosphorylation of
FoxO1 at Ser(256), a downstream target for Akt, was inhibited in hepatocytes
infected with HCV or expressing the core protein or full-length (FL) genome of
HCV. Further, an interaction between FoxO1 and 14-3-3 protein, important for
FoxO1 translocation, was inhibited in HCV core-expressing cells. Hepatocytes
infected with HCV, expressing the core protein alone or polyprotein displayed an 
increased level of glucose-6-phosphatase (G6P) mRNA. On the other hand,
microsomal triglycerol transfer protein (MTP) activity and apolipoprotein B
(ApoB) secretion were significantly reduced in hepatocytes expressing HCV
proteins. Together, these observations suggest that HCV infection or ectopic
expression of the core protein either alone or together with other viral proteins
from an FL gene construct differentially modulates FoxO1 and FoxA2 activation and
affects insulin-induced metabolic gene regulation in human hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC2876629
PMID: 20357092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jun;38(11):e122. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq199. Epub 2010 Mar
28.

An inducible RNA interference system for the functional dissection of mouse
embryogenesis.

Vidigal JA(1), Morkel M, Wittler L, Brouwer-Lehmitz A, Grote P, Macura K,
Herrmann BG.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Department of Developmental
Genetics, Ihnestrasse 63-73, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Functional analysis of multiple genes is key to understanding gene regulatory
networks controlling embryonic development. We have developed an integrated
vector system for inducible gene silencing by shRNAmir-mediated RNA interference 
in mouse embryos, as a fast method for dissecting mammalian gene function. For
validation of the vector system, we generated mutant phenotypes for Brachyury,
Foxa2 and Noto, transcription factors which play pivotal roles in embryonic
development. Using a series of Brachyury shRNAmir vectors of various strengths we
generated hypomorphic and loss of function phenotypes allowing the identification
of Brachyury target genes involved in trunk development. We also demonstrate
temporal control of gene silencing, thus bypassing early embryonic lethality.
Importantly, off-target effects of shRNAmir expression were not detectable. Taken
together, the system allows the dissection of gene function at unprecedented
detail and speed, and provides tight control of the genetic background minimizing
intrinsic variation.

PMCID: PMC2887975
PMID: 20350929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Hepatol. 2010 May;52(5):765-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2009.12.022. Epub 2010 Feb
18.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate bile duct development in mice.

Strazzabosco M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Center and Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University, USA.
mario.strazzabosco@yale.edu

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2009 Jun;119(6):1537-45.

PMCID: PMC2862815
PMID: 20347503  [PubMed]


433. Genetika. 2010 Feb;46(2):282-6.

[Expression of early developmental genes in vole Microtus rossiaemeridionalis].

[Article in Russian]

Sorokin MA, Medvedev SP, Shevchenko AI, Slyn'ko NM, Zakiian SM.

The expression of genes Sox2, Klf4, Myc, Sall4, Gata6, Foxa2, Hnf4a, Cdx2, Esrrb,
Hand1 in cultivated cells, embryos and organs of adult voles Microtus
rossiaemeridionalis was studied. High resemblance of the expression patterns of
these genes in the organs of adult voles, mice and humans was demonstrated. It
was established that genes Gata6, Foxa2 and Hnf4a were specifically expressed in 
vole extraembryonic endoderm cells, while Cdx2 and Handl genes, in trophoblast
stem cells. This shows that these genes can be used markers for corresponding
vole cell lines. Indirect confirmation pointing to the fact that Oct4 gene is a
marker gene for epiblast cells both in the vole and mouse was obtained.

PMID: 20297663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Gastroenterology. 2010 Jun;138(7):2233-45, 2245.e1-14. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2010.02.056. Epub 2010 Mar 3.

Noggin, retinoids, and fibroblast growth factor regulate hepatic or pancreatic
fate of human embryonic stem cells.

Mfopou JK(1), Chen B, Mateizel I, Sermon K, Bouwens L.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Differentiation Unit, Diabetes Research Centre, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.

Erratum in
    Gastroenterology. 2010 Dec;139(6):2224.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2010 Jun;138(7):2211-2.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: New sources of beta cells are needed to develop cell therapies
for patients with diabetes. An in vitro, sequential method has been developed to 
derive pancreatic progenitors, but this technique has not been used for other
cell lines. We investigated whether definitive endoderm derived from human
embryonic stem (hES) cells might be used to create beta cells.
METHODS: Five hES cell lines were induced to form pancreatic progenitors and
analyzed for pancreas markers. Cells were incubated with a bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) antagonist, retinoids, a Hedgehog antagonist, or fibroblast growth 
factor (FGF) and phenotypes were analyzed.
RESULTS: Four hES cell lines sequentially generated definitive endoderm,
primitive gut, and posterior foregut equivalents, as described previously.
However, functional hepatocytes, rather than pancreas progenitors, developed.
Consistent with liver development, FGF and BMP signaling pathways were involved
in this process; their inhibition disrupted hepatocyte differentiation. During
early stages of development, exposure of cells to noggin and retinoid acid,
followed by FGF10, generated pancreatic cells (PDX1+; 50%-80%) that coexpressed
FOXA2, HNF6, and SOX9.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate the combined functions of endogenous BMP 
and supplemented FGF in inducing differentiation of hepatocytes from hES cells
and the ability to shift developmental pathways from hepatic to pancreatic cell
differentiation. Although additional signals appear to be required for full
specification of PDX1(+) early pancreatic progenitors (via PTF1a and NKX6.1
coexpression), these findings indicate the signaling pathways required for
differentiation of bipotential progenitors.

Copyright 2010 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20206178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010 May;298(5):L646-59. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00409.2009. Epub 2010 Feb 26.

Conditional deletion of Abca3 in alveolar type II cells alters surfactant
homeostasis in newborn and adult mice.

Besnard V(1), Matsuzaki Y, Clark J, Xu Y, Wert SE, Ikegami M, Stahlman MT, Weaver
TE, Hunt AN, Postle AD, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)The Perinatal Institute and Section of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary
Biology, Cincinnati Childrens Hospital Medical Center, Department of Pediatrics 
and University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Ohio.

ATP-binding cassette A3 (ABCA3) is a lipid transport protein required for
synthesis and storage of pulmonary surfactant in type II cells in the alveoli.
Abca3 was conditionally deleted in respiratory epithelial cells (Abca3(<U+0394>/<U+0394>)) in
vivo. The majority of mice in which Abca3 was deleted in alveolar type II cells
died shortly after birth from respiratory distress related to surfactant
deficiency. Approximately 30% of the Abca3(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) mice survived after birth.
Surviving Abca3(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) mice developed emphysema in the absence of significant
pulmonary inflammation. Staining of lung tissue and mRNA isolated from alveolar
type II cells demonstrated that ~50% of alveolar type II cells lacked ABCA3.
Phospholipid content and composition were altered in lung tissue, lamellar
bodies, and bronchoalveolar lavage fluid from adult Abca3(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) mice. In adult
Abca3(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) mice, cells lacking ABCA3 had decreased expression of mRNAs associated
with lipid synthesis and transport. FOXA2 and CCAAT enhancer-binding protein-a,
transcription factors known to regulate genes regulating lung lipid metabolism,
were markedly decreased in cells lacking ABCA3. Deletion of Abca3 disrupted
surfactant lipid synthesis in a cell-autonomous manner. Compensatory surfactant
synthesis was initiated in ABCA3-sufficient type II cells, indicating that
surfactant homeostasis is a highly regulated process that includes sensing and
coregulation among alveolar type II cells.

PMCID: PMC2867401
PMID: 20190032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Aug;211(2):353-60. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.01.028. Epub 2010 Jan 29.

Abnormal hepatic apolipoprotein B metabolism in type 2 diabetes.

Vergès B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Service Endocrinologie, Diabétologie et Maladies Métaboliques, Dijon
University Hospital, France. bruno.verges@chu-dijon.fr

Increased Very Low Density Lipoprotein (VLDL) production is a major feature of
diabetic dyslipidemia with consequences on the metabolism of other lipoproteins
such as Low Density Lipoproteins (LDL) and High Density Lipoproteins (HDL). More 
precisely, we observe, in patients with type 2 diabetes, an increased production 
of VLDL(1) particles that is potentially detrimental by generating atherogenic
remnants, small dense LDL particles and triglyceride-rich HDL particles. Several 
pathophysiological factors are responsible for increased VLDL production, in type
2 diabetes. Among those, insulin resistance plays an important role. Indeed,
defective activation of PI3-kinase, secondary to insulin resistance, is
associated with a reduction of apoB degradation in the hepatocytes, a rise in MTP
expression (by increasing nuclear transcription factors Fox01 and Foxa2) and an
increased activity of phospholipase D1 and ARF-1, which are involved in VLDL(1)
formation. Moreover, peripheral insulin resistance is responsible for increased
lipolysis of adipose tissue leading to augmented portal flux of FFA to the liver 
and, as a consequence, activation of VLDL production. In addition, increased de
novo lipogenesis is observed in type 2 diabetes. This is secondary to increased
activation of SREBP-1c (Sterol Regulatory Element-Binding Protein-1c), mainly by 
Endoplasmic Reticulum stress, and of ChREBP (Carbohydrate Responsive Element
Binding Protein), mainly by hyperglycemia. Furthermore, decreased plasma
adiponectin observed in type 2 diabetes, may also play a role in increased VLDL
production by decreasing liver AMP-kinase activation and by increasing plasma FFA
levels as a consequence of reduced muscle FFA oxidation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20189175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Rev Invest Clin. 2009 Sep-Oct;61(5):428-46.

[Transcription factors in the adult beta cell].

[Article in Spanish]

Lazo-de-la-Vega-Monroy ML(1), Fernández-Mejía C.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genética de la Nutrición, Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas,
Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México/INP. marialuisaqfb@yahoo.com.mx

Insulin secretion by the pancreatic beta cell is critical to maintain glucose
homeostasis. This secretion is impaired in type 1 diabetes, by beta cell
autoimmune destruction, in type 2 diabetes, by multifactorial failures still not 
well determined, and in monogenic diabetes (MODY), by mutations in specific
genes. During the last few years, several beta cell-specific transcription
factors that regulate insulin synthesis and secretion in response to glucose have
been discovered. Knockout mice studies for these genes and MODY diabetes
demonstrate their importance for normal development and function of the beta
cell. These factors are regulated not only in their expression by other genes,
but also in their activity by other proteins and by post-translational
modifications, therefore participating in physiologically important signaling
pathways of the beta cell. The study of transcription factors is crucial for
understanding the normal function of the beta cell, essential knowledge in
developing new strategies for fighting diabetes.

PMID: 20184103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Exp Cell Res. 2010 Apr 15;316(7):1148-58. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2010.02.013. Epub 
2010 Feb 17.

Long-term culture and differentiation of CNS precursors derived from anterior
human neural rosettes following exposure to ventralizing factors.

Colleoni S(1), Galli C, Giannelli SG, Armentero MT, Blandini F, Broccoli V,
Lazzari G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio di Tecnologie della Riproduzione, Avantea, Cremona, Italy.
silviacolleoni@avantea.it

In this study we demonstrated that neural rosettes derived from human ES cells
can give rise either to neural crest precursors, following expansion in presence 
of bFGF and EGF, or to dopaminergic precursors after exposure to ventralizing
factors Shh and FGF8. Both regionalised precursors are capable of extensive
proliferation and differentiation towards the corresponding terminally
differentiated cell types. In particular, peripheral neurons, cartilage, bone,
smooth muscle cells and also pigmented cells were obtained from neural crest
precursors while tyrosine hydroxylase and Nurr1 positive dopaminergic neurons
were derived from FGF8 and Shh primed rosette cells. Gene expression and
immunocytochemistry analyses confirmed the expression of dorsal and neural crest 
genes such as Sox10, Slug, p75, FoxD3, Pax7 in neural precursors from bFGF-EGF
exposed rosettes. By contrast, priming of rosettes with FGF8 and Shh induced the 
expression of dopaminergic markers Engrailed1, Pax2, Pitx3, floor plate marker
FoxA2 and radial glia markers Blbp and Glast, the latter in agreement with the
origin of dopaminergic precursors from floor plate radial glia. Moreover, in vivo
transplant of proliferating Shh/FGF8 primed precursors in parkinsonian rats
demonstrated engraftment and terminal dopaminergic differentiation. In
conclusion, we demonstrated the derivation of long-term self-renewing precursors 
of selected regional identity as potential cell reservoirs for cell therapy
applications, such as CNS degenerative diseases, or for the development of
toxicological tests.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20171210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Cancer Res. 2010 Mar 1;70(5):2115-25. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2979. Epub
2010 Feb 16.

Loss of FOXA1/2 is essential for the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in
pancreatic cancer.

Song Y(1), Washington MK, Crawford HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York
11794-8651, USA.

FOXA1 and FOXA2, members of the forkhead transcription factor family, are
critical for epithelial differentiation in many endoderm-derived organs,
including the pancreas. However, their role in tumor progression is largely
unknown. Here, we identified FOXA1 and FOXA2 as important antagonists of the
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDA) through their positive regulation of E-cadherin and maintenance of the
epithelial phenotype. In human PDA samples, FOXA1/2 are expressed in all
epithelia from normal to well-differentiated cancer cells, but are lost in
undifferentiated cancer cells. In PDA cell lines, FOXA1/2 expression is
consistently suppressed in experimental EMT models and RNAi silencing of FOXA1/2 
alone is sufficient to induce EMT. Conversely, ectopic FOXA1/2 expression can
potently neutralize several EMT-related E-cadherin repressive mechanisms.
Finally, ectopic FOXA2 expression could reactivate E-cadherin expression in a PDA
cell line with extensive promoter hypermethylation. In fact,
demethylation-mediated reactivation of E-cadherin expression in these cells
required concurrent reactivation of endogenous FOXA2 expression. We conclude that
suppression of FOXA1/2 expression is both necessary and sufficient for EMT during
PDA malignant progression.

PMCID: PMC2831111
PMID: 20160041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Mar;15(3):612-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01034.x.

MafA promotes the reprogramming of placenta-derived multipotent stem cells into
pancreatic islets-like and insulin+ cells.

Chiou SH(1), Chen SJ, Chang YL, Chen YC, Li HY, Chen DT, Wang HH, Chang CM, Chen 
YJ, Ku HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department & Institute of Pharmacology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital,
Taipei, Taiwan. shchiou@vghtpe.gov.tw

MafA is a pancreatic transcriptional factor that controls ß-cell-specific
transcription of the insulin gene. However, the role of MafA in the regulation of
pancreatic transdifferentiation and reprogramming in human stem cells is still
unclear. In this study, we investigate the role of MafA in placenta-derived
multipotent stem cells (PDMSCs) that constitutively expressed Oct-4 and Nanog.
PDMSCs were isolated and transfected with MafA using a lentivector. Our results
showed that overexpression of MafA in PDMSCs significantly up-regulated the
expression of pancreatic development-related genes (Sox17, Foxa2, Pdx1 and Ngn3).
Microarray analysis suggested that the gene expression profile of
MafA-overexpressing PDMSCs was similar to that of pancreas and islet tissues.
MafA increased the expression levels of the mRNAs of NKx2.2, Glut2, insulin,
glucagons and somatostatin, and further facilitated the differentiation of PDMSCs
into insulin(+) cells. The glucose-stimulated responses to insulin and c-peptide 
production in MafA-overexpressing PDMSCs were significantly higher than in PDMSCs
with vector control. Our results indicated that MafA-overexpressing PDMSCs were
more resistant to oxidative damage and oxidative damage-induced apoptosis than
PDMSCs carrying the vector control were. Importantly, the expression of MafA in
PDMSCs xenotransplanted into immunocompromised mice improved the restoration of
blood insulin levels to control values and greatly prolonged the survival of
graft cells in immunocompromised mice with STZ-induced diabetes. In summary,
these data suggest that MafA plays a novel role in the reprogramming of stem
cells into pancreatic ß-progenitors, promotes the islet-like characteristics of
PDMSCs, as well as functionally enhances insulin production to restore the
regulation of blood glucose levels in transplanted grafts.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3922383
PMID: 20158571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Mar 12;86(3):440-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.01.025. Epub
2010 Feb 11.

A weighted false discovery rate control procedure reveals alleles at FOXA2 that
influence fasting glucose levels.

Xing C(1), Cohen JC, Boerwinkle E.

Author information: 
(1)Donald W. Reynolds Cardiovascular Clinical Research Center, McDermott Center
for Human Growth and Development, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-8591, USA. chao.xing@utsouthwestern.edu

Association signals in GWAS are usually prioritized solely by p values. Here, we 
attempt to improve the power of GWAS by using a weighted false discovery rate
control procedure to detect associations of low-frequency variants with effect
sizes similar to or even larger than those of common variants. We used the
Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP Array 6.0 to test for association with fasting
glucose levels in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study (ARIC)
population. In addition to finding several previously identified sequence
variations, we identified a low-frequency variant (rs1209523; minor allele
frequency = 0.043) near FOXA2 that was associated with fasting glucose levels in 
European Americans (EAs) (n = 7428, p value = 1.3 x 10(-5)). The association
between rs1209523 and glucose levels was also significant in African Americans
(AAs) (n = 2029, p value = 6.7 x 10(-3)) of the ARIC and was confirmed by
replication in both EAs and AAs of the Dallas Heart Study (n = 963 and 1571,
respectively; p values = 5.3 x 10(-3) and 5.8 x 10(-4), respectively) and in EAs 
of the Cooper Center Longitudinal Study (n = 2862; p value = 1.6 x 10(-2)). A
meta-analysis of these five populations yielded an estimated effect size of -1.31
mg/dl per minor allele (p value = 2.2 x 10(-11)). This study reveals that there
is a cache of less-frequent variants in GWAS arrays that can be identified via
analytical approaches accounting for allele frequencies.

Copyright 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2833364
PMID: 20152958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Stem Cells. 2010 Apr;28(4):674-86. doi: 10.1002/stem.315.

Differentiation and characterization of metabolically functioning hepatocytes
from human embryonic stem cells.

Duan Y(1), Ma X, Zou W, Wang C, Bahbahan IS, Ahuja TP, Tolstikov V, Zern MA.

Author information: 
(1)Transplant Research Program, University of California Davis Medical Center,
Sacramento, California, USA.

Erratum in
    Stem Cells. 2011 Sep;29(9):1476. Ma, Xiaochui [corrected to Ma, Xiaocui].

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) may provide a cell source for functional
hepatocytes for clinical applications and drug development. Initially, the hESC
population was enriched to be more than 85% definitive endoderm (DE) as assessed 
by the expression of CXCR4, SOX17, and FOXA2. We then successfully converted DE
into hepatic progenitors with 93% of the cells being positive for alpha-feto
protein within 9 days. The percentage of albumin positive cells gradually
increased to 90% at days 20-22 after differentiation. Moreover, our hESC-derived 
hepatocytes (hEH) developed a complete biotransformation system including phase I
and II metabolizing enyzmes and phase III transporters. Nuclear receptors, which 
are critical in regulating the expression of metabolizing enzymes, were also
expressed by our hEH. Using ultraperformance liquid chromatography-tandem mass
spectrometry technology, we identified seven metabolic pathways of the drug
bufuralol including four newly-reported ones in our hEH, which are the same as
those in freshly isolated human primary hepatocytes (hPH). In addition, the
results of the metabolism of four drugs indicate that our hEH have the capacity
to metabolize these drugs at levels that are comparable to hPH. In conclusion, we
have generated a relatively homogenous population of hepatocytes from hESCs,
which appear to have complete metabolic function that is comparable to primary
liver cells. These results represent a significant step towards the efficient
differentiation of mature hepatocytes for cell-based therapeutics as well as for 
pharmacology and toxicology studies.

PMID: 20135682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Dev Dyn. 2010 Mar;239(3):980-6. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22217.

Dynamic expression of Groucho-related genes Grg1 and Grg3 in foregut endoderm and
antagonism of differentiation.

Santisteban P(1), Recacha P, Metzger DE, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas, Alberto Sols Consejo Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

While much is known about Groucho corepressors in Drosophila development, less is
known about Grg homologs in mammalian embryogenesis. The transcription factors
FoxA1 and FoxA2 are redundantly necessary for liver-inductive competence of the
endoderm, and recently we found that FoxA factors bind Grg3, recruit the
corepressor to FoxA target genes, and cause transcriptional repression, when Grg3
is ectopically expressed in adult liver cell lines that express little or no
endogenous Grg. Unexpectedly, we now find that Grg1 and Grg3 mRNAs are
co-expressed with FoxA factors in the foregut endoderm, prior to liver
differentiation, though only Grg3 protein is expressed there. Grg3 mRNA and
protein are extinguished at the onset of liver differentiation. Lentiviral
delivery of Grg3 to explants of foregut endoderm suppresses liver gene induction.
We suggest that Grg expression in the endoderm helps suppress the liver program
and find that endodermal competence involves a balance between activators and
corepressors.

Copyright (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3071952
PMID: 20108349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Cell Death Differ. 2010 Jun;17(6):1025-33. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2009.204. Epub 2010
Jan 15.

Nitric oxide repression of Nanog promotes mouse embryonic stem cell
differentiation.

Mora-Castilla S(1), Tejedo JR, Hmadcha A, Cahuana GM, Martín F, Soria B, Bedoya
FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine-University
Pablo de Olavide, CIBERDEM, Seville, Spain.

Exposure of mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells to high concentrations of chemical
nitric oxide (NO) donors promotes differentiation, but the mechanisms involved in
this process at the gene expression level are poorly defined. In this study we
report that culture of mES cells in the presence of 0.25-1.0 mM
diethylenetriamine nitric oxide adduct (DETA-NO) leads to downregulation of Nanog
and Oct4, the two master genes involved in the control of the pluripotent state. 
This action of NO was also apparent in the human ES cell line, HS 181. The
suppressive action of NO on Nanog gene depends on the activation of p53 repressor
protein by covalent modifications, such as pSer15, pSer315, pSer392 and acetyl
Lys 379. NO-induced repression of Nanog is also associated with binding of
trimethylated histone H3 and pSer315 p53 to its promoter region. In addition,
exposure to 0.5 mM DETA-NO induces early differentiation events of cells with
acquisition of epithelial morphology and expression of markers of definitive
endoderm, such as FoxA2, Gata4, Hfn1-beta and Sox 17. This phenotype was
increased when cells were treated with valproic acid (VPA) for 10 days.

PMID: 20075941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 May-Jun;1799(5-6):411-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2010.01.002. Epub 2010 Jan 13.

Tissue-specific Forkhead protein FOXA2 up-regulates SOX14 gene expression.

Popovic J(1), Klajn A, Petrovic I, Stevanovic M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Belgrade, Vojvode Stepe, 11010 Belgrade, Serbia.

The expression of Sox14 gene in spinal cord explants was found to be regulated by
Sonic hedgehog (SHH) in a dose-dependent manner, indicating that this signaling
molecule might act as a regulator of Sox14-expressing interneuron
differentiation. In the present study we identified the positive control element 
and provided the first evidence that FOXA2 is involved in up-regulation of SOX14 
expression in HepG2 and U87MG cell lines. By functional analysis we demonstrated 
that mutation in FOXA2 binding site reduced the SOX14 reporter construct
activity, and that FOXA2 over-expression increased endogenous SOX14 protein
expression. Further, we have shown that human SOX14 expression is GLI1 dependent 
in U87MG cells and SHH-N dependent in U87MG and HepG2 cell lines. By applying
siRNA silencing of FOXA2, we have demonstrated that upregulation of endogenous
SOX14 gene expression by SHH is, at least in part, mediated by FOXA2. However,
our data revealed that a positive regulatory region, containing functional FOXA2 
site analyzed in this study, is not involved in mediation of SHH dependent SOX14 
activation. Data presented here provide the initial insight into molecular
mechanism underlying tissue and developmentally specific regulation of the SOX14 
gene expression.

PMID: 20074681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Oncol Res. 2009;18(2-3):47-56.

Identification of genes with differential expression in chemoresistant epithelial
ovarian cancer using high-density oligonucleotide microarrays.

Ju W(1), Yoo BC, Kim IJ, Kim JW, Kim SC, Lee HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Medical Research Institute,
College of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South Korea.
goodmorning@ewha.ac.kr

A major obstacle in treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer is chemoresistance.
The aim of this study was to determine whether distinct gene expression profiles 
are associated with chemoresistance in epithelial ovarian carcinoma. We performed
global gene expression analysis in 13 primary epithelial ovarian cancer tissues
including 5 primary chemosensitive tumors and 8 primary chemoresistant tumors
using Affymetrix HGU133A microarray. The gene expression patterns of
chemosensitive tumors were compared with those of chemoresistant tumors using
fold change. Validity of microarray results was examined by semiquantitative
RT-PCR. We identified over 320 genes differentially expressed in chemoresistant
epithelial ovarian cancer (> or = twofold). Upregulated genes in chemoresistant
tumors included cell cycle regulating genes (TOP2A, BCAT1, CDCA8, CCNA2, CENPE), 
and genes with previously known mechanisms in tumorigenesis (S100A9, APOA1,
RNF125, IFI16). Downregulated genes in chemoresistant tumors included genes
related to cell adhesion (MUC5B, CITED2), transcription regulating genes (FOXD1, 
MAD1L1, PAX2), genes involving signal transduction (SOSTDC1, SNX1, SFRP1, FOXA2, 
PLK2), and stress protein gene (TP53AP1). These data show that gene expression
profiling can discriminate primary chemoresistant from primary chemosensitive
ovarian cancers. This type of molecular profiling could provide a basis for
additional functional studies.

PMID: 20066894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Hum Genet. 2010 Apr;127(4):421-40. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0778-7.

Clinical characterization of individuals with deletions of genes in
holoprosencephaly pathways by aCGH refines the phenotypic spectrum of HPE.

Rosenfeld JA(1), Ballif BC, Martin DM, Aylsworth AS, Bejjani BA, Torchia BS,
Shaffer LG.

Author information: 
(1)Signature Genomic Laboratories, Spokane, WA 99207, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common developmental forebrain anomaly in
humans. Both environmental and genetic factors have been identified to play a
role in the HPE phenotype. Previous studies of the genetic bases of HPE have
taken a phenotype-first approach by examining groups of patients with HPE for
specific mutations or deletions in known or candidate HPE genes. In this study,
we characterized the presence or absence of HPE or a microform in 136 individuals
in which microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) identified a
deletion of one of 35 HPE loci. Frank holoprosencephaly was present in 11
individuals with deletions of one of the common HPE genes SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and
TGIF1, in one individual with a deletion of the HPE8 locus at 14q13, and in one
individual with a deletion of FGF8, whereas deletions of other HPE loci and
candidate genes (FOXA2 and LRP2) expressed microforms of HPE. Although
individuals with deletions of other HPE candidates (DISP1, LSS, HHIP, SMO, BMP4, 
CDON, CDC42, ACVR2A, OTX2, and WIF1) had clinically significant features, none
had frank HPE or a microform. A search for significant aCGH findings in
individuals referred for testing for HPE revealed a novel association of a
duplication involving GSK3B at 3q13.33 with HPE or a microform, seen in two
unrelated individuals.

PMID: 20066439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Int J Androl. 2010 Apr;33(2):405-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2605.2009.01031.x. Epub 
2010 Jan 4.

Temporal and anatomical sensitivities to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonist
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin leading to premature acyclicity with age in
rats.

Jablonska O(1), Shi Z, Valdez KE, Ting AY, Petroff BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Physiology, University of Warmia and Mazury in Olsztyn,
Olsztyn, Poland.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that mediates diverse dioxin toxicities. While the acute effects of activation of
the AhR pathway by 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) have been a focus
of past study, the role of this pathway in normal physiology and ageing is
unclear. The purpose of this study was to identify the portion of the
reproductive axis [ovary vs. hypothalamus and pituitary gland (H-H axis)] and the
stages of the reproductive lifespan (foetal and early post-natal life vs.
adolescence and adulthood) that are particularly sensitive to the effects of TCDD
during female reproductive ageing. Adult pregnant Lewis rat dams were dosed with 
corn oil vehicle or TCDD (50 ng/kg-week by gavage) on days 14 and 21 of gestation
and post-natal days 7 and 14 to provide in utero and lactational (IUL) exposure
to pups. Female pups (n = 96) were weaned on post-natal day 21 and dosed with
TCDD or vehicle weekly. Half of the pups were used as donors for ovary
transplantation while the remainder were recipients. Following ovary
transplantation, rats (n = 6-8 per group) received weekly TCDD or vehicle again
until sacrifice at 8 months of age. Beginning at vaginal opening, reproductive
cycles were monitored by vaginal cytology for 10 days each month. Blood samples
were collected at 22.00 h on proestrus to measure concentration of
17beta-oestradiol in serum. Real-time PCR was used to determine differences in
Cyp1a1, Cyp19a1, Cyp17a1, LH receptor (LHR), FoxA2 and FoxJ1 genes expression
between control and remaining groups. IUL exposure of the H-H axis plus adult
exposure of the whole body to TCDD significantly delayed puberty in females rats.
Data analysis revealed an accelerated onset of acyclicity by 5 months in all
groups involving IUL exposure of the developing ovary to TCDD. 17beta-oestradiol 
was significantly decreased in animals receiving TCDD during IUL exposure of the 
H-H axis. CYP1a1 expression was markedly greater in the liver than in ovarian
tissue and correlated with ongoing TCDD exposure. Aromatase, 17alpha-hydroxylase 
and LHR gene expressions were largely unchanged (or occasionally elevated) by
TCDD. FoxA2 and FoxJ1 mRNAs were similarly of limited value mechanistically,
although FoxJ1 was much higher in TTT females (receiving TCDD as donor, recipient
and adult). This study reveals a particular sensitivity of the developing ovary
to TCDD leading to early loss of reproductive function with age.

PMCID: PMC2874621
PMID: 20059580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Stem Cells. 2010 Mar 31;28(3):501-12. doi: 10.1002/stem.294.

Foxa2 and Nurr1 synergistically yield A9 nigral dopamine neurons exhibiting
improved differentiation, function, and cell survival.

Lee HS(1), Bae EJ, Yi SH, Shim JW, Jo AY, Kang JS, Yoon EH, Rhee YH, Park CH, Koh
HC, Kim HJ, Choi HS, Han JW, Lee YS, Kim J, Li JY, Brundin P, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Hanyang University, Seoul,
Korea.

Effective dopamine (DA) neuron differentiation from neural precursor cells (NPCs)
is prerequisite for precursor/stem cell-based therapy of Parkinson's disease
(PD). Nurr1, an orphan nuclear receptor, has been reported as a transcription
factor that can drive DA neuron differentiation from non-dopaminergic NPCs in
vitro. However, Nurr1 alone neither induces full neuronal maturation nor
expression of proteins found specifically in midbrain DA neurons. In addition,
Nurr1 expression is inefficient in inducing DA phenotype expression in NPCs
derived from certain species such as mouse and human. We show here that Foxa2, a 
forkhead transcription factor whose role in midbrain DA neuron development was
recently revealed, synergistically cooperates with Nurr1 to induce DA phenotype
acquisition, midbrain-specific gene expression, and neuronal maturation. Thus,
the combinatorial expression of Nurr1 and Foxa2 in NPCs efficiently yielded fully
differentiated nigral (A9)-type midbrain neurons with clearly detectable DA
neuronal activities. The effects of Foxa2 in DA neuron generation were observed
regardless of the brain regions or species from which NPCs were derived.
Furthermore, DA neurons generated by ectopic Foxa2 expression were more resistant
to toxins. Importantly, Foxa2 expression resulted in a rapid cell cycle exit and 
reduced cell proliferation. Consistently, transplantation of NPCs transduced with
Nurr1 and Foxa2 generated grafts enriched with midbrain-type DA neurons but
reduced number of proliferating cells, and significantly reversed motor deficits 
in a rat PD model. Our findings can be applied to ongoing attempts to develop an 
efficient and safe precursor/stem cell-based therapy for PD.

PMID: 20049900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 1;70(1):240-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2904.

ErbB3 binding protein 1 represses metastasis-promoting gene anterior gradient
protein 2 in prostate cancer.

Zhang Y(1), Ali TZ, Zhou H, D'Souza DR, Lu Y, Jaffe J, Liu Z, Passaniti A,
Hamburger AW.

Author information: 
(1)Greenebaum Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA. Yzhan001@umaryland.edu

Dysregulation of the developmental gene anterior gradient protein 2 (AGR2) has
been associated with a metastatic phenotype, but its mechanism of action and
control in prostate cancers is unknown. In this study, we show that
overexpression of AGR2 promotes the motility and invasiveness of nonmetastatic
LNCaP tumor cells, whereas silencing of AGR2 in the metastatic derivative C4-2B
blocks invasive behavior. ErbB3 binding protein 1 (EBP1), a putative repressor of
AGR2, is attenuated in prostate cancer. We show that the anti-invasive effect of 
EBP1 occurs, at least in part, through its ability to inhibit AGR2 expression.
Mechanistic investigations indicate that EBP1 downregulates Foxa1- and
Foxa2-stimulated AGR2 transcription and decreases metastatic behavior. In
contrast, EBP1 ablation upregulates AGR2 via Foxa1- and Foxa2-stimulated AGR2
promoter activity and increases metastatic behavior. In both prostate cell lines 
and primary tumors, we documented an inverse correlation between EBP1 and AGR2
levels. Collectively, our results reveal an EBP1-Foxa-AGR2 signaling circuit with
functional significance in metastatic prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3724404
PMID: 20048076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Int J Oncol. 2010 Feb;36(2):415-20.

Integrative genomic analyses of CXCR4: transcriptional regulation of CXCR4 based 
on TGFbeta, Nodal, Activin signaling and POU5F1, FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXH1, SOX17, and 
GFI1 transcription factors.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

CXCR4, CD133, CD44 and ABCG2 are representative transmembrane proteins expressed 
on the surfaces of normal and/or cancer stem cells. CXCR4 is co-expressed with
POU5F1 in endodermal precursors and adult-tissue stem cells. CXCR4 is expressed
in a variety of human tumors, such as breast cancer, prostate cancer, pancreatic 
cancer, and gastric cancer. CXCR4 is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) for
CXCL12 (SDF1) chemokine, and the CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling axis is involved in
proliferation, survival, migration, and homing of cancer cells. Integrative
genomic analyses of CXCR4 gene were carried out to elucidate the mechanisms of
CXCR4 expression in stem cells, because CXCR4 is a key molecule occupying the
crossroads of oncology, immunology, gerontology and regenerative medicine. Human 
CXCR4 promoter region with binding sites for HIF1alpha, ETS1, NF-kappaB and GLI
was not conserved in mouse and rat Cxcr4 orthologs. Proximal enhancer region with
palindromic Smad-binding sites, FOX-binding site, POU-binding site, triple
SOX17-binding sites, bHLH-binding site, TCF/LEF-binding site, and double
GFI1-binding sites was almost completely conserved among human, chimpanzee,
mouse, and rat CXCR4 orthologs. TGFbeta, Nodal, and Activin signals induce CXCR4 
upregulation based on Smad2/3 and FOX family members, such as FOXA2, FOXC2, and
FOXH1. CXCR4 is expressed in endodermal precursors due to the existence of triple
SOX17-binding sites around the POU-binding site instead of the POU5F1-SOX2 joint 
motif. Because CXCR4 is downregulated by p53-GFI1 signaling axis, p53 mutation in
cancer stem cells leads to CXCR4 upregulation. CXCR4 is also upregulated by
TGFbeta and Hedgehog signals in tumor cells at the invasion front. Small molecule
compound or human antibody targeted to CXCR4 will be applied for cancer
therapeutics focusing on cancer stem cells at the primary lesion as well as
metastasis or recurrence niches, such as bone marrow and peritoneal cavity.

PMID: 20043076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 1;339(1):101-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.12.017. Epub 2009
Dec 24.

Lmx1a and Lmx1b cooperate with Foxa2 to coordinate the specification of
dopaminergic neurons and control of floor plate cell differentiation in the
developing mesencephalon.

Nakatani T(1), Kumai M, Mizuhara E, Minaki Y, Ono Y.

Author information: 
(1)KAN Research Institute Inc., Kobe MI R&D Center, 6-7-3 Minatojima-minamimachi,
Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Mesencephalic dopaminergic (mesDA) neurons control movement and behavior, and
their loss causes severe neurological disorders, such as Parkinson's disease.
Recent studies have revealed that mesDA neurons originate from mesencephalic
floor plate (FP) cells, which had been thought of as non-neurogenic organizer
cells regulating regional patterning and axonal projections. Otx2 and its
FP-specific downstream factor Lmx1a have been shown to be sufficient to confer
neurogenic activity on FP cells and determine a mesDA fate. However, the
mechanism underlying how these factors control mesDA development and how FP cells
and mesDA neurons are coordinately specified are still largely unknown. In the
present study, we obtained evidence that Lmx1a and Lmx1b cooperate with Foxa2 to 
specify mesDA neuron identity by gain-of-function approaches using transgenic
mice. Lmx1a/b appeared to select a mesDA fate by suppressing red nucleus fate in 
the context of Foxa2-positive progenitors, at least in part, through repressing
the Sim1-Lhx1 and Ngn1 pathways that inhibit proper mesDA differentiation. We
also found that, in the mesencephalon, FP cell fate is primarily determined by
Foxa2 with a supportive action of Lmx1a/b through repressing Nkx6.1, which
inhibits FP cell differentiation. Thus, FP and mesDA identities are determined by
distinct specification pathways, both of which are controlled by the same
combination of transcription factors, Lmx1a/b and Foxa2, and, as a consequence,
mesDA neurons are generated from mesencephalic FP cells.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20035737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Pancreas. 2010 Jan;39(1):105-7. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e3181b79d3c.

Importance of quantitative analysis in the generation of insulin-expressing cells
from human embryonic stem cells.

Courtney ML, Jones PM, Burns CJ.

Erratum in
    Pancreas. 2010 Oct;39(7):1123.

PMID: 20019566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. BMC Biotechnol. 2009 Dec 15;9:101. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-9-101.

Unrestricted somatic stem cells from human umbilical cord blood grow in
serum-free medium as spheres.

Zaibak F(1), Bello P, Kozlovski J, Crombie D, Ang H, Dottori M, Williamson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Royal Children's
Hospital, Victoria, 3052, Australia. fzaibak@unimelb.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Human umbilical cord blood-derived unrestricted somatic stem cells
(USSCs), which are capable of multilineage differentiation, are currently under
investigation for a number of therapeutic applications. A major obstacle to their
clinical use is the fact that in vitro expansion is still dependent upon fetal
calf serum, which could be a source of pathogens. In this study, we investigate
the capacity of three different stem cell culture media to support USSCs in
serum-free conditions; HEScGRO, PSM and USSC growth medium ACF. Our findings
demonstrate that USSCs do not grow in HEScGRO or PSM, but we were able to
isolate, proliferate and maintain multipotency of three USSC lines in USSC growth
medium ACF.
RESULTS: For the first one to three passages, cells grown in USSC growth medium
ACF proliferate and maintain their morphology, but with continued passaging the
cells form spherical cell aggregates. Upon dissociation of spheres, cells
continue to grow in suspension and form new spheres. Dissociated cells can also
revert to monolayer growth when cultured on extracellular matrix support
(fibronectin or gelatin), or in medium containing fetal calf serum. Analysis of
markers associated with pluripotency (Oct4 and Sox2) and differentiation (FoxA2, 
Brachyury, Goosecoid, Nestin, Pax6, Gata6 and Cytokeratin 8) confirms that cells 
in the spheres maintain their gene expression profile. The cells in the spheres
also retain the ability to differentiate in vitro to form cells representative of
the three germline layers after five passages.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that USSC growth medium ACF maintains USSCs in an
undifferentiated state and supports growth in suspension. This is the first
demonstration that USSCs can grow in a serum- and animal component-free medium
and that USSCs can form spheres.

PMCID: PMC2805630
PMID: 20003538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Nature. 2009 Dec 3;462(7273):646-50. doi: 10.1038/nature08589.

Regulation of adaptive behaviour during fasting by hypothalamic Foxa2.

Silva JP(1), von Meyenn F, Howell J, Thorens B, Wolfrum C, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)The Rockefeller University, Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The lateral hypothalamic area is considered the classic 'feeding centre',
regulating food intake, arousal and motivated behaviour through the actions of
orexin and melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH). These neuropeptides are inhibited
in response to feeding-related signals and are released during fasting. However, 
the molecular mechanisms that regulate and integrate these signals remain poorly 
understood. Here we show that the forkhead box transcription factor Foxa2, a
downstream target of insulin signalling, regulates the expression of orexin and
MCH. During fasting, Foxa2 binds to MCH and orexin promoters and stimulates their
expression. In fed and in hyperinsulinemic obese mice, insulin signalling leads
to nuclear exclusion of Foxa2 and reduced expression of MCH and orexin.
Constitutive activation of Foxa2 in the brain (Nes-Cre/+;Foxa2T156A(flox/flox)
genotype) results in increased neuronal MCH and orexin expression and increased
food consumption, metabolism and insulin sensitivity. Spontaneous physical
activity of these animals in the fed state is significantly increased and is
similar to that in fasted mice. Conditional activation of Foxa2 through the T156A
mutation expression in the brain of obese mice also resulted in improved glucose 
homeostasis, decreased fat and increased lean body mass. Our results demonstrate 
that Foxa2 can act as a metabolic sensor in neurons of the lateral hypothalamic
area to integrate metabolic signals, adaptive behaviour and physiological
responses.

PMID: 19956259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cell Stem Cell. 2009 Dec 4;5(6):646-58. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2009.09.015.

Wnt1-lmx1a forms a novel autoregulatory loop and controls midbrain dopaminergic
differentiation synergistically with the SHH-FoxA2 pathway.

Chung S(1), Leung A, Han BS, Chang MY, Moon JI, Kim CH, Hong S, Pruszak J,
Isacson O, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Program in Neuroscience, McLean Hospital/Harvard 
Medical School, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.

Selective degeneration of midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons is associated with 
Parkinson's disease (PD), and thus an in-depth understanding of molecular
pathways underlying mDA development will be crucial for optimal bioassays and
cell replacement therapy for PD. In this study, we identified a novel Wnt1-Lmx1a 
autoregulatory loop during mDA differentiation of ESCs and confirmed its in vivo 
presence during embryonic development. We found that the Wnt1-Lmx1a
autoregulatory loop directly regulates Otx2 through the beta-catenin complex and 
Nurr1 and Pitx3 through Lmx1a. We also found that Lmx1a and Lmx1b cooperatively
regulate mDA differentiation with overlapping and cross-regulatory functions.
Furthermore, coactivation of both Wnt1 and SHH pathways by exogenous expression
of Lmx1a, Otx2, and FoxA2 synergistically enhanced the differentiation of ESCs to
mDA neurons. Together with previous works, this study shows that two regulatory
loops (Wnt1-Lmx1a and SHH-FoxA2) critically link extrinsic signals to
cell-intrinsic factors and cooperatively regulate mDA neuron development.

PMCID: PMC2788512
PMID: 19951692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Mar;332(3):1088-99. doi: 10.1124/jpet.109.160804. Epub
2009 Nov 24.

Genetic predictors of interindividual variability in hepatic CYP3A4 expression.

Lamba V(1), Panetta JC, Strom S, Schuetz EG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 262 Danny Thomas Place, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Variability in hepatic CYP3A4 cannot be explained by common CYP3A4 coding
variants. We previously identified polymorphisms in pregnane X receptor (PXR) and
ATP-binding cassette subfamily B member 1 (ABCB1) associated with CYP3A4 mRNA
levels in small cohorts of human livers. However, the relative contributions of
these genetic variations or of polymorphisms in other CYP3A4 regulators to
variable CYP3A4 expression were not known. We phenotyped livers from white donors
(n = 128) by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction for expression of
CYP3A4, CYP3A5, and CYP3A7 and nine transcriptional regulators, coactivators, and
corepressors. We resequenced hepatic nuclear factor-3-beta (HNF3beta, FoxA2),
HNF4alpha, HNF3gamma (FoxA3), nuclear receptor corepressor 2 (NCoR2), and regions
of the CYP3A4 promoter and genotyped informative single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
in PXR and ABCB1 in the same livers. CYP3A4 mRNA was positively correlated with
PXR and FoxA2 and negatively correlated with NCoR2 mRNA. A common silent
polymorphism and a polymorphic trinucleotide (CCT) repeat in FoxA2 were
associated with CYP3A4 expression. The transcriptional activity of the FoxA2
polymorphic CCT repeat alleles (wild-type, n = 14 and variant, n = 13, 15, and
19) when assayed by luciferase reporter transactivation assays was greatest for
the wild-type repeat, with deviations from this number having decreased
transcriptional activity. This corresponded with higher expression of FoxA2 mRNA 
and its targets PXR and CYP3A4 in human livers with (CCT) n = 14 genotypes.
Multiple linear regression analysis was used to quantify the contributions of
selected genetic polymorphisms to variable CYP3A4 expression. This approach
identified sex and polymorphisms in FoxA2, HNF4alpha, FoxA3, PXR, ABCB1, and the 
CYP3A4 promoter that together explained as much as 24.6% of the variation in
hepatic CYP3A4 expression.

PMCID: PMC2835441
PMID: 19934400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Genome Biol. 2009;10(11):R129. doi: 10.1186/gb-2009-10-11-r129. Epub 2009 Nov 17.

Differential binding and co-binding pattern of FOXA1 and FOXA3 and their relation
to H3K4me3 in HepG2 cells revealed by ChIP-seq.

Motallebipour M(1), Ameur A, Reddy Bysani MS, Patra K, Wallerman O, Mangion J,
Barker MA, McKernan KJ, Komorowski J, Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Rudbeck Laboratory, 
Dag Hammarskjölds väg 20, Uppsala SE-75185, Sweden.
mehdi.motallebipour@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The forkhead box/winged helix family members FOXA1, FOXA2, and FOXA3 
are of high importance in development and specification of the hepatic linage and
the continued expression of liver-specific genes.
RESULTS: Here, we present a genome-wide location analysis of FOXA1 and FOXA3
binding sites in HepG2 cells through chromatin immunoprecipitation with detection
by sequencing (ChIP-seq) studies and compare these with our previous results on
FOXA2. We found that these factors often bind close to each other in different
combinations and consecutive immunoprecipitation of chromatin for one and then a 
second factor (ChIP-reChIP) shows that this occurs in the same cell and on the
same DNA molecule, suggestive of molecular interactions. Using
co-immunoprecipitation, we further show that FOXA2 interacts with both FOXA1 and 
FOXA3 in vivo, while FOXA1 and FOXA3 do not appear to interact. Additionally, we 
detected diverse patterns of trimethylation of lysine 4 on histone H3 (H3K4me3)
at transcriptional start sites and directionality of this modification at FOXA
binding sites. Using the sequence reads at polymorphic positions, we were able to
predict allele specific binding for FOXA1, FOXA3, and H3K4me3. Finally, several
SNPs associated with diseases and quantitative traits were located in the
enriched regions.
CONCLUSIONS: We find that ChIP-seq can be used not only to create gene regulatory
maps but also to predict molecular interactions and to inform on the mechanisms
for common quantitative variation.

PMCID: PMC3091322
PMID: 19919681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol. 2010 Feb;10(1):67-76. doi:
10.1097/ACI.0b013e328334643a.

Mucus hypersecretion in asthma: intracellular signalling pathways as targets for 
pharmacotherapy.

Lai HY(1), Rogers DF.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart & Lung Institute, Imperial College London, UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Airway mucus hypersecretion is a pathophysiological feature of
asthma and, in many patients, contributes to morbidity and mortality. Although
current pharmacotherapy is effective in patients with stable disease, severe
asthma is poorly treated, and there is no specific treatment for the
hypersecretion. Consequently, identification of potential targets for
pharmacotherapy of hypersecretion in asthma is warranted. This review identifies 
intracellular signalling pathways as rational targets for treatment of excessive 
airway mucus production.
RECENT FINDINGS: The inflammatory mediators and the associated intracellular
signalling pathways underlying development of goblet cell hyperplasia, an index
of mucus hypersecretion, are becoming ever clearer, and include T-helper type 2
(Th2) cytokines, in particular interleukin (IL)-9 and IL-13, as well as IL-1beta,
tumour necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha and cyclooxygenase (COX)-2. IL-9 may act
predominantly via calcium-activated chloride channels (CLCAs), IL-13 via STAT-6
and FOXA2, TNF-alpha via nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB, and IL-1beta via COX-2.
Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGF-R) and FOXA2 appear to be convergent
pathways for a number of mediator signals, with EGF-R up-regulated in the airways
of asthmatic patients.
SUMMARY: Although many potential intracellular signalling pathways have been
identified as possible targets for pharmacotherapy of airway mucus hypersecretion
in asthma, the EGF-R and Th2 cytokine pathways offer the greatest potential for
inhibition of excessive mucus production.

PMID: 19907312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 15;337(2):471-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.040. Epub 2009 
Nov 5.

Foxh1 and Foxa2 are not required for formation of the midgut and hindgut
definitive endoderm.

McKnight KD(1), Hou J, Hoodless PA.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada;
Genetics Graduate Program, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

The definitive endoderm forms during gastrulation and is rapidly transformed into
the gut tube which is divided along the anterior-posterior axis into the foregut,
midgut, and hindgut. Lineage tracing and genetic analysis have examined the
origin of the definitive endoderm during gastrulation and demonstrated that the
majority of definitive endoderm arises at the anterior end of the primitive
streak (APS). Foxh1 and Foxa2 have been shown to play a role in specification of 
the APS and definitive endoderm. However, prior studies have focused on the role 
of these factors in specification of foregut definitive endoderm, while their
role in the specification of midgut and hindgut definitive endoderm is less
understood. Furthermore, previous analyses of these mutants have utilized
definitive endoderm markers that are restricted to the anterior endoderm,
expressed in extraembryonic endoderm, or present in other germ layers. Here, we
characterized the expression of several novel definitive and visceral endoderm
markers in Foxh1 and Foxa2 null embryos. In accordance with previous studies, we 
observed a deficiency of foregut definitive endoderm resulting in incorporation
of visceral endoderm into the foregut. Interestingly, this analysis revealed that
formation of midgut and hindgut definitive endoderm is unaffected by loss of
Foxh1 or Foxa2. This finding represents a significant insight into specification 
and regionalization of mouse definitive endoderm.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19896480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 1;337(1):63-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.003. Epub 2009
Oct 20.

Gata4 directs development of cardiac-inducing endoderm from ES cells.

Holtzinger A(1), Rosenfeld GE, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical School, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The transcription factor Gata4 is essential for normal heart morphogenesis and
regulates the survival, growth, and proliferation of cardiomyocytes. We tested if
Gata4 can specify cardiomyocyte fate from an uncommitted stem or progenitor cell 
population, by developing a system for conditional expression of Gata4 in
embryonic stem cells. We find that in embryoid body cultures containing even a
low ratio of these cells, expression of Gata4 is sufficient to enhance
significantly the generation of cardiomyocytes, via a non-cell-autonomous
mechanism. The Gata4-expressing cells do not generate cardiac or other mesoderm
derivatives. Rather, Gata4 expression directs the development of two types of
Sox17+ endoderm. This includes an epCam+Dpp4+ subtype of visceral endoderm. In
addition, Gata4 generates similar amounts of epCam+Dpp4- definitive endoderm
enriched for Cxcr4, FoxA2, FoxA3, Dlx5 and other characteristic transcripts. Both
types of endoderm express cardiac-inducing factors, including WNT antagonists
Dkk1 and Sfrp5, although the visceral endoderm subtype has much higher
cardiac-inducing activity correlating with relatively enhanced levels of
transcripts encoding BMPs. The Gata4-expressing cells eventually express
differentiation markers showing commitment to liver development, even under
conditions that normally support mesoderm development. The results suggest that
Gata4 is capable of specifying endoderm fates that facilitate, with temporal and 
spatial specificity, the generation of cardiomyocyte progenitors from associated 
mesoderm.

PMCID: PMC2799892
PMID: 19850025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Biomaterials. 2010 Jan;31(3):505-14. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.09.071.
Epub 2009 Oct 14.

Alginate microcapsule for propagation and directed differentiation of hESCs to
definitive endoderm.

Chayosumrit M(1), Tuch B, Sidhu K.

Author information: 
(1)Prince of Wales Hospital, School of Psychiatry, University of New South Wales,
NSW, Australia.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are potential renewable sources of cells in
replacement therapies for many diseases including type 1 diabetes. We have
established a three dimensional (3D) model to culture and differentiate hESCs
that are encapsulated in calcium alginate microcapsules. This system promotes
cellular interactions that are essential for both maintaining pluripotency and
differentiation. This 3D model also provides opportunity to separate out hESCs
from fibroblasts used as feeder layer during culture. In this study, we compared 
the viability and proliferation of the encapsulated hESCs cultured in serum
replacement (SR) medium, human fetal fibroblast-conditioned medium (hFF-CM), in
the presence and absence of Y-27632, a ROCK inhibitor. Treatment of hESCs with
Y-27632 promoted cell survival, cell cluster formation and proliferation rate in 
both SR medium and hFF-CM. These encapsulated hESC clusters were then directly
differentiated to definitive endoderm cells that expressed mesendoderm (Brachyury
70-fold), definitive endoderm (SOX17>300-fold, FOXA2>800-fold, and
CXCR4>100-fold) and primitive gut tube (HNF1beta>120-fold) as compared to the
undifferentiated hESCs. These data show that microcapsules can be used for
differentiation of hESCs into definitive endoderm in 3D and could have potential 
application for immune-isolation and prevention of teratomas formation of hESCs
during transplantation.

PMID: 19833385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Dec;9(8):555-61. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.10.002. Epub
2009 Oct 13.

Organization of the human embryonic ventral mesencephalon.

Nelander J(1), Hebsgaard JB, Parmar M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medical Science and Lund Strategic Center for Stem 
Cell, Biology and Cell Therapy, Lund University, Sweden.

The neurons in the ventral mesencephalon (VM) are organized into several nuclei
consisting of distinct neuronal populations. These include the dopaminergic (DA) 
neurons of the substania nigra and ventral tegmental area, the oculomotor (OM)
neurons that innervate the muscles controlling eye movement, and the reticular
neurons of the red nucleus (RN) involved in motor control and coordination
reviewed in Puelles (2007). The factors and genes that control the
differentiation of the various neuronal populations in the VM have been
extensively studied in the mouse and other model organisms but little is known
about the progenitors and their protein expression in the developing human brain.
In this study we analyze if key regulators identified in rodents are also
expressed in the human VM during embryonic development. We report that BLBP and
LMX1A mark the floor plate and that FOXA2 is expressed in both the floor plate
and basal plate of the human VM. The proneural transcription factors NGN2 and
MASH1 are expressed in the ventricular zone of the human VM within and lateral to
the floor plate. The post-mitotic DA neurons express TH as well as NURR1 and
PITX3. ISL1 and BRN3A can be used to detect the cells of OM and RN, respectively.
We show that many key developmental control factors are expressed in a temporal
and spatial manner in the human VM essentially corresponding to what has been
observed in the mouse. This data therefore suggest similar roles for these
factors also in human VM development and dopamine neurogenesis.

PMID: 19825428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Dec;37(22):7498-508. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp823.

Molecular interactions between HNF4a, FOXA2 and GABP identified at regulatory DNA
elements through ChIP-sequencing.

Wallerman O(1), Motallebipour M, Enroth S, Patra K, Bysani MS, Komorowski J,
Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, SE-751 85 Uppsala,
Sweden.

Gene expression is regulated by combinations of transcription factors, which can 
be mapped to regulatory elements on a genome-wide scale using ChIP experiments.
In a previous ChIP-chip study of USF1 and USF2 we found evidence also of binding 
of GABP, FOXA2 and HNF4a within the enriched regions. Here, we have applied
ChIP-seq for these transcription factors and identified 3064 peaks of enrichment 
for GABP, 7266 for FOXA2 and 18783 for HNF4a. Distal elements with USF2 signal
was frequently bound also by HNF4a and FOXA2. GABP peaks were found at
transcription start sites, whereas 94% of FOXA2 and 90% of HNF4a peaks were
located at other positions. We developed a method to accurately define TFBS
within peaks, and found the predicted sites to have an elevated conservation
level compared to peak centers; however the majority of bindings were not
evolutionary conserved. An interaction between HNF4a and GABP was seen at TSS,
with one-third of the HNF4a positive promoters being bound also by GABP, and this
interaction was verified by co-immunoprecipitations.

PMCID: PMC2794179
PMID: 19822575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. FEBS J. 2009 Jul;276(14):3757-69. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07091.x.

Tumour necrosis factor-alpha attenuates insulin action on phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase gene expression and gluconeogenesis by altering the cellular
localization of Foxa2 in HepG2 cells.

Pandey AK(1), Bhardwaj V, Datta M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (CSIR), Delhi, India.

Circulating tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha) levels, which are elevated in
obesity-associated insulin resistance and diabetes, inhibit insulin signalling at
several points in the signalling cascade. The liver is critical in maintaining
circulating glucose levels and, in a preliminary investigation using the human
hepatoma (HepG2) cell line in this study, we demonstrated the role of TNFalpha in
the regulation of this phenomenon and determined the underlying molecular
mechanisms. As the transcription factor Foxa2 has been implicated, in part, in
the regulation of gluconeogenic genes, we studied the effects of TNFalpha and/or 
insulin on its cellular status in hepatocytes, followed by an assessment of its
occupancy on the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) promoter.
Preincubation of cells with TNFalpha, followed by insulin, significantly
prevented insulin-mediated nuclear exclusion of Foxa2 and substantially increased
its nuclear concentration. Foxa2 was subsequently found to occupy its binding
element on the PEPCK promoter. TNFalpha alone, however, did not alter the status 
of cellular Foxa2 or its occupancy on the PEPCK promoter. TNFalpha preincubation 
also significantly attenuated insulin-induced inhibition of the expression of
gluconeogenic enzymes and hepatic glucose production. Insulin inhibition of PEPCK
expression and the preventive effect of TNFalpha could be partially but
significantly restored in the presence of Foxa2 siRNA. Several other well-known
mediators of insulin action in the liver in general and of gluconeogenic genes in
particular include Foxo1, PGC-1 and SREBP-1c. Our results indicate that another
transcription factor, Foxa2, is at least partly responsible for the attenuating
effect of TNFalpha on insulin action on PEPCK expression and glucose production
in HepG2 cells.

PMID: 19769745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Eur Cell Mater. 2009 Sep 21;18:1-13; discussion 13-4.

Substrate stiffness affects early differentiation events in embryonic stem cells.

Evans ND(1), Minelli C, Gentleman E, LaPointe V, Patankar SN, Kallivretaki M,
Chen X, Roberts CJ, Stevens MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Embryonic stem cells (ESC) are both a potential source of cells for tissue
replacement therapies and an accessible tool to model early embryonic
development. Chemical factors such as soluble growth factors and insoluble
components of the extracellular matrix are known to affect the differentiation of
murine ESCs. However, there is also evidence to suggest that undifferentiated
cells can both sense the mechanical properties of their environment and
differentiate accordingly. By growing ESCs on flexible polydimethylsiloxane
substrates with varying stiffness, we tested the hypothesis that substrate
stiffness can influence ESC differentiation. While cell attachment was unaffected
by the stiffness of the growth substrate, cell spreading and cell growth were all
increased as a function of substrate stiffness. Similarly, several genes
expressed in the primitive streak during gastrulation and implicated in early
mesendoderm differentiation, such as Brachyury, Mixl1 and Eomes, were upregulated
in cell cultures on stiffer compared to softer substrates. Finally, we
demonstrated that osteogenic differentiation of ESCs was enhanced on stiff
substrates compared to soft substrates, illustrating that the mechanical
environment can play a role in both early and terminal ESC differentiation. Our
results suggest a fundamental role for mechanosensing in mammalian development
and illustrate that the mechanical environment should be taken into consideration
when engineering implantable scaffolds or when producing therapeutically relevant
cell populations in vitro.

PMID: 19768669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Gastroenterology. 2009 Dec;137(6):2052-62. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.08.059.
Epub 2009 Sep 6.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 control the differentiation of goblet and enteroendocrine L- and 
D-cells in mice.

Ye DZ(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The winged helix transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 are
expressed in all epithelia of the gastrointestinal tract from its embryonic
origin into adulthood. In vitro studies have shown that Foxa1/a2 can
transactivate the promoters of Mucin 2 (Muc2), which is expressed in goblet
cells, and of preproglucagon, which is expressed in enteroendocrine cells. These 
findings suggest Foxa1/a2 as critical factors in the differentiation of gut
epithelial cells.
METHODS: Mice with intestine-specific simultaneous deletion of Foxa1 and Foxa2
were derived using the Cre-loxP system and analyzed using histologic and
molecular means.
RESULTS: Both Foxa1 and Foxa2 were deleted successfully in the epithelia of the
small intestine and colon using Villin-Cre mice. Immunohistochemical staining
showed that Foxa1/a2 mutants lack glucagon-like peptide-1- and
peptide-2-expressing cells (L-cells), and have reduced numbers of somatostatin
(D-cells) and peptide YY-expressing cells (L-cells). Preproglucagon,
somatostatin, and peptide YY messenger RNA (mRNA) levels also were reduced
significantly in Foxa1/a2 mutants. Thus, Foxa1 and Foxa2 are essential regulators
of these enteroendocrine lineages in vivo. The mRNA levels of transcription
factors Islet-1 and Pax6 were reduced significantly in the small intestine,
showing that Foxa1 and Foxa2 impact on a transcription factor network in the
enteroendocrine lineage. In addition, deletion of Foxa1/a2 caused a reduction in 
goblet cell number with altered expression of the secretory mucins Muc2, Mucin5b,
Mucin5ac, and Mucin 6.
CONCLUSIONS: The winged helix factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 are essential members of
the transcription factor network that govern secretory cell differentiation in
the mammalian gastrointestinal tract.

PMCID: PMC2789913
PMID: 19737569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2009;651:58-65.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 transcription factors regulate differentiation of midbrain
dopaminergic neurons.

Ang SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)NIMR, The Rigeway, London, NW7 1AA. sang@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Midbrain dopaminergic neurons (mDA), comprising the substanti nigra pars compacta
(A8), the ventral tegmental area (A9) and the retrorubal field (A10) subgroups,
are generated from floor plate progenitors, rostral to the isthmic boundary.
Floor plate progenitors are specified to become mDA progenitors between embryonic
days 8.0 and 10.5. Subsequently these progenitors undergo neuronal
differentiation in two phases, termed early and late differentiation to generate 
immature and mature neurons respectively. Genes that regulate specification,
early and late phases of differentiation ofmDA cells have recently been
identified. Among them, the forkhead winged helix transcription factors Foxal and
Foxa2 (Foxa1/2), have been shown to have essential and dose dependent roles at
multiple phases of development. In this chapter, I will summarize recent studies 
demonstrating a role for Foxa1/2 in regulating the neuronal specification and
differentiation ofmDA progenitors and conclude with projections on future
directions of this area of research.

PMID: 19731550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. FEBS J. 2009 Oct;276(19):5357-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07245.x. Epub
2009 Sep 2.

Evolutionary changes to transthyretin: developmentally regulated and
tissue-specific gene expression.

Yamauchi K(1), Ishihara A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Faculty of Science, Shizuoka University,
Shizuoka, Japan. sbkyama@ipc.shizuoka.ac.jp

A survey of the expression of the transthyretin and thyroxine-binding globulin
genes in various species during development provides clues as to how the present 
thyroid hormone distribution network in extracellular compartments developed
during vertebrate evolution. Albumin may be the 'oldest' component of the thyroid
hormone distribution network as it is found in the plasma of all vertebrates
investigated. Subsequent to albumin, transthyretin appeared as the second
component in this network during the evolution of vertebrates. The strong
expression of transthyretin genes in the liver coincides with the presence of
recognition site(s) for liver-enriched transcription factors, such as HNF-3beta
(Foxa2), in the transthyretin promoter regions of vertebrates. Finally, the
addition of thyroxine-binding globulin to this network occurred at postnatal
stages in some marsupials and rodents and in perinatal to adult stages in most
eutherians. All vertebrates have defined developmental stages when thyroid
hormone-dependent transition from larval to juvenile forms occurs. The inclusion 
of transthyretin and thyroxine-binding globulin in the thyroid hormone
distribution network may be correlated with the increased requirement of thyroid 
hormones for thyroid hormone-dependent tissue remodeling during these stages
and/or increased metabolism in thyroid hormone-target tissues with the
acquisition of homeothermy.

PMID: 19725881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Dec;1790(12):1624-35. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2009.08.004. Epub 2009 Aug 26.

Localized expression of genes related to carbohydrate and lipid absorption along 
the crypt-villus axis of rat jejunum.

Suzuki T(1), Mochizuki K, Goda T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutritional Physiology, The University of Shizuoka Graduate
School of Nutritional and Environmental Sciences and Global COE, Shizuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Enterocytes of the jejunum express several genes related to
digestion/absorption of nutrients and ions when these cells rapidly differentiate
from crypt to villus cells. However, it is unknown whether the distribution of
extensive gene expression along the villus-crypt axis of the jejunum is altered
during differentiation.
METHODS: We investigated the changes in jejunal gene expression during
differentiation from crypt to villus cells in rats using DNA microarray analysis 
on cryostat sections of the villus-crypt columns.
RESULTS: During differentiation, the expression of many genes related to cell
growth rapidly decreased, while expression of genes related to digestion and
absorption of nutrients and ions increased. Expression of a subset of genes
related to the digestion and absorption of starch and sucrose was highest at the 
middle of the villi, whereas expression of genes related to dietary fat
absorption was highest at the top of the villi. Several transcriptional factors
such as Pdx1, Foxa2 and Thra were expressed in the crypt, whereas Klf15 was
highly expressed during the crypt-villus transition. Expression of Klf4 and Pparg
was highest at the top of the villi.
CONCLUSIONS: Subsets of genes related to the digestion and absorption of
starch/sucrose and dietary fat as well as their transcriptional
factors/co-factors are expressed in the specific locations along the crypt-villus
axis.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: The jejunum may absorb nutrients effectively by
simultaneously expressing subsets of genes along the villus-crypt axis.

PMID: 19715743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Pharmacol Res. 2010 Feb;61(2):121-8. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2009.08.003. Epub 2009
Aug 13.

beta2-Agonist modulates epithelial gene expression involved in the T- and B-cell 
chemotaxis and induces airway sensitization in human isolated bronchi.

Faisy C(1), Pinto FM, Blouquit-Laye S, Danel C, Naline E, Buenestado A, Grassin
Delyle S, Burgel PR, Chapelier A, Advenier C, Candenas ML, Devillier P.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit UPRES EA220, Université Versailles Saint-Quentin, Hôpital Foch, 
40 rue Worth, 92150 Suresnes, France. christophe.faisy@egp.aphp.fr

Regular use of beta(2)-adrenoceptor agonists may enhance non-specific airway
responsiveness and inflammation. In earlier experimental studies, we showed that 
prolonged in vitro fenoterol exposure induced airway sensitization via perturbed 
epithelial regulation of bronchoconstriction. The aim of the present work was to 
examine the involvement of inflammatory mediator genes and proinflammatory cells 
and to investigate the role of the bronchial epithelium in these untoward
effects. Bronchial tissues were surgically removed from 17 ex-smokers. Bronchial 
rings and primary cultures of bronchial epithelial cells were incubated with
0.1microM fenoterol for 15h. Levels of mRNA-expression were analyzed using a
real-time quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction array.
Bronchial rings were contracted with endothelin-1 and immune cell infiltration
was assessed by immunohistochemistry. Compared to paired controls, fenoterol
up-regulated the mRNAs of cytokines/proteins implicated in the recruitment of T
and B cells or the activation and proliferation of bronchial epithelial cells
(CCL20/MIP-3alpha, FOXA2, PPAR-gamma) in isolated bronchi and in cultured
epithelial cells. Fenoterol exposure significantly enhanced CD8(+)-T and
differentiated CD138(+)-B-cells infiltration into the bronchi, especially the
subepithelial area. Increase in CD8 or CD138 labeling-intensity strongly
correlated with rise in maximal contraction to endothelin-1 induced by fenoterol 
exposure. In summary, our results show that fenoterol modulates the T and B cells
chemotaxis possibly via the epithelial chemokine secretion in isolated bronchi
from ex-smokers. They also suggest that the infiltration of resident T and B
cells into the subepithelial area is associated with an increase in airway
responsiveness due to fenoterol exposure.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19683054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2009 Oct 1;180(7):603-10. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200811-1768OC. Epub 2009 Jul 23.

Distinct roles of FOXA2 and FOXA3 in allergic airway disease and asthma.

Park SW(1), Verhaeghe C, Nguyenvu LT, Barbeau R, Eisley CJ, Nakagami Y, Huang X, 
Woodruff PG, Fahy JV, Erle DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lung Biology Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California 94143, USA.

RATIONALE: Increased production of mucus is a prominent feature of asthma.
IL-13-driven mucous cell metaplasia is associated with decreased expression of
the transcription factor FOXA2 and increased expression of the related
transcription factor FOXA3 in animal and cell culture models.
OBJECTIVES: Establish how changes in FOXA2 and FOXA3 expression contribute to
mucous metaplasia and determine whether FOXA2 and FOXA3 expression is altered in 
asthma.
METHODS: Mice expressing a Foxa2 transgene in airway epithelial cells and mice
deficient in Foxa3 were analyzed after allergen sensitization and challenge.
Expression of FOXA2, FOXA3, MUC5AC, and the highly IL-13-inducible gene CLCA1 was
analyzed in airway biopsies from subjects with asthma and control subjects.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Expression of a Foxa2 transgene reduced
allergen-induced mucous metaplasia by 45% compared with control transgenic mice
(P < 0.05) whereas inactivation of Foxa3 had no detectable effects on mucous
metaplasia. Expression of FOXA2 was reduced in subjects with asthma and was
negatively correlated with MUC5AC and CLCA1 levels in subjects with asthma. In
contrast, FOXA3 expression was not significantly correlated with MUC5AC and was
positively correlated with CLCA1.
CONCLUSIONS: Increasing Foxa2 expression reduced mucous metaplasia in an allergic
mouse model. Subjects with asthma had decreased FOXA2 expression, suggesting that
therapeutic approaches that increase FOXA2 expression or function could be
beneficial for reducing mucus production in asthma. Unlike FOXA2, FOXA3 did not
regulate mucous metaplasia.

PMCID: PMC2753788
PMID: 19628779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Biochem Soc Trans. 2009 Aug;37(Pt 4):877-81. doi: 10.1042/BST0370877.

Regulation of mucin expression in respiratory diseases.

Turner J(1), Jones CE.

Author information: 
(1)Novartis Institutes of Biomedical Research, Respiratory Diseases Area,
Horsham, West Sussex RH12 5AB, UK. jonathan.turner@novartis.com

Respiratory diseases such as asthma and COPD (chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease) are characterized by increased numbers of goblet cells and excessive
mucus production, which contribute to the underlying disease pathology. Mucins
form a major component of the mucus contributing to its viscoelastic properties, 
and in the airways the mucins MUC5AC and MUC5B are found at increased levels in
both asthmatic and COPD subjects. A diverse range of stimuli have been shown to
regulate MUC5AC expression and cause increases in the number of mucus-producing
goblet cells. Perhaps the best characterized of these mediators is the cytokine
IL (interleukin)-13, which causes increases in MUC5AC-expressing goblet cells in 
the airways. Several transcription factors have been linked with goblet cell
formation and mucus production and include STAT6 (signal transducer and activator
of transcription 6), FOXA2 (forkhead box A2) and the SPDEF [SAM (sterile alpha
motif) domain-containing prostate-derived Ets factor]. In mouse airways, goblet
cells are normally rare or absent, but increase rapidly in number in response to 
certain stimuli. The origins of these goblet cells are not well understood,
although Clara cells and ciliated cells have been implicated as goblet cell
progenitors. An understanding of the origin and processes regulating goblet cell 
formation in human airway epithelial cells has important implications for the
identification of therapeutic targets to treat respiratory diseases.

PMID: 19614611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Dev Biol. 2009 Sep 15;333(2):386-96. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.07.006. Epub 2009 
Jul 14.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 function both upstream of and cooperatively with Lmx1a and Lmx1b 
in a feedforward loop promoting mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neuron development.

Lin W(1), Metzakopian E, Mavromatakis YE, Gao N, Balaskas N, Sasaki H, Briscoe J,
Whitsett JA, Goulding M, Kaestner KH, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, London, NW7 1AA, UK.

Mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neurons control voluntary movement and reward based
behaviours. Their dysfunction can lead to neurological disorders, including
Parkinson's disease. These neurons are thought to arise from progenitors in the
floor plate of the caudal diencephalon and midbrain. Members of the Foxa family
of forkhead/winged helix transcription factor, Foxa1 and Foxa2, have previously
been shown to regulate neuronal specification and differentiation of
mesodiencephalic progenitors. However, Foxa1 and Foxa2 are also expressed earlier
during regional specification of the rostral brain. In this paper, we have
examined the early function of Foxa1 and Foxa2 using conditional mutant mice. Our
studies show that Foxa1 and Foxa2 positively regulate Lmx1a and Lmx1b expression 
and inhibit Nkx2.2 expression in mesodiencephalic dopaminergic progenitors.
Subsequently, Foxa1 and Foxa2 function cooperatively with Lmx1a and Lmx1b to
regulate differentiation of mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neurons. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments indicate that Nkx2.2 and TH genes are likely
direct targets of Foxa1 and Foxa2 in mesodiencephalic dopaminergic cells in vivo.
Foxa1 and Foxa2 also inhibit GABAergic neuron differentiation by repressing the
Helt gene in the ventral midbrain. Our data therefore provide new insights into
the specification and differentiation of mesodiencephalic dopaminergic neurons
and identifies Foxa1 and Foxa2 as essential regulators in these processes.

PMID: 19607821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Biol Chem. 2009 Sep 11;284(37):24816-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.042135. Epub
2009 Jul 9.

Nuclear export-independent inhibition of Foxa2 by insulin.

Howell JJ(1), Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology,
Wolfgang-Pauli Strasse 16, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

The Forkhead box A2 transcription factor (Foxa2/HNF-3beta) has been shown to be a
key regulator of genes involved in the maintenance of glucose and lipid
homeostasis in the liver. It is constitutively inactivated in several
hyperinsulinemic/obese mouse models, thereby enhancing their metabolic
phenotypes. Foxa2 is activated under fasting conditions but is inhibited by
insulin signaling via phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/AKT in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner, which results in its nuclear exclusion.
However, the mechanism and relative importance of its nuclear export has not yet 
been elucidated. Here we show that Foxa2 contains a functional nuclear export
signal and is excluded from the nucleus via a CRM1-dependent pathway in response 
to insulin signaling. Furthermore, direct evidence is provided that nuclear
export-defective Foxa2 is phosphorylated and inactivated by insulin in vitro and 
in vivo. These data demonstrate for the first time that phosphorylation itself is
the main event regulating the activity of Foxa2, suggesting that
export-independent mechanisms have evolved to ensure inhibition of Foxa2 under
conditions in which insulin signaling is present.

PMCID: PMC2757185
PMID: 19589781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Sep;37(17):e113. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp536. Epub 2009 Jun
24.

Extracting transcription factor targets from ChIP-Seq data.

Tuteja G(1), White P, Schug J, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

ChIP-Seq technology, which combines chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) with
massively parallel sequencing, is rapidly replacing ChIP-on-chip for the
genome-wide identification of transcription factor binding events. Identifying
bound regions from the large number of sequence tags produced by ChIP-Seq is a
challenging task. Here, we present GLITR (GLobal Identifier of Target Regions),
which accurately identifies enriched regions in target data by calculating a
fold-change based on random samples of control (input chromatin) data. GLITR uses
a classification method to identify regions in ChIP data that have a peak height 
and fold-change which do not resemble regions in an input sample. We compare
GLITR to several recent methods and show that GLITR has improved sensitivity for 
identifying bound regions closely matching the consensus sequence of a given
transcription factor, and can detect bona fide transcription factor targets
missed by other programs. We also use GLITR to address the issue of sequencing
depth, and show that sequencing biological replicates identifies far more binding
regions than re-sequencing the same sample.

PMCID: PMC2761252
PMID: 19553195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Stem Cells. 2009 Aug;27(8):1941-53. doi: 10.1002/stem.117.

Generation of pancreatic hormone-expressing islet-like cell aggregates from
murine adipose tissue-derived stem cells.

Chandra V(1), G S, Phadnis S, Nair PD, Bhonde RR.

Author information: 
(1)National Centre for Cell Science, Ganeshkhind, Pune, India.

The success of cell replacement therapy for diabetes depends on the availability 
and generation of an adequate number of islets, preferably from an autologous
origin. Stem cells are now being probed for the generation of physiologically
competent, insulin-producing cells. In this investigation, we explored the
potential of adipose tissue-derived stem cells (ASCs) to differentiate into
pancreatic hormone-expressing islet-like cell aggregates (ICAs). We initiated ASC
culture from epididymal fat pads of Swiss albino mice to obtain mesenchymal
cells, murine epididymal (mE)-ASCs. Subsequent single-cell cloning resulted in a 
homogeneous cell population with a CD29(+)CD44(+)Sca-1(+) surface antigen
expression profile. We formulated a 10-day differentiation protocol to generate
insulin-expressing ICAs from mE-ASCs by progressively changing the
differentiation cocktail on day 1, day 3, and day 5. Our stage-specific approach 
successfully differentiated mesodermic mE-ASCs into definitive endoderm (cells
expressing Sox17, Foxa2, GATA-4, and cytokeratin [CK]-19), then into pancreatic
endoderm (cells expressing pancreatic and duodenal homeobox [PDX]-1, Ngn3,
NeuroD, Pax4, and glucose transporter 2), and finally into cells expressing
pancreatic hormones (insulin, glucagon, somatostatin). Fluorescence-activated
cell sorting analysis showed that day 5 ICAs contained 64.84% +/- 7.03% PDX-1(+) 
cells, and in day 10 mature ICAs, 48.17% +/- 3% of cells expressed C-peptide. Day
10 ICAs released C-peptide in a glucose-dependent manner, exhibiting in vitro
functionality. Electron microscopy of day 10 ICAs revealed the presence of
numerous secretory granules within the cell cytoplasm. Calcium
alginate-encapsulated day 10 ICAs (1,000-1,200), when transplanted i.p. into
streptozotocin-induced diabetic mice, restored normoglycemia within 2 weeks. The 
data presented here demonstrate the feasibility of using ASCs as a source of
autologous stem cells to differentiate into the pancreatic lineage.

PMID: 19544426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Stem Cells. 2009 Sep;27(9):2103-13. doi: 10.1002/stem.147.

Generation of monoclonal antibodies specific for cell surface molecules expressed
on early mouse endoderm.

Gadue P(1), Gouon-Evans V, Cheng X, Wandzioch E, Zaret KS, Grompe M, Streeter PR,
Keller GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Center for Cellular and Molecular Therapeutics;
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

The development of functional cell populations such as hepatocytes and pancreatic
beta cells from embryonic stem cell (ESC) is dependent on the efficient induction
of definitive endoderm early in the differentiation process. To monitor
definitive endoderm formation in mouse ESC differentiation cultures in a
quantitative fashion, we generated a reporter cell line that expresses human CD25
from the Foxa3 locus and human CD4 from the Foxa2 locus. Induction of these
reporter ESCs with high concentrations of activin A led to the development of a
CD25-Foxa3+CD4-Foxa2+ population within 4-5 days of culture. Isolation and
characterization of this population showed that it consists predominantly of
definitive endoderm that is able to undergo hepatic specification under the
appropriate conditions. To develop reagents that can be used for studies on
endoderm development from unmanipulated ESCs, from induced pluripotent stem
cells, and from the mouse embryo, we generated monoclonal antibodies against the 
CD25-Foxa3+CD4-Foxa2+ population. With this approach, we identified two
antibodies that react specifically with endoderm from ESC cultures and from the
early embryo. The specificity of these antibodies enables one to quantitatively
monitor endoderm development in ESC differentiation cultures, to study endoderm
formation in the embryo, and to isolate pure populations of culture- or
embryo-derived endodermal cells.

PMCID: PMC2890285
PMID: 19522011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 Mar;42(3):268-75. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2009-0151TR. 
Epub 2009 Jun 11.

Advances in mucous cell metaplasia: a plug for mucus as a therapeutic focus in
chronic airway disease.

Curran DR(1), Cohn L.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Mucous cell metaplasia is induced in response to harmful insults and provides
front-line protection to clear the airway of toxic substances and cellular
debris. In chronic airway diseases mucous metaplasia persists and results in
airway obstruction and contributes significantly to morbidity and mortality.
Mucus hypersecretion involves increased expression of mucin genes, and increased 
mucin production and release. The past decade has seen significant advances in
our understanding of the molecular mechanisms by which these events occur.
Inflammation stimulates epidermal growth factor receptor activation and IL-13 to 
induce both Clara and ciliated cells to transition into goblet cells through the 
coordinated actions of FoxA2, TTF-1, SPDEF, and GABA(A)R. Ultimately, these steps
lead to up-regulation of MUC5AC expression, and increased mucin in goblet cell
granules that fuse to the plasma membrane through actions of MARCKS, SNAREs, and 
Munc proteins. Blockade of mucus in exacerbations of asthma and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease may affect morbidity. Development of new therapies 
to target mucus production and secretion are now possible given the advances in
our understanding of molecular mechanisms of mucous metaplasia. We now have a
greater incentive to focus on inhibition of mucus as a therapy for chronic airway
diseases.

PMCID: PMC2830403
PMID: 19520914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Int J Oncol. 2009 Jul;35(1):187-92.

Integrative genomic analyses on GLI1: positive regulation of GLI1 by
Hedgehog-GLI, TGFbeta-Smads, and RTK-PI3K-AKT signals, and negative regulation of
GLI1 by Notch-CSL-HES/HEY, and GPCR-Gs-PKA signals.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

GLI family members are zinc-finger transcription factors, which are involved in
embryogenesis and carcinogenesis through transcription regulation of GLI1, CCND1,
CCND2, FOXA2, FOXC2, RUNX2, SFRP1, and JAG2. GLI1 transcription is upregulated in
a variety of human tumors, such as basal cell carcinoma, lung cancer, breast
cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, and esophageal cancer. Hedgehog
signaling via Smoothened cascade and receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) signaling via
PI3K-AKT cascade induce stabilization of GLI1 protein, whereas G-protein coupled 
receptor (GPCR) signaling via Gs-PKA cascade induces degradation of GLI1 protein.
Here we report integrative genomic analyses of the GLI1 gene. The GLI1 and
ARHGAP9 genes are located in a tail-to-tail manner with overlapping 3'-ends.
ARHGAP9 was expressed in bone marrow, spleen, thymus, monocytes, and macrophages,
whereas GLI1 was almost undetectable in normal tissues or cells with predominant 
ARHGAP9 expression. Because overlapping sense and anti-sense transcripts are
annealed to each other to give rise to double-stranded RNAs functioning as
endogenous RNAi, GLI1 expression might be negatively regulated by ARHGAP9
transcripts. GLI-binding element with one base substitution at the +1589-bp
position from the transcriptional start site (TSS) of the human GLI1 gene was
completely conserved in chimpanzee GLI1, mouse Gli1, and rat Gli1 genes. Ten
Smad-binding elements, double E-boxes for EMT regulators, and double N-boxes for 
HES/HEY family members within intron 1 of the human GLI1 gene were also conserved
in mammalian GLI1 orthologs. GLI1 transcription is upregulated due to Hedgehog,
and TGFbeta signaling activation, whereas GLI1 transcription is downregulated due
to Snail/Slug, and Notch signaling activation. Together these facts indicate that
Hedgehog, TGFbeta, and RTK signals positively regulate GLI1, and that Notch, and 
GsPCR signals negatively regulate the GLI1.

PMID: 19513567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jul;119(7):1888-98. doi: 10.1172/JCI37028.

The diabetes gene Pdx1 regulates the transcriptional network of pancreatic
endocrine progenitor cells in mice.

Oliver-Krasinski JM(1), Kasner MT, Yang J, Crutchlow MF, Rustgi AK, Kaestner KH, 
Stoffers DA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding the pancreatic homeodomain
transcription factor pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1) are associated with
maturity onset diabetes of the young, type 4 (MODY4) and type 2 diabetes. Pdx1
governs the early embryonic development of the pancreas and the later
differentiation of the insulin-producing islet beta cells of the endocrine
compartment. We derived a Pdx1 hypomorphic allele that reveals a role for Pdx1 in
the specification of endocrine progenitors. Mice homozygous for this allele
displayed a selective reduction in endocrine lineages associated with decreased
numbers of endocrine progenitors and a marked reduction in levels of mRNA
encoding the proendocrine transcription factor neurogenin 3 (Ngn3). During
development, Pdx1 occupies an evolutionarily conserved enhancer region of Ngn3
and interacts with the transcription factor one cut homeobox 1 (Hnf6) to activate
this enhancer. Furthermore, mRNA levels of all 4 members of the transcription
factor network that regulates Ngn3 expression, SRY-box containing gene 9 (Sox9), 
Hnf6, Hnf1b, and forkhead box A2 (Foxa2), were decreased in homozygous mice. Pdx1
also occupied regulatory sequences in Foxa2 and Hnf1b. Thus, Pdx1 contributes to 
specification of endocrine progenitors both by regulating expression of Ngn3
directly and by participating in a cross-regulatory transcription factor network 
during early pancreas development. These results provide insights that may be
applicable to beta cell replacement strategies involving the guided
differentiation of ES cells or other progenitor cell types into the beta cell
lineage, and they suggest a molecular mechanism whereby human PDX1 mutations
cause diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2701861
PMID: 19487809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 24;284(30):19915-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.016295. Epub
2009 May 28.

Identification of DNA-dependent protein kinase as a cofactor for the forkhead
transcription factor FoxA2.

Nock A(1), Ascano JM, Jones T, Barrero MJ, Sugiyama N, Tomita M, Ishihama Y,
Malik S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10065, USA.

Forkhead factors are important regulators of animal development and homeostasis. 
They are among the earliest to bind quiescent genes, which they activate in
conjunction with other transcription factors. Many liver-specific genes are under
the control of FoxA2, a liver-enriched forkhead protein. Here we confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation that FoxA2 is one of the factors bound to the
promoter-proximal enhancer of the gene encoding apolipoprotein AI (a component of
high density lipoprotein) and that it functions in synergy with the nuclear
receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha. Furthermore, toward identifying
additional cofactors that could potentially regulate FoxA2 activity, we
identified DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) as a FoxA2-associated factor
upon affinity purification of epitope-tagged FoxA2. We show that FoxA2, found to 
be a phosphoprotein in vivo, is also an efficient substrate for DNA-PK, which
targets serine 283. This residue is contained within a conserved serine-glutamine
phosphorylation signal for DNA-PK, located within the C-terminal third of the
polypeptide, just distal to its winged-helix DNA binding domain. We establish
that this residue is critical for FoxA2 function because FoxA2 bearing a mutation
at this site is severely compromised in its ability to activate a reporter gene
under the control of its cognate DNA-binding site (apoAI site B). Complementary
experiments rule out that this mutation compromises the ability of FoxA2 to
either translocate to the nucleus or to bind site B. We therefore conclude that
DNA-PK-dependent phosphorylation of FoxA2 plays a critical role in its
transcriptional activation function per se.

PMCID: PMC2740417
PMID: 19478084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Biol Cell. 2009 Jul;20(14):3353-62. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E08-09-0965. Epub 2009
May 28.

Induction of Dlk1 by PTTG1 inhibits adipocyte differentiation and correlates with
malignant transformation.

Espina AG(1), Méndez-Vidal C, Moreno-Mateos MA, Sáez C, Romero-Franco A, Japón
MA, Pintor-Toro JA.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa, CABIMER-CSIC,
41092 Sevilla, Spain.

Pituitary tumor-transforming gene-1 (PTTG1) is an oncogene highly expressed in a 
variety of endocrine, as well as nonendocrine-related cancers. Several
tumorigenic mechanisms for PTTG1 have been proposed, one of the best
characterized being its capacity to act as a transcriptional activator. To
identify novel downstream target genes, we have established cell lines with
inducible expression of PTTG1 and a differential display approach to analyze gene
expression changes after PTTG1 induction. We identified dlk1 (also known as
pref-1) as one of the most abundantly expressed PTTG1 targets. Dlk1 is known to
participate in several differentiation processes, including adipogenesis, adrenal
gland development, and wound healing. Dlk1 is also highly expressed in
neuroendocrine tumors. Here, we show that PTTG1 overexpression inhibits
adipogenesis in 3T3-L1 cells and that this effect is accomplished by promoting
the stability and accumulation of Dlk1 mRNA, supporting a role for PTTG1 in
posttranscriptional regulation. Moreover, both pttg1 and dlk1 genes show
concomitant expression in fetal liver and placenta, as well as in pituitary
adenomas, breast adenocarcinomas, and neuroblastomas, suggesting that PTTG1 and
DLK1 are involved in cell differentiation and transformation.

PMCID: PMC2710844
PMID: 19477929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jun;119(6):1537-45. doi: 10.1172/JCI38201. Epub 2009 May 11.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate bile duct development in mice.

Li Z(1), White P, Tuteja G, Rubins N, Sackett S, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute of Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104-6145, USA.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2010 May;52(5):765-7.

The forkhead box proteins A1 and A2 (Foxa1 and Foxa2) are transcription factors
with critical roles in establishing the developmental competence of the foregut
endoderm and in initiating liver specification. Using conditional gene ablation
during a later phase of liver development, we show here that deletion of both
Foxa1 and Foxa2 (Foxa1/2) in the embryonic liver caused hyperplasia of the
biliary tree. Abnormal bile duct formation in Foxa1/2-deficient liver was due, at
least in part, to activation of IL-6 expression, a proliferative signal for
cholangiocytes. The glucocorticoid receptor is a negative regulator of IL-6
transcription; in the absence of Foxa1/2, the glucocorticoid receptor failed to
bind to the IL-6 promoter, causing enhanced IL-6 expression. Thus, after liver
specification, Foxa1/2 are required for normal bile duct development through
prevention of excess cholangiocyte proliferation. Our data suggest that Foxa1/2
function as terminators of bile duct expansion in the adult liver through
inhibition of IL-6 expression.

PMCID: PMC2689124
PMID: 19436110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Int J Mol Med. 2009 Jun;23(6):763-9.

Transcriptional mechanisms of WNT5A based on NF-kappaB, Hedgehog, TGFbeta, and
Notch signaling cascades.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

WNT5A is a cancer-associated gene involved in invasion and metastasis of
melanoma, breast cancer, pancreatic cancer, and gastric cancer. WNT5A transduces 
signals through Frizzled, ROR1, ROR2 or RYK receptors to beta-catenin-TCF/LEF,
DVL-RhoA-ROCK, DVL-RhoB-Rab4, DVL-Rac-JNK, DVL-aPKC, Calcineurin-NFAT,
MAP3K7-NLK, MAP3K7-NF-kappaB, and DAG-PKC signaling cascades in a
context-dependent manner. SNAI1 (Snail), CD44, G3BP2, and YAP1 are WNT5A target
genes. We and other groups previously reported that IL6- or LIF-induced signaling
through JAK-STAT3 signaling cascade is involved in WNT5A upregulation
(STAT3-WNT5A signaling loop). Here, refined integrative genomic analyses of WNT5A
were carried out to elucidate other mechanisms of WNT5A transcription. The WNT5A 
gene was found to encode two isoforms by using alternative first exons 1A and 1B.
Quadruple Smad-binding elements (SBEs), single Sp1-binding site (GC-box),
PPARgamma-binding site, C/EBP-binding site and bHLH-binding site within the
promoter A region, 5'-adjacent to exon 1A, were conserved in human WNT5A,
chimpanzee WNT5A, mouse Wnt5a, and rat Wnt5a. NF-kappaB-binding site,
CUX1-binding site, double SBEs and double GC-boxes within the promoter B region, 
5'-adjacent to exon 1B, were conserved in mammalian WNT5A orthologs. Quadruple
FOX-binding sites and double SBEs within ultra-conserved intron 1 were also
conserved in mammalian WNT5A orthologs. Conserved NF-kappaB-binding site within
the WNT5A promoter B region elucidated the mechanisms that TNFalpha and toll-like
receptor (TLR) signals upregulate WNT5A via MAP3K7. Quadruple FOX-binding sites
rather than GLI-binding site revealed that Hedgehog signals induce WNT5A
upregulation indirectly via FOX family members, such as FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXE1,
FOXF1 and FOXL1. TGFbeta signals were found to upregulate WNT5A expression
directly through the Smad complex, and also indirectly through Smad-induced CUX1 
and MAP3K7-mediated NF-kappaB. Together these facts indicate that WNT5A is
transcribed based on multiple mechanisms, such as NF-kappaB, Hedgehog, TGFbeta,
and Notch signaling cascades.

PMID: 19424602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Physiol Genomics. 2009 Jul 9;38(2):186-95. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.90376.2008. Epub 2009 May 5.

Foxa2-dependent hepatic gene regulatory networks depend on physiological state.

Bochkis IM(1), Schug J, Rubins NE, Chopra AR, O'Malley BW, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Bile acids are powerful detergents produced by the liver to aid in the absorption
of dietary lipids. We recently reported a novel role for Foxa2 in bile acid
metabolism. The winged helix transcription factor Foxa2 is required to prevent
intrahepatic cholestasis and liver injury in mice fed a cholic acid-enriched
diet. Here, we use functional genomics to study how Foxa2 regulates its targets
in a cholic acid-dependent manner. We found that multiple signaling pathways
essential for the hepatic response to acute liver injury are impaired in livers
of Foxa2-deficient mice, suggesting that the deletion of Foxa2 in the hepatocyte 
affects the liver on a large scale. We also discovered distinct feed-forward
regulatory loops controlling Foxa2-dependent targets in a cholic acid-dependent
or -independent manner. We show that Foxa2 interacts with different transcription
factors to achieve gene expression responses appropriate for each physiologic
state.

PMCID: PMC2712224
PMID: 19417011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Hepatology. 2009 Jul;50(1):282-90. doi: 10.1002/hep.22971.

Protein or amino acid deprivation differentially regulates the hepatic forkhead
box protein A (FOXA) genes through an activating transcription
factor-4-independent pathway.

Su N(1), Thiaville MM, Awad K, Gjymishka A, Brant JO, Yang TP, Kilberg MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Florida
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610-0245, USA.

The FOXA (forkhead box A) proteins (FOXA1, FOXA2, and FOXA3) play a critical role
in the development of the liver, and they also regulate metabolism in adult
hepatic tissue. The liver responds to changes in nutrient availability by
initiating a number of stress signaling pathways. The present studies
demonstrated that in mouse dams fed a low-protein diet hepatic expression of
FOXA2 and FOXA3 messenger RNA, but not FOXA1, was induced. Conversely, fetal
liver did not exhibit this regulation. Amino acid deprivation of HepG2 hepatoma
cells also enhanced transcription from the FOXA2 and FOXA3 genes. In contrast,
endoplasmic reticulum stress inhibited the expression of FOXA1, only slightly
induced FOXA2, and had no effect on FOXA3. The FOXA2 and FOXA3 messenger RNA
induction by amino acid deprivation did not require activating transcription
factor 4, a critical component of the conventional amino acid response (AAR)
pathway, but their induction was partially dependent on CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein beta. Simultaneous knockdown of both FOXA2 and FOXA3 by small interfering
RNA did not affect the activation of other amino acid responsive genes,
suggesting that the FOXA proteins are not required for the known AAR pathway.
Collectively, the results document that the hepatic FOXA family of genes are
differentially regulated by amino acid availability.

PMCID: PMC3594789
PMID: 19415718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Ophthalmology. 2009 May;116(5):971-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2008.10.032.

Cellular and molecular origin of circumpapillary dysgenesis of the pigment
epithelium.

Tosi J(1), Janisch KM, Wang NK, Kasanuki JM, Flynn JT, Lin CS, Tsang SH.

Author information: 
(1)Bernard and Shirlee Brown Glaucoma Laboratory, Department of Pathology and
Cell Biology, Columbia University, 160 Fort Washington Ave., New York, NY 10032, 
USA.

PURPOSE: We studied clinical phenotyping and TEAD1 expression in mice and humans 
to gain a better understanding of the primary origin in the pathogenesis of
circumpapillary dysgenesis of the pigment epithelium.
DESIGN: Observational case series and experimental study.
PARTICIPANTS: Three female patients from an affected family were included for
phenotypic study. Mice and human tissues were used for biochemistry and
immunohistochemistry studies.
METHODS: We performed genetic analyses and longitudinal clinical, imaging, and
electrophysiologic studies in a 3-generation family. Western blotting and
immunohistochemistry were used to detect TEAD1 expression in mice and human
retinal tissues.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Autofluorescence and optical coherence tomography (OCT)
imaging were compared and reviewed from 3 patients. TEAD1 expression was compared
in different tissues from mice and human samples.
RESULTS: A point mutation at T1261 in TEAD1 was detected in the mother.
Autofluorescence and OCT imaging studies revealed choroid is involved earlier
than retinal pigment epithelium (RPE). From immunoblot analysis, we discovered
that TEAD1 and its cofactors YAP65 and FOXA2 are expressed in the choroid.
Immunohistochemical analysis on frozen sections of mouse retina supports
immunoblot results.
CONCLUSIONS: The primary cellular origin of circumpapillary dysgenesis of the
pigment epithelium is within the choroid instead of the pigment epithelium. The
loss of the RPE and photoreceptors in later stages of the disease is a secondary 
consequence of choroidal degeneration. Studies of the downstream targets of TEAD1
in choroidal cells will provide promising new research opportunities for the
development of treatments for choroidal diseases.
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE(S): The author(s) have no proprietary or commercial interest
in any materials discussed in this article.

PMCID: PMC2717946
PMID: 19410955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. J Transl Med. 2009 Apr 22;7:27. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-7-27.

Human embryonic stem cells hemangioblast express HLA-antigens.

Basak GW(1), Yasukawa S, Alfaro A, Halligan S, Srivastava AS, Min WP, Minev B,
Carrier E.

Author information: 
(1)Rebecca and John Moore's Cancer Center, University of California, La Jolla, CA
92093, USA. gbasak@ib.amwaw.edu.pl

BACKGROUND: It has been suggested that the initial differentiation of endothelial
and hematopoietic cells during embryogenesis occurs from a common progenitor,
called hemangioblast (hB). We hypothesized that these cells with dual
hematopoietic/endothelial potential could be used in future regenerative
medicine.
METHODS: We used the two-step differentiation technology to generate bipotential 
blast cells from human embryonic stem cells (hES). This involved short
differentiation in our in vitro EB system followed by differentiation in
semisolid culture medium supplemented with mixture of cytokines.
RESULTS: The occurrence of blast-colony-forming cells (BL-CFC) during EB
differentiation (day 0-6) was transient and peaked on day 3. The emergence of
this event was associated with expression of mesoderm gene T, and inversely
correlated with expression of endoderm gene FoxA2. Similarly, the highest BL-CFC 
number was associated with increase in expression of early
hematopoietic/endothelial genes: CD34, CD31 and KDR. The derived colonies were
composed of 30-50 blast cells on day 6 in culture. These cells had homogenous
appearance in Wright-Giemsa stain, but to a different extent expressed markers of
immature hematopoietic and endothelial cells (CD31, CD34, VE-cadherin, Flt-1) and
mature differentiated cells (CD45, CD33, CD146). We found that some of them
expressed fetal and embryonic globin genes. Interestingly, these cells expressed 
also HLA class I molecules, however at very low levels compared to endothelial
and hematopoietic cells. The blast cells could be successfully differentiated to 
hematopoietic cells in a CFU assay. In these conditions, blast cells formed CFU-M
colonies (63.4 +/- 0.8%) containing macrophages, BFU-E colonies (19.5 +/- 3.5%)
containing nucleated red blood cells, and CFU-EM colonies (17.1 +/- 2.7%)
composed of macrophages and nucleated erythrocytes. Cells of CFU-EM and BFU-E
colonies expressed both epsilon - and gamma- globin genes, but not adult-type
gamma-globin. When in endothelial cell culture conditions, blast cells
differentiated to endothelial cells which had the ability to take up Dil-Ac-LDL
and to form complex vascular networks in Matrigel.
CONCLUSION: 1) Hematoendothelial precursors exist transiently in early embryonic 
development and form single cell-derived colonies; 2) their differentiation can
be tracked by the use of chosen molecular markers; 3) blast colonies consist of
cells having properties of endothelial and hematopoietic precursors, however the 
issue of their ability to maintain dual properties over time needs to be further 
explored; 4) blast cells can potentially be used in regenerative medicine due to 
their low expression of HLA molecules.

PMCID: PMC2680830
PMID: 19386101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Int J Oncol. 2009 May;34(5):1411-5.

Transcriptional regulation of WNT2B based on the balance of Hedgehog, Notch, BMP 
and WNT signals.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

We cloned and characterized human WNT2B in 1996, and then others cloned and
characterized mouse, chicken, and zebrafish WNT2B orthologs. WNT2B is expressed
in several types of human cancer, such as basal cell carcinoma, gastric cancer,
breast cancer, head/neck squamous cell carcinoma, cervical cancer and leukemia.
WNT2B is one of canonical WNTs transducing signals through Frizzled (FZD) and
LRP5/LRP6 receptors to beta-catenin-TCF/LEF signaling cascade. Here, refined
integrative genomic analyses on WNT2B orthologs were carried out to elucidate its
transcriptional mechanisms. GLI-, double FOX-, HES/HEY-, bHLH-, and Sp1-binding
sites within mammalian WNT2B promoter were well conserved. Because GLI1, FOXA2,
FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXF1 and FOXL1 are direct target genes of Hedgehog-GLI2 signaling 
cascade, Hedgehog signals should induce WNT2B upregulation through GLI family
members as well as FOX family members. Notch, BMP and Hedgehog signals inhibit
WNT2B expression via HES/HEY-binding to N-box, whereas BMP and WNT signals
inhibit bHLH transcription factor-induced WNT2B expression via ID1, ID2, ID3,
MSX1 or MSX2. Together these facts indicate that Hedgehog signals and bHLH
transcription factors are involved in WNT2B upregulation, which is counteracted
by BMP, WNT and Notch signals. Mesenchymal BMP induces IHH expression in
gastrointestinal epithelial cells, and then epithelial Hedgehog induces WNT2B and
BMP4 expression in mesenchymal cells. NF-kappaB signals induce SHH upregulation, 
and WNT2B is upregulated in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). BMP-IHH and
inflammation-SHH signaling loops are involved in WNT2B up-regulation during
embryogenesis, adult tissue homeostasis, and carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19360354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Genes Dev. 2009 Apr 1;23(7):804-9. doi: 10.1101/gad.1775509.

Nucleosome-binding affinity as a primary determinant of the nuclear mobility of
the pioneer transcription factor FoxA.

Sekiya T(1), Muthurajan UM, Luger K, Tulin AV, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Epigenetics and Progenitor Cells Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

FoxA proteins are pioneer transcription factors, among the first to bind
chromatin domains in development and enable gene activity. The Fox DNA-binding
domain structurally resembles linker histone and binds nucleosomes stably. Using 
fluorescence recovery after photobleaching, we found that FoxA1 and FoxA2 move
much more slowly in nuclei than other transcription factor types, including
c-Myc, GATA-4, NF-1, and HMGB1. We find that slower nuclear mobility correlates
with high nonspecific nucleosome binding, and point mutations that disrupt
nonspecific binding markedly increase nuclear mobility. FoxA's distinct nuclear
mobility is consistent with its pioneer activity in chromatin.

PMCID: PMC2666343
PMID: 19339686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mech Dev. 2009 May-Jun;126(5-6):301-13. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.03.001. Epub 2009
Mar 17.

Shh dependent and independent maintenance of basal midbrain.

Perez-Balaguer A(1), Puelles E, Wurst W, Martinez S.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias de Alicante, CSIC & Universidad Miguel Hernández,
Sant Joan d'Alacant, Spain.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is well known as the molecule responsible for the induction 
and maintenance of ventral neural tube structures. Recent data have shown that
ventral neuronal populations react differentially to the amount of this morphogen
not only in the spinal cord, but also in more rostral parts of the brain, like
the midbrain. A dorsal expansion in the Shh expression domain modifies the
differentiation program in this territory. The lack of Shh produces alterations
in the development of this area as well. Here, for the first time, we analyze in 
detail the development of the different mesencephalic basal nuclei in the absence
of Shh. We report that the oculomotor complex is lost, the dopaminergic
populations are strongly affected but the red nucleus is maintained. These
results point out that not all the midbrain neuronal populations are dependent on
Shh for their maintenance, as previously thought. Based on our results and
recently published data, we suggest the existence of a specific genetic pathway
for the specification of the mesencephalic red nucleus. Foxa2 could be the
candidate gene that might control this genetic pathway.

PMID: 19298856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Blood. 2009 May 21;113(21):5144-56. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-10-185751. Epub 2009 
Mar 9.

Sonic hedgehog negatively regulates pre-TCR-induced differentiation by a
Gli2-dependent mechanism.

Rowbotham NJ(1), Hager-Theodorides AL, Furmanski AL, Ross SE, Outram SV, Dessens 
JT, Crompton T.

Author information: 
(1)Univeristy College London Institute of Child Health, United Kingdom.

Hedgehog signaling regulates differentiation, survival, and proliferation of the 
earliest double-negative (DN) thymocytes, but its importance at later stages of
T-cell development is controversial. Here we use loss- and gain-of-function mouse
models to show that Shh, by signaling directly to the developing thymocyte, is a 
negative regulator of pre-TCR-induced differentiation from DN to double-positive 
(DP) cell. When hedgehog signaling was reduced, in the Shh(-/-) and Gli2(-/-)
thymus, or by T lineage-specific transgenic expression of a
transcriptional-repressor form of Gli2 (Gli2DeltaC(2)), differentiation to DP
cell after pre-TCR signal transduction was increased. In contrast, when Hh
signaling was constitutively activated in thymocytes, by transgenic expression of
a constitutive transcriptional-activator form of Gli2 (Gli2DeltaN(2)), the
production of DP cells was decreased. Gene expression profiling showed that
physiologic Hh signaling in thymocytes maintains expression of the transcription 
factor FoxA2 on pre-TCR signal transduction.

PMCID: PMC2686185
PMID: 19273836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Development. 2009 Mar;136(6):1029-38. doi: 10.1242/dev.028415.

Foxa2 regulates polarity and epithelialization in the endoderm germ layer of the 
mouse embryo.

Burtscher I(1), Lickert H.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Stem Cell Research, Ingolstädter
Landstrasse 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany.

In the mouse, one of the earliest events in the determination of cell fate is the
segregation of cells into germ layers during gastrulation; however, the cellular 
and molecular details are not well defined due to intrauterine development. We
were able to visualize a clear sequence of events occurring in the process of
germ-layer formation, using immunohistochemistry and time-lapse confocal imaging.
The T-box transcription factor brachyury (T) and the Forkhead transcription
factor Foxa2 specify mesoderm and endoderm in the posterior epiblast.
Fate-specified epiblast cells lose their polarity and undergo
epithelial-mesenchymal transition to invade into the primitive streak region,
where these cell populations quickly separate and differentiate into
morphologically and molecularly distinct Foxa2-positive endoderm and T-positive
mesoderm populations. The endoderm cells flatten and acquire apical-basal
polarity during intercalation into the outside epithelium in order to establish
proper intracellular junctions with pre-existing cells. By contrast, the
mesodermal cells become spherical during migration and acquire a mesenchymal
fate. Interestingly, axial mesodermal cells are descended from Foxa2-positive
epiblast cells that upregulate T protein in the anterior primitive streak region.
These cells, as well as Foxa2-positive endoderm cells, are highly polarized and
epithelialized, suggesting that Foxa2 promotes an epithelial fate and suppresses 
a mesenchymal fate. This observation is supported by the fact that Foxa2 mutant
endodermal cells fail to maintain polarity and do not establish proper cellular
junctions, and are thus unable to functionally integrate into the endoderm
epithelium. We propose that Foxa2 regulates a molecular program that induces an
epithelial cellular phenotype.

PMID: 19234065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Apr 3;381(2):264-70. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.02.035. Epub 2009 Feb 14.

Differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells to thyrocytes requires insulin and
insulin-like growth factor-1.

Arufe MC(1), Lu M, Lin RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Box 1055, One Gustave 
L. Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The mechanisms controlling thyrocyte development during embryonic stem (ES) cell 
differentiation have only been partially elucidated, although previous studies
have suggested the participation of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) in these
processes. To further define the role of TSH in this context, we have studied a
murine ES cell line in which green fluorescent protein (GFP) cDNA is targeted to 
the TSH receptor (TSHR) gene, linking the expression of GFP to the transcription 
of the endogenous TSHR gene. We demonstrate that, in the initial stages of
embryoid body formation, activin A and TSH induce the differentiation of
definitive endoderm and thyrocyte progenitors expressing Sox17, Foxa2, and TSHR. 
These thyrocyte progenitors are then converted into cellular aggregates that, in 
the presence of insulin and IGF-1, further differentiate into mature
thyroglobulin-expressing thyrocytes. Our data suggest that, despite the fact that
TSH is important for the induction and specification of thyrocytes from ES cells,
insulin and IGF-1 are crucial for thyrocyte maturation. Our method provides a
powerful in vitro differentiation model for studying the mechanisms of early
thyrocyte lineage development.

PMCID: PMC2661622
PMID: 19232325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Tissue Eng Part A. 2009 Aug;15(8):2051-63. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2008.0455.

Expansion and differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to endoderm progeny
in a microcarrier stirred-suspension culture.

Lock LT(1), Tzanakakis ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, State University of New
York at Buffalo, Buffalo, New York 14260, USA.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) with their abilities for extensive proliferation and 
multi-lineage differentiation can serve as a renewable source of cellular
material in regenerative medicine. However, the development of processes for
large-scale generation of human ESCs (hESCs) or their progeny will be necessary
before hESC-based therapies become a reality. We hypothesized that microcarrier
stirred-suspension bioreactors characterized by scalability, straightforward
operation, and tight control of the culture environment can be used for hESC
culture and directed differentiation. Under appropriate conditions, the
concentration of hESCs cultured in a microcarrier bioreactor increased 34- to
45-fold over 8 days. The cells retained the expression of pluripotency markers
such as OCT3/4A, NANOG, and SSEA4, as assessed by quantitative PCR,
immunocytochemistry, and flow cytometry. We further hypothesized that hESCs on
microcarriers can be induced to definitive endoderm (DE) when incubated with
physiologically relevant factors. In contrast to embryoid body cultures, all
hESCs on microcarriers are exposed to soluble stimuli in the bulk medium
facilitating efficient transition to DE. After reaching a peak concentration,
hESCs in microcarrier cultures were incubated in medium containing activin A,
Wnt3a, and low concentration of serum. More than 80% of differentiated hESCs
coexpressed FOXA2 and SOX17 in addition to other DE markers, whereas the
expression of non-DE genes was either absent or minimal. We also demonstrate that
the hESC-to-DE induction in microcarrier cultures is scalable. Our findings
support the use of microcarrier bioreactors for the generation of endoderm
progeny from hESCs including pancreatic islets and liver cells in therapeutically
useful quantities.

PMCID: PMC2811059
PMID: 19196140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2009 Oct;41(4):459-66. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2008-0195OC. 
Epub 2009 Jan 23.

Chronic intermittent mechanical stress increases MUC5AC protein expression.

Park JA(1), Tschumperlin DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Integrative Physiological Sciences Program, Harvard School of
Public Health, 665 Huntington Ave., SPH1-309, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Increased abundance of mucin secretory cells is a characteristic feature of the
epithelium in asthma and other chronic airway diseases. We showed previously that
the mechanical stresses of airway constriction, both in the intact mouse lung and
a cell culture model, activate the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a
known modulator of mucin expression in airway epithelial cells. Here we tested
whether chronic, intermittent, short-duration compressive stress (30 cm H(2)O) is
sufficient to increase the abundance of MUC5AC-positive cells and intracellular
mucin levels in human bronchial epithelial cells cultured at an air-liquid
interface. Compressive stress applied for 1 hour per day for 14 days
significantly increased the percentage of cells staining positively for MUC5AC
protein (22.0 +/- 3.8%, mean +/- SD) relative to unstimulated controls (8.6 +/-
2.6%), and similarly changed intracellular MUC5AC protein levels measured by
Western and slot blotting. The effect of compressive stress was gradual, with
significant changes in MUC5AC-positive cell numbers evident by Day 7, but
required as little as 10 minutes of compressive stress daily. Daily treatment of 
cells with an EGFR kinase inhibitor (AG1478, 1 muM) significantly but
incompletely attenuated the response to compressive stress. Complete attenuation 
could be accomplished by simultaneous treatment with the combination of AG1478
and a transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta(2) (1 microg/ml)-neutralizing
antibody, or with anti-TGF-beta(2) alone. Our findings demonstrate that short
duration episodes of mechanical stress, representative of those occurring during 
bronchoconstriction, are sufficient to increase goblet cell number and MUC5AC
protein expression in bronchial epithelial cells in vitro. We propose that the
mechanical environment present in asthma may fundamentally bias the composition
of airway epithelial lining in favor of mucin secretory cells.

PMCID: PMC2746990
PMID: 19168703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Biomaterials. 2009 May;30(13):2507-15. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2009.01.007.
Epub 2009 Jan 21.

Homogeneous and organized differentiation within embryoid bodies induced by
microsphere-mediated delivery of small molecules.

Carpenedo RL(1), Bratt-Leal AM, Marklein RA, Seaman SA, Bowen NJ, McDonald JF,
McDevitt TC.

Author information: 
(1)The Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute
of Technology/Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30332-0535, USA.

Cell specification and tissue formation during embryonic development are
precisely controlled by the local concentration and temporal presentation of
morphogenic factors. Similarly, pluripotent embryonic stem cells can be induced
to differentiate in vitro into specific phenotypes in response to morphogen
treatment. Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are commonly differentiated as 3D
spheroids referred to as embryoid bodies (EBs); however, differentiation of cells
within EBs is typically heterogeneous and disordered. In this study, we
demonstrate that in contrast to soluble morphogen treatment, delivery of
morphogenic factors directly within EB microenvironments in a spatiotemporally
controlled manner using polymer microspheres yields homogeneous, synchronous and 
organized ESC differentiation. Degradable PLGA microspheres releasing retinoic
acid were incorporated directly within EBs and induced the formation of cystic
spheroids uniquely resembling the phenotype and structure of early streak mouse
embryos (E6.75), with an exterior of FOXA2+ visceral endoderm enveloping an
epiblast-like layer of OCT4+ cells. These results demonstrate that controlled
morphogen presentation to stem cells using degradable microspheres more
efficiently directs cell differentiation and tissue formation than simple soluble
delivery methods and presents a unique route to study the spatiotemporal effects 
of morphogenic factors on embryonic developmental processes in vitro.

PMCID: PMC2921510
PMID: 19162317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Genes Dev. 2008 Dec 15;22(24):3435-48. doi: 10.1101/gad.1752608.

Dynamic regulation of Pdx1 enhancers by Foxa1 and Foxa2 is essential for pancreas
development.

Gao N(1), LeLay J, Vatamaniuk MZ, Rieck S, Friedman JR, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

The onset of pancreas development in the foregut endoderm is marked by activation
of the homeobox gene Pdx1 (IPF1). Pdx1 is essential for the expansion of the
pancreatic primordium and the development of endocrine islets. The control of
Pdx1 expression has been only partially elucidated. We demonstrate here that the 
winged-helix transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 co-occupy multiple regulatory 
domains in the Pdx1 gene. Compound conditional ablation of both Foxa1 and Foxa2
in the pancreatic primordium results in complete loss of Pdx1 expression and
severe pancreatic hypoplasia. Mutant mice exhibit hyperglycemia with severely
disrupted acinar and islet development, and die shortly after birth. Assessment
of developmental markers in the mutant pancreas revealed a failure in the
expansion of the pancreatic anlage, a blockage of exocrine and endocrine cell
differentiation, and an arrest at the primitive duct stage. Comparing their
relative developmental activity, we find that Foxa2 is the major regulator in
promoting pancreas development and cell differentiation. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitations (ChIP) and ChIP sequencing (ChIPSeq) of fetal pancreas and
islet chromatin, we demonstrate that Foxa1 and Foxa2 predominantly occupy a
distal enhancer at -6.4 kb relative to the transcriptional start site in the Pdx1
gene. In addition, occupancy of the well-characterized proximal Pdx1 enhancer by 
Foxa1 and Foxa2 is developmental stage-dependent. Thus, the regulation of Pdx1
expression by Foxa1 and Foxa2 is a key early event controlling the expansion and 
differentiation of the pancreatic primordia.

PMCID: PMC2607077
PMID: 19141476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Nat Neurosci. 2009 Feb;12(2):125-31. doi: 10.1038/nn.2243. Epub 2009 Jan 4.

Wnt antagonism of Shh facilitates midbrain floor plate neurogenesis.

Joksimovic M(1), Yun BA, Kittappa R, Anderegg AM, Chang WW, Taketo MM, McKay RD, 
Awatramani RB.

Author information: 
(1)Northwestern University Feinberg Medical School, Department of Neurology and
Center for Genetic Medicine, 7-113 Lurie Bldg, 303 E Superior Street, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2009 Feb;12(2):107-8.

The floor plate, an essential ventral midline organizing center that produces the
morphogen Shh, has distinct properties along the neuraxis. The neurogenic
potential of the floor plate and its underlying mechanisms remain unknown. Using 
Shh as a driver for lineage analysis, we found that the mouse midbrain, but not
the hindbrain, floor plate is neurogenic, giving rise to dopamine (DA) neurons.
Distinct spatiotemporal Shh and Wnt expression may distinguish the neurogenetic
potential of these structures. We discovered an inhibitory role for Shh: removal 
of Shh resulted in neurogenesis from the hindbrain midline and, conversely, high 
doses of Shh inhibited proliferation and DA neuron production in midbrain
cultures. We found that Wnt/beta-catenin signaling is necessary and sufficient
for antagonizing Shh, DA progenitor marker induction and promotion of
dopaminergic neurogenesis. These findings demonstrate how the dynamic interplay
of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and Shh may orchestrate floor plate
neurogenesis or a lack thereof.

PMID: 19122665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Mol Med (Berl). 2009 Mar;87(3):299-306. doi: 10.1007/s00109-008-0425-0. Epub
2008 Dec 11.

Transcriptional co-activator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR)gamma co-activator-1beta is involved in the regulation of
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in INS-1E cells.

Oberkofler H(1), Hafner M, Felder T, Krempler F, Patsch W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Landeskliniken and Paracelsus Private
Medical University Salzburg, Müllner Hauptstr., Austria. h.oberkofler@salk.at

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma co-activator-1 (PGC-1) alpha and
-beta play pivotal roles in the regulation of intermediary metabolism. We have
previously shown that PGC-1alpha-mediated upregulation of beta-cell sterol
element binding protein (SREBP) gene expression impairs insulin secretion via
increased transcription of uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2). PGC-1beta, in contrast to
PGC-1alpha, directly binds to and acts as a co-activator of SREBPs and the
forkhead transcription factor 2A (FOXA2) involved in pancreas development and
function. To address a possible role of PGC-1beta in beta-cell function, we
determined islet gene expression levels of PGC-1alpha, PGC-1beta, SREBPs, FOXA2, 
FOXO1, UCP2 as well as granuphilin, a critical component of the insulin secretory
machinery, in Zucker diabetic fatty rats (ZDF). In comparison to controls, mRNA
levels of all genes studied except for FOXA2 and FOXO1 were increased in islets
of obese, fa/fa ZDF rats. The transcriptional activities of the UCP2 and
granuphilin promoters were assessed in INS-1E cells in response to PGC-1beta
overexpression and small interference RNA (siRNA)-mediated gene silencing.
PGC-1beta as well as SREBP-1c and -2 increased transcription from the UCP2
promoter in INS-1E cells. Transient transfection of PGC-1beta-specific siRNAs
significantly decreased SREBP-2-mediated transcriptional activation of the UCP2
gene. Furthermore PGC-1beta, SREBP-1c, and FOXA2 overexpression augmented
granuphilin promoter activity, whereas siRNA-mediated gene knockdown of PGC-1beta
reduced the effects of SREBP-1c and FOXA2 on granuphilin gene transcription and
significantly increased glucose-stimulated insulin release from INS-1E cells. Our
results support a role of PGC-1beta in the regulation of insulin secretion via
upregulation of UCP2 and granuphilin gene expression.

PMID: 19082571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Curr Opin Pulm Med. 2009 Jan;15(1):4-11. doi: 10.1097/MCP.0b013e32831da8d3.

Mucus hypersecretion in asthma: causes and effects.

Evans CM(1), Kim K, Tuvim MJ, Dickey BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030-1402, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Airway mucus plugging has long been recognized as a principal 
cause of death in asthma. However, molecular mechanisms of mucin overproduction
and secretion have not been understood until recently. These mechanisms are
reviewed together with ongoing investigations relating them to lung
pathophysiology.
RECENT FINDINGS: Of the five secreted gel-forming mucins in mammals, only MUC5AC 
and MUC5B are produced in significant quantities in intrapulmonary airways. MUC5B
is the principal gel-forming mucin at baseline in small airways of humans and
mice, and therefore likely performs most homeostatic clearance functions. MUC5AC 
is the principal gel-forming mucin upregulated in airway inflammation and is
under negative control by forkhead box a2 (Foxa2) and positive control by hypoxia
inducible factor-1 (HIF-1). Mucin secretion is regulated separately from
production, principally by extracellular triphosphate nucleotides that bind P2Y2 
receptors on the lumenal surface of airway secretory cells, generating
intracellular second messengers that activate the exocytic proteins, Munc13-2 and
synaptotagmin-2.
SUMMARY: Markedly upregulated production of MUC5AC together with stimulated
secretion leads to airflow obstruction in asthma. As MUC5B appears to mediate
homeostatic functions, it may be possible to selectively inhibit MUC5AC
production without impairing airway function. The precise roles of mucin
hypersecretion in asthma symptoms such as dyspnea and cough and in physiologic
phenomena such as airway hyperresponsiveness remain to be defined.

PMCID: PMC2709596
PMID: 19077699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Stem Cells. 2009 Feb;27(2):363-74. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-1008.

Enforced expression of Mixl1 during mouse ES cell differentiation suppresses
hematopoietic mesoderm and promotes endoderm formation.

Lim SM(1), Pereira L, Wong MS, Hirst CE, Van Vranken BE, Pick M, Trounson A,
Elefanty AG, Stanley EG.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Immunology and Stem Cell Laboratories, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

The Mixl1 gene encodes a homeodomain transcription factor that is required for
normal mesoderm and endoderm development in the mouse. We have examined the
consequences of enforced Mixl1 expression during mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC) 
differentiation. We show that three independently derived ESC lines
constitutively expressing Mixl1 (Mixl1(C) ESCs) differentiate into embryoid
bodies (EBs) containing a higher proportion of E-cadherin (E-Cad)(+) cells. Our
analysis also shows that this differentiation occurs at the expense of
hematopoietic mesoderm differentiation, with Mixl1(C) ESCs expressing only low
levels of Flk1 and failing to develop hemoglobinized cells. Immunohistochemistry 
and immunofluorescence studies revealed that Mixl1(C) EBs have extensive areas
containing cells with an epithelial morphology that express E-Cad, FoxA2, and
Sox17, consistent with enhanced endoderm formation. Luciferase reporter
transfection experiments indicate that Mixl1 can transactivate the Gsc, Sox17,
and E-Cad promoters, supporting the hypothesis that Mixl1 has a direct role in
definitive endoderm formation. Taken together, these studies suggest that high
levels of Mixl1 preferentially allocate cells to the endoderm during ESC
differentiation.

PMID: 19038793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. DNA Res. 2009 Feb;16(1):45-58. doi: 10.1093/dnares/dsn030. Epub 2008 Nov 11.

Database for mRNA half-life of 19 977 genes obtained by DNA microarray analysis
of pluripotent and differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells.

Sharova LV(1), Sharov AA, Nedorezov T, Piao Y, Shaik N, Ko MS.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genomics and Aging Section, Laboratory of Genetics, National
Institute on Aging, NIH, 251 Bayview Boulevard, Suite 100, Baltimore, MD 21224,
USA.

Degradation of mRNA is one of the key processes that control the steady-state
level of gene expression. However, the rate of mRNA decay for the majority of
genes is not known. We successfully obtained the rate of mRNA decay for 19 977
non-redundant genes by microarray analysis of RNA samples obtained from mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells. Median estimated half-life was 7.1 h and only <100
genes, including Prdm1, Myc, Gadd45 g, Foxa2, Hes5 and Trib1, showed half-life
less than 1 h. In general, mRNA species with short half-life were enriched among 
genes with regulatory functions (transcription factors), whereas mRNA species
with long half-life were enriched among genes related to metabolism and structure
(extracellular matrix, cytoskeleton). The stability of mRNAs correlated more
significantly with the structural features of genes than the function of genes:
mRNA stability showed the most significant positive correlation with the number
of exon junctions per open reading frame length, and negative correlation with
the presence of PUF-binding motifs and AU-rich elements in 3'-untranslated region
(UTR) and CpG di-nucleotides in the 5'-UTR. The mRNA decay rates presented in
this report are the largest data set for mammals and the first for ES cells.

PMCID: PMC2644350
PMID: 19001483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Prostate. 2009 Feb 15;69(3):249-62. doi: 10.1002/pros.20877.

Activation of beta-Catenin in mouse prostate causes HGPIN and continuous prostate
growth after castration.

Yu X(1), Wang Y, Jiang M, Bierie B, Roy-Burman P, Shen MM, Taketo MM, Wills M,
Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

BACKGROUND: The role of Wnt/beta-Catenin signaling in embryogenesis and
carcinogenesis has been extensively studied in organs such as colon, lung and
pancreas, but little is known about Wnt/beta-Catenin signaling in the prostate.
Although stabilizing mutations in APC and beta-Catenin are rare in primary
prostate tumors, recent studies suggest that cytoplasmic/nuclear beta-Catenin is 
associated with advanced, metastatic, hormone-refractory prostate carcinoma.
METHODS: To better understand the role of beta-Catenin in prostatic development
and carcinogenesis, we studied Wnt expression during prostate development and
activated Wnt/beta-Catenin signaling in the developing and adult prostate.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that during prostate development Wnt ligands
display a dynamic expression pattern. Activation of beta-Catenin during prostate 
development caused epithelial hyperplasia followed by prostatic intraepithelial
neoplasia (PIN) in prostate. In the adult prostate, activation of beta-Catenin
resulted in high grade PIN (HGPIN) and continuous prostatic growth after
castration. As a result of activation of beta-Catenin, AR was first up-regulated 
with the emergence of epithelial hyperplasia, but was later down-regulated when
HGPIN developed. Furthermore, activation of beta-Catenin induced Foxa2
re-expression in adult prostate which normally is only expressed in the embryonic
budding stage during prostate development.
CONCLUSIONS: The results from this study strongly suggest that Wnt/beta-Catenin
signaling is involved in the regulation of prostate development and confirm that 
constitutive activation of this pathway enables the mouse prostate to grow after 
castration.

PMCID: PMC4437562
PMID: 18991257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Diabetes. 2009 Feb;58(2):489-92. doi: 10.2337/db08-0587. Epub 2008 Nov 4.

A single-nucleotide polymorphism in a methylatable Foxa2 binding site of the
G6PC2 promoter is associated with insulin secretion in vivo and increased
promoter activity in vitro.

Dos Santos C(1), Bougnères P, Fradin D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and U561 Institut National de Santé et
de Recherche Médicale, Hôpital Saint-Vincent de Paul, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: The G6PC2 gene encoding islet-specific glucose-6-phosphatase related
protein (IGRP) has a common promoter variant, rs573225 (-231G/A), located within 
a Foxa binding site. We tested the cis-regulatory effects of rs573225 on promoter
activity and its association with insulin response to oral glucose.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Functional effects of rs573225 were explored in
transfected INS-1 and HIT-T beta-cell lines. A total of 734 young obese subjects 
of European ancestry were genotyped for rs573225. Insulin and glucose levels were
measured in response to oral glucose, and the insulinogenic index (IGI) of
insulin secretion was calculated.
RESULTS: In vitro, the G allele showed a higher affinity for binding Foxa2
transcription factor and increased G6PC2 promoter activity. Foxa2 binding is
modified if the C adjacent to the G allele is methylated. IGI was associated with
rs573225 by linear regression analysis and was 30% greater in AA or AG than in GG
obese children. rs573225 was also associated with fasting glucose.
CONCLUSIONS: rs573225 is a functional cis-regulatory (epi)-single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) of G6PC2 associated with glucose-insulin homeostasis in obese 
children, likely to explain the results of recent genome-wide association studies
in nondiabetic adults.

PMCID: PMC2628624
PMID: 18984742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. BMC Genomics. 2008 Oct 30;9:511. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-9-511.

Microarray analysis of Foxa2 mutant mouse embryos reveals novel gene expression
and inductive roles for the gastrula organizer and its derivatives.

Tamplin OJ(1), Kinzel D, Cox BJ, Bell CE, Rossant J, Lickert H.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Research Institute, The
Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, M5G 1X8,
Canada. owen.tamplin@utoronto.ca

BACKGROUND: The Spemann/Mangold organizer is a transient tissue critical for
patterning the gastrula stage vertebrate embryo and formation of the three germ
layers. Despite its important role during development, there are still relatively
few genes with specific expression in the organizer and its derivatives. Foxa2 is
a forkhead transcription factor that is absolutely required for formation of the 
mammalian equivalent of the organizer, the node, the axial mesoderm and the
definitive endoderm (DE). However, the targets of Foxa2 during embryogenesis, and
the molecular impact of organizer loss on the gastrula embryo, have not been well
defined.
RESULTS: To identify genes specific to the Spemann/Mangold organizer, we
performed a microarray-based screen that compared wild-type and Foxa2 mutant
embryos at late gastrulation stage (E7.5). We could detect genes that were
consistently down-regulated in replicate pools of mutant embryos versus
wild-type, and these included a number of known node and DE markers. We selected 
314 genes without previously published data at E7.5 and screened for expression
by whole mount in situ hybridization. We identified 10 novel expression patterns 
in the node and 5 in the definitive endoderm. We also found significant reduction
of markers expressed in secondary tissues that require interaction with the
organizer and its derivatives, such as cardiac mesoderm, vasculature, primitive
streak, and anterior neuroectoderm.
CONCLUSION: The genes identified in this screen represent novel Spemann/Mangold
organizer genes as well as potential Foxa2 targets. Further investigation will be
needed to define these genes as novel developmental regulatory factors involved
in organizer formation and function. We have placed these genes in a
Foxa2-dependent genetic regulatory network and we hypothesize how Foxa2 may
regulate a molecular program of Spemann/Mangold organizer development. We have
also shown how early loss of the organizer and its inductive properties in an
otherwise normal embryo, impacts on the molecular profile of surrounding tissues.

PMCID: PMC2605479
PMID: 18973680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Dec;36(21):6795-805. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn752. Epub 2008
Oct 25.

Positional distribution of human transcription factor binding sites.

Koudritsky M(1), Domany E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, Israel.

We developed a method for estimating the positional distribution of transcription
factor (TF) binding sites using ChIP-chip data, and applied it to recently
published experiments on binding sites of nine TFs: OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, HNF1A,
HNF4A, HNF6, FOXA2, USF1 and CREB1. The data were obtained from a genome-wide
coverage of promoter regions from 8-kb upstream of the transcription start site
(TSS) to 2-kb downstream. The number of target genes of each TF ranges from few
hundred to several thousand. We found that for each of the nine TFs the estimated
binding site distribution is closely approximated by a mixture of two components:
a narrow peak, localized within 300-bp upstream of the TSS, and a distribution of
almost uniform density within the tested region. Using Gene Ontology (GO) and
Enrichment analysis, we were able to associate (for each of the TFs studied) the 
target genes of both types of binding with known biological processes. Most GO
terms were enriched either among the proximal targets or among those with a
uniform distribution of binding sites. For example, the three stemness-related
TFs have several hundred target genes that belong to 'development' and
'morphogenesis' whose binding sites belong to the uniform distribution.

PMCID: PMC2588498
PMID: 18953043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biochem J. 2009 Jan 15;417(2):611-20. doi: 10.1042/BJ20080999.

Insulin and epidermal growth factor suppress basal glucose-6-phosphatase
catalytic subunit gene transcription through overlapping but distinct mechanisms.

Onuma H(1), Oeser JK, Nelson BA, Wang Y, Flemming BP, Scheving LA, Russell WE,
O'Brien RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, TN 37232, U.S.A.

The G6Pase (glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit) catalyses the final step in 
the gluconeogenic and glycogenolytic pathways, the hydrolysis of
glucose-6-phosphate to glucose. We show here that, in HepG2 hepatoma cells, EGF
(epidermal growth factor) inhibits basal mouse G6Pase fusion gene transcription. 
Several studies have shown that insulin represses basal mouse G6Pase fusion gene 
transcription through FOXO1 (forkhead box O1), but Stoffel and colleagues have
recently suggested that insulin can also regulate gene transcription through
FOXA2 (forkhead box A2) [Wolfrum, Asilmaz, Luca, Friedman and Stoffel (2003)
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 100, 11624-11629]. A combined GR (glucocorticoid
receptor)-FOXA2 binding site is located between -185 and -174 in the mouse G6Pase
promoter overlapping two FOXO1 binding sites located between (-188 and -182) and 
(-174 and -168). Selective mutation of the FOXO1 binding sites reduced the effect
of insulin, whereas mutation of the GR/FOXA2 binding site had no effect on the
insulin response. In contrast, selective mutation of the FOXO1 and GR/FOXA2
binding sites both reduced the effect of EGF. The effect of these mutations was
additive, since the combined mutation of both FOXO1 and GR/FOXA2 binding sites
reduced the effect of EGF to a greater extent than the individual mutations.
These results suggest that, in HepG2 cells, GR and/or FOXA2 are required for the 
inhibition of basal G6Pase gene transcription by EGF but not insulin. EGF also
inhibits hepatic G6Pase gene expression in vivo, but in cultured hepatocytes EGF 
has the opposite effect of stimulating expression, an observation that may be
explained by a switch in ErbB receptor sub-type expression following hepatocyte
isolation.

PMCID: PMC2929524
PMID: 18847435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cell Metab. 2008 Oct;8(4):276-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2008.09.009.

Welcoming Foxa2 in the bile acid entourage.

Moschetta A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Clinica Medica Murri, University of Bari & Department of Translational
Pharmacology, Consorzio Mario Negri Sud, Via Nazionale 8/A, 66030 Santa Maria
Imbaro (CH), Italy. moschetta@negrisud.it

Homeostatic regulation of bile acid metabolism and biliary lipid secretion is
critical to prevent enterohepatic diseases. Kaestner and coworkers (Bochkis et
al., 2008) show that loss of forkhead box transcription factor Foxa2 in the liver
leads to hepatic injury due to downregulation in the expression levels of bile
acid transporters and detoxification enzymes.

PMID: 18840356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. In Vitro Cell Dev Biol Anim. 2009 Jan-Feb;45(1-2):44-54. doi:
10.1007/s11626-008-9149-2. Epub 2008 Oct 2.

Culture of endodermal stem/progenitor cells of the mouse tongue.

Luo X(1), Okubo T, Randell S, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3709, Durham, 
NC 27710, USA.

The tongue represents a very accessible source of tissue-specific epithelial stem
cells of endodermal origin. However, little is known about the properties of
these cells and the mechanisms regulating their proliferation and
differentiation. Foxa2, an endodermal marker, is expressed throughout the tongue 
epithelium during embryonic development but becomes confined to a minority of
basal cells and some taste bud sensory cells in the adult tongue. Using a
previously described line of transgenic mice in which enhanced green fluorescent 
protein (eGFP) is expressed under the control of a human keratin 5 promoter
region (Krt5-eGFP), we have isolated a subpopulation of cells in the basal
epithelial layer of the mouse tongue with a high efficiency of generating
holoclones of undifferentiated cells in culture with a feeder layer. Krt5-GFP(hi)
cells can both self renew and give rise to differentiated stratified keratinized 
epithelial cells when cultured on an air-liquid interface.

PMID: 18830772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Int J Oncol. 2008 Oct;33(4):881-6.

Integrative genomic analyses on GLI2: mechanism of Hedgehog priming through basal
GLI2 expression, and interaction map of stem cell signaling network with P53.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh-kkr@umin.ac.jp

Hedgehog-binding to Patched family receptors results in Smoothened-mediated
activation of MAP3K10 (MST) and inactivation of SUFU. MAP3K10-induced DYRK2
phosphorylation combined with SUFU inhibition results in the stabilization and
nuclear accumulation of GLI2 for transcriptional activation of GLI1, CCND1,
CCND2, FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXP3, FOXQ1, RUNX2, and JAG2. Here, integrative genomic
analyses on GLI2 orthologs were carried out. Rat Gli2 complete coding sequence
was determined by assembling nucleotide sequences of exons 1, 2, and 5'-truncated
rat Gli2 RefSeq (NM_001107169.1). GLI2 orthologs were more related to GLI3
orthologs than to GLI1 orthologs lacking the N-terminal repressor domain.
betaTRCP1 (FBXW1)-binding DSYxxxS motif was conserved in GLI2 and GLI3 orthologs,
while betaTRCP2 (FBXW11)-binding DSGxxxxxxxxxS motif in GLI2 and GLI1 orthologs. 
Human GLI2 mRNA was expressed in ES cells, NT2 cells, fetal lung, fetal heart,
regenerating liver, gastric cancer, and other tumors. Mouse Gli2 mRNA was
expressed in unfertilized egg, ES cells, and EG cells. Tandem RRRCWWGYYY motifs
for P53, P63 or P73, and also four conserved bHLH-binding sites were identified
within GLI2 proximal promoter region. Interaction map of P53 and stem cell
signaling network were then constructed. P53-induced NOTCH1 upregulation leads to
HES1, HES5, HEY1, HEY2 or HEYL upregulation for the repression of tissue specific
bHLH transcriptional activators. DYRK2 functions as a positive regulator of
P53-mediated apoptosis, and also as a negative regulator of the Hedgehog
signaling cascade. GLI2 expression is regulated based on the balance of P53,
Notch, and TGF-beta signaling, and Hedgehog signaling activation results in cell 
survival and proliferation due to transcriptional activation of Hedgehog-target
genes, and also partly due to perturbation of P53-mediated transcriptional
regulation.

PMID: 18813803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. FASEB J. 2009 Jan;23(1):114-22. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-111203. Epub 2008 Sep 22.

Directed induction of anterior and posterior primitive streak by Wnt from
embryonic stem cells cultured in a chemically defined serum-free medium.

Nakanishi M(1), Kurisaki A, Hayashi Y, Warashina M, Ishiura S, Kusuda-Furue M,
Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences (Biology), Graduate School of Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1, Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8902, Japan.

Formation of the primitive streak (PS) is the initial specification step that
generates all the mesodermal and endodermal tissue lineages during early
differentiation. Thus, a therapeutically compatible and efficient method for
differentiation of the PS is crucial for regenerative medicine. In this study, we
developed chemically defined serum-free culture conditions for the
differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells into the PS-like cells. Cultures
supplemented with Wnt showed induction of expression of a PS marker, the
brachyury gene, followed by induction of the anterior PS markers goosecoid and
foxa2, a posterior PS marker, evx1, and the endoderm marker sox17. Similar
differentiation of PS by Wnt was also observed in human ES cells. Moreover, we
revealed that the activation of the Wnt canonical pathway is essential for PS
differentiation in mouse ES cells. These results demonstrated that Wnt is an
essential and sufficient factor for the induction of the PS-like cells in vitro. 
These conditions of induction could constitute the initial step in generating
therapeutically useful cells of the definitive endoderm lineage, such as
hepatocytes and pancreatic endocrine cells, under chemically defined conditions.

PMID: 18809738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Genesis. 2008 Oct;46(10):515-22. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20410.

A mouse line expressing Foxa2-driven Cre recombinase in node, notochord,
floorplate, and endoderm.

Uetzmann L(1), Burtscher I, Lickert H.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz Zentrum München, Institute of Stem Cell Research, Ingolstädter
Landstrasse 1, Neuherberg, Germany.

Foxa2 is a forkhead transcription factor expressed in the node, notochord,
floorplate, and definitive endoderm and is required in the foregut endoderm for
the normal development of the endoderm-derived organs, such as the liver, lung
and pancreas. To conditionally inactivate genes in these tissues and organs, we
have targeted a Cre recombinase into Exon 1 of the Foxa2 gene. We show, upon
crossing to the ROSA26 reporter mice, that Cre expression from the Foxa2(iCre)
knock-in allele specifically activates beta-galactosidase expression in the node,
notochord, floorplate, and endoderm. In addition, we detect Cre recombination
activity in the endoderm-derived organs including lung, liver, pancreas, and
gastrointestinal tract throughout development. These results demonstrate that the
Foxa2(iCre) knock-in mice are a valuable tool to analyze gene function in
endoderm progenitors and endoderm-derived organs. Moreover, the widespread
beta-galactosidase reporter activity in the endoderm suggests that Foxa2 marks a 
progenitor cell population, which gives rise to the majority of cells in
endoderm-derived organs.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18798232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Hum Genet. 2008;53(11-12):957-65. doi: 10.1007/s10038-008-0335-6. Epub 2008 Sep
17.

Genetic variants of FOXA2: risk of type 2 diabetes and effect on metabolic traits
in North Indians.

Tabassum R(1), Chavali S, Dwivedi OP, Tandon N, Bharadwaj D.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, CSIR,
Mall Road, Delhi 110 007, India.

Here, we examined the association of genetic variants of FOXA2, an upstream
activator of the beta-cell transcription factor network, with type 2 diabetes and
related phenotypes in North India. We genotyped three SNPs (rs1212275, rs1055080,
rs6048205) and the (TCC)( n ) repeat polymorphism in 1,656 participants
comprising 1,031 patients with type 2 diabetes and 625 controls. SNPs rs1212275
and rs6048205 were uncommon (MAF < 5%) with similar distribution among patients
and controls. We found a strong association of (TCC)( n ) common allele A5 with
type 2 diabetes [OR = 1.66 (95% CI 1.36-2.04, p = 5.9 x 10(-7)) for A5
homozygotes]. Obese individuals with A5A5 genotype had enhanced risk when
segregated from normal-weight subjects [OR = 1.92 (95% CI 1.47-2.51), p = 1.6 x
10(-6)]. A5 was also nominally associated with higher fasting glucose (p = 0.02) 
and lower fasting insulin (p = 0.0028) and C-peptide (p = 0.036) levels among
controls. At the rs1055080 locus, GG was found to provide reduced risk among
normal-weight subjects [OR = 0.59 (95% CI 0.40-0.88), p = 0.011]. Combination of 
protective GG and non-risk genotypes of (TCC)( n ) showed reduced risk of type 2 
diabetes both among normal-weight [OR = 0.43 (95% CI 0.29-0.65), p = 1.2 x
10(-6)] and obese individuals [0.47 (95% CI 0.34-0.64), p = 4.3 x 10(-5)]. For
the first time we demonstrated that FOXA2 variants may affect risk of type 2
diabetes and metabolic traits in North India, however replication analyses in
other cohorts are required to confirm the findings.

PMID: 18797817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Genome Res. 2008 Dec;18(12):1906-17. doi: 10.1101/gr.078519.108. Epub 2008 Sep
11.

Genome-wide relationship between histone H3 lysine 4 mono- and tri-methylation
and transcription factor binding.

Robertson AG(1), Bilenky M, Tam A, Zhao Y, Zeng T, Thiessen N, Cezard T, Fejes
AP, Wederell ED, Cullum R, Euskirchen G, Krzywinski M, Birol I, Snyder M,
Hoodless PA, Hirst M, Marra MA, Jones SJ.

Author information: 
(1)BC Cancer Agency Genome Sciences Centre, Vancouver, Canada.

We characterized the relationship of H3K4me1 and H3K4me3 at distal and proximal
regulatory elements by comparing ChIP-seq profiles for these histone
modifications and for two functionally different transcription factors: STAT1 in 
the immortalized HeLa S3 cell line, with and without interferon-gamma (IFNG)
stimulation; and FOXA2 in mouse adult liver tissue. In unstimulated and
stimulated HeLa cells, respectively, we determined approximately 270,000 and
approximately 301,000 H3K4me1-enriched regions, and approximately 54,500 and
approximately 76,100 H3K4me3-enriched regions. In mouse adult liver, we
determined approximately 227,000 and approximately 34,800 H3K4me1 and H3K4me3
regions. Seventy-five percent of the approximately 70,300 STAT1 binding sites in 
stimulated HeLa cells and 87% of the approximately 11,000 FOXA2 sites in mouse
liver were distal to known gene TSS; in both cell types, approximately 83% of
these distal sites were associated with at least one of the two histone
modifications, and H3K4me1 was associated with over 96% of marked distal sites.
After filtering against predicted transcription start sites, 50% of approximately
26,800 marked distal IFNG-stimulated STAT1 binding sites, but 95% of
approximately 5800 marked distal FOXA2 sites, were associated with H3K4me1 only. 
Results for HeLa cells generated additional insights into transcriptional
regulation involving STAT1. STAT1 binding was associated with 25% of all H3K4me1 
regions in stimulated HeLa cells, suggesting that a single transcription factor
can interact with an unexpectedly large fraction of regulatory regions.
Strikingly, for a large majority of the locations of stimulated STAT1 binding,
the dominant H3K4me1/me3 combinations were established before activation,
suggesting mechanisms independent of IFNG stimulation and high-affinity STAT1
binding.

PMCID: PMC2593584
PMID: 18787082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Nov;41(5):315-28. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0062. Epub 2008 Aug 
27.

Foxa2 and MafA regulate islet-specific glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic
subunit-related protein gene expression.

Martin CC(1), Flemming BP, Wang Y, Oeser JK, O'Brien RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, 8415 MRB IV, 2213 Garland Avenue, Nashville, Tennessee 37232,
USA.

Islet-specific glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit-related protein
(IGRP/G6PC2) is a major autoantigen in both mouse and human type 1 diabetes. IGRP
is selectively expressed in islet beta cells and polymorphisms in the IGRP gene
have recently been associated with variations in fasting blood glucose levels and
cardiovascular-associated mortality in humans. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays have shown that the IGRP promoter binds the islet-enriched
transcription factors Pax-6 and BETA2. We show here, again using ChIP assays,
that the IGRP promoter also binds the islet-enriched transcription factors MafA
and Foxa2. Single binding sites for these factors were identified in the proximal
IGRP promoter, mutation of which resulted in decreased IGRP fusion gene
expression in betaTC-3, Hamster insulinoma tumor (HIT), and Min6 cells. ChiP
assays have shown that the islet-enriched transcription factor Pdx-1 also binds
the IGRP promoter, but mutational analysis of four Pdx-1 binding sites in the
proximal IGRP promoter revealed surprisingly little effect of Pdx-1 binding on
IGRP fusion gene expression in betaTC-3 cells. In contrast, in both HIT and Min6 
cells mutation of these four Pdx-1 binding sites resulted in a approximately 50% 
reduction in fusion gene expression. These data suggest that the same group of
islet-enriched transcription factors, namely Pdx-1, Pax-6, MafA, BETA2, and
Foxa2, directly or indirectly regulate expression of the two major autoantigens
in type 1 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2614309
PMID: 18753309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Tissue Cell. 2009 Feb;41(1):79-84. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2008.06.005. Epub 2008 Aug
23.

The method of mouse embryoid body establishment affects structure and
developmental gene expression.

Mogi A(1), Ichikawa H, Matsumoto C, Hieda T, Tomotsune D, Sakaki S, Yamada S,
Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Organ Technology, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan. mogi@sch.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp

To investigate formation of the three primary germ layers in mouse embryoid
bodies (EBs), we observed changes in structure and gene expression over a 7-day
culture period. We compared these changes using two methods for EB formation:
hanging drop (HD) and static suspension culture (SSC). Light microscopy showed
that a stratified columnar epithelial layer developed on the surface of EBs
formed using the HD method. From Day 3 in culture, ultrastructural changes
occurred in the aligned cellular membranes. Condensation of actin filaments was
followed by formation of complicated adherent junctions and dilatation of
intercellular canaliculi containing well-developed microvilli. These changes were
more marked in EBs formed by the HD method than the SSC method. On Day 5 of
culture, Brachyury gene expression, a marker for mesoderm formation, was detected
only with the HD method. Nestin, an ectoderm marker, and Foxa2, an endoderm
marker, were expressed with both methods. These results suggest that in EBs
formed with the HD method, actin formation and Brachyury gene expression mark the
transition from two to three primary germ layers. Additionally, the HD method
promotes more rapid and complete development of mouse EBs than does the SSC
method. While the SSC method is simple and easy to use, it needs improvement to
form more complete EBs.

PMID: 18722634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Urol. 2008 Oct;180(4 Suppl):1784-9. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2008.03.098. Epub 2008 
Aug 21.

Temporal-spatial protein expression in bladder tissue derived from embryonic stem
cells.

Thomas JC(1), Oottamasathien S, Makari JH, Honea L, Sharif-Afshar AR, Wang Y,
Adams C, Wills ML, Bhowmick NA, Adams MC, Brock JW 3rd, Hayward SW, Matusik RJ,
Pope JC 4th.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Division
of Pediatric Urology, Monroe Carell Jr. Vanderbilt Children's Hospital,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA. john.thomas@vanderbilt.edu

PURPOSE: Identifying developmental proteins could lead to markers of bladder
progenitor cells, which could be used to investigate bladder diseases. We
recently reported a novel embryonic stem cell model in which to study
differential protein expression patterns during bladder development. Differential
and temporal expressions of the endodermal proteins known as forkhead box (Foxa1 
and Foxa2) were observed. In the current study we further delineated these
protein expression patterns.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Epithelium was removed from the underlying mesenchyma from
embryonic day 18 rat bladders. Heterospecific recombinant xenografts were created
by combining embryonic stem cells plus embryonic bladder mesenchyma and placed
beneath the renal capsule of mouse hosts. Grafts were harvested at 16, 18, 21,
28, 35 and 42 days, and evaluated with hematoxylin and eosin, trichrome staining,
and immunohistochemistry for uroplakin, smooth muscle alpha-actin, p63, Foxa1,
Foxa2 and androgen receptor.
RESULTS: At 16 days uroplakin was detectable and it seemed to correlate with the 
loss of Foxa2, while Foxa1 remained at all time points. Androgen receptor was
first noted in stroma at day 16. It localized to urothelial nuclei at day 21 and 
was undetectable at 42 days. Adjacent to the urothelium alpha-smooth muscle actin
was seen on day 16 and it was localized in bundles to the periphery of the graft 
at later time points. Staining for basilar urothelium with p63 confirmed basilar 
orientation at all time points.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the temporal spatial expression of various genes in early 
bladder development. This suggests that some proteins may be potential markers of
bladder progenitor cells. Characterizing these markers may potentially identify
bladder progenitor cells that have been directed toward a lineage path destined
to become urothelial cells. Ultimately these multipotential progenitor cells
could be isolated and used to study and treat diseases that affect the bladder.

PMID: 18721943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Int J Mol Med. 2008 Sep;22(3):271-5.

Hedgehog signaling, epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and miRNA (review).

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-003, Japan.

SHH, IHH, and DHH are lipid-modified secreted proteins binding to Patched
receptors, and CDON, BOC or GAS1 co-receptors. In the absence of Hedgehog
signaling, GLI1 is transcriptionally repressed, GLI2 is phosphorylated by GSK3
and CK1 for the FBXW11 (betaTRCP2)-mediated degradation, and GLI3 is processed to
a cleaved repressor. In the presence of Hedgehog signaling, Smoothened is
relieved from Patched-mediated suppression due to the Hedgehog-dependent
internalization of Patched, which leads to MAP3K10 (MST) activation and SUFU
inactivation for the stabilization and nuclear accumulation of GLI family
members. GLI activators then upregulate CCND1, CCND2 for cell cycle acceleration,
FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXF1, FOXL1, FOXP3, POU3F1, RUNX2, SOX13, TBX2 for cell
fate determination, JAG2, INHBC, and INHBE for stem cell signaling regulation.
Hedgehog signals also upregulate SFRP1 in mesenchymal cells for WNT signaling
regulation. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) during embryogenesis,
adult tissue homeostasis and carcinogenesis is characterized by class switch from
E-cadherin to N-cadherin. SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), SNAI3, ZEB1, ZEB2 (SIP1), 
KLF8, TWIST1, and TWIST2 are EMT regulators repressing CDH1 gene encoding
E-cadherin. Hedgehog signals induce JAG2 upregulation for Notch-CSL-mediated
SNAI1 upregulation, and also induce TGFbeta1 secretion for ZEB1 and ZEB2
upregulation via TGFbeta receptor and NF-kappaB. TGFbeta-mediated downregulation 
of miR-141, miR-200a, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-205, and miR-429 results in
upregulation of ZEB1 and ZEB2 proteins. Hedgehog signaling activation indirectly 
leads to EMT through FGF, Notch, TGFbeta signaling cascades, and miRNA regulatory
networks. miRNAs targeted to stem cell signaling components or EMT regulators are
potent drug targets; however, off-target effects should be strictly controlled
before clinical application of synthetic miRNA. Peptide mimetic and RNA aptamer
could also be utilized as Hedgehog signaling inhibitors or EMT suppressors.

PMID: 18698484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Br J Cancer. 2008 Sep 2;99(5):781-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6604544.

Induction of sodium iodide symporter gene and molecular characterisation of HNF3 
beta/FoxA2, TTF-1 and C/EBP beta in thyroid carcinoma cells.

Akagi T(1), Luong QT, Gui D, Said J, Selektar J, Yung A, Bunce CM, Braunstein GD,
Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai
Medical Center, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
tadayuki.akagi@gmail.com

Thyroid carcinoma cells often do not express thyroid-specific genes including
sodium iodide symporter (NIS), thyroperoxidase (TPO), thyroglobulin (TG), and
thyrotropin-stimulating hormone receptor (TSHR). Treatment of thyroid carcinoma
cells (four papillary and two anaplastic cell lines) with histone deacetylase
inhibitors (SAHA or VPA) modestly induced the expression of the NIS gene. The
promoter regions of the thyroid-specific genes contained binding sites for
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 beta (HNF3 beta)/forkhead box A2 (FoxA2), thyroid
transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP beta). 
Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) showed
decreased expression of HNF3 beta/FoxA2 and TTF-1 mRNA in papillary thyroid
carcinoma cell lines, when compared with normal thyroid cells. Forced expression 
of these genes in papillary thyroid carcinoma cells inhibited their growth.
Furthermore, the CpG island in the promoter region of HNF3 beta/FoxA2 was
aberrantly methylated; and treatment with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine (5-Az) induced
its expression. Immunohistochemical staining showed that C/EBP beta was localised
in the nucleus in normal thyroid cells but was detected in the cytoplasm in
papillary thyroid carcinoma cells. Subcellular fractionation of papillary thyroid
carcinoma cell lines also demonstrated high levels of expression of C/EBP beta in
the cytoplasm, suggesting that a large proportion of C/EBP beta protein is
inappropriately localised in the cytoplasm. In summary, these findings reveal
novel abnormalities in thyroid carcinoma cells.

PMCID: PMC2528161
PMID: 18682709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Nat Med. 2008 Aug;14(8):828-36. doi: 10.1038/nm.1853. Epub 2008 Jul 27.

Hepatocyte-specific ablation of Foxa2 alters bile acid homeostasis and results in
endoplasmic reticulum stress.

Bochkis IM(1), Rubins NE, White P, Furth EE, Friedman JR, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Production of bile by the liver is crucial for the absorption of lipophilic
nutrients. Dysregulation of bile acid homeostasis can lead to cholestatic liver
disease and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. We show by global location
analysis ('ChIP-on-chip') and cell type-specific gene ablation that the winged
helix transcription factor Foxa2 is required for normal bile acid homeostasis. As
suggested by the location analysis, deletion of Foxa2 in hepatocytes in mice
using the Cre-lox system leads to decreased transcription of genes encoding bile 
acid transporters on both the basolateral and canalicular membranes, resulting in
intrahepatic cholestasis. Foxa2-deficient mice are strikingly sensitive to a diet
containing cholic acid, which results in toxic accumulation of hepatic bile
salts, ER stress and liver injury. In addition, we show that expression of FOXA2 
is markedly decreased in liver samples from individuals with different
cholestatic syndromes, suggesting that reduced FOXA2 abundance could exacerbate
the injury.

PMCID: PMC4095974
PMID: 18660816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Aug;36(14):4549-64. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn382. Epub 2008
Jul 8.

Global analysis of in vivo Foxa2-binding sites in mouse adult liver using
massively parallel sequencing.

Wederell ED(1), Bilenky M, Cullum R, Thiessen N, Dagpinar M, Delaney A, Varhol R,
Zhao Y, Zeng T, Bernier B, Ingham M, Hirst M, Robertson G, Marra MA, Jones S,
Hoodless PA.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, Canada.

Foxa2 (HNF3 beta) is a one of three, closely related transcription factors that
are critical to the development and function of the mouse liver. We have used
chromatin immunoprecipitation and massively parallel Illumina 1G sequencing
(ChIP-Seq) to create a genome-wide profile of in vivo Foxa2-binding sites in the 
adult liver. More than 65% of the approximately 11.5 k genomic sites associated
with Foxa2 binding, mapped to extended gene regions of annotated genes, while
more than 30% of intragenic sites were located within first introns. 20.5% of all
sites were further than 50 kb from any annotated gene, suggesting an association 
with novel gene regions. QPCR analysis demonstrated a strong positive correlation
between peak height and fold enrichment for Foxa2-binding sites. We measured the 
relationship between Foxa2 and liver gene expression by overlapping Foxa2-binding
sites with a SAGE transcriptome profile, and found that 43.5% of genes expressed 
in the liver were also associated with Foxa2 binding. We also identified
potential Foxa2-interacting transcription factors whose motifs were enriched near
Foxa2-binding sites. Our comprehensive results for in vivo Foxa2-binding sites in
the mouse liver will contribute to resolving transcriptional regulatory networks 
that are important for adult liver function.

PMCID: PMC2504304
PMID: 18611952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jul;36(12):4149-57. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn366. Epub 2008
Jun 13.

Cis-regulatory modules in the mammalian liver: composition depends on strength of
Foxa2 consensus site.

Tuteja G(1), Jensen ST, White P, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Genomics and Computational Biology Graduate Group,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Foxa2 is a critical transcription factor that controls liver development and
plays an important role in hepatic gluconeogensis in adult mice. Here, we use
genome-wide location analysis for Foxa2 to identify its targets in the adult
liver. We then show by computational analyses that Foxa2 containing
cis-regulatory modules are not constructed from a random assortment of binding
sites for other transcription factors expressed in the liver, but rather that
their composition depends on the strength of the Foxa2 consensus site present.
Genes containing a cis-regulatory module with a medium or weak Foxa2 consensus
site are much more liver-specific than the genes with a strong consensus site. We
not only provide a better understanding of the mechanisms of Foxa2 regulation but
also introduce a novel method for identification of different cis-regulatory
modules involving a single factor.

PMCID: PMC2475634
PMID: 18556755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Jul 15;76(2):268-78. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2008.05.002. Epub
2008 May 7.

Differential regulation of human hepatic flavin containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3)
by CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBPbeta) liver inhibitory and liver
activating proteins.

Klick DE(1), Shadley JD, Hines RN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Pharmacology, Medical College of Wisconsin and
Children's Hospital and Health System, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) is important for oxidative xenobiotic
metabolism, but regulation of the FMO3 gene remains poorly understood. FMO3 is
not expressed in HepG2 cells, a commonly employed model for hepatic gene
regulation studies. Transcription factor transient expression and treatment with 
histone deacetylase or DNA methylase inhibitors identified decreased hepatic
nuclear factor (HNF) 4alpha levels and DNA hypermethylation as mechanisms
suppressing HepG2 FMO3 expression. The absence of major deficiencies in
transcriptional machinery suggested that within limits, the HepG2 model is
suitable for the study of FMO3 regulation. DNA-protein binding studies with HepG2
cell and hepatic tissue nuclear protein extracts and reporter construct transient
expression experiments were performed to characterize FMO3 sequences from
position -494 to -439 (domain I), previously demonstrated to significantly impact
promoter function. Although both HNF3beta and CCAAT enhancer-binding protein
(C/EBP) were observed to specifically interact with this element using HepG2 cell
nuclear proteins, only C/EBP DNA-protein interactions were observed using adult
liver nuclear proteins. No specific DNA/protein interactions were observed using 
fetal liver nuclear proteins. Mutation of a putative HNF3beta element had no
effect on FMO3 promoter activity, while mutagenesis of a distinct, but
overlapping C/EBP element resulted in a 55% reduction in activity. Furthermore,
promoter activity was regulated as a function of defined C/EBPbeta liver
activating protein:liver inhibitory protein ratios through this same element.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation demonstrated C/EBPbeta binding to the FMO3 domain I
element in intact cells and adult liver tissue. These results are consistent with
C/EBPbeta being important for regulating hepatic FMO3 expression.

PMID: 18555208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Diabetologia. 2008 Jul;51(7):1169-80. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1006-z. Epub 2008
May 20.

Transcription factor expression in the developing human fetal endocrine pancreas.

Lyttle BM(1), Li J, Krishnamurthy M, Fellows F, Wheeler MB, Goodyer CG, Wang R.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Health Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London,
ON, Canada.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Morphological changes that occur during pancreatic endocrine
cell differentiation have been shown in rodent systems to be dependent on
sequential alterations in transcription factor expression. However, similar data 
for humans have been limited. The aim of the present study was to provide a
connection between pancreatic morphology, transcription factor gene expression
and protein localisation during human fetal development.
METHODS: Human fetal pancreases were examined at early (8-12 weeks of fetal age),
middle (14-16 weeks) and late (19-21 weeks) stages, using immunohistological,
microarray and qRT-PCR analyses.
RESULTS: We observed a significant decrease in pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1
(PDX-1)(+)/cytokeratin 19(+) cells (p < 0.001), with a simultaneous increase in
PDX-1(+)/insulin(+) cells from 8 to 21 weeks (p < 0.05). Increased PDX-1/insulin 
co-localisation within islet clusters was noted, while no co-expression of PDX-1 
with glucagon was found, suggesting that loss of PDX-1 is essential for alpha
cell formation. Given that neurogenin 3 (NGN3) expression is critical for
establishing the endocrine cell programme in the rodent pancreas, we examined its
expression pattern and co-localisation in PDX-1(+), insulin(+) and glucagon(+)
cells. Co-localisation of NGN3 with PDX-1, insulin and glucagon was noted during 
early development, with significant decreases in middle and late stages (p <
0.001). Our microarray and co-localisation analyses of transcription factors
linked to NGN3 demonstrated that ISL1 transcription factor (ISL1), neurogenic
differentiation 1 (NEUROD1), NK2 related transcription factor related, locus 2
(NKX2-2) and paired box gene 6 (PAX6) were upregulated during development and
present in all four endocrine cell types, while NK6 related transcription factor 
related, locus 1 (NKX6-1) was expressed exclusively in beta cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study is an important step towards identifying
key molecular factors involved in development of the human fetal endocrine
pancreas.

PMID: 18491072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Dev Biol. 2008 Jun 15;318(2):366-77. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.034. Epub 2008 
Apr 4.

The words of the regulatory code are arranged in a variable manner in highly
conserved enhancers.

Rastegar S(1), Hess I, Dickmeis T, Nicod JC, Ertzer R, Hadzhiev Y, Thies WG,
Scherer G, Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology and Genetics, Forschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Postfach
3640, 76021 Karlsruhe, Germany. sepand.rastegar@itg.fzk.de

The cis-regulatory regions of many developmental regulators and transcription
factors are believed to be highly conserved in the genomes of vertebrate species,
suggesting specific regulatory mechanisms for these gene classes. We functionally
characterized five notochord enhancers, whose sequence is highly conserved, and
systematically mutated two of them. Two subregions were identified to be
essential for expression in the notochord of the zebrafish embryo. Synthetic
enhancers containing the two essential regions in front of a TATA-box drive
expression in the notochord while concatemerization of the subregions alone is
not sufficient, indicating that the combination of the two sequence elements is
required for notochord expression. Both regions are present in the five
functionally characterized notochord enhancers. However, the position, the
distance and relative orientation of the two sequence motifs can vary
substantially within the enhancer sequences. This suggests that the regulatory
grammar itself does not dictate the high evolutionary conservation between these 
orthologous cis-regulatory sequences. Rather, it represents a less well-conserved
layer of sequence organization within these sequences.

PMID: 18455719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 13;283(24):16940-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M801930200. Epub 2008 
Apr 1.

Foxa2 activity increases plasma high density lipoprotein levels by regulating
apolipoprotein M.

Wolfrum C(1), Howell JJ, Ndungo E, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology,
Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich, 8093 Zürich, Switzerland.

Obesity, diabetes, insulin resistance, and hyperinsulinemia are frequently
associated with a cluster of closely related lipid abnormalities such as low
plasma levels of high density lipoprotein (HDL) and elevated levels of
triglyceride, both known to increase the risk of developing atherosclerotic
disease. The molecular mechanisms linking obesity, insulin resistance, and
hyperinsulinemia to low HDL levels are incompletely understood. Here we
demonstrate that insulin, through a Foxa2-mediated mechanism, inhibited the
expression of apolipoprotein M (apoM), an important determinant of plasma
pre-beta-HDL and alpha-HDL concentrations. Obese mice had decreased apoM
expression and plasma pre-beta-HDL levels due to inactivation of Foxa2 in
hyperinsulinemic states. Nuclear reexpression of Foxa2 with a
phosphorylation-deficient mutant Foxa2T156A (Ad-T156A) activated apoM expression 
and increased plasma pre-beta-HDL and alpha-HDL levels. In contrast,
haploinsufficient Foxa2(+/-) mice exhibited decreased hepatic apoM expression and
plasma pre-beta-HDL and HDL levels. The increase in plasma HDL levels and
pre-beta-HDL formation by Foxa2 was mediated exclusively by apoM, as constitutive
active expression of Foxa2 in apoM(-/-) mice had no effect on plasma HDL levels. 
Our results identify a fundamental mechanism by which insulin regulates plasma
HDL levels in physiological and insulin-resistant states and thus have important 
implications for novel therapeutic approaches to prevent atherosclerosis.

PMID: 18381283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Regul Pept. 2008 Jun 5;148(1-3):39-45. doi: 10.1016/j.regpep.2008.02.008. Epub
2008 Mar 4.

INGAP-PP up-regulates the expression of genes and proteins related to K+ ATP
channels and ameliorates Ca2+ handling in cultured adult rat islets.

Silva KE(1), Barbosa HC, Rafacho A, Bosqueiro JR, Stoppiglia LF, Carneiro EM,
Borelli MI, Del Zotto H, Gagliardino JJ, Boschero AC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Fisiologia e Biofísica, Instituto de Biologia Universidade
Estadual de Campinas, 13083-970, Campinas-SP, Brazil.

Islet Neogenesis Associated Protein (INGAP) increases pancreatic beta-cell mass
and potentiates glucose-induced insulin secretion. Here, we investigated the
effects of the pentadecapeptide INGAP-PP in adult cultured rat islets upon the
expression of proteins constitutive of the K(+)(ATP) channel, Ca(2+) handling,
and insulin secretion. The islets were cultured in RPMI medium with or without
INGAP-PP for four days. Thereafter, gene (RT-PCR) and protein expression (Western
blotting) of Foxa2, SUR1 and Kir6.2, cytoplasmic Ca(2+) ([Ca(2+)](i)), static and
dynamic insulin secretion, and (86)Rb efflux were measured. INGAP-PP increased
the expression levels of Kir6.2, SUR1 and Foxa2 genes, and SUR1 and Foxa2
proteins. INGAP-PP cultured islets released significantly more insulin in
response to 40 mM KCl and 100 muM tolbutamide. INGAP-PP shifted to the left the
dose-response curve of insulin secretion to increasing concentrations of glucose 
(EC(50) of 10.0+/-0.4 vs. 13.7+/-1.5 mM glucose of the controls). It also
increased the first phase of insulin secretion elicited by either 22.2 mM glucose
or 100 microM tolbutamide and accelerated the velocity of glucose-induced
reduction of (86)Rb efflux in perifused islets. These effects were accompanied by
a significant increase in [Ca(2+)](i) and the maintenance of a considerable
degree of [Ca(2+)](i) oscillations. These results confirm that the enhancing
effect of INGAP-PP upon insulin release, elicited by different secretagogues, is 
due to an improvement of the secretory function in cultured islets. Such
improvement is due, at least partly, to an increased K(+)(ATP) channel protein
expression and/or changing in the kinetic properties of these channels and
augmented [Ca(2+)](i) response. Accordingly, INGAP-PP could potentially be used
to maintain the functional integrity of cultured islets and eventually, for the
prevention and treatment of diabetes.

PMID: 18378016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Feb 7;2(2):110-2. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.01.012.

Foxa2: the rise and fall of dopamine neurons.

Arenas E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurobiology, MBB, Center of Excellence in
Developmental Biology, Karolinska Institute, Scheeles vägen 1, plan 2, Retzius
building A1, 17 177 Stockholm, Sweden. ernest.arenas@kis.se

Understanding the development and maintenance of dopamine neurons is essential to
establish novel stem cell therapies and animal models of Parkinson's disease. A
recent PLoS Biology report (Kittappa et al., 2007) reveals that Foxa2 regulates
dopamine neuron generation and differentiation, and that aging foxa2(+/-) mice
spontaneously develop Parkinsonism.

PMID: 18371430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Mol Med. 2008 Apr;21(4):507-11.

SREBP-1c, regulated by the insulin and AMPK signaling pathways, plays a role in
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease.

Kohjima M(1), Higuchi N, Kato M, Kotoh K, Yoshimoto T, Fujino T, Yada M, Yada R, 
Harada N, Enjoji M, Takayanagi R, Nakamuta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a common liver disease whose
prevalence has increased markedly. We reported previously that fatty acid
synthesis was enhanced in NAFLD with the accumulation of fatty acids. To clarify 
the disorder, we evaluated the expression of genes regulating fatty acid
synthesis by real-time PCR using samples from NAFLD (n=22) and normal liver
(control; n=10). A major regulator of fatty acids synthesis is sterol regulatory 
element-binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c). Its expression was significantly higher in
NAFLD, nearly 5-fold greater than the controls. SREBP-1c is positively regulated 
by insulin signaling pathways, including insulin receptor substrate (IRS)-1 and
-2. In NAFLD, IRS-1 expression was enhanced and correlated positively with
SREBP-1c expression. In contrast, IRS-2 expression decreased by 50% and was not
correlated with SREBP-1c. Forkhead box protein A2 (Foxa2) is a positive regulator
of fatty acid oxidation and is itself negatively regulated by IRSs. Foxa2
expression increased in NAFLD and showed a negative correlation with IRS-2, but
not with IRS-1, expression. It is known that SREBP-1c is negatively regulated by 
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) but expression levels of AMPK in NAFLD were
almost equal to those of the controls. These data indicate that, in NAFLD,
insulin signaling via IRS-1 causes the up-regulation of SREBP1-c, leading to the 
increased synthesis of fatty acids by the hepatocytes; negative feedback
regulation via AMPK does not occur and the activation of Foxa2, following a
decrease of IRS-2, up-regulates fatty acid oxidation.

PMID: 18360697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Nagoya J Med Sci. 2007 Oct;69(3-4):133-7.

In vitro developmental model of the gastrointestinal tract from mouse embryonic
stem cells.

Torihashi S(1), Kuwahara M, Kurahashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Physical and Occupational Therapy, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, 1-1-20 Daiko-minami, Higashi-ku, Nagoya 461-8673, Japan.
storiha@met.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells are pluripotent and retain their potential to
form cells, tissues and organs originated from three embryonic germ layers.
Recently, we developed in vitro organ--gut-like structures--from mouse ES cells. 
They had basically similar morphological features to a mouse gastrointestinal
tract in vivo composed of three distinct layers (i.e., epithelium, connective
tissue and musculature). Gut-like structures showed spontaneous contractions
derived from pacemaker cells (interstitial cells of Cajal) in the musculature. We
also examined their formation process and expression pattern of transcription
factors crucial for gut organogenesis such as Id2, Sox17, HNF3beta/Foxa2 and
GATA4. We found that they mimic the development of embryonic gut in vivo and
showed a similar expression pattern of common transcription factors. They also
maintain their developmental potential after transplantation to a renal capsule. 
Therefore, gut-like structures are suitable for in vitro models of
gastrointestinal tracts and their development. In addition, we pointed out
several unique features different from gut in vivo that provide useful and
advantageous tools to investigate the developmental mechanism of the
gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 18351232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008 Jun;36(6):1080-7. doi: 10.1124/dmd.107.019729. Epub 2008 
Mar 13.

Forkhead box A2-mediated regulation of female-predominant expression of the mouse
Cyp2b9 gene.

Hashita T(1), Sakuma T, Akada M, Nakajima A, Yamahara H, Ito S, Takesako H,
Nemoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Graduate School of Medical and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.

The regulation mechanism of female-predominant expression of the mouse Cyp2b9
gene was investigated in vivo and in vitro. Luciferase reporter assay revealed
that the -234/-194 region of the Cyp2b9 gene may be responsible for sexually
dimorphic expression. There is a predicted forkhead box A2 (FoxA2) (hepatic
nuclear factor 3beta)-binding site in this region. Chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assay indicated that the binding protein to the site was FoxA2 in 5-week-old
female mice, whereas this protein was found in both sexes at age 3 weeks, in
accordance with our previous observation on the developmental expression of this 
gene. Mutation of the predicted FoxA2 site in the reporter construct containing
the -234/+18 fragment led to complete elimination of luciferase activity, but
deletion of the -234/-194 region resulted in considerable transcriptional
activity, suggesting that by mutating the FoxA2-binding site a potent suppressor 
might bind to eliminate activity, whereas by deleting this region it could not.
Sexually dimorphic secretion of growth hormone is involved in female-predominant 
expression of the gene, and the -234/-194 region was also responsible for
suppressing the expression by male-type secretion.

PMID: 18339816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 May 16;369(4):1108-13. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.02.158. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Forkhead box transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 are important regulators of
Muc2 mucin expression in intestinal epithelial cells.

van der Sluis M(1), Vincent A, Bouma J, Korteland-Van Male A, van Goudoever JB,
Renes IB, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Division of Neonatology, Erasmus MC-Sophia
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The mucin Muc2 is the main component of the intestinal mucus layer and thus plays
important roles in intestinal protection. Therefore, it is important to
understand its regulation during goblet cell differentiation. Foxa1 and Foxa2
forkhead box transcription factors (TFs) participate in transcriptional programs 
governing intestinal cell differentiation. Using immunohistochemistry, we showed 
a spatio-temporal pattern of expression of both TFs in developing and adult mouse
intestine and their expression in Muc2-expressing intestinal cells.
Down-regulation of Foxa1 and Foxa2 by RNA interference in cultured intestinal
cells decreased Muc2 mRNA level by half, and abolished Muc2 protein expression.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and gel shift assays showed that these two TFs
directly bind to the Muc2 promoter. Co-transfection experiments indicated that
both TFs activate the Muc2 promoter and that mutations of three Foxa cis-elements
inhibit Muc2 transactivation. In conclusion, this work identifies Foxa1 and Foxa2
as important regulators of Muc2 expression in the intestine.

PMID: 18336786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Regen Med. 2008 Mar;3(2):175-80. doi: 10.2217/17460751.3.2.175.

Generation of definitive endoderm from human embryonic stem cells cultured in
feeder layer-free conditions.

King CC(1), Beattie GM, Lopez AD, Hayek A.

Author information: 
(1)University of California, Whittier Institute, Department of Pediatrics, San
Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, Center for Molecular Genetics, Room 131, La Jolla, CA
92037-0634, USA. chking@ucsd.edu

PURPOSE: The purpose of these studies was twofold: to reduce the level of
nonhuman, potentially immunogenic sialic acid N-glycolylneuraminic acid (Neu5Gc) 
in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) through culture of the cells in the absence
of feeder layers; and to determine whether directed differentiation was preserved
under these conditions, that is, using exclusively human-derived products.
METHODS: Using a technique developed in our laboratory to culture hESCs in the
absence of feeder layers, all nonhuman cell culture reagents were replaced with
recombinant or human-derived reagents. The level of the nonhuman sialic acid
(Neu5Gc) was measured by high-performance liquid chromatography and monitored
over many passages. Subsequently, the cells were subjected to in vitro
differentiation into definitive endoderm by lowering the serum concentrations and
elevating the amount of activin A.
RESULTS: Under standard tissue culture conditions using mouse and other animal
products, the basal levels of Neu5Gc were measured between 7 and 10%. After the
cell culture reagents were changed to all human products, Neu5Gc levels decreased
steadily before leveling below 2%. Upon initiation of the differentiation
protocol under these cell culture conditions, we observed robust endoderm
formation, as measured by fluorescence-activated cell sorting analysis and the
appearance of mRNA for markers of definitive endoderm (Sox17, CXCR4, Goosecoid
and FoxA2).
CONCLUSION: Consistent with other findings, elimination of nonhuman products in
cell culture of hESCs decreases the levels of nonhuman and potentially
immunogenic sialic acid levels. Furthermore, our studies demonstrate that in this
feeder layer-free system, hESCs undergo directed differentiation into definitive 
endoderm.

PMID: 18307401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2008;23(1):8-13.

The roles of nuclear receptors CAR and PXR in hepatic energy metabolism.

Konno Y(1), Negishi M, Kodama S.

Author information: 
(1)The Pharmacogenetics Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Nuclear receptors constitutive active/androstane receptor (CAR) and pregnane X
receptor (PXR) were originally characterized as transcription factors regulating 
the hepatic genes that encode drug metabolizing enzymes. Recent works have now
revealed that these nuclear receptors also play the critical roles in modulating 
hepatic energy metabolism. While CAR and PXR directly bind to their response
sequences phenobarbital-responsive enhancer module (PBREM) and xenobiotic
responsive enhancer module (XREM) in the promoter of target genes to increase
drug metabolism, the receptors also cross talk with various hormone responsive
transcription factors such as forkhead box O1 (FoxO1), forkhead box A2 (FoxA2),
cAMP-response element binding protein, and peroxisome proliferator activated
receptor gamma coactivator 1alpha (PGC 1alpha) to decrease energy metabolism
through down-regulating gluconeogenesis, fatty acid oxidation and ketogenesis and
up-regulating lipogenesis. In addition, CAR modulates thyroid hormone activity by
regulating type 1 deiodinase in the regenerating liver. Thus, CAR and PXR are now
placed at the crossroad where both xenobiotics and endogenous stimuli co-regulate
liver function.

PMID: 18305370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2008 Jan;73(1):70-5.

Detection of target genes of FOXA transcription factors involved in proliferation
control.

Bryzgalov LO(1), Ershov NI, Oshchepkov DY, Kaledin VI, Merkulova TI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia. Bryzgalov_l@mail.ru

To reveal the mechanism of tumor-suppressing activity of FOXA proteins in liver, 
a search for potential target genes of these transcription factors involved in
proliferation control was carried out. In the first step, we have used data from 
the literature concerning gene expression in mouse liver (high content of FOXA
proteins) and kidney (FOXA expression is absent) obtained by hybridization on
microchips. A search for FOXA binding sites in regulatory regions of forty
differentially expressing genes involved in proliferation control was carried out
using the computer method SITECON. Eleven genes containing clusters of potential 
FOXA sites incorporating 3-6-fold repeats of TTTG were revealed. The
FOXA-specific interaction with such microsatellite sites was confirmed by
gel-retardation technique using the GST-fused protein containing the DNA-binding 
domain of FOXA2. Six genes containing clusters of confirmed binding sites--Cul2, 
Cdc73, Ptk, Pdcd, Creb, and Ppp2r5d--were selected. The effect of
hepatocarcinogen orthoaminoazotoluene (OAT), which lowers the FOXA activity, on
expression of these genes was studied by the real-time PCR. OAT was shown to
increase sharply the level of mRNA of the Cul2 and Cdc73 genes.

PMID: 18294132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Feb;24(2):117. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2008242117.

[Foxa2, a new player in the development of dopaminergic neurons in Parkinson
disease].

[Article in French]

Epelbaum J.

PMID: 18272062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Stem Cells Dev. 2008 Feb;17(1):41-51. doi: 10.1089/scd.2007.0055.

Derivation of a new human embryonic stem cell line, endeavour-1, and its clonal
propagation.

Sidhu KS(1), Ryan JP, Tuch BE.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales,
Randwick, Australia 2052. k.sidhu@unsw.edu.au

Here we describe the derivation of a novel human embryonic stem (hES) cell line, 
Endeavour-1 (E1), its four new clonal lines (E1C1, E1C2, E1C3, E1C4), and their
characterization. E1 and its clonal lines are propagated on human fetal
fibroblasts (HFFs) derived and grown in a largely serum-free medium. Seven inner 
cell masses were isolated from 34 donated human embryos (27 survived), and one
new hES cell line was obtained. E1 has been in culture for over 1 year and
possesses all the typical features of stem cells, i.e., expression of stem cell
surface markers (stage-specific embryonic antigens SSEA-3 and SSEA-4, and tumor
recognition antigens TRA-1-60 and TRA-1-81), staining for alkaline phosphatase,
and the presence of the pluripotent gene marker (nanog). This line shows
pluripotency both under in vitro and in vivo conditions. E1 has a normal
karyotype (46XX). Using our optimized procedure for cloning, four new clonal
lines were derived from E1: E1C1, E1C2, E1C3, and E1C4. These clonal lines show
normal characteristics: karyotype of that of the parent line (46XX) except for
E1C3, which showed reciprocal translocation involving chromosomes 15 and 17; stem
cell surface markers SSEA-4, TRA-1-60, and TRA-1-81; and gene expression for
pluripotency (Nanog). All of these clonal lines formed embryoid bodies (EBs) in
suspension cultures. After seeding, the EBs differentiated, forming cell lineages
derived from all three germ layers as indicated by immunolocalization for the
ectodermal marker beta-III tubulin, the mesodermal marker CD34, and the
endodermal marker alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). There were subtle differences in the
expression of these markers between clones. These clonal lines showed
pluripotency in vivo. E1 and its clonal lines can differentiate to definitive
endoderm after treatment with activin A, and, as indicated by expression of
SOX17, FOXa2, and GATA-4 by RT-PCR, there are some subtle differences between
these clonal lines. This may help in selecting clonal lines for specific lineage 
specification and for developing future cell therapy for various diseases.

PMID: 18271699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Cloning Stem Cells. 2008 Mar;10(1):49-64. doi: 10.1089/clo.2007.0075.

Serum-free differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells into alveolar type II
epithelial cells.

Winkler ME(1), Mauritz C, Groos S, Kispert A, Menke S, Hoffmann A, Gruh I,
Schwanke K, Haverich A, Martin U.

Author information: 
(1)Leibniz Research Laboratories for Biotechnology and Artificial Organs (LEBAO),
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Alveolar type II (AT2) epithelial cells have important functions including the
production of surfactant and regeneration of lost alveolar type I epithelial
cells. The ability of in vitro production of AT2 cells would offer new
therapeutic options in treating pulmonary injuries and disorders including
genetically based surfactant deficiencies. Aiming at the generation of AT2-like
cells, the differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells (mESCs) toward
mesendodermal progenitors (MEPs) was optimized using a "Brachyury-eGFP-knock in" 
mESC line. eGFP expression demonstrated generation of up to 65% MEPs at day 4
after formation of embryoid bodies (EBs) under serum-free conditions. Plated EBs 
were further differentiated into AT2-like cells for a total of 25 days in
serum-free media resulting in the expression of endodermal marker genes (FoxA2,
Sox17, TTR, TTF-1) and of markers for distal lung epithelium (surfactant proteins
(SP-) A, B, C, and D, CCSP, aquaporin 5). Notably, expression of SP-C as the only
known AT2 cell specific marker could be detected after serum-induction as well as
under serum-free conditions. Cytoplasmic localization of SP-C was demonstrated by
confocal microscopy. The presence of AT2-like cells was confirmed by electron
microscopy providing evidence for polarized cells with apical microvilli and
lamellar body-like structures. Our results demonstrate the differentiation of
AT2-like cells from mESCs after serum-induction and under serum-free conditions. 
The established serum-free differentiation protocol will facilitate the
identification of key differentiation factors leading to a more specific and
effective generation of AT2-like cells from ESCs.

PMID: 18241124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Development. 2008 Mar;135(5):941-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.010595. Epub 2008 Jan 30.

Zebrafish cdx1b regulates expression of downstream factors of Nodal signaling
during early endoderm formation.

Cheng PY(1), Lin CC, Wu CS, Lu YF, Lin CY, Chung CC, Chu CY, Huang CJ, Tsai CY,
Korzh S, Wu JL, Hwang SP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung, Taiwan.

We identified a zebrafish caudal-related homeobox (cdx1b) gene, which shares
syntenic conservation with both human and mouse Cdx1. Zebrafish cdx1b transcripts
are maternally deposited. cdx1b is uniformly expressed in both epiblast and
hypoblast cells from late gastrulation to the 1-2s stages and can be identified
in the retinas, brain and somites during 18-22 hpf stages. After 28 hours of
development, cdx1b is exclusively expressed in the developing intestine. Both
antisense morpholino oligonucleotide-mediated knockdown and overexpression
experiments were conducted to analyze cdx1b function. Hypoplastic development of 
the liver and pancreas and intestinal abnormalities were observed in 96 hpf cdx1b
morphants. In 85% epiboly cdx1b morphants, twofold decreases in the respective
numbers of gata5-, cas-, foxa2- and sox17-expressing endodermal precursors were
identified. Furthermore, ectopic cdx1b expression caused substantial increases in
the respective numbers of gata5-, cas-, foxa2- and sox17-expressing endodermal
precursors and altered their distribution patterns in 85% epiboly injected
embryos. Conserved Cdx1-binding motifs were identified in both gata5 and foxa2
genes by interspecific sequence comparisons. Cdx1b can bind to the Cdx1-binding
motif located in intron 1 of the foxa2 gene based on an electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay. Co-injection of either zebrafish or mouse foxa2 mRNA with the cdx1b 
MO rescued the expression domains of ceruloplasmin in the liver of 53 hpf
injected embryos. These results indicate that zebrafish cdx1b regulates foxa2
expression and may also modulate gata5 expression, thus affecting early endoderm 
formation. This study underscores a novel role of zebrafish cdx1b in the
development of different digestive organs compared with its mammalian homologs.

PMID: 18234726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2008 Sep;10(10):939-49. doi:
10.1111/j.1463-1326.2007.00836.x. Epub 2008 Jan 14.

Isosteviol increases insulin sensitivity and changes gene expression of key
insulin regulatory genes and transcription factors in islets of the diabetic KKAy
mouse.

Nordentoft I(1), Jeppesen PB, Hong J, Abudula R, Hermansen K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism C, Aarhus Sygehus THG, Aarhus
University Hospital, Aarhus C, Denmark. iver.nordentoft@ki.au.dk

AIMS: Isosteviol (ISV), a diterpene molecule, is an isomer of the backbone
structure of a group of substances with recently proven antidiabetic capabilities
in both man and rodents. The aim of this study was to investigate if ISV
possesses beneficial effects on the metabolism in the diabetic KKAy mouse and to 
establish the long-term in vivo effects of ISV on the gene expression profile of 
key insulin regulatory genes in islets.
METHODS: Twenty KKAy mice, aged 5 weeks, were divided into two groups and treated
for 9 weeks with either (i) standard chow diet (control) or (ii) chow + 20 mg/kg 
body weight of ISV. Blood samples were collected before and after intervention
and were subsequently analysed. As a non-diabetic control group, 10 normal C57BL 
mice were fed with standard chow diet. Gene expression was determined in islets
by quantitative real-time RT-PCR and Affymetrix microarray.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that long-term treatment with ISV improves glucose
homeostasis, increases insulin sensitivity, lowers plasma triglycerides and
lowers weight in the diabetic KKAy mice. Furthermore, ISV markedly changes the
gene expression profile of key insulin regulatory genes GLUT2, Ins1, Ins2,
Pdx1/Ipf1, Beta2/Neurod1, Pax6 and 11-beta-HSD-1 and beta-cell transcription
factors Nkx2-2, Nkx6-1, C/EBPalpha and FoxA2 in isolated islets of the KKAy mice.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that ISV improves glucose and insulin
sensitivity as well as improving the lipid profile and upregulates the gene
expression of key beta-cell genes, including insulin regulatory transcription
factors.

PMID: 18201205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Endocrinol. 2008 Jan;196(1):33-43. doi: 10.1677/JOE-07-0397.

Inability to process and store proinsulin in transdifferentiated pancreatic
acinar cells lacking the regulated secretory pathway.

Aldibbiat A(1), Marriott CE, Scougall KT, Campbell SC, Huang GC, Macfarlane WM,
Shaw JA.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Group, Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences,
Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH, UK.

Erratum in
    J Endocrinol. 2008 Oct;199(1):149. Alidibbiat, A [corrected to Aldibbiat, A].

Generation of new beta-cells from the adult pancreas or the embryonic stem cells 
is being pursued by research groups worldwide. Success will be dependent on
confirmation of true beta-cell phenotype evidenced by capacity to process and
store proinsulin. The aim of these studies was to robustly determine endocrine
characteristics of the AR42J rat pancreatic acinar cell line before and after in 
vitro transdifferentiation. beta-cell phenotypic marker expression was
characterised by RT-PCR, immunostaining, western blotting, ELISA and in human
preproinsulin transgene over-expression studies in wild-type AR42J cells and
after culture on Matrigel basement membrane matrix with and without
growth/differentiation factor supplementation. Pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1
(PDX1), forkhead box transcription factor a2 (Foxa2), glucokinase, pancreatic
polypeptide and low-level insulin gene transcription in wild-type AR42J cells
were confirmed by RT-PCR. Culture on Matrigel-coated plates and supplementation
of medium with glucagon-like peptide 1 induced expression of the beta-cell Glut 2
with maintained expression of insulin and PDX1. Increased biosynthesis and
secretion of proinsulin were confirmed by immunocytochemical staining and
sensitive ELISA. Absence of the regulated secretory pathway was demonstrated by
undetectable prohormone convertase expression. In addition, inability to process 
and store endogenous proinsulin or human proinsulin translated from a
constitutively over-expressed preproinsulin transgene was confirmed. The
importance of robust phenotypic characterisation at the protein level in
attempted beta-cell transdifferentiation studies has been confirmed. Rodent and
human sensitive/specific differential proinsulin/insulin ELISA in combination
with human preproinsulin over-expression enables detailed elucidatation of core
endocrine functions of proinsulin processing and storage in putative new
beta-cells.

PMID: 18180315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Eur J Med Genet. 2008 Mar-Apr;51(2):106-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2007.08.004. Epub
2007 Sep 15.

Holoprosencephaly-Polydactyly syndrome: in search of an etiology.

Cordero DR(1), Bendavid C, Shanske AL, Haddad BR, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Biology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Holoprosencephaly-Polydactyly (HPS) or Pseudotrisomy 13 syndrome are names
conferred to clinically categorize patients whose phenotype is congruent with
Trisomy 13 in the context of a normal karyotype. The literature suggests that
this entity may be secondary to submicroscopic deletions in holoprosencephaly
(HPE) genes; however, a limited number of investigations have been undertaken to 
evaluate this hypothesis. To test this hypothesis we studied a patient with HPE, 
polydactyly, and craniofacial dysmorphologies consistent with the diagnosis of
Trisomy 13 whose karyotype was normal. We performed mutational analysis in the
four main HPE causing genes (SHH, SIX3, TGIF, and ZIC2) and GLI3, a gene
associated with polydactyly as well as fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH)
to search for microdeletions in these genes and two candidate HPE genes (DISP1
and FOXA2). No mutations or deletions were detected. A whole genome approach
utilizing array Comparative Genomic Hybridization (aCGH) to screen for copy
number abnormalities was then taken. No loss or gain of DNA was noted. Although a
single case, our results suggest that coding mutations in these HPE genes and
copy number anomalies may not be causative in this disorder. Instead, HPS likely 
involves mutations in other genes integral in embryonic development of the
forebrain, face and limbs. Our systematic analysis sets the framework to study
other affected children and delineate the molecular etiology of this disorder.

PMCID: PMC2441840
PMID: 18178536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dev Dyn. 2008 Feb;237(2):447-53.

System for tamoxifen-inducible expression of cre-recombinase from the Foxa2 locus
in mice.

Park EJ(1), Sun X, Nichol P, Saijoh Y, Martin JF, Moon AM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake City,
Utah, USA.

To study the roles of key transcription factor networks, growth factors, and
signaling molecules in the endoderm, notochord, and floorplate, we developed an
inducible Cre-expressing system for altering gene function in this tissue. We
generated an allele of Foxa2 that directs a tamoxifen-regulated Cre in the Foxa2 
expression domain (Foxa2(mcm)). Activity of Foxa2(mcm) recapitulates endogenous
Foxa2 expression in endoderm, notochord, and floorplate. Efficiency of the system
in a given tissue type was dose- and timing-dependent. By comparing efficiency
and location of Cre activity after administration of tamoxifen by oral gavage vs.
intraperitoneal injection, we found that oral gavage achieves more rapid, robust 
recombination with less embryonic toxicity. This system will be useful for
controlling the activity of floxed alleles at multiple stages of mouse
embryogenesis and fetal development.

PMID: 18161057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Pharm. 2008 Jan-Feb;5(1):35-41. Epub 2007 Dec 27.

Xenoreceptors CAR and PXR activation and consequences on lipid metabolism,
glucose homeostasis, and inflammatory response.

Moreau A(1), Vilarem MJ, Maurel P, Pascussi JM.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, UMR-U632, 1919 route de Mende, F-34293 Montpellier, France.

Xenobiotic and drug metabolism and transport are managed by a large number of
genes coordinately regulated by at least three nuclear receptors or xenosensors: 
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), constitutive androstane receptor (CAR, NR1I3),
and pregnane X receptor (PXR, NR1I2). Initially characterized as xenosensors, it 
is now evident that CAR and PXR also trigger pleiotropic effects on liver
function. Recent studies have shown the existence of crosstalk between
xenosensors and other nuclear receptors or transcription factors controlling
endogenous signaling pathways which regulate physiological functions. This review
is focused on recent observations showing that activation of CAR and PXR alters
lipid metabolism, glucose homeostasis, and inflammation by interfering with
HNF4alpha, FoxO1, FoxA2, PGC1alpha, or NFkB p65. Such crosstalks explain clinical
observations and provide molecular mechanisms allowing understanding how
xenobiotics and drugs may affect physiological functions and provoke endocrine
disruptions.

PMID: 18159929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Am J Pathol. 2008 Jan;172(1):236-46. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Dissociation of epithelial and neuroendocrine carcinoma lineages in the
transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate model of prostate cancer.

Chiaverotti T(1), Couto SS, Donjacour A, Mao JH, Nagase H, Cardiff RD, Cunha GR, 
Balmain A.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA.

The transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP) model is widely used in
prostate cancer research because of rapid tumor onset and progression. The
transgenic mouse is on a C57BL/6 (B6) background and expresses SV40 T-antigen
under the probasin promoter. The strong genetic component of susceptibility to
prostate cancer in humans prompted us to investigate the effect of mouse strain
background (FVB and B6) on incidence, progression, and pathology of prostate
cancer in this model. Because TRAMP lesions are unique but differ from
conventional prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia because the epithelium and
stroma are affected diffusely, we designated them as "atypical hyperplasia of
Tag." Although the incidence and severity of atypical hyperplasia of Tag is
similar, FVB-TRAMP mice live significantly shorter lives than B6-TRAMP mice
because of the rapid development and progression of neuroendocrine carcinomas.
This is associated with an increased frequency of neuroendocrine precursor
lesions in young TRAMP mice, detectable at 4 weeks after birth. These lesions
show properties of bipotential stem cells and co-express markers of epithelial
(E-cadherin) and neuroendocrine (synaptophysin) lineages, as well as the
transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2. Transplantation studies using TRAMP
prostatic ducts suggested that neuroendocrine carcinomas arise independently from
atypical hyperplasias or other epithelial lesions. Adenocarcinomas were not seen 
in our cohort. Thus, neuroendocrine carcinomas are the principal malignancy in
this model and may develop from bipotential progenitor cells at an early stage of
prostate tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2189611
PMID: 18156212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Stem Cells. 2008 Mar;26(3):724-33. Epub 2007 Dec 20.

Insulin redirects differentiation from cardiogenic mesoderm and endoderm to
neuroectoderm in differentiating human embryonic stem cells.

Freund C(1), Ward-van Oostwaard D, Monshouwer-Kloots J, van den Brink S, van
Rooijen M, Xu X, Zweigerdt R, Mummery C, Passier R.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute, Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, Uppsalalaan 
8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESC) can proliferate indefinitely while retaining
the capacity to form derivatives of all three germ layers. We have reported
previously that hESC differentiate into cardiomyocytes when cocultured with a
visceral endoderm-like cell line (END-2). Insulin/insulin-like growth factors and
their intracellular downstream target protein kinase Akt are known to protect
many cell types from apoptosis and to promote proliferation, including
hESC-derived cardiomyocytes. Here, we show that in the absence of insulin, a
threefold increase in the number of beating areas was observed in hESC/END-2
coculture. In agreement, the addition of insulin strongly inhibited cardiac
differentiation, as evidenced by a significant reduction in beating areas, as
well as in alpha-actinin and beta-myosin heavy chain (beta-MHC)-expressing cells.
Real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blot
analysis showed that insulin inhibited cardiomyogenesis in the early phase of
coculture by suppressing the expression of endoderm (Foxa2, GATA-6), mesoderm
(brachyury T), and cardiac mesoderm (Nkx2.5, GATA-4). In contrast to previous
reports, insulin was not sufficient to maintain hESC in an undifferentiated
state, since expression of the pluripotency markers Oct3/4 and nanog declined
independently of the presence of insulin during coculture. Instead, insulin
promoted the expression of neuroectodermal markers. Since insulin triggered
sustained phosphorylation of Akt in hESC, we analyzed the effect of an Akt
inhibitor during coculture. Indeed, the inhibition of Akt or insulin-like growth 
factor-1 receptor reversed the insulin-dependent effects. We conclude that in
hESC/END-2 cocultures, insulin does not prevent differentiation but favors the
neuroectodermal lineage at the expense of mesendodermal lineages.

PMID: 18096723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS Biol. 2007 Dec;5(12):e325.

The foxa2 gene controls the birth and spontaneous degeneration of dopamine
neurons in old age.

Kittappa R(1), Chang WW, Awatramani RB, McKay RD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of
America.

Parkinson disease affects more than 1% of the population over 60 y old. The
dominant models for Parkinson disease are based on the use of chemical toxins to 
kill dopamine neurons, but do not address the risk factors that normally increase
with age. Forkhead transcription factors are critical regulators of survival and 
longevity. The forkhead transcription factor, foxa2, is specifically expressed in
adult dopamine neurons and their precursors in the medial floor plate. Gain- and 
loss-of-function experiments show this gene, foxa2, is required to generate
dopamine neurons during fetal development and from embryonic stem cells. Mice
carrying only one copy of the foxa2 gene show abnormalities in motor behavior in 
old age and an associated progressive loss of dopamine neurons. Manipulating
forkhead function may regulate both the birth of dopamine neurons and their
spontaneous death, two major goals of regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC2121110
PMID: 18076286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Stem Cells. 2008 Feb;26(2):474-84. Epub 2007 Dec 6.

Activin alters the kinetics of endoderm induction in embryonic stem cells
cultured on collagen gels.

Parashurama N(1), Nahmias Y, Cho CH, van Poll D, Tilles AW, Berthiaume F, Yarmush
ML.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Engineering in Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Embryonic stem cell-derived endoderm is critical for the development of cellular 
therapies for the treatment of disease such as diabetes, liver cirrhosis, or
pulmonary emphysema. Here, we describe a novel approach to induce endoderm from
mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells using fibronectin-coated collagen gels. This
technique results in a homogeneous endoderm-like cell population, demonstrating
endoderm-specific gene and protein expression, which remains committed following 
in vivo transplantation. In this system, activin, normally an endoderm inducer,
caused an 80% decrease in the Foxa2-positive endoderm fraction, whereas
follistatin increased the Foxa2-positive endoderm fraction to 78%. Our work
suggests that activin delays the induction of endoderm through its transient
precursors, the epiblast and mesendoderm. Long-term differentiation displays a
twofold reduction in hepatic gene expression and threefold reduction in hepatic
protein expression of activin-treated cells compared with follistatin-treated
cells. Moreover, subcutaneous transplantation of activin-treated cells in a
syngeneic mouse generated a heterogeneous teratoma-like mass, suggesting that
these were a more primitive population. In contrast, follistatin-treated cells
resulted in an encapsulated epithelial-like mass, suggesting that these cells
remained committed to the endoderm lineage. In conclusion, we demonstrate a novel
technique to induce the direct differentiation of endoderm from mES cells without
cell sorting. In addition, our work suggests a new role for activin in induction 
of the precursors to endoderm and a new endoderm-enrichment technique using
follistatin.

PMCID: PMC2802581
PMID: 18065398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genesis. 2007 Dec;45(12):729-36.

Transgenic mouse lines expressing Cre recombinase specifically in posterior
notochord and notochord.

Kumar A(1), Yamaguchi T, Sharma P, Kuehn MR.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Protein Dynamics and Signaling, National Cancer Institute,
NCI-Frederick, National Institutes of Health, Frederick, Maryland, USA.

During development, the organizer provides instructive signals to surrounding
cells as well as contributing cells to axial structures. To dissect organizer
function at different developmental stages, conditional approaches such as the
Cre/loxP system for conditional mutagenesis are particularly useful. Here we
describe two new Cre transgenic mouse lines, Foxa2 NFP-Cre and Nodal PNC-Cre,
with activity in two organizer domains, the posterior notochord (PNC) and
notochord. These lines were made using defined regulatory elements from the Foxa2
and Nodal genes that direct Cre expression in overlapping domains of the PNC and 
notochord. Our detailed analysis of the timing and location of Foxa2 NFP-Cre and 
Nodal PNC-Cre activity indicates that these lines are appropriate for conditional
mutagenesis of genes expressed from early somite stages onward.

PMID: 18064671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Dev Cell. 2007 Dec;13(6):884-96.

Live imaging and genetic analysis of mouse notochord formation reveals regional
morphogenetic mechanisms.

Yamanaka Y(1), Tamplin OJ, Beckers A, Gossler A, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental & Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

The node and notochord have been extensively studied as signaling centers in the 
vertebrate embryo. The morphogenesis of these tissues, particularly in mouse, is 
not well understood. Using time-lapse live imaging and cell lineage tracking, we 
show the notochord has distinct morphogenetic origins along the
anterior-posterior axis. The anterior head process notochord arises independently
of the node by condensation of dispersed cells. The trunk notochord is derived
from the node and forms by convergent extension. The tail notochord forms by
node-derived progenitors that actively migrate toward the posterior. We also
reveal distinct genetic regulation within these different regions. We show that
Foxa2 compensates for and genetically interacts with Noto in the trunk notochord,
and that Noto has an evolutionarily conserved role in regulating axial versus
paraxial cell fate. Therefore, we propose three distinct regions within the mouse
notochord, each with unique morphogenetic origins.

PMID: 18061569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Neoplasia. 2007 Nov;9(11):938-50.

Origin of androgen-insensitive poorly differentiated tumors in the transgenic
adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate model.

Huss WJ(1), Gray DR, Tavakoli K, Marmillion ME, Durham LE, Johnson MA, Greenberg 
NM, Smith GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Oncology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY
14263, USA. wendy.huss@roswellpark.org

Following castration, the transgenic adenocarcinoma of mouse prostate (TRAMP)
model demonstrates rapid development of SV40-Tag-driven poorly differentiated
tumors that express neuroendocrine cell markers. The cell population dynamics
within the prostates of castrated TRAMP mice were characterized by analyzing the 
incorporation of 5-bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd) and the expression of SV40-Tag,
synaptophysin, and androgen receptor (AR). Fourteen days postcastration, the
remaining epithelial cells and adenocarcinoma cells were nonproliferative and
lacked detectable SV40-Tag or synaptophysin expression. In contrast,
morphologically distinct intraglandular foci were identified which expressed
SV40-Tag, synaptophysin, and Ki67, but that lacked AR expression. These
proliferative SV40-Tag and synaptophysin-expressing intraglandular foci were
associated with the rare BrdUrd-retaining cells. These foci expanded rapidly in
the postcastration prostate environment, in contrast to the AR- and
SV40-Tag-expressing adenocarcinoma cells that lost SV40-Tag expression and
underwent apoptosis after castration. Intraglandular foci of
synaptophysin-expressing cells were also observed in the prostates of intact
TRAMP mice at a comparable frequency; however, they did not progress to rapidly
expanding tumors until much later in the life of the mice. This suggests that the
foci of neuroendocrine-like cells that express SV40-Tag and synaptophysin, but
lack AR, arise independent of androgen-deprivation and represent the source of
the poorly differentiated tumors that are the lethal phenotype in the TRAMP
model.

PMCID: PMC2077885
PMID: 18030362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Prostate. 2008 Jan 1;68(1):50-60.

Neuroendocrine differentiation in the 12T-10 transgenic prostate mouse model
mimics endocrine differentiation of pancreatic beta cells.

Gupta A(1), Wang Y, Browne C, Kim S, Case T, Paul M, Wills ML, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2765, USA.

BACKGROUND: Neuroendocrine (NE) prostate cancer develops as an aggressive disease
that does not respond to androgen ablation therapy. It has been demonstrated that
the paracrine action of NE cells facilitates the progression of androgen
dependent adenocarcinoma to an androgen independent state, suggesting a
significant role for NE cells during failure of androgen ablation therapy.
METHODS: To investigate the pathways that are involved in NE differentiation of
prostate cancer, we have looked at the expression of genes known to be involved
in endocrine differentiation of beta-cells in the pancreas. This study has been
performed using the NE prostate cancer mouse model (12T-10) and the derivative
allograft model (NE-10).
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical studies have shown that the neuroendocrine prostate 
tumors express the transcription factors Foxa2, mouse achaete-scute homolog-1
(mash-1), neurogenin3 (Ngn3) and Nkx2.2. These tumors show a loss of
hairy/enhancer of split (Hes-1), a gene that inhibits NE differentiation. Human
NE prostate cancers also express Foxa2 and human achaete-scute homolog-1
(HASH-1). These genes are expressed in NE prostate tumors in the similar
sequential manner as they appear in a pancreatic beta-cell endocrine
differentiation. Foxa2 expression is detected in early prostatic intraepithelial 
neoplasia (PIN). Mash-1 expression is detected in a few clusters within low grade
PIN lesions and Nkx2.2 expression is rarely detected in individual scattered
cells within the PIN lesion. Ngn3 and Nkx2.2 frequently appear in the invasive NE
cancer. Subsequent NE metastasis to lung and liver show a distinct gene
expression pattern. The lung metastasis expresses Ngn3 but does not express
Nkx2.2 whereas liver metastases do not express Ngn3 but express Nkx2.2.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that Ngn3 and Nkx2.2 expression are markers
for site-specific metastasis and/or transcriptionally regulated genes that are
required for organ-specific metastasis. This study indicates that a pathway
similar to pancreatic beta-cell differentiation is involved in NE differentiation
of prostate cancer.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18004726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. FASEB J. 2008 Mar;22(3):898-909. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Homogeneous differentiation of hepatocyte-like cells from embryonic stem cells:
applications for the treatment of liver failure.

Cho CH(1), Parashurama N, Park EY, Suganuma K, Nahmias Y, Park J, Tilles AW,
Berthiaume F, Yarmush ML.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Engineering in Medicine, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

One of the major hurdles of cellular therapies for the treatment of liver failure
is the low availability of functional human hepatocytes. While embryonic stem
(ES) cells represent a potential cell source for therapy, current methods for
differentiation result in mixed cell populations or low yields of the cells of
interest. Here we describe a rapid, direct differentiation method that yields a
homogeneous population of endoderm-like cells with 95% purity. Mouse ES cells
cultured on top of collagen-sandwiched hepatocytes differentiated and
proliferated into a uniform and homogeneous cell population of endoderm-like
cells. The endoderm-like cell population was positive for Foxa2, Sox17, and AFP
and could be further differentiated into hepatocyte-like cells, demonstrating
hepatic morphology, functionality, and gene and protein expression. Incorporating
the hepatocyte-like cells into a bioartificial liver device to treat fulminant
hepatic failure improved animal survival, thereby underscoring the therapeutic
potential of these cells.

PMID: 17942827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008 Jan;36(1):169-81. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Novel single nucleotide polymorphisms in the promoter and intron 1 of human
pregnane X receptor/NR1I2 and their association with CYP3A4 expression.

Lamba J(1), Lamba V, Strom S, Venkataramanan R, Schuetz E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, Tennessee 38105, USA.

The hypothesis was tested that sequence diversity in pregnane X receptor (PXR)
cis-regulatory regions is a significant determinant of variation in inducible and
constitutive CYP3A4 expression. A combination of comparative genomics and
computational algorithms was used to select regions of the human PXR promoter and
intron 1 that were resequenced in the polymorphism discovery resource 24 DNA
subset. PXR single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) were then genotyped in donor
human livers phenotyped for CYP3A4 and multidrug resistance protein 1 mRNA and
primary human hepatocytes phenotyped for basal and rifampin-inducible CYP3A4
activity. The human PXR promoter [16.9 kilobase (kb)] was significantly larger
than in rodents (2.9 kb). Eighty-nine SNPs were identified in the promoter and
intron 1 of PXR. The SNPs most consistently associated with CYP3A4 phenotypic
measures were a 44477T>C(-1359) promoter SNP (in linkage disequilibrium with SNP 
463970, a 6-base pair deletion in intron 1a, and SNP 46551, a C nucleotide
insertion in intron 1b); SNP 63396C>T in intron 1 (in linkage disequilibrium with
SNP 63704A>G, a 63813(CAAA)(CA) variable repeat, and SNP 65104T>C); and SNP
56348C>A, SNP 69789A>G, and SNP 66034T>C. Donor livers with the variant PXR
alleles had altered hepatic expression of PXR targets compared with livers with
PXR wild-type alleles. These results identified PXR promoter and intron 1 SNPs
associated with PXR target gene expression (CYP3A4) in donor livers and cultured 
hepatocytes and that a striking number of the linked intron 1 SNPs will affect
putative binding sites for hepatic nuclear factor 3beta (FOXA2), a transcription 
factor linked with PXR expression.

PMID: 17925385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nat Neurosci. 2007 Nov;10(11):1433-9. Epub 2007 Oct 7.

Transcriptional repression coordinates the temporal switch from motor to
serotonergic neurogenesis.

Jacob J(1), Ferri AL, Milton C, Prin F, Pla P, Lin W, Gavalas A, Ang SL, Briscoe 
J.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical Research, The
Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

In many regions of the developing CNS, distinct cell types are born at different 
times. The means by which discrete and stereotyped temporal switches in cellular 
identities are acquired remains poorly understood. To address this, we have
examined how visceral motor neurons (VMNs) and serotonergic neurons, two neuronal
subtypes, are sequentially generated from a common progenitor pool in the
vertebrate hindbrain. We found that the forkhead transcription factor Foxa2,
acting in progenitors, is essential for the transition from VMN to serotonergic
neurogenesis. Loss-of-function and gain-of-function experiments indicated that
Foxa2 activates the switch through a temporal cross-repressive interaction with
paired-like homeobox 2b (Phox2b), the VMN progenitor determinant. This mechanism 
bears a marked resemblance to the cross-repression between neighboring domains of
transcription factors that establish discrete progenitor identities along the
spatial axes. Moreover, the subsequent differentiation of central serotonergic
neurons required both the suppression of VMN neurogenesis and the induction of
downstream intrinsic determinants of serotonergic identity by Foxa2.

PMID: 17922007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Diabetes. 2008 Feb;57(2):306-14. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

Metformin inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis through AMP-activated protein
kinase-dependent regulation of the orphan nuclear receptor SHP.

Kim YD(1), Park KG, Lee YS, Park YY, Kim DK, Nedumaran B, Jang WG, Cho WJ, Ha J, 
Lee IK, Lee CH, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences & Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, 500-757, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Metformin is an antidiabetic drug commonly used to treat type 2
diabetes. The aim of the study was to determine whether metformin regulates
hepatic gluconeogenesis through the orphan nuclear receptor small heterodimer
partner (SHP; NR0B2).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We assessed the regulation of hepatic SHP gene
expression by Northern blot analysis with metformin and adenovirus containing a
constitutive active form of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) (Ad-AMPK) and
evaluated SHP, PEPCK, and G6Pase promoter activities via transient transfection
assays in hepatocytes. Knockdown of SHP using siRNA SHP was conducted to
characterize the metformin-induced inhibition of hepatic gluconeogenic gene
expression in hepatocytes, and metformin-and adenovirus SHP (Ad-SHP)-mediated
hepatic glucose production was measured in B6-Lep(ob/ob) mice.
RESULTS: Hepatic SHP gene expression was induced by metformin,
5-aminoimidazole-4-carboxamide-1-beta-d-ribofuranoside (AICAR), and Ad-AMPK.
Metformin-induced SHP gene expression was abolished by adenovirus containing the 
dominant negative form of AMPK (Ad-DN-AMPK), as well as by compound C. Metformin 
inhibited hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha-or FoxA2-mediated promoter activity of
PEPCK and G6Pase, and the inhibition was blocked with siRNA SHP. Additionally,
SHP knockdown by adenovirus containing siRNA SHP inhibited metformin-mediated
repression of cAMP/dexamethasone-induced hepatic gluconeogenic gene expression.
Furthermore, oral administration of metformin increased SHP mRNA levels in
B6-Lep(ob/ob) mice. Overexpression of SHP by Ad-SHP decreased blood glucose
levels and hepatic gluconeogenic gene expression in B6-Lep(ob/ob) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: We have concluded that metformin inhibits hepatic gluconeogenesis
through AMPK-dependent regulation of SHP.

PMID: 17909097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Cell Metab. 2007 Oct;6(4):267-79.

Foxa2 controls vesicle docking and insulin secretion in mature Beta cells.

Gao N(1), White P, Doliba N, Golson ML, Matschinsky FM, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

The winged-helix transcription factor Foxa2 regulates Pdx1 gene expression and
fetal endocrine pancreas development. We show here by inducible gene ablation
that Foxa2 inactivation in mature beta cells induces hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia in Foxa2(loxP/loxP),Pdx1-CreERT2 adult mice. Mutant beta cells
exhibited a markedly increased pool of docked insulin granules, some of which
were engaged in sequential or compound exocytosis, consistent with increased
first-phase glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Expression of multiple genes
involved in vesicular trafficking, membrane targeting, and fuel-secretion
pathways is dependent on Foxa2. In addition, impaired cytosolic Ca(2+)
oscillations and elevated intracellular cyclic AMP production accompanied this
secretory defect and were likely contributors to the sensitization of the
exocytotic machinery. Thus, in the absence of Foxa2, alterations in intracellular
second-messenger signaling redistribute the insulin granules into the readily
releasable pool. We conclude that Foxa2 is required for both fetal pancreas
development and the function of mature beta cells.

PMID: 17908556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2007 Dec;293(6):L1395-405. Epub 2007 Sep 21.

Sterol response element binding protein and thyroid transcription factor-1
(Nkx2.1) regulate Abca3 gene expression.

Besnard V(1), Xu Y, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
and The University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, 
USA.

The ATP-binding cassette (ABC) ABCA3 gene encodes a lipid transporter critical
for surfactant function at birth. To identify transcription factors that regulate
ABCA3 expression in the lung, we identified by bioinformatic and functional
analyses two positive regulatory regions, located between bp -2591 and -1102 and 
bp -1102 and +11, relative to the exon 1 of the Abca3 gene promoter. The distal
cassette contains consensus sequences predicting binding to lung transcription
factors including FOXA2, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-alpha (C/EBPalpha),
GATA-6, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1 or Nkx2.1), and nuclear factor of
activated T cells-c3 (NFATc3). The activity of the distal region from bp -2591 to
-1102 was assessed in HeLa and mouse lung epithelial MLE-15 cells. FOXA2,
C/EBPalpha, GATA-6, TTF-1, and NFATc3 increased the activity of the Abca3
luciferase construct in a dose-dependent manner. The distal cassette conferred
activation by FOXA2, C/EBPalpha, GATA-6, TTF-1, and NFATc3 in a position- and
orientation-independent manner, serving as an enhancer-like regulatory element.
The proximal Abca3 promoter region contained multiple sterol responsive element
(SRE) binding sites. SRE binding protein (SREBP)-1c significantly increased the
activity of the Abca3 luciferase construct in a dose-dependent manner, whereas
SREBP-1a and SREBP-2 did not influence the Abca3 promoter activity. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses demonstrated the binding of SREBP-1c,
C/EBPalpha, and TTF-1 to their respective regulatory elements. Conditional
deletion of SREBP cleavage-activating protein (Scap) in respiratory epithelial
cells in the mouse lung in vivo inhibited the expression of SREBPs in concert
with Abca3. Abca3 gene expression is mediated by discrete cis-acting cassettes
that mediate pulmonary cell- and lipid-sensitive pathways regulating surfactant
homeostasis.

PMID: 17890326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Oct 26;362(3):568-74. Epub 2007 Aug 15.

Activin B mediated induction of Pdx1 in human embryonic stem cell derived
embryoid bodies.

Frandsen U(1), Porneki AD, Floridon C, Abdallah BM, Kassem M.

Author information: 
(1)KMEB Laboratory, Medical Biotechnology Center, Winslevparken 25.1, DK-5000
Odense C, Denmark. ufrandsen@health.sdh.dk

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) have the potential to provide alternative
sources for pancreatic islet grafts. In the present study we have investigated
the influence of Activin A and Activin B on the expression of the pancreas marker
gene Pdx1 in hESCs differentiated as embryoid bodies (EBs). We report here that
Activin B in a dose depend manner markedly up-regulates Pdx1 expression as
compared to Activin A and untreated cultures. Pdx1(+) cells co-express FOXA2 but 
lacks, however, co-expression with nkx6.1, a marker combination that in the
present study is shown precisely to identify embryonic and fetal pancreas anlage 
in humans. Pdx1(+) cells are found in cell clusters also expressing Serpina1 and 
FABP1, suggesting activation of intestinal/liver developmental programs.
Moreover, Activin B up-regulates Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) and its target Gli1, which 
during normal development is suppressed in the pancreatic anlage. In conclusion, 
Activin B is a potent inducer of Pdx1 as well as Shh in differentiating hESCs.
The data suggest that additional suppression of Shh signaling may be required to 
allow for proper specification of pancreatic cell lineages in hESCs.

PMID: 17761145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Blood. 2008 Jan 1;111(1):392-401. Epub 2007 Aug 22.

Regulated Fox-2 isoform expression mediates protein 4.1R splicing during
erythroid differentiation.

Yang G(1), Huang SC, Wu JY, Benz EJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 Binney St,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

A regulated splicing event in protein 4.1R pre-mRNA-the inclusion of exon
16-encoding peptides for spectrin-actin binding-occurs in late erythroid
differentiation. We defined the functional significance of an intronic splicing
enhancer, UGCAUG, and its cognate splicing factor, mFox2A, on exon 16 splicing
during differentiation. UGCAUG displays cell-type-specific splicing regulation in
a test neutral reporter and has a dose-dependent enhancing effect. Erythroid
cells express 2 UGCAUG-binding mFox-2 isoforms, an erythroid
differentiation-inducible mFox-2A and a commonly expressed mFox-2F. When
overexpressed, both enhanced internal exon splicing in an UGCAUG-dependent
manner, with mFox-2A exerting a much stronger effect than mFox-2F. A significant 
reciprocal increase in mFox-2A and decrease in mFox-2F occurred during erythroid 
differentiation and correlated with exon 16 inclusion. Furthermore,
isoform-specific expression reduction reversed mFox-2A-enhancing activity, but
not that of mFox-2F on exon 16 inclusion. Our results suggest that an erythroid
differentiation-inducible mFox-2A isoform is a critical regulator of the
differentiation-specific exon 16 splicing switch, and that its up-regulation in
late erythroid differentiation is vital for exon 16 splicing.

PMCID: PMC2200819
PMID: 17715393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Sep 14;361(1):109-15. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

A novel gene trapping for identifying genes expressed under the control of
specific transcription factors.

Naruse C(1), Fukusumi Y, Kakiuchi D, Asano M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transgenic Animal Science, Advanced Science Research Center,
Kanazawa University, Takara-machi 13-1, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan.

Gene trapping is a powerful method for identifying novel genes and for analyzing 
their functions. It is, however, difficult to select trapped genes on the basis
of their function. To identify genes regulated by transcription factors that are 
important in the mesodermal formation, we selected trapped ES clones by infection
of adenoviral vectors expressing Pax1, Brachyury, and Foxa2. Among 366 trapped
genes, seven seemed to be controlled by these transcription factors in the first 
screening. The trapped genes were identified by 5' RACE, and a Northern blotting 
revealed that expressions of three trapped genes were regulated by these
transcription factors. Expression patterns of Cx43 and HP1gamma implicated their 
functional relationships to Foxa2 in the formation of the notochord and the
neural tube. Furthermore, Wtap mutant mice derived from the trapped clone showed 
defects in the mesendoderm formation. Our results indicate that trapped ES clones
could be selected effectively using transcription factors.

PMID: 17644066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Development. 2007 Aug;134(15):2761-9. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate multiple phases of midbrain dopaminergic neuron
development in a dosage-dependent manner.

Ferri AL(1), Lin W, Mavromatakis YE, Wang JC, Sasaki H, Whitsett JA, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

The role of transcription factors in regulating the development of midbrain
dopaminergic (mDA) neurons is intensively studied owing to the involvement of
these neurons in diverse neurological disorders. Here we demonstrate novel roles 
for the forkhead/winged helix transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2 in the
specification and differentiation of mDA neurons by analysing the phenotype of
Foxa1 and Foxa2 single- and double-mutant mouse embryos. During specification,
Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate the extent of neurogenesis in mDA progenitors by
positively regulating Ngn2 (Neurog2) expression. Subsequently, Foxa1 and Foxa2
regulate the expression of Nurr1 (Nr4a2) and engrailed 1 in immature neurons and 
the expression of aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase and tyrosine hydroxylase in
mature neurons during early and late differentiation of midbrain dopaminergic
neurons. Interestingly, genetic evidence indicates that these functions require
different gene dosages of Foxa1 and Foxa2. Altogether, our results demonstrate
that Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate multiple phases of midbrain dopaminergic neuron
development in a dosage-dependent manner.

PMID: 17596284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Asian J Androl. 2007 Jul;9(4):515-21.

Epididymis-specific lipocalin promoters.

Suzuki K(1), Yu X, Chaurand P, Araki Y, Lareyre JJ, Caprioli RM, Orgebin-Crist
MC, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tohoku University Graduate School of 
Medicine, 1-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.
kichiyasuzuki@mail.tains.tohoku.ac.jp

Our goal is to decipher which DNA sequences are required for tissue-specific
expression of epididymal genes. At least 6 epididymis-specific lipocalin genes
are known. These are differently regulated and regionalized in the epididymis.
Lipocalin 5 (Lcn5 or mE-RABP) and Lipocalin 8 (Lcn8 or mEP17) are homologous
genes belonging to the epididymis-specific lipocalin gene cluster. Both the 5 kb 
promoter fragment of the Lcn5 gene and the 5.3 kb promoter fragment of the Lcn8
gene can direct transgene expression in the epididymis (Lcn5 to the distal caput 
and Lcn8 to the initial segment), indicating that these promoter fragments
contain important cis-regulatory element(s) for epididymis-specific gene
expression. To define further the fragments regulating gene expression, the Lcn5 
promoter was examined in transgenic mice and immortalized epididymal cell lines. 
After serial deletion, the 1.8 kb promoter fragment of the Lcn5 gene was
sufficient for tissue-specific and region-specific gene expression in transgenic 
mice. Transient transfection analysis revealed that a transcription factor
forkhead box A2 (Foxa2) interacts with androgen receptor and binds to the 100 bp 
fragment of the Lcn5 promoter between 1.2 kb and 1.3 kb and that Foxa2 expression
inhibits androgen-dependent induction of the Lcn5 promoter activity.
Immunohistochemistry indicated a restricted expression of Foxa2 in the epididymis
where endogenous Lcn5 gene expression is suppressed and that the Foxa2 inhibition
of the Lcn5 promoter is consistent with the lack of expression of Lcn5 in the
corpus and cauda. Our approach provides a basic strategy for further analysis of 
the epididymal lipocalin gene regulation and flexible control of epididymal
function.

PMID: 17589789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jun 19;104(25):10500-5. Epub 2007 Jun 11.

Sox9 coordinates a transcriptional network in pancreatic progenitor cells.

Lynn FC(1), Smith SB, Wilson ME, Yang KY, Nekrep N, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Hormone Research Institute, and Department of Medicine,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

During pancreas development, both the exocrine and endocrine lineages
differentiate from a common pool of progenitor cells with similarities to mature 
pancreatic duct cells. A small set of transcription factors, including Tcf2,
Onecut1, and Foxa2, has been identified in these pancreatic progenitor cells. The
Sry/HMG box transcription factor Sox9 is also expressed in the early pancreatic
epithelium and is required for normal pancreatic exocrine and endocrine
development in humans. In this study, we found Sox9 in mice specifically
expressed with the other progenitor transcription factors in both pancreatic
progenitor cells and duct cells in the adult pancreas. Sox9 directly bound to all
three genes in vitro and in intact cells, and regulated their expression. In
turn, both Foxa2 and Tcf2 regulated Sox9 expression, demonstrating feedback
circuits between these genes. Furthermore, Sox9 activated the expression of the
proendocrine factor Neurogenin3, which also depends on the other members of the
progenitor transcription network. These studies indicate that Sox9 plays a dual
role in pancreatic progenitor cells: both maintaining a stable transcriptional
network and supporting the programs by which these cells differentiate into
distinct lineages.

PMCID: PMC1965542
PMID: 17563382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Nat Genet. 2007 Jun;39(6):730-2. Epub 2007 May 21.

Tissue-specific transcriptional regulation has diverged significantly between
human and mouse.

Odom DT(1), Dowell RD, Jacobsen ES, Gordon W, Danford TW, MacIsaac KD, Rolfe PA, 
Conboy CM, Gifford DK, Fraenkel E.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA.

We demonstrate that the binding sites for highly conserved transcription factors 
vary extensively between human and mouse. We mapped the binding of four
tissue-specific transcription factors (FOXA2, HNF1A, HNF4A and HNF6) to 4,000
orthologous gene pairs in hepatocytes purified from human and mouse livers.
Despite the conserved function of these factors, from 41% to 89% of their binding
events seem to be species specific. When the same protein binds the promoters of 
orthologous genes, approximately two-thirds of the binding sites do not align.

PMCID: PMC3797512
PMID: 17529977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Endocr J. 2007 Aug;54(4):507-15. Epub 2007 May 18.

Role of FoxO Proteins in Pancreatic beta Cells.

Kitamura T(1), Ido Kitamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Signal Research Center, Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi 371-8512, Japan.

Forkhead transcription factors of the FoxO family have important roles in
cellular proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation and stress resistance. FoxO
proteins also play important roles in metabolism of complex organisms. FoxO1
regulates glucose and lipid metabolism in liver, as well as preadipocyte,
myoblast and vascular endothelial cell differentiation. In the hypothalamus, FoxO
controls food intake. In this chapter, we review the role of FoxO in pancreatic
beta cells. Pancreatic beta cells secrete insulin to maintain the plasma glucose 
levels in a strict physiological range. Defects of beta cell function cause
diabetes. The expression pattern of FoxO1 during pancreatic organogenesis is
similar to that of Pdx1, Nkx2.2 and Pax4, transcription factors known to be
critical for beta cell development. FoxO1 is expressed in a subset of pancreatic 
duct cells, in which insulin and/or Pdx1 are occasionally expressed. FoxO1
inhibits beta cell proliferation through suppression of Pdx1 by competing with
FoxA2 and protects against beta cell failure induced by oxidative stress through 
NeuroD and MafA induction. Thus, a series of FoxO1 studies in pancreas suggested 
that FoxO1 plays important roles in pancreatic beta cell differentiation,
neogenesis, proliferation and stress resistance. Genetic or pharmacological
manipulation of FoxO can be used to prevent beta cell failure or aid in the
differentiation of uncommitted endocrine progenitors into beta cells for
transplantation.

PMID: 17510498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Stem Cells. 2007 Aug;25(8):1940-53. Epub 2007 May 17.

Generation of insulin-producing islet-like clusters from human embryonic stem
cells.

Jiang J(1), Au M, Lu K, Eshpeter A, Korbutt G, Fisk G, Majumdar AS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Therapy Research, Geron Corporation, Menlo Park, CA 94025, USA.

Recent success in pancreatic islet transplantation has energized the field to
discover an alternative source of stem cells with differentiation potential to
beta cells. Generation of glucose-responsive, insulin-producing beta cells from
self-renewing, pluripotent human ESCs (hESCs) has immense potential for diabetes 
treatment. We report here the development of a novel serum-free protocol to
generate insulin-producing islet-like clusters (ILCs) from hESCs grown under
feeder-free conditions. In this 36-day protocol, hESCs were treated with sodium
butyrate and activin A to generate definitive endoderm coexpressing CXCR4 and
Sox17, and CXCR4 and Foxa2. The endoderm population was then converted into
cellular aggregates and further differentiated to Pdx1-expressing pancreatic
endoderm in the presence of epidermal growth factor, basic fibroblast growth
factor, and noggin. Soon thereafter, expression of Ptf1a and Ngn3 was detected,
indicative of further pancreatic differentiation. The aggregates were finally
matured in the presence of insulin-like growth factor II and nicotinamide. The
temporal pattern of pancreas-specific gene expression in the hESC-derived ILCs
showed considerable similarity to in vivo pancreas development, and the final
population contained representatives of the ductal, exocrine, and endocrine
pancreas. The hESC-derived ILCs contained 2%-8% human C-peptide-positive cells,
as well as glucagon- and somatostatin-positive cells. Insulin content as high as 
70 ng of insulin/mug of DNA was measured in the ILCs, representing levels higher 
than that of human fetal islets. In addition, the hESC-derived ILCs contained
numerous secretory granules, as determined by electron microscopy, and secreted
human C-peptide in a glucose-dependent manner. Disclosure of potential conflicts 
of interest is found at the end of this article.

PMID: 17510217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Nature. 2007 May 31;447(7144):550-5. Epub 2007 May 2.

PHA-4/Foxa mediates diet-restriction-induced longevity of C. elegans.

Panowski SH(1), Wolff S, Aguilaniu H, Durieux J, Dillin A.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Molecular and Cell Biology
Laboratory, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2007 May 31;447(7144):536-7.
    Gastroenterology. 2007 Nov;133(5):1729-30.

Reduced food intake as a result of dietary restriction increases the lifespan of 
a wide variety of metazoans and delays the onset of multiple age-related
pathologies. Dietary restriction elicits a genetically programmed response to
nutrient availability that cannot be explained by a simple reduction in
metabolism or slower growth of the organism. In the nematode worm Caenorhabditis 
elegans, the transcription factor PHA-4 has an essential role in the embryonic
development of the foregut and is orthologous to genes encoding the mammalian
family of Foxa transcription factors, Foxa1, Foxa2 and Foxa3. Foxa family members
have important roles during development, but also act later in life to regulate
glucagon production and glucose homeostasis, particularly in response to fasting.
Here we describe a newly discovered, adult-specific function for PHA-4 in the
regulation of diet-restriction-mediated longevity in C. elegans. The role of
PHA-4 in lifespan determination is specific for dietary restriction, because it
is not required for the increased longevity caused by other genetic pathways that
regulate ageing.

PMID: 17476212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Nov 1;102(4):1051-8.

Transcriptional regulation of aquaporin 3 by insulin.

Higuchi S(1), Kubota M, Iguchi K, Usui S, Kiho T, Hirano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Gifu Pharmaceutical University, 5-6-1
Mitahorahigashi, Gifu 502-8585, Japan.

In the current study, we identified a regulatory factor for the transcription of 
aquaporin 3 (AQP3) whose expression is repressed by insulin. We constructed a
luciferase reporter vector containing bp -1382 to -12 of the 5'-flanking region
of the AQP3 gene for a reporter gene assay and observed that luciferase activity 
in transfectants with the plasmid decreased on treatment with insulin. Serial
deletion constructs revealed two regions responsible for the insulin-mediated
repression, one between bps -1382 and -780, and the other between bps -404 and
-82. mRNA expression of forkhead box a2 (Foxa2), the binding site of which was
located between bps -1382 and -780, was found to decrease on treatment with
insulin. A mutant reporter plasmid with an altered Foxa2-binding site and siRNA
for the Foxa2 sequence counteracted the insulin-mediated repression of AQP3
transcription. These results suggest that Foxa2 is one of the transcriptional
regulators for AQP3 gene expression regulated by insulin.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17471492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jul 6;282(27):19575-88. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

MicroRNA-124a regulates Foxa2 expression and intracellular signaling in
pancreatic beta-cell lines.

Baroukh N(1), Ravier MA, Loder MK, Hill EV, Bounacer A, Scharfmann R, Rutter GA, 
Van Obberghen E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U145, Nice, F-06107, France.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding RNAs that have been implicated in
fine-tuning gene regulation, although the precise roles of many are still
unknown. Pancreatic development is characterized by the complex sequential
expression of a gamut of transcription factors. We have performed miRNA
expression profiling at two key stages of mouse embryonic pancreas development,
e14.5 and e18.5. miR-124a2 expression was strikingly increased at e18.5 compared 
with e14.5, suggesting a possible role in differentiated beta-cells. Among the
potential miR-124a gene targets identified by biocomputation, Foxa2 is known to
play a role in beta-cell differentiation. To evaluate the impact of miR-124a2 on 
gene expression, we overexpressed or down-regulated miR-124a2 in MIN6 beta-cells.
As predicted, miR-124a2 regulated Foxa2 gene expression, and that of its
downstream target, pancreatic duodenum homeobox-1 (Pdx-1). Foxa2 has been
described as a master regulator of pancreatic development and also of genes
involved in glucose metabolism and insulin secretion, including the ATP-sensitive
K(+) (K(ATP)) channel subunits, Kir6.2 and Sur-1. Correspondingly, miR-124a2
overexpression decreased, and anti-miR-124a2 increased Kir6.2 and Sur-1 mRNA
levels. Moreover, miR-124a2 modified basal and glucose- or KCl-stimulated
intracellular free Ca(2+) concentrations in single MIN6 and INS-1 (832/13)
beta-cells, without affecting the secretion of insulin or co-transfected human
growth hormone, consistent with an altered sensitivity of the beta-cell
exocytotic machinery to Ca(2+). In conclusion, whereas the precise role of
microRNA-124a2 in pancreatic development remains to be deciphered, we identify it
as a regulator of a key transcriptional protein network in beta-cells responsible
for modulating intracellular signaling.

PMID: 17462994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 Mar 21;13(11):1672-9.

Enhancement of insulin-producing cell differentiation from embryonic stem cells
using pax4-nucleofection method.

Lin HT(1), Kao CL, Lee KH, Chang YL, Chiou SH, Tsai FT, Tsai TH, Sheu DC, Ho LL, 
Ku HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research and Education, Taipei Veterans General
Hospital, Taipei, China.

AIM: To enhance the differentiation of insulin producing cell (IPC) ability from 
embryonic stem (ES) cells in vitro.
METHODS: Four-day embryoid body (EB)-formatted ES cells were dissociated as
single cells for the followed plasmid DNA delivery. The use of Nucleofector
electroporator (Amaxa biosystems, Germany) in combination with medium-contained
G418 provided a high efficiency of gene delivery for advanced selection.
Neucleofected cells were plated on the top of fibronectin-coated Petri dishes.
Addition of Ly294002 and raised the glucose in medium at 24 h before examination.
The differentiation status of these cells was monitored by semi-quantitative PCR 
(SQ-PCR) detection of the expression of relative genes, such as oct-4, sox-17,
foxa2, mixl1, pdx-1, insulin 1, glucagons and somatostatin. The percentage of IPC
population on d 18 of the experiment was investigated by immunohistochemistry
(IHC), and the content/secretion of insulin was estimated by ELISA assay. The
mice with severe combined immunodeficiency disease (SCID) pretreated with
streptozotocin (STZ) were used to eliminate plasma glucose restoration after
pax4+ ES implantation.
RESULTS: A high efficiency of gene delivery was demonstrated when neucleofection 
was used in the present study; approximately 70% cells showed DsRed expression 2 
d after neucleofection. By selection of medium-contained G418, the percentage of 
DsRed expressing cells kept high till the end of study. The pancreatic
differentiation seemed to be accelerated by pax4 nucleofection. When compared to 
the group of cells with mock control, foxa2, mixl1, pdx1, higher insulin and
somatostatin levels were detected by SQ-PCR 4 d after nucleofection in the group 
of pax4 expressing plasmid delivery. Approximately 55% of neucleofected cells
showed insulin expression 18 d after neucleofection, and only 18% of cells showed
insulin expression in mock control. The disturbance was shown by nucleofected
pax4 RNAi vector; only 8% of cells expressed insulin 18 d after nucleofection. A 
higher IPC population was also detected in the insulin content by ELISA assay,
and the glucose dependency was demonstrated in insulin secretion level. In the
animal model, improvement of average plasma glucose concentration was observed in
the group of pax-4 expressed ES of SCID mice pretreated with STZ, but no
significant difference was observed in the group of STZ-pretreated SCID mice who 
were transplanted ES with mock plasmid.
CONCLUSION: Enhancement of IPC differentiation from EB-dissociated ES cells can
be revealed by simply using pax4 expressing plasmid delivery. Not only more IPCs 
but also pancreatic differentiation-related genes can be detected by SQ-PCR.
Expression of relative genes, such as foxa 2, mixl 1, pdx-1, insulin 1 and
somatostatin after nucleofection, suggests that pax4 accelerates the whole
differentiation progress. The higher insulin production with glucose dependent
modulation suggests that pax4 expression can drive more mature IPCs. Although
further determination of the entire mechanism is required, the potential of
pax-4-nucleofected cells in medical treatment is promising.

PMCID: PMC4146945
PMID: 17461469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Diabetologia. 2007 Jun;50(6):1228-38. Epub 2007 Apr 18.

Directed differentiation of human embryonic stem cells towards a pancreatic cell 
fate.

Shim JH(1), Kim SE, Woo DH, Kim SK, Oh CH, McKay R, Kim JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, West Building/Room 304, Science Campus, 1 Anam-dong 5-ga,
Sungbuk-goo, Seoul 136-713, Republic of Korea.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The relative lack of successful pancreatic differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) may suggest that directed differentiation of
hESCs into definitive endoderm and subsequent commitment towards a pancreatic
fate are not readily achieved. The aim of this study was to investigate whether
sequential exposure of hESCs to epigenetic signals that mimic in vivo pancreatic 
development can efficiently generate pancreatic endodermal cells, and whether
these cells can be further matured and reverse hyperglycaemia upon
transplantation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The hESCs were sequentially treated with serum, activin
and retinoic acid (RA) during embryoid body formation. The patterns of gene
expression and protein production associated with embryonic germ layers and
pancreatic endoderm were analysed by RT-PCR and immunostaining. The developmental
competence and function of hESC-derived PDX1-positive cells were evaluated after 
in vivo transplantation.
RESULTS: Sequential treatment with serum, activin and RA highly upregulated the
expression of the genes encoding forkhead box protein A2 (FOXA2), SRY-box
containing gene 17 (SOX17), pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1) and
homeobox HB9 (HLXB9). The population of pancreatic endodermal cells that produced
PDX1 was significantly increased at the expense of ectodermal differentiation,
and a subset of the PDX1-positive cells also produced FOXA2, caudal-type homeobox
transcription factor 2 (CDX2), and nestin (NES). After transplantation, the
PDX1-positive cells further differentiated into mature cell types producing
insulin and glucagon, resulting in amelioration of hyperglycaemia and weight loss
in streptozotocin-treated diabetic mice.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our strategy allows the progressive differentiation
of hESCs into pancreatic endoderm capable of generating mature pancreatic cell
types that function in vivo. These findings may establish the basis of further
investigations for the purification of transplantable islet progenitors derived
from hESCs.

PMID: 17457565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Lipid Res. 2007 Jul;48(7):1499-510. Epub 2007 Apr 21.

Effects of glucose metabolism on the regulation of genes of fatty acid synthesis 
and triglyceride secretion in the liver.

Morral N(1), Edenberg HJ, Witting SR, Altomonte J, Chu T, Brown M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. nmorralc@iupui.edu

Glucose disposal induces a signal that modulates the transcriptional regulation
of genes involved in the glycolysis and lipogenesis pathways. To investigate the 
role of glucose metabolism on hepatic gene expression independently from insulin 
action, we overexpressed glucokinase, the limiting enzyme in the glycolysis
pathway, in the liver of streptozotocin-induced type 1 diabetic rats. By
microarray analysis, we observed that critical genes such as liver-type pyruvate 
kinase, malic enzyme, fatty acid synthase, and stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 were
enhanced multiple-fold, whereas genes involved in mitochondrial fatty acid
oxidation and the Krebs cycle were downregulated. Despite the increase in
expression of fatty acid synthesis genes and the presence of steatosis, no major 
alterations to the levels of genes involved in VLDL assembly and secretion, such 
as diacylglycerol acyltransferases 1 and 2 and microsomal triglyceride transfer
protein, were observed. Overall, our data suggest that the gene expression
pattern induced by glucose metabolism favors fatty acid storage in the liver
rather than secretion into the circulation.

PMID: 17449907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 1;357(2):414-20. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

Placenta-derived multipotent stem cells induced to differentiate into
insulin-positive cells.

Chang CM(1), Kao CL, Chang YL, Yang MJ, Chen YC, Sung BL, Tsai TH, Chao KC, Chiou
SH, Ku HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Taipei, Taiwan.

In the present study, we successfully isolated PDMSCs from human placental
tissues. The RT-PCR results show that PDMSCs preserved the genetic
characteristics of the primitive embryonic stage--Oct-4 and Nanog. By using
serum-free medium supplemented essential growth factors and induction medium
culture for 4 weeks, a monolayer of spindle-like PDMSCs gradually formed 3D
spheroid bodies (SB-PDMSCs). By using real-time RT-PCR, early mRNA expressions of
Pdx1, as well as the Sox17 and Foxa2 genes, were observed to be significantly
activated in SB-PDMSCs, followed by the expression of mature pancreas-related
genes (insulin, glucagon, and somatostatin). The high insulin content of
SB-PDMSCs was further confirmed by ELISA assay, and the glucose dependency was
demonstrated by the corresponding insulin secretion level. In a transplantation
study of streptozotocin-pretreated nude mice, the restoration of normoglycemia in
the SB-PDMSC treated group was further observed. In conclusion, these results
indicate that PDMSCs are an excellent source for the induced differentiation of
well-functioning insulin-positive cells. The potential of these insulin producing
cells derived from PDMSCs was also demonstrated functionally by the demonstration
of secreted insulin in vitro and effective control of blood glucose levels in
vivo.

PMID: 17433254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem J. 2007 Jul 15;405(2):359-67.

Transcriptional regulation of the distal promoter of the rat pyruvate carboxylase
gene by hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta/Foxa2 and upstream stimulatory factors in
insulinoma cells.

Boonsaen T(1), Rojvirat P, Surinya KH, Wallace JC, Jitrapakdee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Rama 6
Road, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.

PC (pyruvate carboxylase) plays a crucial role in intermediary metabolism
including glucose-induced insulin secretion in pancreatic islets. In the present 
study, we identified two regions of the 1.2 kb distal promoter, the -803/-795
site and the -408/-403 E-box upstream of the transcription start site, as the
important cis-acting elements for transcriptional activation of the luciferase
reporter gene. Site-directed mutagenesis of either one of these sites in the
context of this 1.2 kb promoter fragment, followed by transient transfections in 
the insulinoma cell line, INS-1, abolished reporter activity by approx. 50%.
However, disruption of either the -803/-795 or the -408/-403 site did not affect 
reporter gene activity in NIH 3T3 cells, suggesting that this promoter fragment
is subjected to cell-specific regulation. The nuclear proteins that bound to
these -803/-795 and -408/-403 sites were identified by gel retardation assays as 
HNF3beta (hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta)/Foxa2 (forkhead/winged helix
transcription factor box2) and USFs (upstream stimulatory factors), USF1 and
USF2, respectively. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays using antisera against
HNF3beta/Foxa2, USF1 and USF2 demonstrated that endogenous HNF3beta/Foxa2 binds
to the -803/-795 Foxa2 site, and USF1 and USF2 bind to the -408/-403 E-box
respectively in vivo, consistent with the gel retardation assay results. Although
there are weak binding sites located at regions -904 and -572 for PDX1
(pancreatic duodenal homeobox-1), a transcription factor that controls expression
of beta-cell-specific genes, it did not appear to regulate PC expression in INS-1
cells in the context of the 1.2 kb promoter fragment. The results presented here 
show that Foxa2 and USFs regulate the distal promoter of the rat PC gene in a
cell-specific manner.

PMCID: PMC1904523
PMID: 17408383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Apr 3;104(14):5919-24. Epub 2007 Mar 26.

Crucial roles of Foxa2 in mouse anterior-posterior axis polarization via
regulation of anterior visceral endoderm-specific genes.

Kimura-Yoshida C(1), Tian E, Nakano H, Amazaki S, Shimokawa K, Rossant J, Aizawa 
S, Matsuo I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Osaka Medical Center and Research
Institute for Maternal and Child Health, Osaka Prefectural Hospital Organization,
Murodo-cho, Izumi, Osaka 594-1101, Japan.

Anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) plays essential roles with respect to
anterior-posterior axis development in the early mouse embryo. To assess the
genetic cascade involved in AVE formation, the cis-regulatory elements directing 
expression of vertebrate Otx2 genes in the AVE were analyzed via generation of
transgenic mice. Otx2 expression in AVE is regulated directly by the forkhead
transcription factor, Foxa2. Moreover, Foxa2 is essential for expression of the
Wnt antagonists, Dkk1 and Cerl, in visceral endoderm during the pre- to early
streak stages; however, Foxa2 appears to be dispensable for subsequent Dkk1
expression associated with forebrain induction. Thus, we propose that Foxa2 is
crucial in early anterior-posterior axis polarization in terms of regulation of
expression of AVE-specific genes. These findings provide profound insights into
conserved roles of Foxa2 transcription factors in anterior specification
throughout the evolution of the chordate body plan.

PMCID: PMC1851592
PMID: 17389379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cancer. 2007 Mar 7;6:19.

Hedgehog pathway activity in the LADY prostate tumor model.

Gipp J(1), Gu G, Crylen C, Kasper S, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin Medical School, Department of Surgery, Division of
Urology, Clinical Sciences Center, Madison, WI 53792, USA. gipp@surgery.wisc.edu

BACKGROUND: Robust Hedgehog (Hh) signaling has been implicated as a common
feature of human prostate cancer and an important stimulus of tumor growth. The
role of Hh signaling has been studied in several xenograft tumor models, however,
the role of Hh in tumor development in a transgenic prostate cancer model has
never been examined.
RESULTS: We analyzed expression of Hh pathway components and conserved Hh target 
genes along with progenitor cell markers and selected markers of epithelial
differentiation during tumor development in the LADY transgenic mouse model.
Tumor development was associated with a selective increase in Ihh expression. In 
contrast Shh expression was decreased. Expression of the Hh target Patched (Ptc) 
was significantly decreased while Gli1 expression was not significantly altered. 
A survey of other relevant genes revealed significant increases in expression of 
Notch-1 and Nestin together with decreased expression of HNF3a/FoxA1, NPDC-1 and 
probasin.
CONCLUSION: Our study shows no evidence for a generalized increase in Hh
signaling during tumor development in the LADY mouse. It does reveal a selective 
increase in Ihh expression that is associated with increased expression of
progenitor cell markers and decreased expression of terminal differentiation
markers. These data suggest that Ihh expression may be a feature of a progenitor 
cell population that is involved in tumor development.

PMCID: PMC1820793
PMID: 17343742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Diabetes. 2007 Mar;56(3):622-33.

PED/PEA-15 regulates glucose-induced insulin secretion by restraining potassium
channel expression in pancreatic beta-cells.

Miele C(1), Raciti GA, Cassese A, Romano C, Giacco F, Oriente F, Paturzo F,
Andreozzi F, Zabatta A, Troncone G, Bosch F, Pujol A, Chneiweiss H, Formisano P, 
Beguinot F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Biology and Pathology, Federico II
University of Naples, via Sergio Pansini 5, Naples 80131, Italy.

The phosphoprotein enriched in diabetes/phosphoprotein enriched in astrocytes
(ped/pea-15) gene is overexpressed in human diabetes and causes this abnormality 
in mice. Transgenic mice with beta-cell-specific overexpression of ped/pea-15
(beta-tg) exhibited decreased glucose tolerance but were not insulin resistant.
However, they showed impaired insulin response to hyperglycemia. Islets from the 
beta-tg also exhibited little response to glucose. mRNAs encoding the Sur1 and
Kir6.2 potassium channel subunits and their upstream regulator Foxa2 were
specifically reduced in these islets. Overexpression of PED/PEA-15 inhibited the 
induction of the atypical protein kinase C (PKC)-zeta by glucose in mouse islets 
and in beta-cells of the MIN-6 and INS-1 lines. Rescue of PKC-zeta activity
elicited recovery of the expression of the Sur1, Kir6.2, and Foxa2 genes and of
glucose-induced insulin secretion in PED/PEA-15-overexpressing beta-cells. Islets
from ped/pea-15-null mice exhibited a twofold increased activation of PKC-zeta by
glucose; increased abundance of the Sur1, Kir6.2, and Foxa2 mRNAs; and enhanced
glucose effect on insulin secretion. In conclusion, PED/PEA-15 is an endogenous
regulator of glucose-induced insulin secretion, which restrains potassium channel
expression in pancreatic beta-cells. Overexpression of PED/PEA-15 dysregulates
beta-cell function and is sufficient to impair glucose tolerance in mice.

PMID: 17327429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Dev Dyn. 2007 Apr;236(4):1085-92.

System for inducible expression of cre-recombinase from the Foxa2 locus in
endoderm, notochord, and floor plate.

Frank DU(1), Elliott SA, Park EJ, Hammond J, Saijoh Y, Moon AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, Utah, USA.

We targeted the reverse tetracycline controlled transactivator (rtTA) to the
Foxa2 locus (Foxa2(ITA)) to generate a system for regulating Cre-recombinase
activity within Foxa2 expression domains, including the endoderm, notochord, and 
floor plate of early mouse embryos. The use of an internal ribosomal entry site
to obtain rtTA expression preserves Foxa2 function of the targeted allele. Cre
activity with this system reflects the level of endogenous Foxa2 activity and is 
also tightly controlled by doxycycline. The location of Cre activity within the
broader Foxa2 expression domain can be restricted by altering the timing of
doxycycline administration. Isolated floor plate expression can be obtained in
this manner. This system will provide a useful tool for manipulating gene
expression in endoderm, notochord, and floor plate, all of which are tissues with
important structural and patterning functions during embryogenesis.

PMID: 17304540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Cell Transplant. 2006;15(10):865-71.

Instant hepatic differentiation of human embryonic stem cells using activin A and
a deleted variant of HGF.

Chen Y(1), Soto-Gutierrez A, Navarro-Alvarez N, Rivas-Carrillo JD, Yamatsuji T,
Shirakawa Y, Tanaka N, Basma H, Fox IJ, Kobayashi N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

Erratum in
    Cell Transplant. 2007;16(1):97. Basma, Hesham [added]; Fox, Ira J [added].

Human embryonic stem (hES) cells have the ability to differentiate into a variety
of different cell lineages and potentially provide a source of differentiated
cells for many therapeutic uses. Here we investigated an efficient method of
hepatic differentiation from hES cells. A human ES cell line, KhES-1, was used
and maintained by a nonfeeder method. KhES-1 cells were cultured for 5 days in
the presence of human activin A (50 ng/ml) and then treated with a deleted
variant of hepatocyte growth factor (dHGF) at 0, 100, or 500 ng/ml for 7 days.
The resultant cells were biologically analyzed. The expression of the endodermal 
genes SOX17 and FOXA2 increased in KhES-1 cells after activin A treatment. In
contrast, Oct4, a self-renewal undifferentiated marker, decreased in a
time-dependent manner in KhES-1 cells. Following a 7-day treatment of the
resultant cells with dHGF, especially at 500 ng/ml, KhES-1 cells showed an
expression of the hepatic makers albumin, AFP, and CK18. Transitional electron
microscopy showed well-developed glycogen rosettes and a gap junction in KhES-1
cells treated with 500 ng/ml of dHGF. We developed an efficient method to
differentiate KhES-1 cells into hepatocyte-like cells in vitro using 50 ng/ml of 
activin A and 500 ng/ml of dHGF.

PMID: 17299990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 15;304(2):556-66. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Directed differentiation of embryonic stem cells into bladder tissue.

Oottamasathien S(1), Wang Y, Williams K, Franco OE, Wills ML, Thomas JC, Saba K, 
Sharif-Afshar AR, Makari JH, Bhowmick NA, DeMarco RT, Hipkens S, Magnuson M,
Brock JW 3rd, Hayward SW, Pope JC 4th, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, and
Division of Pediatric Urology, Vanderbilt Children's Hospital Nashville, TN
37232-2765, USA. siam.oottamasathien@vanderbilt.edu

Manipulatable models of bladder development which interrogate specific pathways
are badly needed. Such models will allow a systematic investigation of the
multitude of pathologies which result from developmental defects of the urinary
bladder. In the present communication, we describe a model in which mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells are directed to differentiate to form bladder tissue by
specific interactions with fetal bladder mesenchyme. This model allows us to
visualize the various stages in the differentiation of urothelium from ES cells, 
including the commitment to an endodermal cell lineage, with the temporal profile
characterized by examining the induction of specific endodermal transcription
factors (Foxa1 and Foxa2). In addition, final functional urothelial
differentiation was characterized by examining uroplakin expression. It is well
established that ES cells will spontaneously develop teratomas when grown within 
immunocompromised mouse hosts. We determined the specific mesenchymal to ES cell 
ratios necessary to dictate organ-specific differentiation while completely
suppressing teratomatous growth. Embryonic mesenchyme is well established as an
inductive tissue which dictates organ-specific programming of epithelial tissues.
The present study demonstrates that embryonic bladder mesenchyme can also steer
ES cells towards developing specific endodermal derived urothelium. These
approaches allow us to capture specific stages of stem cell differentiation and
to better define stem cell hierarchies.

PMCID: PMC1994155
PMID: 17289017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. FASEB J. 2007 May;21(7):1445-62. Epub 2007 Feb 5.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF6) and FOXA2 are key regulators in colorectal
liver metastases.

Lehner F(1), Kulik U, Klempnauer J, Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany.

The molecular causes leading to secondary liver malignancies are unknown. Here we
report regulation of major hepatic nuclear factors in human colorectal liver
metastases and primary colonic cancer. Notably, the genes coding for HNF6,
HNF1beta, and C/EBPgamma were selectively regulated in liver metastases. We
therefore studied protein expression of regulated transcription factors and found
unacetylated HNF6 to be a hallmark of colorectal liver metastases. For its known 
interaction with HNF6, we investigated expression of FOXA2, which we found to be 
specifically induced in colorectal liver metastases. By electromobility shift
assay, we examined DNA binding of disease regulated transcription factors.
Essentially, no HNF6 DNA binding was observed. We also searched for sequence
variations in the DNA binding domains of HNF6, but did not identify any mutation.
Furthermore, we probed for expression of 28 genes targeted by HNF6. Mostly
transcript expression was repressed except for tumor growth. In conclusion, we
show HNF6 protein expression to be driven by the hepatic environment. Its
expression is not observed in healthy colon or primary colonic cancer. HNF6 DNA
binding is selectively abrogated through lack of post-translational modification 
and interaction with FOXA2. Targeting of FOXA2 and HNF6 may therefore enable
mechanism-based therapy for colorectal liver metastases.

PMID: 17283222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2007 Mar 30;282(13):9768-76. Epub 2007 Jan 30.

Nuclear pregnane X receptor cross-talk with FoxA2 to mediate drug-induced
regulation of lipid metabolism in fasting mouse liver.

Nakamura K(1), Moore R, Negishi M, Sueyoshi T.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenetics Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina 27709, USA.

Upon drug activation, the nuclear pregnane X receptor (PXR) regulates not only
hepatic drug but also energy metabolism. Using Pxr(-/-) mice, we have now
investigated the PXR-mediated repression of lipid metabolism in the fasting
livers. Treatment with PXR activator pregnenolone 16alpha-carbonitrile (PCN)
down-regulated the mRNA levels of carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (in
beta-oxidation) and mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutarate-CoA synthase 2 (in 
ketogenesis) in wild-type (Pxr(+/+)) mice only. In contrast, the stearoyl-CoA
desaturase 1 (in lipogenesis) mRNA was up-regulated in the PCN-treated Pxr(+/+)
mice. Reflecting these up- and down-regulations and consistent with decreased
energy metabolism, the levels of hepatic triglycerides and of serum
3-hydroxybutylate were increased and decreased, respectively, in the PCN-treated 
Pxr(+/+) mice. Using gel shift, glutathione S-transferase pull-down and
cell-based reporter assays, we then examined whether PXR could cross-talk with
the insulin response forkhead factor FoxA2 to repress the transcription of the
Cpt1a and Hmgcs2 genes, because FoxA2 activates these genes in fasting liver. PXR
directly bound to FoxA2 and repressed its activation of the Cpt1a and Hmgcs2
promoters. Moreover, ChIP assays showed that PCN treatment attenuated the binding
of FoxA2 to these promoters in fasting Pxr(+/+) but not Pxr(-/-) mice. These
results are consistent with the conclusion that PCN-activated PXR represses
FoxA2-mediated transcription of Ctp1a and Hmgcs2 genes in fasting liver.

PMCID: PMC2258557
PMID: 17267396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Mar;27(6):2155-65. Epub 2007 Jan 12.

Physical and functional interactions between homeodomain NKX2.1 and winged
helix/forkhead FOXA1 in lung epithelial cells.

Minoo P(1), Hu L, Xing Y, Zhu NL, Chen H, Li M, Borok Z, Li C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Southern California Keck School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. minoo@usc.edu

NKX2.1 is a homeodomain transcription factor that controls development of the
brain, lung, and thyroid. In the lung, Nkx2.1 is expressed in a proximo-distal
gradient and activates specific genes in phenotypically distinct epithelial cells
located along this axis. The mechanisms by which NKX2.1 controls its target genes
may involve interactions with other transcription factors. We examined whether
NKX2.1 interacts with members of the winged-helix/forkhead family of FOXA
transcription factors to regulate two spatially and cell type-specific genes, SpC
and Ccsp. The results show that NKX2.1 interacts physically and functionally with
FOXA1. The nature of the interaction is inhibitory and occurs through the NKX2.1 
homeodomain in a DNA-independent manner. On SpC, which lacks a FOXA1 binding
site, FOXA1 attenuates NKX2.1-dependent transcription. Inhibition of FOXA1 by
small interfering RNA increased SpC mRNA, demonstrating the in vivo relevance of 
this finding. In contrast, FOXA1 and NKX2.1 additively activate transcription
from Ccsp, which includes both NKX2.1 and FOXA1 binding sites. In electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, the GST-FOXA1 fusion protein interferes with the formation
of NKX2.1 transcriptional complexes by potentially masking the latter's
homeodomain DNA binding function. These findings suggest a novel mode of
selective gene regulation by proximo-distal gradient distribution of and
functional interactions between forkhead and homeodomain transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1820505
PMID: 17220277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;27(3):830-41. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Role for Fox-1/Fox-2 in mediating the neuronal pathway of calcitonin/calcitonin
gene-related peptide alternative RNA processing.

Zhou HL(1), Baraniak AP, Lou H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid Ave.,
Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. hxl47@case.edu

Although multiple regulatory elements and protein factors are known to regulate
the non-neuronal pathway of alternative processing of the calcitonin/calcitonin
gene-related peptide (CGRP) pre-mRNA, the mechanisms controlling the
neuron-specific pathway have remained elusive. Here we report the identification 
of Fox-1 and Fox-2 proteins as novel regulators that mediate the neuron-specific 
splicing pattern. Fox-1 and Fox-2 proteins function to repress exon 4 inclusion, 
and this effect depends on two UGCAUG elements surrounding the 3' splice site of 
the calcitonin-specific exon 4. In neuron-like cells, mutation of a subset of
UGCAUG elements promotes the non-neuronal pattern in which exon 4 is included. In
HeLa cells, overexpression of Fox-1 or Fox-2 protein decreases exon 4 inclusion. 
Fox-1 and Fox-2 proteins interact with the UGCAUG elements specifically and
regulate splicing by blocking U2AF(65) binding to the 3' splice site upstream of 
exon 4. We further investigated the inter-relationship between the UGCAUG
silencer elements and the previously identified intronic and exonic splicing
regulatory elements and found that exon 4 is regulated by an intricate balance of
positive and negative regulation. These results define a critical role for Fox-1 
and Fox-2 proteins in exon 4 inclusion of calcitonin/CGRP pre-mRNA and establish 
a regulatory network that controls the fate of exon 4.

PMCID: PMC1800674
PMID: 17101796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Dec 29;351(4):877-82. Epub 2006 Nov 2.

N-cadherin is a useful marker for the progenitor of cardiomyocytes differentiated
from mouse ES cells in serum-free condition.

Honda M(1), Kurisaki A, Ohnuma K, Okochi H, Hamazaki TS, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Sciences, The University
of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Cardiomyocytes are known to differentiate spontaneously from embryonic stem (ES) 
cells when they formed aggregates, so called "embryoid bodies", in the presence
of serum. In this study, we explored the induction of cardiomyocytes from mouse
ES cells in chemically defined serum-free medium by using a mesoderm-inducing
factor, BMP4. Comparing the different inductive methods, we found a candidate
cell surface marker, N-cadherin, for cardiomyocyte progenitors from ES cells.
N-cadherin-positive cells highly expressed cardiogenic markers, Nkx2.5, Tbx5, and
Isl1, and showed a high differentiation rate into cardiomyocyte lineage. These
results indicate that N-cadherin can be a useful cell surface marker for the
progenitors of cardiomyocyte differentiated from ES cells in the serum-free
culture.

PMID: 17097609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Cell Biol. 2006 Nov 6;175(3):505-14.

Conditional deletion of beta1 integrins in the intestinal epithelium causes a
loss of Hedgehog expression, intestinal hyperplasia, and early postnatal
lethality.

Jones RG(1), Li X, Gray PD, Kuang J, Clayton F, Samowitz WS, Madison BB, Gumucio 
DL, Kuwada SK.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Conditional deletion of beta1 integrins in the intestinal epithelium, unlike in
epidermal and mammary epithelia, of mice does not result in decreased cell
adhesion and proliferation, but instead causes a profound increase in epithelial 
proliferation with dysplasia and polypoid structures. The increased epithelial
proliferation inhibited epithelial differentiation that caused severe
malnutrition and early postnatal lethality. The striking similarities between
beta1 integrin-deleted mice and neonatal mice with defective Hedgehog signaling
led to the discovery that Hedgehog expression was markedly reduced in the former 
mice. beta1 integrins were found to drive the expression of Hedgehogs in
intestinal epithelial cells in an HNF-3beta (Foxa2)-dependent fashion. The
expression of Tcf-4, a transcription factor known to be required for intestinal
epithelial stem cell proliferation, was increased and mislocalized in the
intestinal epithelia of the beta1 integrin-deleted mice and in newborn mice
treated with the Hedgehog signaling inhibitor cyclopamine. This study shows that 
beta1 integrins are key regulators of proliferation and homeostasis in the
intestine and achieve this not through anchorage-dependent effects but by
generating Hh expression and signaling.

PMCID: PMC2064526
PMID: 17088430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Nat Biotechnol. 2006 Nov;24(11):1402-11. Epub 2006 Nov 5.

BMP-4 is required for hepatic specification of mouse embryonic stem cell-derived 
definitive endoderm.

Gouon-Evans V(1), Boussemart L, Gadue P, Nierhoff D, Koehler CI, Kubo A, Shafritz
DA, Keller G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene and Cell Medicine, Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, 1425 Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10029, USA.

When differentiated in the presence of activin A in serum-free conditions, mouse 
embryonic stem cells efficiently generate an endoderm progenitor population
defined by the coexpression of either Brachyury, Foxa2 and c-Kit, or c-Kit and
Cxcr4. Specification of these progenitors with bone morphogenetic protein-4 in
combination with basic fibroblast growth factor and activin A results in the
development of hepatic populations highly enriched (45-70%) for cells that
express the alpha-fetoprotein and albumin proteins. These cells also express
transcripts of Afp, Alb1, Tat, Cps1, Cyp7a1 and Cyp3a11; they secrete albumin,
store glycogen, show ultrastructural characteristics of mature hepatocytes, and
are able to integrate into and proliferate in injured livers in vivo and mature
into hepatocytes expressing dipeptidyl peptidase IV or fumarylacetoacetate
hydrolase. Together, these findings establish a developmental pathway in
embryonic stem cell differentiation cultures that leads to efficient generation
of cells with an immature hepatocytic phenotype.

PMID: 17086172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Nov 7;103(45):16806-11. Epub 2006 Oct 31.

Wnt and TGF-beta signaling are required for the induction of an in vitro model of
primitive streak formation using embryonic stem cells.

Gadue P(1), Huber TL, Paddison PJ, Keller GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene and Cell Medicine, Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, 1 Gustave Levy Place, Box 1496, New York, NY 10029,
USA.

The establishment of the primitive streak and its derivative germ layers,
mesoderm and endoderm, are prerequisite steps in the formation of many tissues.
To model these developmental stages in vitro, an ES cell line was established
that expresses CD4 from the foxa2 locus in addition to GFP from the brachyury
locus. A GFP-Bry(+) population expressing variable levels of CD4-Foxa2 developed 
upon differentiation of this ES cell line. Analysis of gene-expression patterns
and developmental potential revealed that the CD4-Foxa2(hi)GFP-Bry(+) population 
displays characteristics of the anterior primitive streak, whereas the
CD4-Foxa2(lo)GFP-Bry(+) cells resemble the posterior streak. Using this model, we
were able to demonstrate that Wnt and TGF-beta/nodal/activin signaling
simultaneously were required for the generation of the CD4-Foxa2(+)GFP-Bry(+)
population. Wnt or low levels of activin-induced a posterior primitive streak
population, whereas high levels of activin resulted in an anterior streak fate.
Finally, sustained activin signaling was found to stimulate endoderm commitment
from the CD4-Foxa2(+)GFP-Bry(+) ES cell population. These findings demonstrate
that the early developmental events involved in germ-layer induction in the
embryo are recapitulated in the ES cell model and uncover insights into the
signaling pathways involved in the establishment of mesoderm and endoderm.

PMCID: PMC1636536
PMID: 17077151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Bioinformatics. 2007 Jan 1;23(1):21-9. Epub 2006 Oct 18.

Computational prediction of novel components of lung transcriptional networks.

Martinez MJ(1), Smith AD, Li B, Zhang MQ, Harrod KS.

Author information: 
(1)Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, 2425 Ridgecrest Dr SE, Albuquerque,
NM 87108, USA.

MOTIVATION: Little is known regarding the transcriptional mechanisms involved in 
forming and maintaining epithelial cell lineages of the mammalian respiratory
tract.
RESULTS: Herein, a motif discovery approach was used to identify novel
transcriptional regulators in the lung using genes previously found to be
regulated by Foxa2 or Wnt signaling pathways. A human-mouse comparison of both
novel and known motifs was also performed. Some of the factors and families
identified here were previously shown to be involved epithelial cell
differentiation (ETS family, HES-1 and MEIS-1), and ciliogenesis (RFX family),
but have never been characterized in lung epithelia. Other unidentified
over-represented motifs suggest the existence of novel mammalian lung
transcription factors. Of the fraction of motifs examined we describe 25
transcription factor family predictions for lung. Fifteen novel factors were
shown here to be expressed in mouse lung, and/or human bronchial or distal lung
epithelial tissues or lung epithelial cell lineages.
AVAILABILITY: DME: http://rulai.cshl.edu/dme. MATCOMPARE:
http://rulai.cshl.edu/MatCompare. MOTIFCLASS is available from the authors.

PMID: 17050569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2006 Dec;63(24):2922-38.

Transcriptional control in the mammalian liver: liver development, perinatal
repression, and zonal gene regulation.

Spear BT(1), Jin L, Ramasamy S, Dobierzewska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Kentucky College of Medicine, 800 Rose Street, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.
bspear@uky.edu

Liver function is crucial for maintaining metabolic homeostasis in mammals.
Numerous genes must be properly regulated for the liver to develop and perform a 
variety of activities. Several recent gene-knockout studies in mice have
clarified the roles of GATA6, HNF4alpha, and Foxa1/Foxa2 in early stages of liver
formation. After the liver forms, transcriptional changes continue to occur;
during the perinatal period, certain genes such as alpha-fetoprotein and H19 are 
silenced, others are activated, and position-dependent (or zonal) regulation is
established. Zhx2 was recently identified as one factor involved in postnatal
repression of alpha-fetoprotein and other genes. Furthermore, several studies
indicate that negative regulation is involved in the zonal control of glutamine
synthetase. Finally, exciting new evidence indicates that signaling through the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is also involved in zonal regulation in the adult liver.

PMID: 17041810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2006 Oct;53(5):873-87, viii.

Transcriptional regulation of perinatal lung maturation.

Whitsett JA(1), Matsuzaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
3333 Burnet Avenue Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA. jeff.whitsett@cchmc.org

Respiration at birth depends on maturation changes in lung tissue architecture,
cell differentiation, and gene expression. At the transcriptional level,
maturation is controlled by the actions of a group of transcription factors
mediating gene expression in the lung. A network of transcription factors
regulates gene expression in the respiratory epithelium, which then influences
cell maturation throughout the lung. Glucocorticoids (via the glucocorticoid
receptor), acting primarily in the pulmonary mesenchyme, influence maturation in 
the respiratory epithelium. Elucidation of the intersecting pathways controlling 
perinatal lung function may provide opportunities to induce pulmonary maturation 
in preterm infants at risk for respiratory distress syndrome before birth, and
will help identify genes and processes important for various aspects of lung
function.

PMID: 17027615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Clin Invest. 2006 Oct;116(10):2597-609. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Calcineurin/Nfat signaling is required for perinatal lung maturation and
function.

Davé V(1), Childs T, Xu Y, Ikegami M, Besnard V, Maeda Y, Wert SE, Neilson JR,
Crabtree GR, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. davev0@cchmc.org

Pulmonary surfactant proteins and lipids are required for lung function after
birth. Lung immaturity and resultant surfactant deficiency cause respiratory
distress syndrome, a common disorder contributing to morbidity and mortality in
preterm infants. Surfactant synthesis increases prior to birth in association
with formation of the alveoli that mediate efficient gas exchange. To identify
mechanisms controlling perinatal lung maturation, the Calcineurin b1 (Cnb1) gene 
was deleted in the respiratory epithelium of the fetal mouse. Deletion of Cnb1
caused respiratory failure after birth and inhibited the structural maturation of
the peripheral lung. Synthesis of surfactant and a lamellar body-associated
protein, ABC transporter A3 (ABCA3), was decreased prior to birth. Nuclear factor
of activated T cells (Nfat) calcineurin-dependent 3 (Nfatc3), a transcription
factor modulated by calcineurin, was identified as a direct activator of Sftpa,
Sftpb, Sftpc, Abca3, Foxa1, and Foxa2 genes. The calcineurin/Nfat pathway
controls the morphologic maturation of lungs prior to birth and regulates
expression of genes involved in surfactant homeostasis that are critical for
adaptation to air breathing.

PMCID: PMC1570374
PMID: 16998587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2007 Feb;36(2):244-53. Epub 2006 Sep 15.

IL-13 and epidermal growth factor receptor have critical but distinct roles in
epithelial cell mucin production.

Zhen G(1), Park SW, Nguyenvu LT, Rodriguez MW, Barbeau R, Paquet AC, Erle DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94143-2922, USA.

Overproduction of mucus is a central feature of asthma. The cytokine, IL-13,
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), and transcription factor, FOXA2, have
each been implicated in mucus production, but the mechanistic relationships
between these molecules are not yet well understood. To address this, we
established a primary normal human bronchial epithelial cell culture system with 
IL-13-induced mucus production and gene transcript expression changes similar to 
those seen in vivo in mice. IL-13 did not stimulate release of the EGFR ligand,
transforming growth factor (TGF)-alpha. However, there was constitutive release
of TGF-alpha from normal human bronchial epithelial cells, and inhibition of
TGF-alpha or EGFR reduced both constitutive and IL-13-induced mucin production.
Microarray analysis revealed that IL-13 and the EGFR pathway appear to have
almost completely independent effects on transcript expression. IL-13 induced a
relatively small set of transcripts, including several novel transcripts that
might play a role in pathogenesis of allergic airway disease. In contrast, EGFR
activity had extensive effects, including altered expression of many transcripts 
associated with cell metabolism, survival, transcription, and differentiation.
One of the few common effects of IL-13 and EGFR signaling was decreased
expression of FOXA2, which is known to prevent mucus production. We conclude that
the IL-13 and EGFR pathways make critical but quite distinct contributions to
gene regulation in airway epithelial cells, and that both pathways affect
expression of the key transcription factor, FOXA2, a known regulator of mucus
production.

PMCID: PMC1899314
PMID: 16980555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2006 Oct;63(19-20):2317-28.

The Foxa family of transcription factors in development and metabolism.

Friedman JR(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Abramson Research Center, Room
1007B, 3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The Foxa subfamily of winged helix/forkhead box (Fox) transcription factors has
been the subject of genetic and biochemical study for over 15 years. During this 
time its three members, Foxa1, Foxa2 and Foxa3, have been found to play important
roles in multiple stages of mammalian life, beginning with early development,
continuing during organogenesis, and finally in metabolism and homeostasis in the
adult. Foxa2 is required for the formation of the node and notochord, and in its 
absence severe defects in gastrulation, neural tube patterning, and gut
morphogenesis result in embryonic lethality. Foxa1 and Foxa2 cooperate to
establish competence in foregut endoderm and are required for normal development 
of endoderm-derived organs such as the liver, pancreas, lungs, and prostate. In
post-natal life, members of the Foxa family control glucose metabolism through
the regulation of multiple target genes in the liver, pancreas, and adipose
tissue. Insight into the unique molecular basis of Foxa function has been
obtained from recent genetic and genomic data, which identify the Foxa proteins
as 'pioneer factors' whose binding to promoters and enhancers enable chromatin
access for other tissue-specific transcription factors.

PMID: 16909212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Aug;26(15):5735-43.

FoxA2, Nkx2.2, and PDX-1 regulate islet beta-cell-specific mafA expression
through conserved sequences located between base pairs -8118 and -7750 upstream
from the transcription start site.

Raum JC(1), Gerrish K, Artner I, Henderson E, Guo M, Sussel L, Schisler JC,
Newgard CB, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
School of Medical Center,723 Light Hall, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

The MafA transcription factor is both critical to islet beta-cell function and
has a unique pancreatic cell-type-specific expression pattern. To localize the
potential transcriptional regulatory region(s) involved in directing expression
to the beta cell, areas of identity within the 5' flanking region of the mouse,
human, and rat mafA genes were found between nucleotides -9389 and -9194, -8426
and -8293, -8118 and -7750, -6622 and -6441, -6217 and -6031, and -250 and +56
relative to the transcription start site. The identity between species was
greater than 75%, with the highest found between bp -8118 and -7750 (
approximately 94%, termed region 3). Region 3 was the only upstream mammalian
conserved region found in chicken mafA (88% identity). In addition, region 3
uniquely displayed beta-cell-specific activity in cell-line-based reporter
assays. Important regulators of beta-cell formation and function, PDX-1, FoxA2,
and Nkx2.2, were shown to specifically bind to region 3 in vivo using the
chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Mutational and functional analyses
demonstrated that FoxA2 (bp -7943 to -7910), Nkx2.2 (bp -7771 to -7746), and
PDX-1 (bp -8087 to -8063) mediated region 3 activation. Consistent with a role in
transcription, small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of PDX-1 led to decreased
mafA mRNA production in INS-1-derived beta-cell lines (832/13 and 832/3), while
MafA expression was undetected in the pancreatic epithelium of Nkx2.2 null
animals. These results suggest that beta-cell-type-specific mafA transcription is
principally controlled by region 3-acting transcription factors that are
essential in the formation of functional beta cells.

PMCID: PMC1592775
PMID: 16847327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Biol. 2006 Aug 15;296(2):458-75. Epub 2006 Jun 14.

Roles of organizer factors and BMP antagonism in mammalian forebrain
establishment.

Yang YP(1), Klingensmith J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
27710-3709, USA.

A critical question in mammalian development is how the forebrain is established.
In amphibians, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) antagonism emanating from the
gastrula organizer is key. Roles of BMP antagonism and the organizer in mammals
remain unclear. Anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) promotes early mouse head
development, but its function is controversial. Here, we explore the timing and
regulation of forebrain establishment in the mouse. Forebrain specification
requires tissue interaction through the late streak stage of gastrulation.
Foxa2(-/-) embryos lack both the organizer and its BMP antagonists, yet about 25%
show weak forebrain gene expression. A similar percentage shows ectopic AVE gene 
expression distally. The distal VE may thus be a source of forebrain promoting
signals in these embryos. In wild-type ectoderm explants, AVE promoted forebrain 
specification, while anterior mesendoderm provided maintenance signals.
Embryological and molecular data suggest that the AVE is a source of active BMP
antagonism in vivo. In prespecification ectoderm explants, exogenous BMP
antagonists triggered forebrain gene expression and inhibited posterior gene
expression. Conversely, BMP inhibited forebrain gene expression, an effect that
could be antagonized by anterior mesendoderm, and promoted expression of some
posterior genes. These results lead to a model in which BMP antagonism supplied
by exogenous tissues promotes forebrain establishment and maintenance in the
murine ectoderm.

PMID: 16839541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Development. 2006 Aug;133(15):2835-44.

Ci-FoxA-a is the earliest zygotic determinant of the ascidian anterior ectoderm
and directly activates Ci-sFRP1/5.

Lamy C(1), Rothbächer U, Caillol D, Lemaire P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie du Développement de Marseille, UMR 6216, CNRS/Université 
de la Méditerranée, Parc Scientifique de Luminy, Case 907, F-13288 Marseille
Cedex 9, France. lamy@ibdm.univ-mrs.fr

This work focuses on the anteroposterior patterning of the ectoderm in the
invertebrate chordate Ciona intestinalis. Previous work indicated that, by the
eight-cell stage, the anterior and posterior animal blastomeres have acquired
different properties, including a differential responsiveness to inducing signals
from the underlying mesendoderm. Here, we investigated the molecular basis of
this distinction. For this, we studied the regulation of the earliest marker
specific for the anterior ectoderm, Ci-sFRP1/5, which is activated at the 64-cell
stage. We first found that the activation of this marker in the anterior ectoderm
does not involve communication with other lineages. We then identified, by
phylogenetic footprinting and deletion analysis, a short conserved minimal
enhancer driving the onset of expression of Ci-sFRP1/5. We showed that this
enhancer was a direct target of the Ci-FoxA-a gene, a FoxA/HNF3 orthologue
expressed in anterior ectodermal and mesendodermal lineages from the eight-cell
stage. Gain- and loss-of-function experiments revealed that Ci-FoxA-a is
necessary and sufficient within the ectoderm to impose an ectodermal anterior
identity, and to repress the posterior programme. Thus, Ci-FoxA-a constitutes a
major early zygotic anterior determinant for the ascidian ectoderm, acting
autonomously in this territory, prior to the onset of vegetal inductions.
Interestingly, while vertebrate FoxA2 are also involved in the regionalization of
the ectoderm, they are thought to act during gastrulation to control, in the
mesendoderm, the expression of organizer signals. We discuss the evolution of
chordate ectodermal patterning in light of our findings.

PMID: 16835437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cloning Stem Cells. 2006 Summer;8(2):96-107.

Endoderm and pancreatic islet lineage differentiation from human embryonic stem
cells.

Xu X(1), Kahan B, Forgianni A, Jing P, Jacobson L, Browning V, Treff N, Odorico
J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Transplantation, Department of Surgery, University of Wisconsin
School of Medicine and Public Health, University Hospital, 600 Highland Avenue,
Madison, WI 53792, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells (HESCs) are a potential source of insulin-producing
tissue for transplantation. Recent studies have begun to define factors that
promote definitive endoderm formation from HESCs, but conditions permitting
complete islet specification in vitro have not been described. Here, we study
spontaneous differentiation of HESCs to definitive endoderm and pancreatic
progenitor cells, and begin to determine which aspects of the protocol are
required for this cell fate commitment. HESCs were differentiated in culture for 
up to 10 weeks, including an embryoid body (EB) formation step. Modifications to 
the protocol included elimination of the EB phase, varying initial cell cluster
size when forming EBs, and addition of mesoderm-derived cells to EBs.
Differentiated cells were analyzed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry. HESCs are capable of spontaneous
differentiation to cells expressing the definitive endoderm and pancreatic
progenitor markers Foxa2, Sox17, and Pdx1, and ultimately, some cells express
islet endocrine hormones. This differentiation occurs to a much greater extent
when an EB formation step is included. Increased expression of endoderm markers
during and after EB formation also correlated strongly with the size of cell
clusters used to start EBs, as well as the addition of mesoderm- derived
embryonic cells. This study demonstrates that a subset of differentiated HESC
progeny adopt an endoderm fate and exhibit the capacity for further pancreatic
lineage specification in vitro. Basal conditions were established for examining
factors that can commit HESC-derived endoderm cells to specific pancreatic
lineages.

PMID: 16776601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Nov;291(5):E982-94. Epub 2006 Jun 13.

Limited role for SREBP-1c in defective glucose-induced insulin secretion from
Zucker diabetic fatty rat islets: a functional and gene profiling analysis.

Parton LE(1), McMillen PJ, Shen Y, Docherty E, Sharpe E, Diraison F, Briscoe CP, 
Rutter GA.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Signaling Laboratories and Department of Biochemistry, School
of Medical Sciences, University of Bristol, Bristol, United Kingdom.

Accumulation of intracellular lipid may contribute to defective insulin secretion
in type 2 diabetes. Although Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF; fa/fa) rat islets are
fat-laden and overexpress the lipogenic master gene, sterol regulatory element
binding protein 1c (SREBP-1c), the contribution of SREBP-1c to the secretory
defects observed in this model remains unclear. Here we compare the gene
expression profile of lean control (fa/+) and ZDF rat islets in the absence or
presence of dominant-negative SREBP-1c (SREBP-1c DN). ZDF islets displayed
elevated basal insulin secretion at 3 mmol/l glucose but a severely depressed
response to 17 mmol/l glucose. While SREBP-1c DN reduced basal insulin secretion 
from ZDF islets, glucose-stimulated insulin secretion was not improved. Of 57
genes differentially regulated in ZDF islets and implicated in glucose
metabolism, vesicle trafficking, ion fluxes, and/or exocytosis, 21 were
upregulated and 5 were suppressed by SREBP-1c DN. Genes underrepresented in ZDF
islets were either unaffected (Glut-2, Kir6.2, Rab3), stimulated
(voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channel subunit alpha1D, CPT2, SUR2, rab9, syt13), or
inhibited (syntaxin 7, secretogranin-2) by SREBP-1c inhibition. Correspondingly, 
SREBP-1c DN largely corrected decreases in the expression of the transcription
factors Pdx-1 and MafA but did not affect the abnormalities in Pax6, Arx, hepatic
nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha), HNF3beta/Forkhead box-a2 (Foxa2), inducible
cyclic AMP early repressor (ICER), or transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2)
expression observed in ZDF islets. We conclude that upregulation of SREBP-1c and 
mild increases in triglyceride content do not explain defective
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from ZDF rats. However, overexpression of
SREBP-1c may contribute to enhanced basal insulin secretion in this model.

PMID: 16772326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Dev Growth Differ. 2006 Jun;48(5):283-95.

Development of the endoderm and gut in medaka, Oryzias latipes.

Kobayashi D(1), Jindo T, Naruse K, Takeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

We performed an extensive analysis of endodermal development and gut tube
morphogenesis in the medaka embryo by histology and in situ hybridization. The
markers used in these analyses included sox17, sox32, foxA2, gata-4, -5, -6 and
shh. sox17, sox32, foxA2, and gata-5 and -6 are expressed in the early endoderm
to the onset of gut tube formation. Sections of medaka embryos hybridized with
foxA2, a pan-endodermal marker during gut morphogenesis, demonstrated that gut
tube formation is initiated in the anterior portion and that the anterior and
mid/posterior gut undergo distinct morphogenetic processes. Tube formation in the
anterior endoderm that is fated to the pharynx and esophagus is much delayed and 
appears to be independent of gut morphogenesis. The overall aspects of medaka gut
development are similar to those of zebrafish, except that zebrafish tube
formation initiates at both the anterior and posterior portions. Our results
therefore describe both molecular and morphological aspects of medaka digestive
system development that will be necessary for the characterization of medaka
mutants.

PMID: 16759279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Oct;20(10):2418-31. Epub 2006 Jun 1.

The role of forkhead box A2 to restrict androgen-regulated gene expression of
lipocalin 5 in the mouse epididymis.

Yu X(1), Suzuki K, Wang Y, Gupta A, Jin R, Orgebin-Crist MC, Matusik R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Murine epididymal retinoic acid-binding protein [or lipocalin 5 (Lcn5)] is
synthesized and secreted by the principal cells of the mouse middle/distal caput 
epididymidis. A 5-kb promoter fragment of the Lcn5 gene can dictate
androgen-dependent and epididymis region-specific gene expression in transgenic
mice. Here, we reported that the 1.8-kb Lcn5 promoter confers epididymis
region-specific gene expression in transgenic mice. To decipher the mechanism
that directs transcription, 14 chimeric constructs that sequentially removed 100 
bp of 1.8-kb Lcn5 promoter were generated and transfected into epididymal cells
and nonepididymal cells. Transient transfection analysis revealed that 1.3 kb
promoter fragment gave the strongest response to androgens. Between the 1.2-kb to
1.3-kb region, two androgen receptor (AR) binding sites were identified. Adjacent
to AR binding sites, a Foxa2 [Fox (Forkhead box) subclass A] binding site was
confirmed by gel shift assay. Similar Foxa binding sites were also found on the
promoters of human and rat Lcn5, indicating the Foxa binding site is conserved
among species. We previously reported that among the three members of Foxa
family, Foxa1 and Foxa3 were absent in the epididymis whereas Foxa2 was detected 
in epididymal principal cells. Here, we report that Foxa2 displays a
region-specific expression pattern along the epididymis: no staining observed in 
initial segment, light staining in proximal caput, gradiently heavier staining in
middle and distal caput, and strongest staining in corpus and cauda, regions with
little or no expression of Lcn5. In transient transfection experiments, Foxa2
expression inhibits AR induction of the Lcn5 promoter, which is consistent with
the lack of expression of Lcn5 in the corpus and cauda. We conclude that Foxa2
functions as a repressor that restricts AR regulation of Lcn5 to a
segment-specific pattern in the epididymis.

PMID: 16740652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 15;295(2):743-55. Epub 2006 Apr 7.

Absence of Nodal signaling promotes precocious neural differentiation in the
mouse embryo.

Camus A(1), Perea-Gomez A, Moreau A, Collignon J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement des Vertébrés, Institut Jacques Monod UMR 7592
CNRS, Universités Paris 6 et 7, 2 place Jussieu, 75251 Paris, France.
acamus@ijm.jussieu.fr

After implantation, mouse embryos deficient for the activity of the transforming 
growth factor-beta member Nodal fail to form both the mesoderm and the definitive
endoderm. They also fail to specify the anterior visceral endoderm, a specialized
signaling center which has been shown to be required for the establishment of
anterior identity in the epiblast. Our study reveals that Nodal-/- epiblast cells
nevertheless express prematurely and ectopically molecular markers specific of
anterior fate. Our analysis shows that neural specification occurs and regional
identities characteristic of the forebrain are established precociously in the
Nodal-/- mutant with a sequential progression equivalent to that of wild-type
embryo. When explanted and cultured in vitro, Nodal-/- epiblast cells readily
differentiate into neurons. Genes normally transcribed in organizer-derived
tissues, such as Gsc and Foxa2, are also expressed in Nodal-/- epiblast. The
analysis of Nodal-/-;Gsc-/- compound mutant embryos shows that Gsc activity plays
no critical role in the acquisition of forebrain characters by Nodal-deficient
cells. This study suggests that the initial steps of neural specification and
forebrain development may take place well before gastrulation in the mouse and
highlights a possible role for Nodal, at pregastrula stages, in the inhibition of
anterior and neural fate determination.

PMID: 16678814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Stem Cells. 2006 Aug;24(8):1923-30. Epub 2006 May 4.

The effect of overexpression of Pdx1 and Foxa2 on the differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells into pancreatic cells.

Lavon N(1), Yanuka O, Benvenisty N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904, Israel.

Human embryonic stem cells (HESCs) are pluripotent cells that may serve as a
source of cells for transplantation medicine and as a tool to study human
embryogenesis. Using genetic manipulation methodologies, we have investigated the
potential of HESCs to differentiate into the various pancreatic cell types. We
initially created various HESCs carrying the enhanced green fluorescent protein
(eGFP) reporter gene under the control of either the insulin promoter or the
pancreatic and duodenal homeobox factor-1 (Pdx1) promoter. Our analysis revealed 
that during the differentiation of HESCs into embryoid bodies (EBs), we could
detect green fluorescent cells when eGFP is regulated by Pdx1 promoter but not by
insulin promoter. To examine whether we can induce differentiation into
pancreatic cells, we have established human embryonic stem cell lines that
constitutively express either Pdx1 or the endodermal transcription factor Foxa2. 
Following differentiation into EBs, the constitutive expression of Pdx1 enhanced 
the differentiation of HESCs toward pancreatic endocrine and exocrine cell types.
Thus, we have demonstrated expression of several transcription factors that are
downstream of Pdx1 and various molecular markers for the different pancreatic
cell types. However, the expression of the insulin gene could be demonstrated
only when the cells differentiated in vivo into teratomas. We conclude that
although overexpression of Pdx1 enhanced expression of pancreatic enriched genes,
induction of insulin expression may require additional signals that are only
present in vivo.

PMID: 16675598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jun 30;281(26):17635-43. Epub 2006 May 3.

The constitutive expression of anticoagulant protein S is regulated through
multiple binding sites for Sp1 and Sp3 transcription factors in the protein S
gene promoter.

de Wolf CJ(1), Cupers RM, Bertina RM, Vos HL.

Author information: 
(1)Hemostasis and Thrombosis Research Center, Department of Hematology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Protein S (PS) is a vitamin K-dependent plasma protein that inhibits blood
coagulation by serving as a nonenzymatic cofactor for activated protein C in the 
protein C anticoagulant pathway. Low PS levels are a risk factor for the
development of deep venous thrombosis. The regulation of PS levels through
transcriptional regulation of the PS gene was investigated in this report. A
minimal PS gene promoter 370 bp upstream from the translational initiation codon 
was sufficient for maximal promoter activity in transient transfections
regardless of the cell type. A pivotal role for Sp1 in the constitutive
expression of the PS gene was demonstrated through electrophoretic mobility shift
assay experiments, transient expression of mutant PS promoter-reporter gene
constructs, and chromatin immunoprecipitations in HepG2 cells. At least four
Sp-binding sites were identified. The two sites most proximal to the
translational start codon were found to be indispensable for PS promoter
activity, whereas mutation of the two most distal Sp-binding sites had a
negligible influence on basal promoter activity. In addition, all other major
promoter-binding proteins that were found by electrophoretic mobility shift assay
could be positively identified in supershift assays. We identified binding sites 
for the hepatocyte-specific forkhead transcription factor FOXA2, nuclear factor
Y, and the cAMP-response element-binding protein/activating transcription factor 
family of transcription factors. Their relevance was investigated using
site-directed mutagenesis.

PMID: 16672217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Diabetes. 2006 May;55(5):1190-6.

Transcription factor FoxO1 mediates glucagon-like peptide-1 effects on pancreatic
beta-cell mass.

Buteau J(1), Spatz ML, Accili D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center, Columbia University
Medical Center, Berrie Research Pavilion, 1150 St. Nicholas Ave., Room 238, New
York, NY 10032, USA.

The glucoincretin hormone glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) increases pancreatic
beta-cell proliferation and survival through sequential activation of the
epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI
3-kinase), and Akt. We investigated the role of transcription factor FoxO1 in the
proliferative and antiapoptotic actions of GLP-1 in beta-cells. GLP-1 inhibited
FoxO1 through phosphorylation-dependent nuclear exclusion in pancreatic beta
(INS832/13) cells. The effect of GLP-1 was suppressed by inhibitors of EGFR
(AG1478) and PI 3-kinase (LY294002). In contrast, LY294002 but not AG1478
suppressed insulin-induced FoxO1 phosphorylation. Expression of constitutively
nuclear FoxO1 in beta-cells prevented the proliferative and antiapoptotic actions
of GLP-1 in cultured beta-cells and the increase in pancreatic beta-cell mass in 
response to Exendin4 in transgenic mice. Gene expression and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that GLP-1 increases pancreatic and
duodenal homeobox gene-1 and Foxa2 expression and inhibits FoxO1 binding to both 
promoters. We propose that FoxO1 mediates the pleiotropic effects of the
glucoincretin hormone on cell proliferation and survival.

PMID: 16644672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Endocrinology. 2006 Jul;147(7):3606-12. Epub 2006 Apr 20.

Regulation of the mouse protein targeting to glycogen (PTG) promoter by the FoxA2
forkhead protein and by 3',5'-cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate in H4IIE hepatoma
cells.

Cheng A(1), Zhang M, Crosson SM, Bao ZQ, Saltiel AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Life Sciences Institute, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, 48109, USA.

The scaffolding protein, protein targeting to glycogen (PTG), orchestrates the
signaling of several metabolic enzymes involved in glycogen synthesis. However,
little is known concerning the regulation of PTG itself. In this study, we have
cloned and characterized the mouse promoter of PTG. We identified multiple FoxA2 
binding sites within this region. FoxA2 is a member of the forkhead family of
transcription factors that has recently been implicated in the cAMP-dependent
regulation of several genes involved in liver metabolism. Using luciferase
reporter constructs, we demonstrate that FoxA2 transactivates the PTG promoter in
H4IIE hepatoma cells. Nuclear extracts prepared from mouse liver and H4IIE cells 
were able to bind a FoxA2-specific probe derived within the PTG promoter region. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments further demonstrate that FoxA2 binds to
the PTG promoter in vivo. Finally, we show that treatment with cAMP analogs
activates the PTG promoter and significantly increases PTG levels in H4IIE cells.
Our results provide a framework to investigate how additional transcription
factors may regulate PTG expression in other cell types.

PMID: 16627590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Dev Biol. 2006 May 15;293(2):370-81. Epub 2006 Mar 27.

Synergistic interaction between Gdf1 and Nodal during anterior axis development.

Andersson O(1), Reissmann E, Jörnvall H, Ibáñez CF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Neurobiology, Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska
Institutet, S-17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

Growth and Differentiation Factor 1 (GDF-1) has been implicated in left-right
patterning of the mouse embryo but has no other known function. Here, we
demonstrate a genetic interaction between Gdf1 and Nodal during anterior axis
development. Gdf1-/-;Nodal+/- mutants displayed several abnormalities that were
not present in either Gdf1-/- or Nodal+/- single mutants, including absence of
notochord and prechordal plate, and malformation of the foregut; organizing
centers implicated in the development of the anterior head and branchial arches, 
respectively. Consistent with these deficits, Gdf1-/-;Nodal+/- mutant embryos
displayed a number of axial midline abnormalities, including holoprosencephaly,
anterior head truncation, cleft lip, fused nasal cavity, and lack of jaws and
tongue. The absence of these defects in single mutants indicated a synergistic
interaction between Nodal and GDF-1 in the node, from which the axial mesendoderm
that gives rise to the notochord, prechordal plate, and foregut endoderm
originates, and where the two factors are co-expressed. This notion was supported
by a severe downregulation of FoxA2 and goosecoid in the anterior primitive
streak of double mutant embryos. Unlike that in the lateral plate mesoderm, Nodal
expression in the node was independent of GDF-1, indicating that both factors act
in parallel to control the development of mesendodermal precursors. Receptor
reconstitution experiments indicated that GDF-1, like Nodal, can signal through
the type I receptors ALK4 and ALK7. However, analysis of compound mutants
indicated that ALK4, but not ALK7, was responsible for the effects of GDF-1 and
Nodal during anterior axis development. These results indicate that GDF-1 and
Nodal converge on ALK4 in the anterior primitive streak to control the formation 
of organizing centers that are necessary for normal forebrain and branchial arch 
development.

PMID: 16564040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 Sep;291(3):L502-11. Epub 2006 Mar 23.

Differential expression of chitinases identify subsets of murine airway
epithelial cells in allergic inflammation.

Homer RJ(1), Zhu Z, Cohn L, Lee CG, White WI, Chen S, Elias JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine and Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine Service, Veterans Affairs Connecticut HealthCare System, West
Haven, 06520-8023, USA. Robert.Homer@yale.edu

The mammalian chitinase family includes members both with and without enzymatic
activity against chitin, a product of fungal cell walls, exoskeletons of
crustaceans and insects, and the microfilarial sheaths of parasitic nematodes.
Two members of that family, Ym1 and acidic mammalian chitinase (AMCase), are
strongly upregulated in pulmonary T helper (Th) 2 inflammation but not in Th1
inflammation. The sites of expression of these products are incompletely known.
We show here that, in two different models of Th2 inflammation, Ym1 and AMCase
are mutually exclusively expressed in proximal vs. distal airway epithelium,
respectively, whereas both are expressed in alveolar macrophages. This regional
difference along the airway corresponds to the previously noted distinction
between mucus positive proximal cells and mucus negative distal cells under the
same conditions. Among distal cells, AMCase colocalizes with epithelial cells
expressing the Clara cell marker Clara cell secretory protein. These
AMCase-expressing cells retain expression of FOXA2, a transcription factor whose 
downregulation in association with IL-13 signaling has previously been associated
with production of mucus in proximal airway epithelial cells. These results
provide evidence that secretory cells of proximal and distal airways undergo
fundamentally different gene expression programs in response to allergic
inflammation. Furthermore, AMCase provides the first positive molecular marker of
distal Clara cell secretory protein-expressing cells under these conditions.

PMID: 16556727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Clin Vaccine Immunol. 2006 Mar;13(3):426-32.

FoxA2 involvement in suppression of protein C, an outcome predictor in
experimental sepsis.

Berg DT(1), Gerlitz B, Sharma GR, Richardson MA, Stephens EJ, Grubbs RL, Holmes
KC, Fynboe K, Montani D, Cramer MS, Engle SD, Jakubowski JA, Heuer JG, Grinnell
BW.

Author information: 
(1)Biotechnology Discovery Research, Lilly Corporate Center, Indianapolis, IN
46285, USA.

Low levels of protein C (PC) predict outcome as early as 10 h after insult in a
rat polymicrobial sepsis model and were associated with suppression of PC mRNA,
upstream transcription factor FoxA2, and cofactor hepatocyte nuclear factor 6
(HNF6). Small interfering RNA suppression of FoxA2 in isolated hepatocytes
demonstrated regulation of both its cofactor HNF6 and PC. Our data suggest that
reduced FoxA2 may be important in the suppression of PC and resulting poor
outcome in sepsis.

PMCID: PMC1391958
PMID: 16522789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Diabetologia. 2006 Apr;49(4):685-96. Epub 2006 Feb 18.

Effects of rosiglitazone and metformin on pancreatic beta cell gene expression.

Richardson H(1), Campbell SC, Smith SA, Macfarlane WM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell and Molecular Biosciences, University of Newcastle upon
Tyne, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Rosiglitazone and metformin are two oral antihyperglycaemic
drugs used to treat type 2 diabetes. While both drugs have been shown to improve 
insulin-sensitive glucose uptake, the direct effects of these drugs on pancreatic
beta cells is only now beginning to be clarified. The aim of the present study
was to determine the direct effects of these agents on beta cell gene expression.
METHODS: We used reporter gene analysis to examine the effects of rosiglitazone
and metformin on the activity of the proinsulin and insulin promoter factor 1
(IPF1) gene promoters in the glucose-responsive mouse beta cell line Min6.
Western blot and gel retardation analyses were used to examine the effects of
both drugs on the regulation of IPF1 protein production, nuclear accumulation and
DNA binding activity in both Min6 cells and isolated rat islets of Langerhans.
RESULTS: Over 24 h, rosiglitazone promoted the nuclear accumulation of IPF1 and
forkhead homeobox A2 (FOXA2), independently of glucose concentration, and
stimulated a two-fold increase in the activity of the Ipf1 gene promoter
(p<0.01). Stimulation of the Ipf1 promoter by rosiglitazone was unaffected by the
presence of the peroxisome proliferator activated receptor gamma antagonist
GW9662. No effect of either rosiglitazone or metformin was observed on proinsulin
promoter activity. Metformin stimulated IPF1 nuclear accumulation and DNA binding
activity in a time-dependent manner, with maximal effects observed after 2 h.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Metformin and rosiglitazone have direct effects on
beta cell gene expression, suggesting that these agents may play a previously
unrecognised role in the direct regulation of pancreatic beta cell function.

PMID: 16489446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Cell. 2006 Feb 17;21(4):449-50.

Fatty acids and insulin resistance: a perfect storm.

Koo SH(1), Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

VLDL levels are elevated in type II diabetes, where they contribute to the risk
of coronary heart disease. A study by Wolfrum and Stoffel (2006) shows that the
forkhead protein Foxa2 stimulates hepatic VLDL production in concert with the
coactivator PGC-1beta and that insulin inhibits this process by inactivating
Foxa2.

PMID: 16483925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Development. 2006 Mar;133(6):1155-64. Epub 2006 Feb 8.

C/EBPalpha is required for lung maturation at birth.

Martis PC(1), Whitsett JA, Xu Y, Perl AK, Wan H, Ikegami M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology and Neonatology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital 
Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH
45229, USA.

Epithelial cells lining the peripheral lung synthesize pulmonary surfactant that 
reduces surface tension at the air-liquid interface. Lack of surfactant lipids
and proteins in the lungs causes respiratory distress syndrome, a common cause of
morbidity and mortality in preterm infants. We show that C/EBPalpha plays a
crucial role in the maturation of the respiratory epithelium in late gestation,
being required for the production of surfactant lipids and proteins necessary for
lung function. Deletion of the Cebpa gene in respiratory epithelial cells in
fetal mice caused respiratory failure at birth. Structural and biochemical
maturation of the lung was delayed. Normal synthesis of surfactant lipids and
proteins, including SP-A, SP-B, SP-C, SP-D, ABCA3 (a lamellar body associated
protein) and FAS (precursor of fatty acid synthesis) were dependent upon
expression of the C/EBPalpha in respiratory epithelial cells. Deletion of the
Cebpa gene caused increased expression of Tgfb2, a growth factor that inhibits
lung epithelial cell proliferation and differentiation. Normal expression of
C/EBPalpha required Titf1 and Foxa2, transcription factors that also play an
important role in perinatal lung differentiation. C/EBPalpha participates in a
transcriptional network that is required for the regulation of genes mediating
perinatal lung maturation and surfactant homeostasis that is necessary for
adaptation to air breathing at birth.

PMID: 16467360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Dec;1061:77-93.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 interact with the androgen receptor to regulate prostate and
epididymal genes differentially.

Yu X(1), Gupta A, Wang Y, Suzuki K, Mirosevich J, Orgebin-Crist MC, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Previous studies from our group have shown that Foxa1 is expressed in the
prostate and interacts with the androgen receptor (AR) to regulate
prostate-specific genes such as prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and probasin
(PB). We report here that Foxa2 but not Foxa1 is expressed in the epididymis.
Further, Foxa2 interacts with the AR to regulate the mouse epididymal retinoic
acid binding protein (mE-RABP) gene, an epididymis-specific gene. Binding of
Foxa2 to the mE-RABP promoter was confirmed by gel-shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays. Overexpression of Foxa2 suppresses androgen
activation of the mE-RABP promoter while overexpression of Foxa2 with
prostate-specific promoters activates gene expression in an androgen-independent 
manner. GST pull-down assays determined that both Foxa1 and Foxa2 physically
interact with the DNA binding domain of the AR. The interaction between Foxa
proteins and AR was further confirmed by gel-shift assays where Foxa protein was 
recruited to AR binding oligomers even when Foxa binding sites were not present, 
and AR was recruited to Foxa binding oligomers even in the absence of an AR
binding site. Given that Foxa1 and Foxa2 proteins are expressed differentially in
the prostate and epididymis, these data suggest that the Foxa proteins have
distinct effects on AR-regulated genes in different male reproductive accessory
organs.

PMID: 16467259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cell Metab. 2006 Feb;3(2):99-110.

Coactivation of Foxa2 through Pgc-1beta promotes liver fatty acid oxidation and
triglyceride/VLDL secretion.

Wolfrum C(1), Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Forkhead transcription factor Foxa2 activates genes involved in hepatic lipid
metabolism and is regulated by insulin. Activation of Foxa2 in the liver leads to
increased oxidation and secretion of fatty acids in the form of triacylglycerols 
(TAGs), a process impaired in type 2 diabetes. Here, we demonstrate that Foxa2 is
coactivated by PPARgamma coactivator beta (Pgc-1beta). Adenoviral expression of
Foxa2 and Pgc-1beta in livers of ob/ob mice results in decreased hepatic TAG
content and increased plasma TAG concentrations. In addition, the concerted
action of Foxa2/Pgc-1beta activates genes in mitochondrial beta oxidation and
enhances fatty acid metabolism. Furthermore, Foxa2/Pgc-1beta induce the
expression of microsomal transfer protein, thereby increasing apoB-containing
VLDL secretion. This process is inhibited by insulin through a Foxa2-dependent
mechanism. These data demonstrate that Foxa2/Pgc-1beta regulate hepatic lipid
homeostasis by affecting the clearance rate of fatty acids through oxidation
and/or secretion of lipids in response to insulin.

PMID: 16459311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Hepatology. 2006 Feb;43(2):276-86.

C/EBPalpha and HNF6 protein complex formation stimulates HNF6-dependent
transcription by CBP coactivator recruitment in HepG2 cells.

Yoshida Y(1), Hughes DE, Rausa FM 3rd, Kim IM, Tan Y, Darlington GJ, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

We previously demonstrated that formation of complexes between the DNA-binding
domains of hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF6) and forkhead box a2 (Foxa2)
proteins stimulated Foxa2 transcriptional activity. Here, we used HepG2 cell
cotransfection assays to demonstrate that HNF6 transcriptional activity was
stimulated by CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha), but not by the
related C/EBPbeta or C/EBPdelta proteins. Formation of the C/EBPalpha-HNF6
protein complex required the HNF6 cut domain and the C/EBPalpha activation domain
(AD) 1/AD2 sequences. This C/EBPalpha-HNF6 transcriptional synergy required both 
the N-terminal HNF6 polyhistidine and serine/threonine/proline box sequences, as 
well as the C/EBPalpha AD1/AD2 sequences, the latter of which are known to
recruit the CREB binding protein (CBP) transcriptional coactivator. Consistent
with these findings, adenovirus E1A-mediated inhibition of p300/CBP histone
acetyltransferase activity abrogated C/EBPalpha-HNF6 transcriptional synergy in
cotransfection assays. Co-immunoprecipitation assays with liver protein extracts 
demonstrate an association between the HNF6 and C/EBPalpha transcription factors 
and the CBP coactivator protein in vivo. Furthermore, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays with hepatoma cells demonstrated that increased levels
of both C/EBPalpha and HNF6 proteins were required to stimulate association of
these transcription factors and the CBP coactivator protein with the endogenous
mouse Foxa2 promoter region. In conclusion, formation of the C/EBPalpha-HNF6
protein complex stimulates recruitment of the CBP coactivator protein for
expression of Foxa2, a transcription factor critical for regulating expression of
hepatic gluconeogenic genes during fasting.

PMCID: PMC1360165
PMID: 16440369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2006 May 16;250(1-2):184-9. Epub 2006 Jan 18.

Epididymis-specific promoter-driven gene targeting: a transcription factor which 
regulates epididymis-specific gene expression.

Suzuki K(1), Yu X, Chaurand P, Araki Y, Lareyre JJ, Caprioli RM, Matusik RJ,
Orgebin-Crist MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. kichiya.suzuki@vanderbilt.edu

Mammalian spermatozoa undergo several modification and finally acquire the
ability to fertilize during epididymal transit. One of the distinct features of
the epididymis is that it displays a highly regionalized pattern of gene
expression. This tissue-, region-, and cell-specific pattern of gene expression
is critical for the maintenance of a fully functional epididymis. One would
hypothesize that disrupting this process provides an ideal approach to male
contraception, since it would not interfere with testicular endocrine output or
sperm production. To achieve this purpose, we studied a cluster of
epididymis-specific lipocalin genes for understanding the specific mechanisms
involved in the control of gene expression in the epididymis. We have identified 
six epididymis-specific lipocalin genes that are differently regulated and
regionalized in the epididymis. Lipocalin 5 [Lcn5 or epididymal retinoic
acid-binding protein (E-RABP)] is a member of this epididymis-specific lipocalin 
gene cluster, which binds hydrophobic molecules such as retinoic acid. We have
previously shown that the 5kb promoter fragment of the Lcn5 gene confers both
androgen-dependent regulation and epididymis-specific gene expression in
transgenic mice whereas 0.6 kb promoter fragment does not. To further narrow down
the important cis-regulatory elements that regulate gene expression in the
epididymis, we studied the Lcn5 promoter in both transgenic mice and immortalized
epididymal cells. We have found that 1.8kb promoter fragment of the Lcn5 gene was
sufficient for tissue- and region-specific expression in transgenic mice, and
that a transcription factor Forkhead box A2 (Foxa2) interacts with the androgen
receptor and binds to the 100 bp fragment of the Lcn5 promoter between 1.2 and
1.3 kb. Our finding provides a framework for further analysis of the epididymal
lipocalin gene regulation and modulated control of epididymis-specific
expression.

PMID: 16414179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Physiol Genomics. 2006 Jan 12;24(2):133-43.

Identification of transcriptional targets during pancreatic growth after partial 
pancreatectomy and exendin-4 treatment.

De León DD(1), Farzad C, Crutchlow MF, Brestelli J, Tobias J, Kaestner KH,
Stoffers DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Department of Medicine,
Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

After partial pancreatectomy (Ppx), substantial regeneration of the endocrine and
exocrine pancreatic compartments has been shown in adult rodents. Exendin-4
(Ex-4) is a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist that augments endocrine
beta-cell mass by stimulating neogenesis, proliferation, and cell survival. After
Ppx, treatment with Ex-4 ameliorates hyperglycemia by stimulating beta-cell mass 
recovery. We utilized a cDNA microarray approach to identify genes differentially
regulated during pancreatic regeneration after Ppx and/or Ex-4 administration.
The pancreatic remnant after Ppx showed a large number of differentially
regulated genes. In contrast, Ex-4 treatment resulted in a smaller number of
differentially regulated genes. Of note, a common subset of genes regulated by
Ex-4 and after Ppx was identified, including three members of the mitogenic Reg
gene family, Reg2, -3gamma, and -3beta, as well as fragilis, a gene that
maintains pluripotency during germ cell specification, and Serpin b1a, a member
of an intracellular protease inhibitor family involved in cell survival. These
observations were confirmed by real-time PCR. We determined that Reg3beta protein
is also induced in the acinar pancreas after Ppx, suggesting a novel role for
this factor in pancreatic growth or response to injury. Finally, comparison of
transcription factor-binding sites present in the proximal promoters of these
genes identified potential common transcription factors that may regulate these
genes. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses confirmed Reg3gamma as a novel
transcriptional target of Foxa2 (HNF3beta). Our data suggest molecular pathways
that may regulate pancreatic growth and offer a unique set of candidate genes to 
target in the development of therapies aimed at improving pancreatic growth and
function.

PMID: 16410542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Nat Med. 2006 Jan;12(1):38-9.

Foxa2, a novel transcriptional regulator of insulin sensitivity.

Puigserver P, Rodgers JT.

PMID: 16397559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2006 Feb;34(2):151-7. Epub 2005 Oct 20.

Transdifferentiation of ciliated cells during repair of the respiratory
epithelium.

Park KS(1), Wells JM, Zorn AM, Wert SE, Laubach VE, Fernandez LG, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Since the lung is repeatedly subjected to injury by pathogens and toxicants,
maintenance of pulmonary homeostasis requires rapid repair of its epithelial
surfaces. Ciliated bronchiolar epithelial cells, previously considered as
terminally differentiated, underwent squamous cell metaplasia within hours after 
bronchiolar injury with naphthalene. Expression of transcription factors active
in morphogenesis and differentiation of the embryonic lung, including
beta-catenin, Foxa2, Foxj1, and Sox family members (Sox17 and Sox2), was
dynamically regulated during repair and redifferentiation of the bronchiolar
epithelium after naphthalene injury. Squamous cells derived from ciliated cells
spread beneath injured Clara cells within 6-12 h after injury, maintaining the
integrity of the epithelium. Dynamic changes in cell shape and gene expression,
indicating cell plasticity, accompanied the transition from squamous to cuboidal 
to columnar cell types as differentiation-specific cell markers typical of the
mature airway were restored. Similar dynamic changes in the expression of these
transcription factors occurred in ciliated and Clara cells during regeneration of
the lung after unilateral pneumonectomy. Taken together, these findings
demonstrate that ciliated epithelial cells spread and transdifferentiate into
distinct epithelial cell types to repair the airway epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2644179
PMID: 16239640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Genes Immun. 2006 Jan;7(1):11-8.

Evaluation of AGR2 and AGR3 as candidate genes for inflammatory bowel disease.

Zheng W(1), Rosenstiel P, Huse K, Sina C, Valentonyte R, Mah N, Zeitlmann L,
Grosse J, Ruf N, Nürnberg P, Costello CM, Onnie C, Mathew C, Platzer M, Schreiber
S, Hampe J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel,
Germany.

Linkage analyses have implicated chromosome 7p21.3 as a susceptibility region for
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Recently, the mouse phenotype with diarrhea and
goblet cell dysfunction caused by anterior gradient protein 2 dysfunction was
reported (European patent WO2004056858). The genes encoding for the human
homologues AGR2 and AGR3 are localized on chromosome 7p21.3. The gene structures 
were verified and mutation detection was performed in 47 IBD patients. A total of
30 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were tested for association to
ulcerative colitis (UC, N = 317) and Crohn's disease (CD, N = 631) in a German
cohort and verified in a UK cohort of 384 CD and 311 UC patients. An association 
signal was identified in the 5' region of the AGR2 gene (most significant SNP
hcv1702494, nominal P(TDT) = 0.011, P(case/control) = 0.0007, OR = 1.34, combined
cohort). The risk haplotype carried an odds ratio of 1.43 in the German
population (P = 0.002). AGR2 was downregulated in UC patients as compared to
normal controls (P < 0.001) and a trend toward lower expression was seen in
carriers of the risk alleles. Luciferase assays of the AGR2 promoter showed
regulation by the goblet cell-specific transcription factors FOXA1 and FOXA2. In 
summary, AGR2 represents an interesting new avenue into the etiopathophysiology
of IBD and the maintenance of epithelial integrity.

PMID: 16222343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Oncol Rep. 2005 Nov;14(5):1351-5.

Comparative genomics on SLIT1, SLIT2, and SLIT3 orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

SLIT1 gene at human chromosome 10q24.1, SLIT2 gene at 4p15.31, and SLIT3 gene at 
5q34-q35.1 encode large secreted proteins functioning as ligands for Roundabout
(Robo) receptors. SLIT-ROBO signaling pathway is implicated in neurogenesis,
angiogenesis, and immune response through the regulation of axonal guidance,
endothelial cell migration, and denderitic cell migration, respectively. GREMLIN 
(CKTSF1B1 or GREM1) and DANTE (CKTSF1B3 or GREM3) are secreted antagonists for
BMPs and SLITs. Here, comparative integromics analyses on SLIT1, SLIT2, and SLIT3
orthologs were performed by using bioinformatics. Rat Slit2 gene, consisting of
36 exons, was located within rat genome sequences AC098362.4 and AC111627.6.
Mouse Slit3 complete coding sequence was determined by assembling BB634238 EST,
AF144629 cDNA, and AK129223 cDNA. Leucine-rich repeats with nine conserved
cysteine (LRRCC) domains and SLIT C-terminal cysteine-rich (SLITCCR) domain were 
identified in this study. CPxxCxCxxxxVxCxxxxLxxxPxxxPx(10~58)
Nx(19,20)LxxNx(9)Fx(8)LxLxxNxxxCxxxxxFxxLxxx
xxLxLxxNx(9)Fx(13)NxxxCxCxxxWLx(15)CxxPx(17)C was the consensus sequence of LRRCC
domain. Mammalian SLIT1, SLIT2 and SLIT3 orthologs were large secreted proteins
with four LRRCC domains, nine EGF domains, Laminin G (LamG) domain, and SLITCCR
domain. SLIT1 mRNA was expressed in fetal brain, infant brain, anaplastic
oligodendroglioma, and Jurkat T cells. SLIT2 and SLIT3 mRNAs were co-expressed in
embryonic stem (ES) cells with embryoid body formation, and diffuse type gastric 
cancer with signet ring cell features. Double TCF/LEF and bHLH-binding sites were
conserved among mammalian SLIT1 promoters. FOXJ2, E47, ETS1, and FOXA2-binding
sites and CCAAT box were conserved among mammalian SLIT3 promoters. Mammalian
SLIT1 orthologs were identified as evolutionarily conserved targets of the
WNT/beta-catenin signaling pathway.

PMID: 16211308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Stem Cells. 2006 Mar;24(3):624-30. Epub 2005 Oct 6.

Crucial transcription factors in endoderm and embryonic gut development are
expressed in gut-like structures from mouse ES cells.

Matsuura R(1), Kogo H, Ogaeri T, Miwa T, Kuwahara M, Kanai Y, Nakagawa T, Kuroiwa
A, Fujimoto T, Torihashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Molecular Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya University, Japan.

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells are pluripotent and retain the potential to form 
an organ similar to the gut showing spontaneous contractions in vitro. The
morphological features of these structures and their formation, as assessed using
the hanging drop method to produce embryoid bodies (EBs), seem to be similar to
those in vivo. To determine whether the same molecular mechanisms are involved in
the formation process, the expression pattern of transcription factors regulating
endoderm and gut development in the mouse embryo was examined by in situ
hybridization and compared with in vivo expression. Expression of gene products
was also examined by immunohistochemistry, and expression colocalization was
analyzed with double staining. The results showed that all factors examined, that
is, Sox17, Id2, HNF3beta/Foxa2, and GATA4, were expressed in both EBs and
gut-like structures. Moreover, their expression patterns were similar to those in
the mouse embryo. EBs after the hanging drop period and before outgrowth already 
expressed all factors that were colocalized with each other in EB epithelial
structures. These findings suggest that the origin of the gut-like structure is
determined during the hanging drop period and that the gut-like structure is
formed as the epithelial structure in EBs during the hanging drop period. They
also indicate that the in vitro system using mouse ES cells mimics in vivo
development and should prove useful in the study of molecular mechanisms for
endoderm and gut development.

PMID: 16210401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Development. 2005 Nov;132(21):4719-29. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Tead proteins activate the Foxa2 enhancer in the node in cooperation with a
second factor.

Sawada A(1), Nishizaki Y, Sato H, Yada Y, Nakayama R, Yamamoto S, Nishioka N,
Kondoh H, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Embryonic Induction, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

The cell population and the activity of the organizer change during the course of
development. We addressed the mechanism of mouse node development via an analysis
of the node/notochord enhancer (NE) of Foxa2. We first identified the core
element (CE) of the enhancer, which in multimeric form drives gene expression in 
the node. The CE was activated in Wnt/beta-catenin-treated P19 cells with a time 
lag, and this activation was dependent on two separate sequence motifs within the
CE. These same motifs were also required for enhancer activity in transgenic
embryos. We identified the Tead family of transcription factors as binding
proteins for the 3' motif. Teads and their co-factor YAP65 activated the CE in
P19 cells, and binding of Tead to CE was essential for enhancer activity.
Inhibition of Tead activity by repressor-modified Tead compromised NE enhancer
activation and notochord development in transgenic mouse embryos. Furthermore,
manipulation of Tead activity in zebrafish embryos led to altered expression of
foxa2 in the embryonic shield. These results suggest that Tead activates the
Foxa2 enhancer core element in the mouse node in cooperation with a second factor
that binds to the 5' element, and that a similar mechanism also operates in the
zebrafish shield.

PMID: 16207754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Med Genet. 2006 Jun;43(6):496-500. Epub 2005 Sep 30.

Multicolour FISH and quantitative PCR can detect submicroscopic deletions in
holoprosencephaly patients with a normal karyotype.

Bendavid C(1), Haddad BR, Griffin A, Huizing M, Dubourg C, Gicquel I, Cavalli LR,
Pasquier L, Shanske AL, Long R, Ouspenskaia M, Odent S, Lacbawan F, David V,
Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, 35 Convent Drive, MSC 3717, Building 35, Room 1B-203,
Bethesda, MD 20892-3717, USA.

Holoprosencephaly (HPE) is the most common structural malformation of the
developing forebrain. At birth, nearly 50% of children with HPE have cytogenetic 
anomalies. Approximately 20% of infants with normal chromosomes have sequence
mutations in one of the four main HPE genes (SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF). The
other non-syndromic forms of HPE may be due to environmental factors or mutations
in other genes, or potentially due to submicroscopic deletions of HPE genes. We
used two complementary assays to test for HPE associated submicroscopic
deletions. Firstly, we developed a multicolour fluorescent in situ hybridisation 
(FISH) assay using probes for the four major HPE genes and for two candidate
genes (DISP1 and FOXA2). We analysed lymphoblastoid cell lines (LCL) from 103
patients who had CNS findings of HPE, normal karyotypes, and no point mutations, 
and found seven microdeletions. We subsequently applied quantitative PCR to 424
HPE DNA samples, including the 103 samples studied by FISH: 339 with CNS findings
of HPE, and 85 with normal CNS and characteristic HPE facial findings.
Microdeletions for either SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, or TGIF were found in 16 of the 339
severe HPE cases (that is, with CNS findings; 4.7%). In contrast, no
microdeletion was found in the 85 patients at the mildest end of the HPE
spectrum. Based on our data, microdeletion testing should be considered as part
of an evaluation of holoprosencephaly, especially in severe HPE cases.

PMCID: PMC2564532
PMID: 16199538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Diabetes. 2005 Oct;54(10):2867-74.

Signals from the embryonic mouse pancreas induce differentiation of human
embryonic stem cells into insulin-producing beta-cell-like cells.

Brolén GK(1), Heins N, Edsbagge J, Semb H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Department of Experimental Medical Science,
Lund University, B10 SE-22184 Lund, Sweden.

The recent success in restoring normoglycemia in type 1 diabetes by islet cell
transplantation indicates that cell replacement therapy of this severe disease is
achievable. However, the severe lack of donor islets has increased the demand for
alternative sources of beta-cells, such as adult and embryonic stem cells. Here, 
we investigate the potential of human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to
differentiate into beta-cells. Spontaneous differentiation of hESCs under
two-dimensional growth conditions resulted in differentiation of Pdx1(+)/Foxa2(+)
pancreatic progenitors and Pdx1(+)/Isl1(+) endocrine progenitors but no
insulin-producing cells. However, cotransplantation of differentiated hESCs with 
the dorsal pancreas, but not with the liver or telencephalon, from mouse embryos 
resulted in differentiation of beta-cell-like cell clusters. Comparative analysis
of the basic characteristics of hESC-derived insulin(+) cell clusters with human 
adult islets demonstrated that the insulin(+) cells share important features with
normal beta-cells, such as synthesis (proinsulin) and processing (C-peptide) of
insulin and nuclear localization of key beta-cell transcription factors,
including Foxa2, Pdx1, and Isl1.

PMID: 16186387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 18;280(46):38317-27. Epub 2005 Sep 22.

Distinct mechanisms of glucose lowering by specific agonists for peroxisomal
proliferator activated receptor gamma and retinoic acid X receptors.

Li X(1), Hansen PA, Xi L, Chandraratna RA, Burant CF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0354, USA.

Agonists for the nuclear receptor peroxisomal proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma (PPARgamma) and its heterodimeric partner, retinoid X receptor
(RXR), are effective agents for the treatment of type 2 diabetes. To gain insight
into the antidiabetic action of these compounds, we treated female Zucker
diabetic rats (ZFF) with AGN194204, which we show to be a homodimer-specific RXR 
agonist, or the PPARgamma agonist, troglitazone. Hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic
clamps in ZFF showed that troglitazone and AGN194204 reduced basal endogenous
glucose production (EGP) approximately 30% and doubled the insulin suppression of
EGP. AGN194204 had no effect on peripheral glucose utilization, whereas
troglitazone increased insulin-stimulated glucose utilization by 50%, glucose
uptake into skeletal muscle by 85%, and de novo skeletal muscle glycogen
synthesis by 300%. Troglitazone increased skeletal muscle Irs-1 and phospho-Akt
levels following in vivo insulin treatment, whereas AGN194204 increased hepatic
Irs-2 and insulin stimulated phospho-Akt in liver. Gene profiles of
AGN194204-treated mouse liver analyzed by Ingenuity Pathway Analysis identified
increases in fatty acid synthetic genes, including Srebp-1 and fatty acid
synthase, a pathway previously shown to be induced by RXR agonists. A network of 
down-regulated genes containing Foxa2, Foxa3, and G-protein subunits was
identified, and decreases in these mRNA levels were confirmed by quantitative
reverse transcription-PCR. Treatment of HepG2 cells with AGN194204 resulted in
inhibition of glucagon-stimulated cAMP accumulation suggesting the G-protein
down-regulation may provide an additional mechanism for hepatic insulin
sensitization by RXR. These studies demonstrate distinct molecular events lead to
insulin sensitization by high affinity RXR and PPARgamma agonists.

PMID: 16179348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biol Chem. 2005 Nov 11;280(45):37908-16. Epub 2005 Sep 6.

Functional characterization of evolutionarily conserved DNA regions in forkhead
box f1 gene locus.

Kim IM(1), Zhou Y, Ramakrishna S, Hughes DE, Solway J, Costa RH, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, the University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The Forkhead Box f1 (Foxf1) transcription factor (previously known as HFH-8 or
Freac-1) is expressed in the septum transversum and splanchnic (visceral)
mesoderm and is required for proper development of gut-derived organs. Sequence
comparisons of mouse and human Foxf1 genes have revealed highly conserved DNA
sequences located within the -5.3-kb Foxf1 promoter region and the 400-nucleotide
regulatory element located 1 kb 3' to the Foxf1 gene (3'RE). To examine their
transcriptional activity during mouse embryonic development, we generated
transgenic mice in which the expression of the beta-galactosidase transgene was
controlled by the -2.7-kb Foxf1 promoter region, the -5.3-kb Foxf1 promoter
region, or the -5.3-kb Foxf1 promoter region fused to the 3'RE. The -5.3-kb Foxf1
promoter sequences induced appropriate transgene expression in the midgut and
developing intestine, whereas the -2.7-kb Foxf1 promoter region was
transcriptionally inactive. Addition of 3'RE to the -5.3-kb Foxf1 promoter
restored proper transgene expression in the foregut, liver, and lung mesenchyme
and prevented ectopic transgene expression in the developing nervous system.
Cotransfection studies demonstrated that FoxA2 protein bound to the 3'RE region
(+4506/+4529 bp) and was sufficient to inhibit expression of the -5.3-kb Foxf1
promoter. Furthermore, C/EBPbeta and HNF-6 proteins bound to the 3'RE region
(+4647/+4694 bp) and provided synergistic transcriptional activation of the
-5.3-kb Foxf1 promoter in cotransfection assays. These studies demonstrated that 
the conserved Foxf1 3'RE region is essential for proper tissue-specific
regulation of the Foxf1 promoter region during mouse embryogenesis.

PMID: 16144835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Cell Cycle. 2005 Sep;4(9):1146-8. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

The making of the liver: developmental competence in foregut endoderm and
induction of the hepatogenic program.

Kaestner KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. Kaestner@mail.med.upenn.edu

The making of the vertebrate liver occurs in a two step process, beginning with
the establishment of competence in the foregut endoderm to respond to signals
from cardiac mesoderm, followed by the induction of liver-specific gene
expression. Two winged helix transcription factors, Foxa1 and Foxa2, act in
concert in hepatic specification. In a mouse model engineered to lack both of
these genes in the foregut endoderm, no liver bud is formed and expression of
even the earliest known hepatoblast markers does not occur. Furthermore, foregut 
endoderm derived from double mutant embryos is not responsive to inductive
signals in vitro. The Foxa1/Foxa2 model is the first of a completely "liver-less 
mouse" and provides strong evidence for the competence model of hepatic
induction.

PMID: 16123587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Hepatology. 2005 Sep;42(3):558-67.

Recapitulation of in vivo gene expression during hepatic differentiation from
murine embryonic stem cells.

Yamamoto Y(1), Teratani T, Yamamoto H, Quinn G, Murata S, Ikeda R, Kinoshita K,
Matsubara K, Kato T, Ochiya T.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Studies on Metastasis, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Hepatic differentiation at the molecular level is poorly understood, mainly
because of the lack of a suitable model. Recently, using adherent monoculture
conditions, we demonstrated the direct differentiation of hepatocytes from
embryonic stem (ES) cells. In this study, we exploited the direct differentiation
model to compare the gene expression profiles of ES cell-derived hepatocytes with
adult mouse liver using DNA microarray technology. The results showed that the ES
cell-derived hepatocyte gene expression pattern is very similar to adult mouse
liver. Through further analysis of gene ontology categories for the 232 most
radically altered genes, we found that the significant categories related to
hepatic function. Furthermore, through the use of small interfering RNA
technology in vitro, hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta/FoxA2 was identified as
having an essential role in hepatic differentiation. These results demonstrate
that ES cell-derived hepatocytes recapitulate the gene expression profile of
adult mouse liver to a significant degree and indicate that our direct induction 
system progresses via endoderm differentiation. In conclusion, our system closely
mimics in vivo hepatic differentiation at the transcriptional level and could,
therefore, be useful for studying the molecular basis of hepatocyte
differentiation per se.

PMID: 16104048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cell Metab. 2005 Aug;2(2):141-8.

Foxa2 integrates the transcriptional response of the hepatocyte to fasting.

Zhang L(1), Rubins NE, Ahima RS, Greenbaum LE, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

Survival during prolonged food deprivation depends on the activation of hepatic
gluconeogenesis. Inappropriate regulation of this process is a hallmark of
diabetes and other metabolic diseases. Activation of the genes encoding
gluconeogenic enzymes is mediated by hormone-responsive transcription factors
such as the cyclic AMP response element binding protein (CREB) and the
glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Here we show using cell-type-specific gene ablation
that the winged helix transcription factor Foxa2 is required for activation of
the hepatic gluconeogenic program during fasting. Specifically, Foxa2 promotes
gene activation both by cyclic AMP, the second messenger for glucagon, and
glucocorticoids. Foxa2 mediates these effects by enabling recruitment of CREB and
GR to their respective target sites in chromatin. We conclude that Foxa2 is
required for execution of the hepatic gluconeogenic program by integrating the
transcriptional response of the hepatocyte to hormonal stimulation.

PMID: 16098831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Biol Reprod. 2005 Dec;73(6):1147-56. Epub 2005 Aug 3.

Growth and differentiation of embryoid bodies derived from human embryonic stem
cells: effect of glucose and basic fibroblast growth factor.

Khoo ML(1), McQuade LR, Smith MS, Lees JG, Sidhu KS, Tuch BE.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Transplant Unit, Prince of Wales Hospital and The University of New
South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales 2031, Australia.

Erratum in
    Biol Reprod. 2006 Feb;74(2):448.

Differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells generally occurs after formation of 
three-dimensional cell aggregates, known as embryoid bodies (EBs). This
differentiation occurs following suspension culturing of EBs in media containing 
a high (25 mM) glucose concentration. Although high-glucose-containing media is
used for maintenance and proliferation of ES cells, it has not been demonstrated 
whether this is a necessary requirement for EB development. To address this, we
examined the growth and differentiation of EBs established in 0-mM, 5.5-mM
(physiological), and 25-mM (high) glucose concentrations, through morphometric
analysis and examination of gene and protein expression. The effect on EB
development of supplementation with basic fibroblast growth factor (FGF2) was
also studied. We report that the greatest rate of EB growth occurs in 5.5 mM
glucose media. A morphological study of EBs over 104 days duration under
glucose-containing conditions demonstrated the development of all three major
embryonic cell types. The difference from normal human development was obvious in
the lack of rostrocaudal control by the notochord. In the latest stages of
development, the main tissue observed appeared to be cartilage and cells of a
mesodermal lineage. We conclude that physiological glucose concentrations are
suitable for the culturing of EBs, that the addition of FGF2 enhances the
temporal expression of genes including POU5F1, nestin, FOXA2, ONECUT1, NEUROD1,
PAX6, and insulin, and that EBs can be cultured in vitro for long periods,
allowing for further examination of developmental processes.

PMID: 16079311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 1;65(15):6640-50.

Breast cancer resistance protein-mediated efflux of androgen in putative benign
and malignant prostate stem cells.

Huss WJ(1), Gray DR, Greenberg NM, Mohler JL, Smith GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Lineberger Comprehensive
Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina 27599-7525, USA.

Malignantly transformed stem cells represent a potential common nidus for the
primary cancer and the recurrent cancer that arises after treatment failure.
Putative prostate stem cells and prostate tumor stem cells in benign and
malignant human prostate tissue, in primary human prostate xenografts, and in the
transgenic adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) mouse model of prostate
cancer, are defined by expression of breast cancer resistance protein (BCRP), a
marker of pluripotent hematopoietic, muscle, and neural stem cells, and by an
absence of androgen receptor (AR) protein. Inhibition of BCRP-mediated efflux of 
dihydrotestosterone by novobiocin or fumitremorgin C in a rat prostate progenitor
cell line that expresses BCRP and AR mRNAs, but minimal AR protein, results in
stabilization and nuclear translocation of AR protein, providing a mechanism for 
lack of AR protein in BCRP-expressing stem cells. In both benign and malignant
human prostate tissue, the rare epithelial cells that express BCRP and lack AR
protein are localized in the basal cell compartment, survive androgen
deprivation, and maintain proliferative potential in the hypoxic,
androgen-deprived prostate. Putative prostate tumor stem cells that express BCRP 
but not AR protein in TRAMP are the source of a BCRP-negative and AR-negative,
Foxa2- and SV40Tag-expressing, transit amplifying compartment that progresses to 
the poorly differentiated carcinomas that arise rapidly after castration.
Therefore, BCRP expression isolates prostate stem/tumor stem cells from the
prostate tissue microenvironment through constitutive efflux of androgen,
protecting the putative tumor stem cells from androgen deprivation, hypoxia, or
adjuvant chemotherapy, and providing the nidus for recurrent prostate cancer.

PMID: 16061644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Aug;25(16):7069-77.

Transcriptional networks in the liver: hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 function is
largely independent of Foxa2.

Rubins NE(1), Friedman JR, Le PP, Zhang L, Brestelli J, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

A complex network of hepatocyte nuclear transcription factors, including HNF6 and
Foxa2, regulates the expression of liver-specific genes. The current model, based
on in vitro studies, suggests that HNF6 and Foxa2 interact physically. This
interaction is thought to synergistically stimulate Foxa2-dependent transcription
through the recruitment of p300/CBP by HNF6 and to inhibit HNF6-mediated
transcription due to the interference of Foxa2 with DNA binding by HNF6. To test 
this model in vivo, we utilized hepatocyte-specific gene ablation to study the
binding of HNF6 to its targets in the absence of Foxa2. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation using anti-HNF6 antibodies was performed on chromatin
isolated from Foxa2(loxP/loxP) Alfp.Cre and control mouse livers, and HNF6
binding to its target, Glut2, was determined by quantitative PCR. In contrast to 
the current model, we found no significant difference in HNF6 occupancy at the
Glut2 promoter between Foxa2-deficient and control livers. In order to evaluate
the Foxa2/HNF6 interaction model on a global scale, we performed a location
analysis using a microarray with 7,000 mouse promoter fragments. Again, we found 
no evidence that HNF6 binding to its targets in chromatin is reduced in the
presence of Foxa2. We also examined the mRNA levels of HNF6 targets in the liver 
using a cDNA array and found that their expression was similar in Foxa2-deficient
and control mice. Overall, our studies demonstrate that HNF6 binds to and
regulates its target promoters in vivo in the presence and absence of Foxa2.

PMCID: PMC1190247
PMID: 16055718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2005 Dec;289(6):L971-9. Epub 2005 Jul 22.

Beta-catenin regulates differentiation of respiratory epithelial cells in vivo.

Mucenski ML(1), Nation JM, Thitoff AR, Besnard V, Xu Y, Wert SE, Harada N, Taketo
MM, Stahlman MT, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA. michael.mucenski@cchmc.org

An activated form of beta-catenin [Catnb(Delta(ex3))] was expressed in
respiratory epithelial cells of the developing lung. Although morphogenesis was
not altered at birth, air space enlargement and epithelial cell dysplasia were
observed in the early postnatal period and persisted into adulthood. The
Catnb(Delta(ex3)) protein caused squamous, cuboidal, and goblet cell dysplasia in
intrapulmonary conducting airways. Atypical epithelial cells that stained for
surfactant pro protein C (pro-SP-C) and had morphological characteristics of
alveolar type II cells were observed in bronchioles of the transgenic mice.
Catnb(Delta(ex3)) inhibited expression of Foxa2 and caused goblet cell
hyperplasia associated with increased staining for mucins and the MUC5A/C
protein. In vitro, both wild type and activated beta-catenin negatively regulated
the expression of the Foxa2 promoter. Catnb(Delta(ex3)) also caused pulmonary
tumors in adult mice. Activation of beta-catenin caused ectopic differentiation
of alveolar type II-like cells in conducting airways, goblet cell hyperplasia,
and air space enlargement, demonstrating a critical role for the Wnt/beta-catenin
signal transduction pathway in the differentiation of the respiratory epithelium 
in the postnatal lung.

PMID: 16040629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Int J Oncol. 2005 Aug;27(2):581-5.

Comparative genomics on BMP4 orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) are implicated in cell-fate determination of
embryonic stem (ES) cells and cancer cells. GREM1 (CKTSF1B1 or DAND2) and CER1
(Cerberus 1 or DAND4) are cysteine knot superfamily proteins, functioning as
secreted-type BMP antagonists. BMP4 is preferentially expressed in diffuse-type
gastric cancer cells. Here, vertebrate BMP4 orthologs were identified and
characterized by using bioinformatics for comparative proteomics and comparative 
genomics analyses. Baboon BMP4 gene within AC153751.2 genome sequence encoded a
408-aa protein, showing A152V and S298P amino-acid substitutions compared with
human BMP4. Cow Bmp4, bat Bmp4 and zebrafish bmp4 genes were located within
AC149774.2, AC156788.2 and CR391996.2 genome sequences, respectively. Human BMP4 
showed 99.5%, 98.0%, 97.8%, 97.1%, 96.3%, 83.3% and 71.1% total-amino-acid
identity with baboon BMP4, cow Bmp4, bat Bmp4, mouse Bmp4, rat Bmp4, chicken bmp4
and zebrafish bmp4, respectively. Human BMP4 gene was found consisting of six
exons, including novel exon 1C, and known exons 1 (1A or I), 1B (II), 2 (III), 3 
(IV) and 4 (V). Forty human BMP4 ESTs started from exon 1, seven from intron 1
(5'-flanking region of exon 2), and two from exon 1C. Fourteen mouse Bmp4 ESTs
started from exon 1, and one from intron 1. The 5'-flanking region of exon 1 and 
exon 1 itself, but not exons 1C and 1B, were well conserved between human BMP4
and rodent Bmp4 genes. The major promoter region of human BMP4 and rodent Bmp4
genes were located within the 5'-flanking region of exon 1. FOXA2, OLF1, and
MYC-binding sites were conserved among the major promoter region of human,
baboon, cow, bat, mouse and rat BMP4 orthologs.

PMID: 16010442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Sep 10;309(1):68-77.

In vitro differentiation and maturation of mouse embryonic stem cells into
hepatocytes.

Ishii T(1), Yasuchika K, Fujii H, Hoppo T, Baba S, Naito M, Machimoto T, Kamo N, 
Suemori H, Nakatsuji N, Ikai I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, 54 Kawahara-cho Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8507, Japan.

It is difficult to induce the maturation of embryonic stem (ES) cells into
hepatocytes in vitro. We previously reported that Thy1-positive mesenchymal cells
derived from the mouse fetal liver promote the maturation of hepatic progenitor
cells. Here, we isolated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)-producing cells from mouse ES
cells for subsequent differentiation into hepatocytes in vitro by coculture with 
Thy1-positive cells. ES cells expressing green fluorescent protein (GFP) under
the control of an AFP promoter were cultured under serum- and feeder layer-free
culture conditions. The proportion of GFP-positive cells plateaued at 41.6 +/-
12.2% (means +/- SD) by day 7. GFP-positive cells, isolated by flow cytometry,
were cultured in the presence or absence of Thy1-positive cells as a feeder
layer. Isolated GFP-positive cells were stained for AFP, Foxa2, and albumin. The 
expression of mRNAs encoding tyrosine amino transferase, tryptophan
2,3-dioxygenase, and glucose-6-phosphatase were only detected following coculture
with Thy1-positive cells. Following coculture with Thy1-positive cells, the
isolated cells produced and stored glycogen. Ammonia clearance activity was also 
enhanced following coculture. Electron microscopic analysis indicated that the
cocultured cells exhibited the morphologic features of mature hepatocytes. In
conclusion, coculture with Thy1-positive cells in vitro induced the maturation of
AFP-producing cells isolated from ES cell cultures into hepatocytes.

PMID: 16009362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Eur J Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;84(5):555-66.

Homeobox B3, FoxA1 and FoxA2 interactions in epithelial lung cell differentiation
of the multipotent M3E3/C3 cell line.

Yoshimi T(1), Nakamura N, Shimada S, Iguchi K, Hashimoto F, Mochitate K,
Takahashi Y, Miura T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Science,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo
192-0392, Japan. vzz05106@nifty.com

HOM/C homeobox (Hox) and forkhead box (Fox) factors are reported to be expressed 
in the foregut endoderm and are subsequently detected in a spatio-temporal
pattern during lung development. Some of these factors were reported to influence
the expression of lung marker proteins or to modulate lung development. To
clarify the molecular mechanisms for generating functional lung cells from
progenitor cell populations, we introduced the forkhead box factors, FoxA1 and
FoxA2, and the homeobox factor, HoxB3, into the differentiation process in a
multipotent hamster lung epithelial M3E3/C3 cell line. Ectopic expression of
FoxA2 promoted differentiation to Clara-like cells with up-regulation of the
expression of the lung marker proteins, Clara cell-specific 10-kDa protein and
surfactant protein-B. In contrast, FoxA1 repressed the differentiation. HoxB3
transfection induced FoxA2 expression transiently at the pre-differentiation
stage. The endogenous HoxB3 expression level decreased at later stages of
Clara-like cell differentiation, and the attenuation was enhanced by FoxA2
transfection. HoxB3 is a putative upstream regulator that enhances FoxA2
expression at the pre-differentiation stage. In addition, we found that the
expression of HoxA4, HoxA5, and HoxC9 increased differentially during Clara-like 
cell differentiation. These results suggest that HoxB3 may be a putative positive
regulator of FoxA2 expression at the pre-differentiation stage, and those
interactions of Fox factors and Hox factors could participate in Clara cell
differentiation.

PMID: 16003909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Prostate. 2006 Jul 1;66(10):1013-28.

Expression and role of Foxa proteins in prostate cancer.

Mirosevich J(1), Gao N, Gupta A, Shappell SB, Jove R, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Prostate Cancer Center, AA-1302 Medical Center North, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-2765, USA.

The molecular mechanism(s) for prostate cancer progression to androgen
independence are poorly understood. We have recently shown that Foxa1 and Foxa2
proteins are differentially expressed in epithelial cells during murine prostate 
development, growth, and adult function. Currently, the role of Foxa proteins in 
prostate cancer development and progression is unknown. Foxa protein expression
was investigated in the LPB-Tag LADY mouse prostate cancer models, in human
prostate cancer specimens, and various prostate cancer cell lines using Western
blot and immunostaining analysis. In vitro transient transfection, studies were
performed to investigate Foxa/prostate-specific gene regulation. Foxa1 was
strongly expressed in areas of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) in both 
the androgen dependent 12T-7f and in the metastatic, androgen independent 12T-10 
LADY models. Prominent Foxa1 and Foxa2 expression was observed in 12T-10 invasive
undifferentiated neuroendocrine carcinomas, in the hormone independent and
metastasizing 12T-10 derived, NE-10 allograft tumors, and in all metastatic
lesions isolated from 12T-10 mice. Foxa1 protein expression was always observed
in human prostate carcinomas, regardless of Gleason grade score, while Foxa2 was 
only detected in neuroendocrine small cell carcinomas and in some high Gleason
score adenocarcinomas. Foxa proteins were also differentially expressed in three 
prostate cancer cell lines. Importantly, in vitro functional assays demonstrated 
that Foxa2 could activate androgen-dependent prostate-specific genes in an
androgen receptor and ligand-independent manner. These results suggest that Foxa 
proteins are important in prostate carcinogenesis. In particular, Foxa2 may be
involved in progression of prostate cancer to androgen independence. As such,
Foxa proteins may represent novel targets for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16001449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Development. 2005 Aug;132(15):3431-43. Epub 2005 Jun 29.

Forkhead box A1 regulates prostate ductal morphogenesis and promotes epithelial
cell maturation.

Gao N(1), Ishii K, Mirosevich J, Kuwajima S, Oppenheimer SR, Roberts RL, Jiang M,
Yu X, Shappell SB, Caprioli RM, Stoffel M, Hayward SW, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University,
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

We have previously shown that a forkhead transcription factor Foxa1 interacts
with androgen signaling and controls prostate differentiated response. Here, we
show the mouse Foxa1 expression marks the entire embryonic urogenital sinus
epithelium (UGE), contrasting with Shh and Foxa2, which are restricted to the
basally located cells during prostate budding. The Foxa1-deficient mouse prostate
shows a severely altered ductal pattern that resembles primitive epithelial cords
surrounded by thick stromal layers. Characterization of these mutant cells
indicates a population of basal-like cells similar to those found in the
embryonic UGE, whereas no differentiated or mature luminal epithelial cells are
found in Foxa1-deficient epithelium. These phenotypic changes are accompanied
with molecular aberrations, including focal epithelial activation of Shh and
elevated Foxa2 and Notch1 in the null epithelium. Perturbed epithelial-stromal
interactions induced by Foxa1-deficient epithelium is evident, as demonstrated by
the expansion of surrounding smooth muscle and elevated levels of stromal factors
(Bmp4, Fgf7, Fgf10 and Gli). The prostatic homeobox protein Nkx3.1, a known
proliferation inhibitor, was downregulated in Foxa1-deficient epithelial cells,
while several prostate-specific androgen-regulated markers, including a novel
Foxa1 target, are absent in the null prostate. These data indicate that Foxa1
plays a pivotal role in controlling prostate morphogenesis and cell
differentiation.

PMID: 15987773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biol Neonate. 2005;87(4):283-7. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Genetic disorders of surfactant homeostasis.

Whitsett JA(1), Wert SE, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, The University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA. jeff.whitsett@cchmc.org

Adaptation to air breathing at birth requires the precise orchestration of
cellular processes to initiate fluid clearance, enhance pulmonary blood flow, and
to synthesize and secrete pulmonary surfactant needed to reduce surface tension
at the air-liquid interface in the alveoli. Genetic programs regulating the
synthesis of the surfactant proteins and lipids required for the production and
function of pulmonary surfactant are highly conserved across vertebrates, and
include proteins that regulate the synthesis and packaging of pulmonary
surfactant proteins and lipids. Surfactant proteins B and C (SP-B and -C) are
small, uniquely hydrophobic proteins that play important roles in the stability
and spreading of surfactant lipids in the alveolus. Deletion or mutations in SP-B
and -C cause acute and chronic lung disease in neonates and infants. SP-B and -C 
are synthesized and packaged with surfactant phospholipids in lamellar bodies.
Normal lamellar body formation requires SP-B and a member of the ATP-binding
cassette (ABC) family of ATP-dependent membrane-associated transport proteins,
ABCA3. Mutations in ABCA3 cause fatal respiratory disease in newborns and severe 
chronic lung disease in infancy. Expression of SP-B, -C, and ABCA3 are
coregulated during late gestation by transcriptional programs influenced by
thyroid transcription factor-1 and forkhead box a2, transcription factors that
regulate both differentiation of the respiratory epithelium and transcription of 
genes required for perinatal adaptation to air breathing.

Copyright 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 15985750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Nature. 2005 Jun 16;435(7044):944-7.

The initiation of liver development is dependent on Foxa transcription factors.

Lee CS(1), Friedman JR, Fulmer JT, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The specification of the vertebrate liver is thought to occur in a two-step
process, beginning with the establishment of competence within the foregut
endoderm for responding to organ-specific signals, followed by the induction of
liver-specific genes. On the basis of expression and in vitro studies, it has
been proposed that the Foxa transcription factors establish competence by opening
compacted chromatin structures within liver-specific target genes. Here we show
that Foxa1 and Foxa2 (forkhead box proteins A1 and A2) are required in concert
for hepatic specification in mouse. In embryos deficient for both genes in the
foregut endoderm, no liver bud is evident and expression of the hepatoblast
marker alpha-fetoprotein (Afp) is lost. Furthermore, Foxa1/Foxa2-deficient
endoderm cultured in the presence of exogenous fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2) 
fails to initiate expression of the liver markers albumin and transthyretin.
Thus, Foxa1 and Foxa2 are required for the establishment of competence within the
foregut endoderm and the onset of hepatogenesis.

PMID: 15959514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Trends Mol Med. 2005 Jun;11(6):262-5.

Does chasing selected 'Fox' to the nucleus prevent diabetes?

Wang H(1), Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, University Medical Center,
CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Haiyan.Wang@medicine.unige.ch

Foxa2 (Hnf3beta) is a winged-helix/forkhead transcription factor that regulates
gene expression in the liver, pancreatic islets and adipocytes. It is required
for the maintenance of glucose and lipid homeostasis. Hyperinsulinemia-mediated
inactivation of Foxa2 by nuclear exclusion has recently been implicated in the
development of liver steatosis and insulin resistance in three animal models of
diabetes. These abnormalities were cured by adenovirus-mediated expression of a
constitutively active form of Foxa2 containing a mutated T156 phosphorylation
site, which increases fatty acid oxidation and reduces its biosynthesis.
Accordingly, the prevention of phosphorylation of Foxa2 was suggested as a
pharmacological target for the treatment of obesity and diabetes.

PMID: 15949766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Biochem J. 2005 Aug 1;389(Pt 3):831-41.

Characterization of a novel Foxa (hepatocyte nuclear factor-3) site in the
glucagon promoter that is conserved between rodents and humans.

Sharma SK(1), Leinemann U, Ratke R, Oetjen E, Blume R, Dickel C, Knepel W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Göttingen, D-37099
Göttingen, Germany.

The pancreatic islet hormone glucagon stimulates hepatic glucose production and
thus maintains blood glucose levels in the fasting state. Transcription factors
of the Foxa [Fox (forkhead box) subclass A; also known as HNF-3 (hepatocyte
nuclear factor-3)] family are required for cell-specific activation of the
glucagon gene in pancreatic islet alpha-cells. However, their action on the
glucagon gene is poorly understood. In the present study, comparative sequence
analysis and molecular characterization using protein-DNA binding and transient
transfection assays revealed that the well-characterized Foxa-binding site in the
G2 enhancer element of the rat glucagon gene is not conserved in humans and that 
the human G2 sequence lacks basal enhancer activity. A novel Foxa site was
identified that is conserved in rats, mice and humans. It mediates activation of 
the glucagon gene by Foxa proteins and confers cell-specific promoter activity in
glucagon-producing pancreatic islet alpha-cell lines. In contrast with previously
identified Foxa-binding sites in the glucagon promoter, which bind nuclear Foxa2,
the novel Foxa site was found to bind preferentially Foxa1 in nuclear extracts of
a glucagon-producing pancreatic islet alpha-cell line, offering a mechanism that 
explains the decrease in glucagon gene expression in Foxa1-deficient mice. This
site is located just upstream of the TATA box (between -30 and -50), suggesting a
role for Foxa proteins in addition to direct transcriptional activation, such as 
a role in opening the chromatin at the start site of transcription of the
glucagon gene.

PMCID: PMC1180734
PMID: 15828872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Int J Cancer. 2005 Sep 1;116(3):407-14.

Identification of 20 genes aberrantly methylated in human breast cancers.

Miyamoto K(1), Fukutomi T, Akashi-Tanaka S, Hasegawa T, Asahara T, Sugimura T,
Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Chuo-ku,
Tokyo, Japan.

Aberrant methylation of CpG islands (CGI) not only plays a role in gene
silencing, but is also a potential cancer biomarker. To identify more CGI
aberrantly methylated in human breast cancers, we carried out a genome-wide
search for aberrant methylation, using methylation-sensitive-representational
difference analysis. CGI in 5' upstream regions of 20 genes, TSPAN-2, AK5,
LOC284999, HOXD11, FLJ25161, XT3, PCDH10, PCDHGB6, SIM1, LOC346978, COE2, TDH
(FLJ25033), LOC346419, FLJ33790, GJB2, AMN, LOC201164, DLX4, DCC and FOXA2, were 
found to be methylated in at least one of 8 breast cancer cell lines. Fifteen of 
the 20 genes were methylated in more than one of 21 primary breast cancers in
Stages I or II, and especially, those of LOC346978, HOXD11, SIM1, PCDHGB6 and
FLJ25161 were methylated in more than 10 cancers. All the breast cancers had some
aberrant methylation. Among the 13 genes whose CGI were completely methylated in 
one or more cell lines, FOXA2 and XT3 were expressed in normal human mammary
epithelial cells (HMEC) and were not expressed in cancer cell lines with complete
methylation. The other 11 genes examined were barely expressed, or not expressed 
even in HMEC. Our results showed that breast cancer cells accumulate aberrant
methylation of the CGI identified here. This may serve as markers for early-stage
breast cancers and suggests that aberrant methylation targets transcriptionally
inactive genes in vivo.

PMID: 15818620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Int J Mol Med. 2005 May;15(5):885-9.

Comparative genomics on Norrie disease gene.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

DAND1 (NBL1), DAND2 (CKTSF1B1 or GREM1 or GREMLIN), DAND3 (CKTSF1B2 or GREM2 or
PRDC), DAND4 (CER1), DAND5 (CKTSF1B3 or GREM3 or DANTE), MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B,
MUC6, MUC19, WISP1, WISP2, WISP3, VWF, NOV and Norrie disease (NDP or NORRIN)
genes encode proteins with cysteine knot domain. Cysteine-knot superfamily
proteins regulate ligand-receptor interactions for a variety of signaling
pathways implicated in embryogenesis, homeostasis, and carcinogenesis. Although
Ndp is unrelated to Wnt family members, Ndp is claimed to function as a ligand
for Fzd4. Here, we identified and characterized rat Ndp, cow Ndp, chicken ndp and
zebrafish ndp genes by using bioinformatics. Rat Ndp gene, consisting of three
exons, was located within AC105563.4 genome sequence. Cow Ndp and chicken ndp
complete CDS were derived from CB467544.1 EST and BX932859.2 cDNA, respectively. 
Zebrafish ndp gene was located within BX572627.5 genome sequence. Rat Ndp (131
aa) was a secreted protein with C-terminal cysteine knot-like (CTCK) domain. Rat 
Ndp showed 100, 96.9, 95.4, 87.8 and 66.4 total-amino-acid identity with mouse
Ndp, cow Ndp, human NDP, chicken ndp and zebrafish ndp, respectively. Exon-intron
structure of mammalian Ndp orthologs was well conserved. FOXA2, CUTL1 (CCAAT
displacement protein), LMO2, CEBPA (C/EBPalpha)-binding sites and triple POU2F1
(OCT1)-binding sites were conserved among promoters of mammalian Ndp orthologs.

PMID: 15806314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Stem Cells. 2005 Apr;23(4):594-603.

Human bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells can express insulin and key
transcription factors of the endocrine pancreas developmental pathway upon
genetic and/or microenvironmental manipulation in vitro.

Moriscot C(1), de Fraipont F, Richard MJ, Marchand M, Savatier P, Bosco D, Favrot
M, Benhamou PY.

Author information: 
(1)Centre d'Investigation Biologique, Pavillon B, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire, 38043 Grenoble Cedex 9, France.

Multipotential stem cells can be selected from the bone marrow by plastic
adhesion, expanded, and cultured. They are able to differentiate not only into
multiple cell types, including cartilage, bone, adipose and fibrous tissues, and 
myelosupportive stroma, but also into mesodermal (endothelium), neuroectodermal, 
or endodermal (hepatocytes) lineages. Our goal was to characterize the
multipotential capacities of human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) and to evaluate
their ability to differentiate into insulin-secreting cells in vitro. hMSCs were 
obtained from healthy donors, selected by plastic adhesion, and phenotyped by
fluorescence-activated cell sorter and reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction analysis before and after infection with adenoviruses coding for mouse
IPF1, HLXB9, and FOXA2 transcription factors involved early in the endocrine
developmental pathway. We found that native hMSCs have a pluripotent phenotype
(OCT4 expression and high telomere length) and constitutively express NKX6-1 at a
low level but lack all other transcription factors implicated in beta-cell
differentiation. In all hMSCs, we detected mRNA of cytokeratin 18 and 19,
epithelial markers present in pancreatic ductal cells, whereas proconvertase 1/3 
mRNA expression was detected only in some hMSCs. Ectopic expression of IPF1,
HLXB9, and FOXA2 with or without islet coculture or islet-conditioned medium
results in insulin gene expression. In conclusion, our results demonstrated that 
in vitro human bone marrow stem cells are able to differentiate into
insulin-expressing cells by a mechanism involving several transcription factors
of the beta-cell developmental pathway when cultured in an appropriate
microenvironment.

PMID: 15790780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Gene. 2005 May 9;350(2):149-60. Epub 2005 Mar 19.

Development of a spot reliability evaluation score for DNA microarrays.

Matsumura Y(1), Shimokawa K, Hayashizaki Y, Ikeo K, Tateno Y, Kawai J.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Exploration Research Group, RIKEN Genomic Sciences Center (GSC),
Yokohama Institute, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, 
Japan.

We developed a reliability index named SRED (Spot Reliability Evaluation Score
for DNA microarrays) that represents the probability that the calibrated gene
expression level from a DNA microarray would be less than a factor of 2 different
from that of quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction assays whose
dynamic quantification range is treated statistically to be similar to that of
the DNA microarray. To define the SRED score, two parameters, the reproducibility
of measurement value and the relative expression value were selected from nine
candidate parameters. The SRED score supplies the probability that the expression
level in each spot of a microarray is less than a certain-fold different compared
to other expression profiling data, such as QRT-PCR. This score was applied to
approximately 1,500,000 points of the expression profile in the RIKEN Expression 
Array Database.

PMID: 15788151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2005 Apr;26(4):469-76.

Hepatocyte-like cells from directed differentiation of mouse bone marrow cells in
vitro.

Shi XL(1), Qiu YD, Li Q, Xie T, Zhu ZH, Chen LL, Li L, Ding YT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital, Medical
College of Nanjing University, Nanjing 210008, China.

AIM: To design the effective directed differentiation medium to differentiate
bone marrow cells into hepatocyte-like cells.
METHODS: Bone marrow cells were cultured in the directed differentiation media
including fibroblast growth factor-4 (FGF-4) and oncostatin M (OSM).
Hepatocyte-like cells from directed differentiation of bone marrow cells were
identified through cell morphology, RNA expressions by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), protein expressions by Western 
blot, and hepatocellular synthesis and metabolism functions by albumin ELISA,
Periodic acid-Shiff staining and urea assay.
RESULTS: Some epithelial-like cells or polygonal cells appeared and increased in 
the course of the cell directed differentiation. Hepatocyte nucleur factor-3beta 
(HNF-3beta, albumin (ALB), cytokeratin 18 (CK18), transthyretin (TTR),
glucose-6-phosphate (G-6-Pase), and tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) mRNA were
expressed in the course of the directed differentiation. The directed
differentiated cells on d 21 expressed HNF-3? ALB, and CK18 proteins. The
directed differentiated cells produced albumin and synthesized urea in a
time-dependent manner. They could also synthesize glycogen.
CONCLUSION: Our differentiation media, including FGF-4 and OSM, are effective to 
differentiate bone marrow cells into hepatocyte-like cells, which could be used
for hepatocyte resources for bioartificial liver or hepatocyte transplantation.

PMID: 15780197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Mar 14;33(5):1513-23. Print 2005.

Identification of the 'NORE' (N-Oct-3 responsive element), a novel structural
motif and composite element.

Alazard R(1), Blaud M, Elbaz S, Vossen C, Icre G, Joseph G, Nieto L, Erard M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale UMR 5089, 205 Route de
Narbonne, 31077 Toulouse Cedex 4, France.

N-Oct-3 is a neuronal transcription factor widely expressed in the developing
mammalian central nervous system, and necessary to maintain neural cell
differentiation. The key role of N-Oct-3 in the transcriptional regulation of a
multiplicity of genes is primarily due to the structural plasticity of its
so-called 'POU' (acronym of Pit, Oct, Unc) DNA-binding domain. We have recently
reported about the unusual dual neuro-specific transcriptional regulation
displayed by N-Oct-3 [Blaud,M., Vossen,C., Joseph,G., Alazard,R., Erard,M. and
Nieto,L. (2004) J. Mol. Biol., 339, 1049-1058]. To elucidate the underlying
molecular mechanisms, we have now made use of molecular modeling, DNA
footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assay techniques. This combined
approach has allowed us to uncover a novel mode of homodimerization adopted by
the N-Oct-3 POU domain bound to the neuronal aromatic amino acids de-carboxylase 
and corticotropin-releasing hormone gene promoters and to demonstrate that this
pattern is induced by a structural motif that we have termed 'NORE' (N-Oct-3
responsive element), comprising the 14 bp sequence element TNNRTAAATAATRN. In
addition, we have been able to explain how the same structural motif can also
induce the formation of a heterodimer in association with hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3beta(/Forkhead box a2). Finally, we discuss the possible role of the NORE
motif in relation to neuroendocrine lung tumor formation, and in particular the
development of small cell lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC1065252
PMID: 15767276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Dev Dyn. 2005 Apr;232(4):950-7.

Retinoic acid generated by Raldh2 in mesoderm is required for mouse dorsal
endodermal pancreas development.

Molotkov A(1), Molotkova N, Duester G.

Author information: 
(1)OncoDevelopmental Biology Program, Burnham Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Studies on nonmammalian vertebrate embryos have indicated that retinoic acid (RA)
is required for pancreas development. We have analyzed mouse embryos carrying a
null mutation of the gene encoding retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (Raldh2), which 
controls RA synthesis. Raldh2-/- embryos specifically lack expression of Pdx1 (a 
homeobox gene required for pancreas development) and Prox1 in dorsal endodermal
but not ventral endodermal pancreatic precursor tissues. Ventral endodermal
expression of Hex is not affected in Raldh2-/- embryos, indicating that liver
specification is not dependent upon RA. Also, expression of Foxa2 across the
dorsoventral axis of the endoderm is not affected in Raldh2-/- embryos,
indicating that a lack of RA does not cause a general defect in foregut endoderm 
development. Comparison of wild-type and Raldh2-/- embryos carrying an
RA-reporter transgene demonstrates that RA activity is normally present
throughout the endoderm except in the ventral-most region but is totally missing 
in endoderm of Raldh2-/- embryos. Thus, Raldh2 expressed in adjacent splanchnic
lateral plate mesoderm provides an RA signal to dorsal endoderm. Dorsal Pdx1
expression is rescued in Raldh2-/- embryos by low-dose maternal administration of
RA, which preferentially restores RA-reporter expression in the dorsal endoderm. 
Our findings demonstrate a specific role for RA in mouse embryos as a
mesodermally synthesized signal needed for dorsal endodermal expression of Pdx1
during development of the dorsal pancreatic lineage.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15739227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):16763-71. Epub 2005 Feb 28.

A hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 site in the fibrinogen beta promoter is important
for interleukin 6-induced expression, and its activity is influenced by the
adjacent -148C/T polymorphism.

Verschuur M(1), de Jong M, Felida L, de Maat MP, Vos HL.

Author information: 
(1)Hemostasis and Thrombosis Research Center, Department of Hematology, Leiden
University Medical Center, P. O. Box 9600, 2300 RC Leiden, Gaubius Laboratory,
TNO Quality of Life, P. O. Box 2215, 2301 CE Leiden, The Netherlands.

An elevated plasma fibrinogen level is an independent risk factor for
cardiovascular disease. Therefore, an understanding of the regulation of
fibrinogen expression is important. Inflammation and genetic variation of the
fibrinogen beta gene regulate plasma fibrinogen levels, and there are indications
that inflammation and genetic variation interact. The aim of our study was to
gain more understanding of the regulation of the inflammatory response of the
fibrinogen beta gene and to determine the effects of genetic variation.
Luciferase reporter gene assays in hepatoma cells, mutation analysis, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to investigate the
transcriptional regulation of the fibrinogen beta promoter. We identified a
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) site located just upstream of previously
identified interleukin-6 (IL6)-responsive sequences. This HNF-3 site is essential
for a full response of the promoter to IL6, which is a new function for HNF-3.
The activity of the CCAAT box/enhancer-binding protein site (located 18
nucleotides downstream of the HNF-3 site and important to the IL6 response)
depends on the integrity of the HNF-3 site and vice versa, explaining the
necessity of HNF-3 in the IL6 response of the fibrinogen beta promoter.
Furthermore, small interfering RNA to HNF-3 reduces the fibrinogen beta mRNA
levels. The rare T allele of the -148C/T polymorphism, which is present between
the binding sites of HNF-3 and CCAAT box/enhancer-binding protein, interferes
with this mechanism, and this polymorphism is in our assay system the only
genetic determinant of IL6-induced promoter activity among six polymorphisms in
the fibrinogen beta promoter.

PMID: 15737987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Dev Dyn. 2005 Apr;232(4):928-38.

Retinoic acid down-regulates Tbx1 expression in vivo and in vitro.

Roberts C(1), Ivins SM, James CT, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, United
Kingdom. c.roberts@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Both Tbx1 and retinoic acid (RA) are key players in embryonic pharyngeal
development; loss of Tbx1 produces DiGeorge syndrome-like phenotypes in mouse
models as does disruption of retinoic acid homeostasis. We have demonstrated that
perturbation of retinoic acid levels in the avian embryo produces altered Tbx1
expression. In vitamin A-deficient quails, which lack endogenous retinoic acid,
Tbx1 expression patterns were disrupted early in development and expression was
subsequently lost in all tissues. "Gain-of-function" experiments where RA-soaked 
beads were grafted into the pharyngeal region produced localized down-regulation 
of Tbx1 expression. In these embryos, analysis of Shh and Foxa2, upstream control
factors for Tbx1, suggested that the effect of RA was independent of this
regulatory pathway. Real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis of retinoic
acid-treated P19 cells showed a dose-dependent repression of Tbx1 by retinoic
acid. Repression of Tbx1 transcript levels was first evident after 8-12 hr in
culture in the presence of retinoic acid, and to achieve the highest levels of
repression, de novo protein synthesis was required.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15736167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):16484-98. Epub 2005 Feb 18.

Differences in gene expression between wild type and Hoxa1 knockout embryonic
stem cells after retinoic acid treatment or leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)
removal.

Martinez-Ceballos E(1), Chambon P, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

Homeobox (Hox) genes encode a family of transcription factors that regulate
embryonic patterning and organogenesis. In embryos, alterations of the normal
pattern of Hox gene expression result in homeotic transformations and
malformations. Disruption of the Hoxa1 gene, the most 3' member of the Hoxa
cluster and a retinoic acid (RA) direct target gene, results in abnormal
ossification of the skull, hindbrain, and inner ear deficiencies, and neonatal
death. We have generated Hoxa1(-/-) embryonic stem (ES) cells (named Hoxa1-15)
from Hoxa1(-/-) mutant blastocysts to study the Hoxa1 signaling pathway. We have 
characterized in detail these Hoxa1(-/-) ES cells by performing microarray
analyses, and by this technique we have identified a number of putative Hoxa-1
target genes, including genes involved in bone development (e.g. Col1a1,
Postn/Osf2, and the bone sialoprotein gene or BSP), genes that are expressed in
the developing brain (e.g. Nnat, Wnt3a, BDNF, RhoB, and Gbx2), and genes involved
in various cellular processes (e.g. M-RAS, Sox17, Cdkn2b, LamA1, Col4a1, Foxa2,
Foxq1, Klf5, and Igf2). Cell proliferation assays and Northern blot analyses of a
number of ES cell markers (e.g. Rex1, Oct3/4, Fgf4, and Bmp4) suggest that the
Hoxa1 protein plays a role in the inhibition of cell proliferation by RA in ES
cells. Additionally, Hoxa1(-/-) ES cells express high levels of various
endodermal markers, including Gata4 and Dab2, and express much less Fgf5 after
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) withdrawal. Finally, we propose a model in which
the Hoxa1 protein mediates repression of endodermal differentiation while
promoting expression of ectodermal and mesodermal characteristics.

PMID: 15722554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 29;280(17):16979-86. Epub 2005 Feb 14.

Expression and function of cGMP-dependent protein kinase type I during medaka
fish embryogenesis.

Yamamoto T(1), Suzuki N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo 060-0810, Japan. take-y@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

We isolated and characterized cDNA clones (PKG Ialpha and PKG Ibeta) for medaka
fish cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) Ialpha and Ibeta, and demonstrated that 
both are expressed in the embryos after late gastrula stage. Whole-mount in situ 
hybridization using each isoform-specific probe revealed that the transcripts of 
the PKG Ialpha gene were present in the spinal cord and gill arch, whereas those 
of the PKG Ibeta gene were only weakly expressed in these organs, but highly
expressed in the otic vesicles. Injection of PKG Ialpha-specific morpholino
antisense oligonucleotides (Ialpha-MO) into two-cell stage medaka fish embryos
caused severe abnormalities in the developing embryos, such as the development of
a hammer-like head, fusion of the developing eyes, and degeneration of cells
around the eyes, whereas injection of PKG Ibeta-specific morpholino antisense
oligonucleotides (Ibeta-MO) caused fewer abnormalities in the embryos, even when 
injected at higher concentrations than Ialpha-MO. The PKG I-overexpressing
embryos exhibited smaller eyes and enlargement of the forebrain, a phenotype
similar to that observed in the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA)-depressed
embryos. In the PKG-deficient embryos, a sonic hedgehog (shh)-target gene,
HNF-3beta, was expressed weakly, and this phenotype was similar to that observed 
in the PKA-overexpressing embryos suggesting that the cGMP/PKG signaling pathway 
is involved in some steps of shh signaling. We also demonstrated that Gli
proteins, shh-downstream molecules, are phosphorylated by the NO/cGMP signaling
pathway, probably by PKG in NG108-15 neuroblastoma cells. These results imply
that PKG and PKA share common substrates and work in an opposite manner during
the early embryogenesis of medaka fish.

PMID: 15710621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Int J Mol Med. 2005 Mar;15(3):527-31.

Identification and characterization of rat Wnt6 and Wnt10a genes in silico.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

WNT and Hedgehog signaling pathways are implicated in various types of human
cancer, such as gastric and pancreatic cancer. WNT1, WNT2, WNT2B (WNT13), WNT3,
WNT3A, WNT4, WNT5A, WNT5B, WNT6, WNT7A, WNT7B, WNT8A, WNT8B, WNT9A (WNT14), WNT9B
(WNT14B). WNT10A, WNT10B, WNT11 and WNT16 genes encode WNT family glycoproteins, 
which transduce signals through Frizzled (FZD) family receptors with
extracellular WNT-binding and cytoplasmic Dishevelled-binding domains. WNT6 and
WNT10A genes at human chromosome 2q35 are clustered in tail-to-head manner with
an interval of <7 kb. Here, we identified and characterized rat Wnt6 and Wnt10a
genes by using bioinformatics. Wnt6 and Wnt10a genes were clustered in
tail-to-head manner with an interval of about 7 kb within AC127107.3 and
AC132020.3 genome sequences. Rat Wnt6 gene, consisting of four exons, encoded a
365-aa protein with signal peptide, 24 conserved Cys residues, two Asn-linked
glycosylation sites and an RGD motif. Rat Wnt10a gene, consisting of four exons, 
encoded a 417-aa protein with 24 conserved Cys residues, two Asn-linked
glycosylation sites and an RGD motif. Rat Wnt6 and human WNT6 showed 97.8%
total-amino-acid identity, while rat Wnt10a and human WNT10A showed 95.4%
total-amino-acid identity. Promoter region was conserved between rat Wnt6 and
human WNT6 genes. GATA, FOXA2, and TGIF binding sites were located within the
conserved region of rat Wnt6 and human WNT6 promoters. This is the first report
on rat Wnt6 and Wnt10a genes as well as on the conserved promoter region of Wnt6 
orthologs.

PMID: 15702249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Dev Biol. 2005 Feb 15;278(2):484-95.

Foxa2 is required for the differentiation of pancreatic alpha-cells.

Lee CS(1), Sund NJ, Behr R, Herrera PL, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Penn Diabetes Center, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 415 Curie Boulevard, CRB 560 Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The differentiation of insulin-producing beta-cells has been investigated in
great detail; however, little is known about the factors that delineate the
second-most abundant endocrine lineage, the glucagon-producing alpha-cell. Here
we utilize a novel YAC-based Foxa3Cre transgene to delete the winged helix
transcription factor Foxa2 (formerly HNF-3beta) in the pancreatic primordium
during midgestation. The resulting Foxa2(loxP/loxP); Foxa3Cre mice are severely
hypoglycemic and die within the first week of life. Mutant mice are
hypoglucagonemic secondary to a 90% reduction of glucagon expression. While the
number of mature glucagon-positive alpha-cells is dramatically reduced,
specification of alpha-cell progenitors is not affected by Foxa2 deficiency. By
marker gene analysis, we show that the expression of the alpha-cell transcription
factors Arx, Pax6, and Brn4 does not require Foxa2 in the transcriptional
hierarchy governing alpha-cell differentiation.

PMID: 15680365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Development. 2005 Feb;132(4):645-58.

Monorail/Foxa2 regulates floorplate differentiation and specification of
oligodendrocytes, serotonergic raphé neurones and cranial motoneurones.

Norton WH(1), Mangoli M, Lele Z, Pogoda HM, Diamond B, Mercurio S, Russell C,
Teraoka H, Stickney HL, Rauch GJ, Heisenberg CP, Houart C, Schilling TF,
Frohnhoefer HG, Rastegar S, Neumann CJ, Gardiner RM, Strähle U, Geisler R, Rees
M, Talbot WS, Wilson SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, UCL, Gower Street, London
WC1E 6BT, UK.

In this study, we elucidate the roles of the winged-helix transcription factor
Foxa2 in ventral CNS development in zebrafish. Through cloning of monorail (mol),
which we find encodes the transcription factor Foxa2, and phenotypic analysis of 
mol-/- embryos, we show that floorplate is induced in the absence of Foxa2
function but fails to further differentiate. In mol-/- mutants, expression of
Foxa and Hh family genes is not maintained in floorplate cells and lateral
expansion of the floorplate fails to occur. Our results suggest that this is due 
to defects both in the regulation of Hh activity in medial floorplate cells as
well as cell-autonomous requirements for Foxa2 in the prospective laterally
positioned floorplate cells themselves. Foxa2 is also required for induction
and/or patterning of several distinct cell types in the ventral CNS. Serotonergic
neurones of the raphenucleus and the trochlear motor nucleus are absent in mol-/-
embryos, and oculomotor and facial motoneurones ectopically occupy ventral CNS
midline positions in the midbrain and hindbrain. There is also a severe reduction
of prospective oligodendrocytes in the midbrain and hindbrain. Finally, in the
absence of Foxa2, at least two likely Hh pathway target genes are ectopically
expressed in more dorsal regions of the midbrain and hindbrain ventricular
neuroepithelium, raising the possibility that Foxa2 activity may normally be
required to limit the range of action of secreted Hh proteins.

PMCID: PMC2790417
PMID: 15677724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2005 Apr;32(4):311-8. Epub 2005 Jan 24.

Interleukin-1beta causes pulmonary inflammation, emphysema, and airway remodeling
in the adult murine lung.

Lappalainen U(1), Whitsett JA, Wert SE, Tichelaar JW, Bry K.

Author information: 
(1)Goteborg University, Department of Pediatrics, The Queen Silvia Children's
Hospital, 41685 Goteborg, Sweden.

The production of the inflammatory cytokine interleukin (IL)-1 is increased in
lungs of patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or asthma. To
characterize the in vivo actions of IL-1 in the lung, transgenic mice were
generated in which human IL-1beta was expressed in the lung epithelium with a
doxycycline-inducible system controlled by the rat Clara cell secretory protein
(CCSP) promoter. Induction of IL-1beta expression in the lungs of adult mice
caused pulmonary inflammation characterized by neutrophil and macrophage
infiltrates. IL-1beta caused distal airspace enlargement, consistent with
emphysema. IL-1beta caused disruption of elastin fibers in alveolar septa and
fibrosis in airway walls and in the pleura. IL-1beta increased the thickness of
conducting airways, enhanced mucin production, and caused lymphocytic aggregates 
in the airways. Decreased immunostaining for the winged helix transcription
factor FOXA2 was associated with goblet cell hyperplasia in IL-1beta-expressing
mice. The production of the neutrophil attractant CXC chemokines KC (CXCL1) and
MIP-2 (CXCL2), and of matrix metalloproteases MMP-9 and MMP-12, was increased by 
IL-1beta. Chronic production of IL-1beta in respiratory epithelial cells of adult
mice causes lung inflammation, enlargement of distal airspaces, mucus metaplasia,
and airway fibrosis in the adult mouse.

PMID: 15668323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13809-16. Epub 2005 Jan 24.

Compensatory roles of Foxa1 and Foxa2 during lung morphogenesis.

Wan H(1), Dingle S, Xu Y, Besnard V, Kaestner KH, Ang SL, Wert S, Stahlman MT,
Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
and the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio
45229-3039, USA.

Foxa1 and Foxa2 are closely related family members of the Foxa group of
transcription factors that are coexpressed in subsets of respiratory epithelial
cells throughout lung morphogenesis. Shared patterns of expression, conservation 
of DNA binding, and transcriptional activation domains indicate that they may
serve complementary functions in the regulation of gene expression during lung
morphogenesis. Whereas branching morphogenesis of the fetal lung occurs normally 
in the Foxa2Delta/Delta and Foxa1-/- mice, deletion of both Foxa1 and Foxa2 (in
Foxa2Delta/Delta, Foxa1-/- mice) inhibited cell proliferation, epithelial cell
differentiation, and branching. Dilation of terminal lung tubules and decreased
branching were observed as early as embryonic day 12.5. Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulated
Shh (sonic hedgehog) and Shh-dependent genes in the respiratory epithelial cells 
that influenced the expression of genes in the pulmonary mesenchyme that are
required for branching morphogenesis. Epithelial cell differentiation, as
indicated by lack of expression of surfactant protein B, surfactant protein C,
the Clara cell secretory protein, and Foxj1, was inhibited. Foxa family members
regulate signaling and transcriptional programs required for morphogenesis and
cell differentiation during formation of the lung.

PMID: 15668254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Clin Sci (Lond). 2005 Mar;108(3):195-204.

Winged-helix transcription factors and pancreatic development.

Lantz KA(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Medical School, 560
Clinical Research Building, 415 Curie Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The forkhead gene family, named after the founding gene member in Drosophila, is 
characterized by a unique DNA-binding domain. This so-called forkhead box encodes
a winged-helix DNA-binding motif, the name of which describes the structure of
the domain when bound to DNA. The three Fox (forkhead box) group A genes, Foxa1, 
Foxa2 and Foxa3, are expressed in embryonic endoderm, the germ layer that gives
rise to the digestive system, and contribute to the specification of the pancreas
and the regulation of glucose homoeostasis. Deletion of the Foxa2 gene in
pancreatic beta-cells in mice results in a phenotype resembling PHHI (persistent 
hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia of infancy). Molecular analyses have demonstrated
that Foxa2 is an important regulator of the genes encoding Sur1, Kir6.2 and Schad
(short chain L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase), mutation of which causes PHHI in
humans. Foxa1 was shown to be an essential activator of glucagon gene expression 
in vivo. An additional winged-helix protein, Foxo1, contributes to pancreatic
beta-cell function by regulating the Pdx1 gene, which is required for pancreatic 
development in cooperation with Foxa2.

PMID: 15631623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Clin Invest. 2005 Jan;115(1):138-45.

PKClambda regulates glucose-induced insulin secretion through modulation of gene 
expression in pancreatic beta cells.

Hashimoto N(1), Kido Y, Uchida T, Matsuda T, Suzuki K, Inoue H, Matsumoto M,
Ogawa W, Maeda S, Fujihara H, Ueta Y, Uchiyama Y, Akimoto K, Ohno S, Noda T,
Kasuga M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Molecular Medicine, Division of Diabetes and Digestive 
and Kidney Diseases, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2005 Jan;115(1):16-20.

Altered regulation of insulin secretion by glucose is characteristic of
individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus, although the mechanisms that underlie 
this change remain unclear. We have now generated mice that lack the lambda
isoform of PKC in pancreatic beta cells (betaPKClambda(-/-) mice) and show that
these animals manifest impaired glucose tolerance and hypoinsulinemia.
Furthermore, insulin secretion in response to high concentrations of glucose was 
impaired, whereas the basal rate of insulin release was increased, in islets
isolated from betaPKClambda(-/-) mice. Neither the beta cell mass nor the islet
insulin content of betaPKClambda(-/-) mice differed from that of control mice,
however. The abundance of mRNAs for Glut2 and HNF3beta was reduced in islets of
betaPKClambda(-/-) mice, and the expression of genes regulated by HNF3beta was
also affected (that of Sur1 and Kir6.2 genes was reduced, whereas that of
hexokinase 1 and hexokinase 2 genes was increased). Normalization of HNF3beta
expression by infection of islets from betaPKClambda(-/-) mice with an adenoviral
vector significantly reversed the defect in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion.
These results indicate that PKClambda plays a prominent role in regulation of
glucose-induced insulin secretion by modulating the expression of genes important
for beta cell function.

PMCID: PMC539193
PMID: 15630453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Nature. 2004 Dec 23;432(7020):1027-32.

Foxa2 regulates lipid metabolism and ketogenesis in the liver during fasting and 
in diabetes.

Wolfrum C(1), Asilmaz E, Luca E, Friedman JM, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The
Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2004 Dec 23;432(7020):958-9.

The regulation of fat and glucose metabolism in the liver is controlled primarily
by insulin and glucagon. Changes in the circulating concentrations of these
hormones signal fed or starvation states and elicit counter-regulatory responses 
that maintain normoglycaemia. Here we show that in normal mice, plasma insulin
inhibits the forkhead transcription factor Foxa2 by nuclear exclusion and that in
the fasted (low insulin) state Foxa2 activates transcriptional programmes of
lipid metabolism and ketogenesis. In insulin-resistant or hyperinsulinaemic mice,
Foxa2 is inactive and permanently located in the cytoplasm of hepatocytes. In
these mice, adenoviral expression of Foxa2T156A, a nuclear, constitutively active
Foxa2 that cannot be inhibited by insulin, decreases hepatic triglyceride
content, increases hepatic insulin sensitivity, reduces glucose production,
normalizes plasma glucose and significantly lowers plasma insulin. These changes 
are associated with increased expression of genes encoding enzymes of fatty acid 
oxidation, ketogenesis and glycolysis. Chronic hyperinsulinaemia in
insulin-resistant syndromes results in the cytoplasmic localization and
inactivation of Foxa2, thereby promoting lipid accumulation and insulin
resistance in the liver. Pharmacological intervention to inhibit phosphorylation 
of Foxa2 may be an effective treatment for type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 15616563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nature. 2004 Dec 23;432(7020):958-9.

Diabetes: outfoxing insulin resistance?

Montminy M, Koo SH.

Comment on
    Nature. 2004 Dec 23;432(7020):1027-32.

PMID: 15616540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Diabetes. 2005 Feb;54(2):301-5. Epub 2004 Dec 7.

Retinoic acid induces Pdx1-positive endoderm in differentiating mouse embryonic
stem cells.

Micallef SJ(1), Janes ME, Knezevic K, Davis RP, Elefanty AG, Stanley EG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Early Human Development, Monash Institute of Reproduction and
Development, 27-31 Wright St., Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia.

We have generated an embryonic stem (ES) cell line in which sequences encoding
green fluorescent protein (GFP) were targeted to the locus of the
pancreatic-duodenal homeobox gene (Pdx1). Analysis of chimeric embryos derived
from blastocyst injection of Pdx1(GFP/w) ES cells demonstrated that the pattern
of GFP expression was consistent with that reported for the endogenous Pdx1 gene.
By monitoring GFP expression during the course of ES cell differentiation, we
have shown that retinoic acid (RA) can regulate the commitment of ES cells to
form Pdx1(+) pancreatic endoderm. RA was most effective at inducing Pdx1
expression when added to cultures at day 4 of ES differentiation, a period
corresponding to the end of gastrulation in the embryo. RT-PCR analysis showed
that Pdx1-positive cells from day 8 cultures expressed the early endoderm markers
Ptf1a, Foxa2, Hnf4alpha, Hnf1beta, and Hnf6, consistent with the notion that they
corresponded to the early pancreatic endoderm present in the embryonic day 9.5
mouse embryo. These results demonstrate the utility of Pdx1(GFP/w) ES cells as a 
tool for monitoring the effects of factors that influence pancreatic
differentiation from ES cells.

PMID: 15585742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mech Dev. 2005 Jan;122(1):43-56.

Hedgehog and retinoid signalling confines nkx2.2b expression to the lateral floor
plate of the zebrafish trunk.

Schäfer M(1), Kinzel D, Neuner C, Schartl M, Volff JN, Winkler C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry I, Biocenter, University of Würzburg, Am
Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany.

The ventral neural tube of vertebrates consists of distinct neural progenitor
domains positioned along the dorsoventral (DV) axis that develop different types 
of moto- and interneurons. Several signalling molecules, most notably Sonic
Hedgehog (Shh), retinoic acid (RA) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF) have been
implicated in the generation of these domains. Shh is secreted from the floor
plate, the ventral most neural tube structure that consists of the medial (MFP)
and the lateral floor plate (LFP). While the MFP is well characterized,
organization and function of the LFP remains unclear. Here, we describe the novel
homeobox gene nkx2.2b that is strongly expressed in the trunk LFP of zebrafish
and thus represents a unique marker for the characterization of LFP formation and
the identification of LFP deficient mutants. nkx2.2b and its paralog nkx2.2a
(formerly known as nk2.2 and nkx2.2) arose by gene duplication in zebrafish. Both
duplicates show significant differences in their expression patterns. For
example, while prominent nkx2.2a expression has been described in the ventral
brain [Barth, K.A., Wilson, S.W., 1995. Expression of zebrafish nk2.2 is
influenced by sonic hedgehog/vertebrate hedgehog-1 and demarcates a zone of
neuronal differentiation in the embryonic forebrain. Development 121, 1755-1768],
hardly any expression can be found in the trunk LFP, which is in contrast to
nkx2.2b. Overexpression, mutant and inhibitor analyses show that nkx2.2b
expression in the LFP is up-regulated by Shh, but repressed by retinoids and
ectopic islet-1 (isl1) expression. In contrast to previously described zebrafish 
trunk LFP markers, like e.g. tal2 or foxa2, nkx2.2b is exclusively expressed in
the LFP. Thus, it represents a unique tool to analyse the mechanisms of ventral
neural tube patterning in zebrafish.

PMID: 15582776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Dec;5(2):193-208.

Immunohistochemical localization of Foxa1 and Foxa2 in mouse embryos and adult
tissues.

Besnard V(1), Wert SE, Hull WM, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Members of the Forkhead box (Fox) transcription factors family Foxa1 (Hnf-3
alpha), Foxa2 (Hnf-3 beta) are known to influence gene expression in endodermally
derived tissues including lung, liver, pancreas, stomach, and intestine. In the
present study, we have generated highly specific antibodies for Foxa1 and Foxa2
and determined their expression patterns in the developing and adult mouse. Foxa1
and Foxa2 were detected in the nuclei of tissues derived from both foregut and
hindgut endoderm (liver, lung, pancreas, stomach, intestine, prostate and
bladder). Foxa2 and Foxa1 were also detected in organs deriving from ectodermal
(several brain structures and olfactory epithelium) and mesodermal origins
(kidney, vagina and uterus, seminal and coagulating glands) during development.
Colocalization and distinct sites of expression of Foxa1 and Foxa2 indicate
unique as well as overlapping roles of Foxa1 or Foxa2 during morphogenesis and in
the function of different adult organs.

PMID: 15567715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Nov 24;1681(1):28-37.

Transcriptional regulation of the IAPP gene in pancreatic beta-cells.

Shepherd LM(1), Campbell SC, Macfarlane WM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Cell and Molecular Biosciences, University of Newcastle upon Tyne,
The Medical School, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.

Islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP or amylin) is co-secreted with insulin from the
pancreatic beta-cells. Transcription of the IAPP gene is controlled by a complex 
promoter region, spanning from -2798 to +450 relative to the transcriptional
start site. In the present study, we have used reporter gene analysis and
semi-quantitative RT-PCR to establish that insulin, glucagon, glucagon-like
peptide-1 (GLP-1) and the GLP-1 derivatives GLP(7-36)Amide and Exendin-4 all
stimulate IAPP promoter activity, as well as endogenous IAPP mRNA levels in
isolated islets of Langerhans. In contrast, somatostatin had no effect, and
whilst the inflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha, IL-1alpha and IL-1beta had no effect
on promoter activity, they all decreased IAPP mRNA levels in isolated islets.
Finally, utilising a series of deletion reporter gene constructs of the human
IAPP gene promoter, we used overexpression studies to establish that HNF-3beta
(FoxA2) negatively regulates the IAPP promoter, whilst the MODY3 transcription
factor HNF-1alpha positively regulates promoter activity.

PMID: 15566941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 4;280(5):3259-68. Epub 2004 Nov 10.

Role of hepatocyte nuclear factors in transcriptional regulation of male-specific
CYP2A2.

Wiwi CA(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Cytochrome P450 2A2 (CYP2A2) is an adult male-specific rat liver steroid
hydroxylase whose sex-dependent expression is regulated at the transcriptional
level by sexually dimorphic pituitary growth hormone (GH) secretory patterns. In 
contrast to CYP2C11 and other male-specific, plasma GH pulse-inducible liver
genes, CYP2A2 is highly expressed in hypophysectomized rat liver, despite the
absence of GH stimulation. CYP2A2 promoter fragments 0.9-6.2 kb long exhibited
unusually high basal promoter activity when transfected into the liver cell line 
HepG2. A further approximately 2.5-fold increase in activity was obtained by
cotransfection of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 3gamma or HNF4alpha. CYP2A2
promoter activity was inhibited approximately 85% by transfection of HNF3beta or 
HNF6, both of which are more highly expressed in female than male liver and can
strongly trans-activate the female-specific CYP2C12 promoter. The male GH
pulse-activated transcription factor STAT5b had no effect on CYP2A2 promoter
activity, either alone or in combination with HNF3gamma and HNF4alpha, consistent
with the GH pulse-independence of CYP2A2 expression. By contrast, STAT5b
synergistically enhanced the transcriptional activity of HNF4alpha toward two
other male-specific liver target genes, Cyp2d9 and CYP8B1. Furthermore, STAT5b in
combination with the HNF4alpha coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha strongly enhanced the transcriptional activity 
of HNF4alpha toward CYP8B1 but not toward CYP2A2. These findings support the
hypothesis that sex-dependent HNFs contribute to the sexually dimorphic
expression of CYP2A2 and other liver CYPs and highlight the ability of STAT5b to 
act in concert with HNF4alpha to regulate select male-specific liver CYP genes.

PMID: 15539409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 21;280(3):1893-900. Epub 2004 Nov 4.

Regulation of ATP-sensitive potassium channel subunit Kir6.2 expression in rat
intestinal insulin-producing progenitor cells.

Hashimoto T(1), Nakamura T, Maegawa H, Nishio Y, Egawa K, Kashiwagi A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Medicine, Shiga
University of Medical Science, Otsu, Japan.

We have reported that the combined expression of Pdx-1 (pancreatic duodenal
homeobox 1) and Isl-1 (islet 1) enables immature rat enterocytes (IEC-6) to
produce and release insulin. A key component regulating the release of insulin is
the ATP-sensitive potassium channel subunit Kir6.2. To investigate the regulation
of Kir6.2 gene expression, we assessed Kir6.2 expression in IEC-6 cells
expressing Pdx-1 and/or Isl-1. We observed that Kir6.2 protein was expressed de
novo in IEC-6 cells expressing both Pdx-1 and Isl-1 but not in cells expressing
Pdx-1 alone. Next, we analyzed the regions of the Kir6.2 promoter (-1677/-45) by 
performing a luciferase assay and electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The
results have demonstrated that Kir6.2 promoter possesses two regions regulating
the promoter activity: a Foxa2-binding site (-1364 to -1210) and an
Sp1/Sp3-binding site (-1035 to -939). The additional expression of Isl-1 in IEC-6
cells expressing Pdx-1 attenuated overexpression of Foxa2 protein and enhanced
Kir6.2 expression. Finally, knockdown of Isl-1 using the iRNA technique resulted 
in decreased expression of Kir6.2 protein in a rat pancreatic beta-cell line
(RIN-5F cells). These results indicate that expression of Kir6.2 in the rat
intestine is moderated by Isl-1.

PMID: 15528203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2004 Oct;70(10):789-807.

Evidence for a molecular mechanism of teratogenicity of SB-236057, a 5-HT1B
receptor inverse agonist that alters axial formation.

Augustine-Rauch KA(1), Zhang QJ, Leonard JL, Chadderton A, Welsh MJ, Rami HK,
Thompson M, Gaster L, Wier PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Toxicology, GlaxoSmithKline Pharmaceuticals, King
of Prussia, Pennsylvania, USA. karen.augustine@bms.com

BACKGROUND: SB-236057 is a potent skeletal teratogen in rodents and rabbits,
producing axial and posterior somite malformations in cultured rat embryos. The
compound shares some structural similarity to cyclopamine.
METHODS: M13 phage display was used to identify amino acid motifs with binding
affinity to SB-236057. A 10 microM SB-236057 solution was administered to
cultured day 9 postcoitus rat embryos and real-time PCR was conducted at 6 hr
posttreatment to evaluate early transcriptional response of axial development
genes. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of selected transcripts was conducted on
embryos at 48 hr post-compound administration. The rat-enhancer of split protein 
1 (r-esp1) expression-functional characterization was done by transcriptional
expression and morpholino antisense approaches.
RESULTS: We identified several amino acid motifs that had high binding affinity
to SB-236057-biotin conjugates, one with 100% sequence homology to a region of
r-esp1, one of the Groucho homologs transcribed by the enhancer of split complex 
(En[spl]C). SB-236057 repressed expression of r-esp1 and members of the
Notch-En[spl]C pathway. Goosecoid and HNF3-beta, both suspected to associate with
Groucho proteins, were also responsive, although expression of another putative
binding protein, engrailed-1 (en-1), and other en-1 pathway members was not
affected. R-esp1 mRNA was localized along the axis and antisense inhibition
produced similar somite malformations as SB-236057 did. At 48 hr post-SB-236057
or post-r-esp1 antisense administration, affected embryos demonstrated unchanged 
sonic hedgehog (shh) expression, however HNF3-beta expression was either absent, 
altered, or reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: We present experimental evidence that the mechanism of SB-236057
teratogenicity includes transcriptional alterations to the Notch1-En[spl]
pathway. In addition, alterations in HNF3-beta expression were similar to those
induced by cyclopamine. The relationships between r-esp1 with Notch1 and shh
signaling pathways and potential mechanisms of SB-236057 teratogenicity are also 
discussed.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15472891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Development. 2004 Nov;131(21):5491-502. Epub 2004 Oct 6.

Tbx1 regulates fibroblast growth factors in the anterior heart field through a
reinforcing autoregulatory loop involving forkhead transcription factors.

Hu T(1), Yamagishi H, Maeda J, McAnally J, Yamagishi C, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

Birth defects, which occur in one out of 20 live births, often affect multiple
organs that have common developmental origins. Human and mouse studies indicate
that haploinsufficiency of the transcription factor TBX1 disrupts pharyngeal arch
development, resulting in the cardiac and craniofacial features associated with
microdeletion of 22q11 (del22q11), the most frequent human deletion syndrome.
Here, we have generated an allelic series of Tbx1 deficiency that reveals a lower
critical threshold for Tbx1 activity in the cardiac outflow tract compared with
other pharyngeal arch derivatives, including the palatal bones. Mice hypomorphic 
for Tbx1 failed to activate expression of the forkhead transcription factor Foxa2
in the pharyngeal mesoderm, which contains cardiac outflow precursors derived
from the anterior heart field. We identified a Fox-binding site upstream of Tbx1 
that interacted with Foxa2 and was necessary for pharyngeal mesoderm expression
of Tbx1, revealing an autoregulatory loop that may explain the increased cardiac 
sensitivity to Tbx1 dose. Downstream of Tbx1, we found a fibroblast growth factor
8 (Fgf8) enhancer that was dependent on Tbx1 in vivo for regulating expression in
the cardiac outflow tract, but not in pharyngeal arches. Consistent with its role
in regulating cardiac outflow tract cells Tbx1 gain of function resulted in
expansion of the cardiac outflow tract segment derived from the anterior heart
field as marked by Fgf10. These findings reveal a Tbx1-dependent transcriptional 
and signaling network in the cardiac outflow tract that renders mouse
cardiovascular development more susceptible than craniofacial development to a
reduction in Tbx1 dose, similar to humans with del22q11.

PMID: 15469978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Oct 5;101(40):14449-54. Epub 2004 Sep 27.

Foxa2 is required for transition to air breathing at birth.

Wan H(1), Xu Y, Ikegami M, Stahlman MT, Kaestner KH, Ang SL, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center
and University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati,
OH 45229-3039, USA.

Toward the end of gestation in mammals, the fetal lung undergoes a process of
differentiation that is required for transition to air breathing at birth.
Respiratory epithelial cells synthesize the surfactant proteins and lipids that
together form the pulmonary surfactant complex necessary for lung function.
Failure of this process causes respiratory distress syndrome, a leading cause of 
perinatal death and morbidity in newborn infants. Here we demonstrate that
expression of the forkhead gene Foxa2 in respiratory epithelial cells of the
peripheral lung controls pulmonary maturation at birth. Newborn mice lacking
Foxa2 expression in the lung develop severe pulmonary disease on the first day of
life, with all of the morphological, molecular, and biochemical features of
respiratory distress syndrome in preterm infants, including atelectasis, hyaline 
membranes, and the lack of pulmonary surfactant lipids and proteins. RNA
microarray analysis at embryonic day 18.5 demonstrated that Foxa2-regulated
expression of a group of genes mediating surfactant protein and lipid synthesis, 
host defense, and antioxidant production. Foxa2 regulates a complex pulmonary
program of epithelial cell maturation required for transition to air breathing at
birth.

PMCID: PMC521955
PMID: 15452354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Prostate. 2005 Mar 1;62(4):339-52.

Expression of Foxa transcription factors in the developing and adult murine
prostate.

Mirosevich J(1), Gao N, Matusik RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Prostate Cancer Center, Department of Urologic Surgery, Vanderbilt 
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2765, USA.

BACKGROUND: The Foxa family (a1, a2, and a3) of proteins are transcription
factors that are central to endodermal development. Recently, Foxa1 has been
shown to regulate the transcription of several murine and human prostate specific
genes involved in differentiated function by interacting with DNA promoter
sequences and androgen receptors. Currently, the developmental expression pattern
of Foxa proteins in the murine prostate is unknown.
METHODS: Male CD-1 mice (embryonic, prepubertal, pubertal, and adult) were used
for immunohistochemical analysis of Foxa1, a2, and a3. Immunofluorescence was
also performed for androgen receptor and cytokeratin 14 expression. Prostate
tissue from pre-pubertal, pubertal, and adult mice were analyzed by Western blot 
and RT-PCR analysis for Foxa1, a2, and a3 expression.
RESULTS: Strong Foxa1 immunoreactivity was observed in epithelial cells
throughout prostate development, growth, and adult differentiation. Prominent
Foxa2 protein expression was only observed in the early stages of prostate
development and was exclusively localized to epithelial cells of the forming
buds. RT-PCR analysis identified low Foxa2 mRNA expression levels in the ventral 
and dorsolateral lobes of the adult prostate, with Foxa2 epithelial cell
expression being localized to periurethral regions of the murine adult prostatic 
complex. Foxa3 expression was not observed in the murine prostate.
CONCLUSIONS: Foxa proteins represent epithelial cell markers in the murine
prostate gland. The early expression of Foxa1 and a2 proteins in prostate
formation suggests that these proteins play an important role in normal prostate 
development, in addition to differentiated secretory function.

PMID: 15389796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2004 Nov 26;279(48):49948-55. Epub 2004 Sep 22.

Regulation of the cell-specific calcitonin/calcitonin gene-related peptide
enhancer by USF and the Foxa2 forkhead protein.

Viney TJ(1), Schmidt TW, Gierasch W, Sattar AW, Yaggie RE, Kuburas A, Quinn JP,
Coulson JM, Russo AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa
52242, USA.

An 18-bp enhancer controls cell-specific expression of the calcitonin/calcitonin 
gene-related peptide gene. The enhancer is bound by a heterodimer of the bHLH-Zip
protein USF-1 and -2 and a cell-specific factor from thyroid C cell lines. In
this report we have identified the cell-specific factor as the forkhead protein
Foxa2 (previously HNF-3beta). Binding of Foxa2 to the 18-bp enhancer was
demonstrated using electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The cell-specific
DNA-protein complex was selectively competed by a series of Foxa2 DNA binding
sites, and the addition of Foxa2 antiserum supershifted the complex. Likewise, a 
complex similar to that seen with extracts from thyroid C cell lines was
generated using an extract from heterologous cells expressing recombinant Foxa2. 
Interestingly, overexpression of Foxa2 activated the 18-bp enhancer in
heterologous cells but only in the presence of the adjacent helix-loop-helix
motif. Likewise, coexpression of USF proteins with Foxa2 yielded greater
activation than by Foxa2 alone. Unexpectedly, Foxa2 overexpression repressed
activity in the CA77 thyroid C cell line, suggesting that Foxa2 may interact with
additional cofactors. The stimulatory role of Foxa2 at the calcitonin/calcitonin 
gene-related peptide gene enhancer was confirmed by short interfering
RNA-mediated knockdown of Foxa2. As seen with Foxa2 overexpression, the effect of
Foxa2 knockdown also required the adjacent helix-loop-helix motif. These results 
provide the first evidence for combinatorial control of gene expression by
bHLH-Zip and forkhead proteins.

PMID: 15385550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Development. 2004 Oct;131(20):4999-5007. Epub 2004 Sep 15.

Targeted deletion of the novel cytoplasmic dynein mD2LIC disrupts the embryonic
organiser, formation of the body axes and specification of ventral cell fates.

Rana AA(1), Barbera JP, Rodriguez TA, Lynch D, Hirst E, Smith JC, Beddington RS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Mammalian Development, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. a.rana@gurdon.cam.ac.uk

Dyneins have been implicated in left-right axis determination during embryonic
development and in a variety of human genetic syndromes. In this paper, we study 
the recently discovered mouse dynein 2 light intermediate chain (mD2LIC), which
is believed to be involved in retrograde intraflagella transport and which, like 
left-right dynein, is expressed in the node of the mouse embryo. Cells of the
ventral node of mouse embryos lacking mD2LIC have an altered morphology and lack 
monocilia, and expression of Foxa2 and Shh in this structure is reduced or
completely absent. At later stages, consistent with the absence of nodal cilia,
mD2LIC is required for the establishment of the left-right axis and for normal
expression of Nodal, and the ventral neural tube fails to express Shh, Foxa2 and 
Ebaf. mD2LIC also functions indirectly in the survival of anterior definitive
endoderm and in the maintenance of the anterior neural ridge, probably through
maintenance of Foxa2/Hnf3beta expression. Together, our results indicate that
mD2LIC is required to maintain or establish ventral cell fates and for correct
signalling by the organiser and midline, and they identify the first embryonic
function of a vertebrate cytoplasmic dynein.

PMID: 15371312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Dec;18(12):2880-94. Epub 2004 Sep 9.

Orphan nuclear receptor small heterodimer partner represses hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3/Foxa transactivation via inhibition of its DNA binding.

Kim JY(1), Kim HJ, Kim KT, Park YY, Seong HA, Park KC, Lee IK, Ha H, Shong M,
Park SC, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 500-757, Korea.

Small heterodimer partner (SHP; NR0B2) is an atypical orphan nuclear receptor and
acts as a coregulator of various nuclear receptors. Herein, we examined a novel
cross talk between SHP and a forkhead transcription factor HNF3 (hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3/Foxa. Transient transfection assay demonstrated that SHP
inhibited the transcriptional activity of all three isoforms of HNF3, HNF3alpha, 
beta, and gamma. In vivo and in vitro protein interaction studies showed that SHP
physically interacted with HNF3. Adenovirus-mediated overexpression of SHP
significantly decreased the mRNA levels of glucose-6-phosphase (G6Pase),
cholesterol 7-alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1), and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
(PEPCK) in HepG2 cells and rat primary hepatocytes. Moreover, the mRNA level of
G6Pase was notably increased by down-regulation of SHP with small interfering
RNA. Interestingly, HNF3 transactivity was still repressed by SHPDelta128-139
that fails to repress nuclear receptors. Mapping of interaction domain revealed
that SHP interacted with forkhead DNA binding domain of HNF3alpha. Gel mobility
shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that SHP inhibits DNA
binding of HNF3. These results suggest that SHP is involved in the regulation of 
G6Pase, CYP7A1, and PEPCK gene expression via novel mechanism of inhibition of
HNF3 activity and expand the role of SHP as a coregulator of other family of
transcription factors in addition to nuclear receptors.

PMID: 15358835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Dev Biol. 2004 Oct 1;274(1):171-87.

Regionalization of cell fates and cell movement in the endoderm of the mouse
gastrula and the impact of loss of Lhx1(Lim1) function.

Tam PP(1), Khoo PL, Wong N, Tsang TE, Behringer RR.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, University of Sydney, 
New South Wales, Australia. ptam@cmri.usyd.edu.au

Investigation of the developmental fates of cells in the endodermal layer of the 
early bud stage mouse embryo revealed a regionalized pattern of distribution of
the progenitor cells of the yolk sac endoderm and the embryonic gut. By tracing
the site of origin of cells that are allocated to specific regions of the
embryonic gut, it was found that by late gastrulation, the respective endodermal 
progenitors are already spatially organized in anticipation of the prospective
mediolateral and anterior-posterior destinations. The fate-mapping data further
showed that the endoderm in the embryonic compartment of the early bud stage
gastrula still contains cells that will colonize the anterior and lateral parts
of the extraembryonic yolk sac. In the Lhx1(Lim1)-null mutant embryo, the
progenitors of the embryonic gut are confined to the posterior part of the
endoderm. In particular, the prospective anterior endoderm was sequestered to a
much smaller distal domain, suggesting that there may be fewer progenitor cells
for the anterior gut that is poorly formed in the mutant embryo. The deficiency
of gut endoderm is not caused by any restriction in endodermal potency of the
mutant epiblast cells but more likely the inadequate allocation of the definitive
endoderm. The inefficient movement of the anterior endoderm, and the abnormal
differentiation highlighted by the lack of Sox17 and Foxa2 expression, may
underpin the malformation of the head of Lhx1 mutant embryos.

PMID: 15355796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. J Clin Invest. 2004 Aug;114(4):512-20.

Foxa2 regulates multiple pathways of insulin secretion.

Lantz KA(1), Vatamaniuk MZ, Brestelli JE, Friedman JR, Matschinsky FM, Kaestner
KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA,
USA.

The regulation of insulin secretion by pancreatic beta cells is perturbed in
several diseases, including adult-onset (type 2) diabetes and persistent
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia of infancy (PHHI). The first mouse model for PHHI
has a conditional deletion of the gene encoding the winged-helix transcription
factor Foxa2 (Forkhead box a2, formerly Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta) in
pancreatic beta cells. Using isolated islets, we found that Foxa2 deficiency
resulted in excessive insulin release in response to amino acids and complete
loss of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Most PHHI cases are associated with
mutations in SUR1 (Sulfonylurea receptor 1) or KIR6.2 (Inward rectifier K(+)
channel member 6.2), which encode the subunits of the ATP-sensitive K(+) channel,
and RNA in situ hybridization of mutant mouse islets revealed that expression of 
both genes is Foxa2 dependent. We utilized expression profiling to identify
additional targets of Foxa2. Strikingly, one of these genes, Hadhsc, encodes
short-chain L-3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase, deficiency of which has
been shown to cause PHHI in humans. Hadhsc is a direct target of Foxa2, as
demonstrated by cotransfection as well as in vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiments using isolated islets. Thus, we have established Foxa2 as an
essential activator of genes that function in multiple pathways governing insulin
secretion.

PMCID: PMC503770
PMID: 15314688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 2004 Oct 8;279(41):43070-6. Epub 2004 Aug 9.

Stability of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 transcription factor requires
acetylation by the CREB-binding protein coactivator.

Rausa FM 3rd(1), Hughes DE, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

We previously demonstrated that the formation of complexes between the DNA
binding domains of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF6) and Forkhead Box a2
(Foxa2) transcription factors resulted in synergistic transcriptional activation 
of a Foxa2 target promoter. This Foxa2.HNF6 transcriptional synergy was mediated 
by the recruitment of CREB-binding protein (CBP) coactivator through the HNF6
Cut-Homeodomain sequences. Although the HNF6 DNA binding domain sequences are
sufficient to recruit CBP coactivator for HNF6.Foxa2 transcriptional synergy,
paradoxically these HNF6 Cut-Homeodomain sequences were unable to stimulate the
transcription of an HNF6-dependent reporter gene. Here, we investigated whether
the CBP coactivator protein played a different role in regulating HNF6
transcriptional activity. We showed that acetylation of the HNF6 protein by CBP
increased both HNF6 protein stability and its ability to stimulate transcription 
of the glucose transporter 2 promoter. Mutation of the HNF6 Cut domain lysine 339
residue to an arginine residue abrogated CBP acetylation, which is required for
HNF6 protein stability. Furthermore, the HNF6 K339R mutant protein, which failed 
to accumulate detected protein levels, was transcriptionally inactive and could
not be stabilized by inhibiting the ubiquitin proteasome pathway. Finally,
increased HNF6 protein levels stabilized the Foxa2 protein, presumably through
the formation of the Foxa2.HNF6 complex. These studies show for the first time
that HNF6 protein stability is controlled by CBP acetylation and provides a novel
mechanism by which the activity of the CBP coactivator may regulate steady levels
of two distinct liver-enriched transcription factors.

PMID: 15304484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Genes Dev. 2004 Jul 15;18(14):1725-36. Epub 2004 Jul 1.

The mouse homeobox gene Not is required for caudal notochord development and
affected by the truncate mutation.

Abdelkhalek HB(1), Beckers A, Schuster-Gossler K, Pavlova MN, Burkhardt H,
Lickert H, Rossant J, Reinhardt R, Schalkwyk LC, Müller I, Herrmann BG, Ceolin M,
Rivera-Pomar R, Gossler A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology OE5250, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

The floating head (flh) gene in zebrafish encodes a homeodomain protein, which is
essential for notochord formation along the entire body axis. flh orthologs,
termed Not genes, have been isolated from chick and Xenopus, but no mammalian
ortholog has yet been identified. Truncate (tc) is an autosomal recessive
mutation in mouse that specifically disrupts the development of the caudal
notochord. Here, we demonstrate that truncate arose by a mutation in the mouse
Not gene. The truncate allele (Nottc) contains a point mutation in the homeobox
of Not that changes a conserved Phenylalanine residue in helix 1 to a Cysteine
(F20C), and significantly destabilizes the homeodomain. Reversion of F20C in one 
allele of homozygous tc embryonic stem (ES) cells is sufficient to restore normal
notochord formation in completely ES cell-derived embryos. We have generated a
targeted mutation of Not by replacing most of the Not coding sequence, including 
the homeobox with the eGFP gene. The phenotype of NoteGFP/eGFP, NoteGFP/tc, and
Nottc/tc embryos is very similar but slightly more severe in NoteGFP/eGFP than in
Nottc/tc embryos. This confirms allelism of truncate and Not, and indicates that 
tc is not a complete null allele. Not expression is abolished in Foxa2 and T
mutant embryos, suggesting that Not acts downstream of both genes during
notochord development. This is in contrast to zebrafish embryos, in which flh
interacts with ntl (zebrafish T) in a regulatory loop and is essential for
development of the entire notochord, and suggests that different genetic control 
circuits act in different vertebrate species during notochord formation.

Copyright 2004 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ISSN

PMCID: PMC478193
PMID: 15231714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cancer Res. 2004 Jun 15;64(12):4137-47.

A transcriptional profiling study of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein targets
identifies hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 beta as a novel tumor suppressor in lung
cancer.

Halmos B(1), Bassères DS, Monti S, D'Aló F, Dayaram T, Ferenczi K, Wouters BJ,
Huettner CS, Golub TR, Tenen DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston,
USA.

We showed previously that CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBP alpha), a
tissue-specific transcription factor, is a candidate tumor suppressor in lung
cancer. In the present study, we have performed a transcriptional profiling study
of C/EBP alpha target genes using an inducible cell line system. This study led
to the identification of hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (HNF3 beta), a
transcription factor known to play a role in airway differentiation, as a
downstream target of C/EBP alpha. We found down-regulation of HNF3 beta
expression in a large proportion of lung cancer cell lines examined and
identified two novel mutants of HNF3 beta, as well as hypermethylation of the
HNF3 beta promoter. We also developed a tetracycline-inducible cell line model to
study the cellular consequences of HNF3 beta expression. Conditional expression
of HNF3 beta led to significant growth reduction, proliferation arrest,
apoptosis, and loss of clonogenic ability, suggesting additionally that HNF3 beta
is a novel tumor suppressor in lung cancer. This is the first study to show
genetic abnormalities of lung-specific differentiation pathways in the
development of lung cancer.

PMID: 15205324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Mol Biol. 2004 Jun 18;339(5):1049-58.

Characteristic patterns of N Oct-3 binding to a set of neuronal promoters.

Blaud M(1), Vossen C, Joseph G, Alazard R, Erard M, Nieto L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, CNRS UPR 9062, 205,
route de Narbonne, 31077 Toulouse Cedex, France.

N Oct-3, a neurospecific POU protein, homodimerizes in a non-cooperative fashion 
on the neuronal aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase gene promoter and generates
heterodimers with HNF-3beta. Several other neuronal gene promoters, the
corticotropin releasing hormone and the aldolase C gene promoters also contain
overlapping binding sites for N Oct-3 and HNF-3beta. We have demonstrated that N 
Oct-3 presents a non-cooperative homodimerization on these two additional targets
and can also give rise to heterodimers with HNF-3beta. Surprisingly, despite the 
high degree of conservation of the respective POU subunits, the ubiquitous POU
protein Oct-1 can only form monomers even in the presence of either N Oct-3 or
HNF-3beta on these DNA targets. Our data indicate that this difference is
correlated with the specific ability of a portion of the N Oct-3 linker to fold
as an alpha-helix, a property shared by class III POU proteins. These results
suggest that this novel binding pattern permits the heterodimerization of N Oct-3
and HNF-3beta on the neuronal promoters, which could be a key issue in the
development of the nervous system and possibly tumors of neural origin.

PMID: 15178247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2004 Jun;15(3):303-7.

New insights into inhibitors of adipogenesis.

Harp JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Adipose tissue is a dynamic organ that changes mass throughout
life in response to the metabolic needs of the animal. In the past three decades,
significant advances have been made in delineating key extracellular and
intracellular stimulators of fat cell formation or adipogenesis. In this review, 
the author focuses on new findings of specific inhibitors of adipogenesis.
Understanding the balance between positive and negative regulators of
adipogenesis has important health-related implications for anti-obesity medical
therapy and lipodystrophy.
RECENT FINDINGS: Adipogenesis is a highly regulated process requiring coordinated
expression and activation of two main groups of adipogenic transcription factors,
CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins and peroxisome proliferators activated receptor
gamma. In response to hormonal and nutrient stimuli, the increased expression and
activation of these transcription factors induce the expression of
adipocyte-specific genes. More recently, several groups have identified
extracellular inhibitors of adipocyte formation, including cytokines, lipid
molecules, genistein, and protease inhibitors. Intracellular signaling molecules,
which negatively regulate adipogenesis, include Pref-1, Foxo1, Foxa2, SMAD-3,
WNT-10b, GATA-2 and GATA-3.
SUMMARY: The prevalence of obesity is increasing in the United States and in
other westernized societies. Understanding the mechanisms of excessive energy
storage in adipose tissue is necessary to develop a comprehensive strategy to
prevent and treat obesity. One potential, but unrealized, approach to obesity
treatment is to target excessive adipose tissue enlargement. A number of
promising extra- and intracellular inhibitors of fat cell formation have been
identified, but the modulation of adipose tissue mass may have both advantageous 
and deleterious health effects.

PMID: 15166786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Science. 2004 May 28;304(5675):1325-8.

A family with severe insulin resistance and diabetes due to a mutation in AKT2.

George S(1), Rochford JJ, Wolfrum C, Gray SL, Schinner S, Wilson JC, Soos MA,
Murgatroyd PR, Williams RM, Acerini CL, Dunger DB, Barford D, Umpleby AM, Wareham
NJ, Davies HA, Schafer AJ, Stoffel M, O'Rahilly S, Barroso I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's
Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.

Inherited defects in signaling pathways downstream of the insulin receptor have
long been suggested to contribute to human type 2 diabetes mellitus. Here we
describe a mutation in the gene encoding the protein kinase AKT2/PKBbeta in a
family that shows autosomal dominant inheritance of severe insulin resistance and
diabetes mellitus. Expression of the mutant kinase in cultured cells disrupted
insulin signaling to metabolic end points and inhibited the function of
coexpressed, wild-type AKT. These findings demonstrate the central importance of 
AKT signaling to insulin sensitivity in humans.

PMCID: PMC2258004
PMID: 15166380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Development. 2004 Jul;131(13):3069-80. Epub 2004 May 26.

Sox17 and beta-catenin cooperate to regulate the transcription of endodermal
genes.

Sinner D(1), Rankin S, Lee M, Zorn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Developmental
Biology and The Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Recent studies have led to a model of the molecular pathway that specifies the
endoderm during vertebrate gastrulation. The HMG box transcription factor Sox17
is a key component of this pathway and is essential for endoderm formation;
however, the molecular events controlled by Sox17 are largely unknown. We have
identified several direct transcriptional targets of Sox17, including Foxa1 and
Foxa2. We show that beta-catenin, a component of Wnt signaling pathway,
physically interacts with Sox17 and potentiates its transcriptional activation of
target genes. We identify a motif in the C terminus of Sox17, which is conserved 
in all the SoxF subfamily of Sox proteins, and this motif is required for the
ability of Sox17 to both transactivate target genes and bind beta-catenin.
Nuclear beta-catenin is present in endoderm cells of the gastrula, and depletion 
of beta-catenin from embryos results in a repression of Sox17 target genes. These
data suggest that in a mechanism analogous to Tcf/Lef interacting with
beta-catenin, Sox17 and beta-catenin interact to transcribe endodermal target
genes.

PMID: 15163629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Hum Pathol. 2004 May;35(5):560-4.

Forkhead box A2 transcription factor is expressed in all types of neuroendocrine 
lung tumors.

Khoor A(1), Stahlman MT, Johnson JM, Olson SJ, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL
32224, USA.

Forkhead box A2 (Foxa2) is a winged helix nuclear transcription protein that
regulates the expression of genes that are critical to lung morphogenesis,
differentiation, and function, including thyroid transcription factor-1,
surfactant proteins, and Clara cell secretory protein. We examined the
immunoreactivity of Foxa2 in paraffin sections of 75 lung tumors: 17 typical
carcinoids, 2 atypical carcinoids, 4 large cell neuroendocrine (NE) carcinomas,
23 small cell carcinomas, 19 adenocarcinomas, 7 squamous cell carcinomas, and 3
(non-NE) large cell carcinomas, using a polyclonal rabbit Foxa2 antibody and a
biotin-streptavidin detection system. In the adjacent lung, Foxa2 was detected in
normal and hyperplastic type II cells. Foxa2 immunoreactivity was detected in 13 
typical carcinoids (76%), 2 atypical carcinoids (100%), 2 large cell NE
carcinomas (50%), 11 small cell carcinomas (48%), and 1 adenocarcinoma (5%).
Squamous cell carcinomas and (non-NE) large cell carcinomas uniformly lacked
Foxa2 staining. Expression of Foxa2 in the entire spectrum of NE lung tumors is
another indication of differentiation shared by typical carcinoid, atypical
carcinoid, large cell NE carcinoma, and small cell carcinoma.

PMID: 15138929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Virchows Arch. 2004 Jul;445(1):45-53. Epub 2004 May 11.

Type-II pneumocyte differentiation in pulmonary sclerosing hemangioma:
ultrastructural differentiation and immunohistochemical distribution of
lineage-specific transcription factors (TTF-1, HNF-3 alpha, and HNF-3 beta) and
surfactant proteins.

Yamazaki K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saiseikai Central Hospital, l-4-17 Mita, Minatoku,
108-0073, Tokyo, Japan. KazutoYamazaki@aol.com

Sclerosing hemangioma (PSH) is a rare pulmonary tumor, in which two types of
tumor cells could be histologically discerned--surface and stromal tumor cells.
Nine tumor-tissue specimens from six female Japanese patients were studied,
focusing on the distribution of several transcription factors related to lung
epithelial development and surfactant proteins and comparing the ultrastructural 
features of the tumor cells. The immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the
surfactant proteins of surfactant apoprotein A, surfactant protein B, and
prosurfactant protein C were distributed in many of the surface-lining cells and 
in a small number of stromal-tumor cells. In addition, the nuclei of the tumor
cells stained positive for thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF)-1, hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-3 alpha, and HNF-3 beta. In situ hybridization staining for 
TTF-1 showed similar positive signals. Ultrastructurally, two types of tumor
cells showed similar features, but stromal tumor cells lost the definitive
apico-lateral differentiation compared with the surface tumor cells and showed
restricted surface differentiation between the adjacent tumor cells, forming
small lumina accompanied by microvilli and occasional multi-vesicle or
multi-lamellar bodies. Conclusively, the real tumoral population being
undifferentiated stromal cells, the lining cells are fully differentiated type-II
pneumonocytes. PSH is a proliferation of rather fetal type-II pneumonocytes
(pneumocytoma or pneumoblastoma?).

PMID: 15138814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 2;279(27):28082-92. Epub 2004 Apr 28.

Hepatic nuclear factor 3 and nuclear factor 1 regulate 5-aminolevulinate synthase
gene expression and are involved in insulin repression.

Scassa ME(1), Guberman AS, Ceruti JM, Cánepa ET.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología Molecular, Departamento de Química Biológica, Facultad
de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Pabellón II Piso 4,
Ciudad Universitaria, 1428 Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Although the negative regulation of gene expression by insulin has been widely
studied, the transcription factors responsible for the insulin effect are still
unknown. The purpose of this work was to explore the molecular mechanisms
involved in the insulin repression of the 5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS) gene.
Deletion analysis of the 5'-regulatory region allowed us to identify an
insulin-responsive region located at -459 to -354 bp. This fragment contains a
highly homologous insulin-responsive (IRE) sequence. By transient transfection
assays, we determined that hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) and nuclear factor 1
(NF1) are necessary for an appropriate expression of the ALAS gene. Insulin
overrides the HNF3beta or HNF3beta plus NF1-mediated stimulation of ALAS
transcriptional activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and Southwestern
blotting indicate that HNF3 binds to the ALAS promoter. Mutational analysis of
this region revealed that IRE disruption abrogates insulin action, whereas
mutation of the HNF3 element maintains hormone responsiveness. This dissociation 
between HNF3 binding and insulin action suggests that HNF3beta is not the sole
physiologic mediator of insulin-induced transcriptional repression. Furthermore, 
Southwestern blotting assay shows that at least two polypeptides other than
HNF3beta can bind to ALAS promoter and that this binding is dependent on the
integrity of the IRE. We propose a model in which insulin exerts its negative
effect through the disturbance of HNF3beta binding or transactivation potential, 
probably due to specific phosphorylation of this transcription factor by Akt. In 
this regard, results obtained from transfection experiments using kinase
inhibitors support this hypothesis. Due to this event, NF1 would lose
accessibility to the promoter. The posttranslational modification of HNF3 would
allow the binding of a protein complex that recognizes the core IRE. These
results provide a potential mechanism for the insulin-mediated repression of
IRE-containing promoters.

PMID: 15123725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Dev Biol. 2004 May 15;269(2):552-66.

Analysis of Spemann organizer formation in Xenopus embryos by cDNA macroarrays.

Wessely O(1), Kim JI, Geissert D, Tran U, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1662, USA.

The understanding of vertebrate development has greatly benefited from the study 
of gastrulation in the Xenopus embryo. Over the years, the molecular dissection
of the Spemann organizer has proven to be a very fruitful source for gene
discovery. Here, we report a comprehensive screen of gene expression in the
Xenopus gastrula using cDNA macroarrays. Nylon filters containing more than 72000
cDNAs from a gastrula stage library were hybridized with differential probes from
embryos in which organizer induction had been inhibited by reducing Nodal-related
or maternal beta-Catenin signaling. Combining the changes in gene expression
levels caused by these two major signaling pathways in a single graph identified 
both known and novel dorsoventral regulated genes. The most highly enriched
organizer-specific genes were the secreted molecules chordin and Xnr-3, followed 
by the transmembrane protein paraxial protocadherin (PAPC). Ventral-specific
abundant cDNAs included S10-40-H5, members of the Hyaluronan synthase family,
Xvent-2 and XFD2/FoxI1. A differential probe of dorsal and ventral lips
identified many more organizer-specific cDNAs than the screens inhibiting
Nodal-related and beta-Catenin signaling, suggesting that additional, as yet
uncharacterized signaling pathways, contribute to organizer formation. Finally,
extension of this approach to the blastula preorganizer signaling center
identified the transcription factor pintallavis/FoxA2 as a new preorganizer
component.

PMID: 15110719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Development. 2004 May;131(9):2037-48.

Otx2 regulates the extent, identity and fate of neuronal progenitor domains in
the ventral midbrain.

Puelles E(1), Annino A, Tuorto F, Usiello A, Acampora D, Czerny T, Brodski C, Ang
SL, Wurst W, Simeone A.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, New Hunt's House, 4th Floor, King's
College London, Guy's Campus, London Bridge, London SE1 1UL, UK.

The specification of distinct neuronal cell-types is controlled by inducing
signals whose interpretation in distinct areas along the central nervous system
provides neuronal progenitors with a precise and typical expression code of
transcription factors. To gain insights into this process, we investigated the
role of Otx2 in the specification of identity and fate of neuronal progenitors in
the ventral midbrain. To achieve this, Otx2 was inactivated by Cre recombinase
under the transcriptional control of En1. Lack of Otx2 in the ventrolateral and
posterior midbrain results in a dorsal expansion of Shh expression and in a
dorsal and anterior rotation of the midbrain-hindbrain boundary and Fgf8
expression. Indeed, in this mutant correct positioning of the ventral site of
midbrain-hindbrain boundary and Fgf8 expression are efficiently controlled by
Otx1 function, thus allowing the study of the identity and fate of neuronal
progenitors of the ventral midbrain in the absence of Otx2. Our results suggest
that Otx2 acts in two ways: by repressing Nkx2.2 in the ventral midbrain and
maintaining the Nkx6.1-expressing domain through dorsal antagonism on Shh.
Failure of this control affects the identity code and fate of midbrain
progenitors, which exhibit features in common with neuronal precursors of the
rostral hindbrain even though the midbrain retains its regional identity and
these neuronal precursors are rostral to Fgf8 expression. Dopaminergic neurons
are greatly reduced in number, red nucleus precursors disappear from the ventral 
midbrain where a relevant number of serotonergic neurons are generated. These
results indicate that Otx2 is an essential regulator of the identity, extent and 
fate of neuronal progenitor domains in the ventral midbrain and provide novel
insights into the mechanisms by which neuronal diversity is generated in the
central nervous system.

PMID: 15105370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Drug Metab Dispos. 2004 May;32(5):525-35.

Role of Sp1, C/EBP alpha, HNF3, and PXR in the basal- and xenobiotic-mediated
regulation of the CYP3A4 gene.

Bombail V(1), Taylor K, Gibson GG, Plant N.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, University of Surrey, Guildford
GU2 7XH, Surrey, United Kingdom.

Cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) is the major cytochrome P450 present in adult human 
liver and is involved in the metabolism of over 50% of therapeutic compounds
currently in use. Since expression levels of CYP3A4 are regulated by many of
these compounds, this raises the potential for drug-drug interactions and
subsequent altered efficacy or toxicity of the individual compounds at the dose
prescribed. Hence, understanding the molecular mechanisms of CYP3A4 regulation is
of key importance in predicting and understanding such interactions. To examine
this we have used DNase I footprinting and bioinformatic analysis to identify
putative transcription factor binding sites within the 250 base pairs of promoter
proximal to the transcription start site. We identified several protected
fragments within this region that corresponded to putative binding sites for Sp1,
AP2, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBPalpha), and hepatic nuclear factor-3
(HNF3), as well as confirming previously identified C/EBPalpha, pregnane X
receptor (PXR), and HNF3 binding sites. Sequential site-directed mutagenesis of
C/EBPalpha, Sp1, HNF3, and PXR binding sites was next used to examine the role of
these sites in basal CYP3A4 expression. Disruption of the C/EBPalpha, HNF3, and
PXR binding sites all affected basal expression. Finally, the role of these sites
was examined in activation of CYP3A4 expression by rifampicin, metyrapone,
clotrimazole, and phenobarbital. Disruption of any of these sites either led to
an altered pattern of activation by the xenobiotic, as altered maximal
activation, or altered the EC(50) value of activation. Such effects were
xenobiotic-specific, with each disrupted site playing a role in the activation of
some of the xenobiotics.

PMID: 15100175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Hepatology. 2004 Apr;39(4):1038-47.

Progression of HCC in mice is associated with a downregulation in the expression 
of hepatocyte nuclear factors.

Lazarevich NL(1), Cheremnova OA, Varga EV, Ovchinnikov DA, Kudrjavtseva EI,
Morozova OV, Fleishman DI, Engelhardt NV, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunochemistry, Institute of Carcinogenesis, N.N. Blokhin
Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russia.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) play a critical role in development of the
liver. Their roles during liver tumorigenesis and progression of hepatocellular
carcinomas (HCC) are, however, poorly understood. To address the role of HNFs in 
tumor progression, we generated a new experimental model in which a highly
differentiated slow-growing transplantable mouse HCC (sgHCC) rapidly gives rise
in vivo to a highly invasive fast-growing dedifferentiated variant (fgHCC). This 
in vivo model has allowed us to investigate the fundamental mechanisms underlying
HCC progression. A complete loss of cell polarity, a decrease in cell-cell and
cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion, elevation of telomerase activity, and
extinction of liver-specific gene expression accompanies tumor progression.
Moreover, cells isolated from fgHCCs acquired the ability to proliferate rapidly 
in culture. These alterations were coupled with a reduced expression of several
liver transcription factors including HNF4, a factor essential for hepatocyte
differentiation. Forced re-expression of HNF4alpha1 in cultured fgHCC cells
reversed the progressive phenotype and induced fgHCC cells to re-establish an
epithelium and reform cell-ECM contacts. Moreover, fgHCC cells that expressed
HNF4alpha1 also re-established expression of the profile of liver transcription
factors and hepatic genes that are associated with a differentiated hepatocyte
phenotype. Importantly, re-expression of HNF4alpha1 in fgHCC reduced the
proliferation rate in vitro and diminished tumor formation in congenic recipient 
mice. In conclusion, loss of HNF4 expression is an important determinant of HCC
progression. Forced expression of this factor can promote reversion of tumors
toward a less invasive highly differentiated slow-growing phenotype.

PMID: 15057908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Dev Dyn. 2004 Apr;229(4):756-62.

Notch signaling can regulate endoderm formation in zebrafish.

Kikuchi Y(1), Verkade H, Reiter JF, Kim CH, Chitnis AB, Kuroiwa A, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, Japan. yutaka@cc.nagoya-u.ac.jp

Early in vertebrate development, the processes of gastrulation lead to the
formation of the three germ layers: ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm. The
mechanisms leading to the segregation of the endoderm and mesoderm are not well
understood. In mid-blastula stage zebrafish embryos, single marginal cells can
give rise to both endoderm and mesoderm (reviewed by Warga and Stainier [2002]
The guts of endoderm formation. In: Solnica-Krezel L, editor. Pattern formation
in zebrafish. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. p 28-47). By the late blastula stage,
however, single marginal cells generally give rise to either endoderm or
mesoderm. To investigate this segregation of the blastoderm into cells with
either endodermal or mesodermal fates, we analyzed the role of Notch signaling in
this process. We show that deltaC, deltaD, and notch1 are expressed in the
marginal domain of blastula stage embryos and that this expression is dependent
on Nodal signaling. Activation of Notch signaling from an early stage leads to a 
reduction of endodermal cells, as assessed by sox17 and foxA2 expression. We
further find that this reduction in endoderm formation by the activation of Notch
signaling is preceded by a reduction in the expression of bonnie and clyde (bon) 
and faust/gata5, two genes necessary for endoderm formation (Reiter et al. [1999]
Genes Dev 13:2983-2995; Reiter et al. [2001] Development 128:125-135; Kikuchi et 
al. [2001] Genes Dev 14:1279-1289). However, activation of Notch signaling in bon
mutant embryos leads to a further reduction in endodermal cells, also arguing for
a bon-independent role for Notch signaling in endoderm formation. Altogether,
these results suggest that Notch signaling plays a role in the formation of the
endoderm, possibly in its segregation from the mesoderm.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15042699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1311-2.

Molecular biology. HNFs--linking the liver and pancreatic islets in diabetes.

Kulkarni RN(1), Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. rohit.kulkarni@joslin.harvard.edu

Comment on
    Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1378-81.

PMID: 14988544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Development. 2004 Feb;131(4):953-64.

Foxa2 regulates alveolarization and goblet cell hyperplasia.

Wan H(1), Kaestner KH, Ang SL, Ikegami M, Finkelman FD, Stahlman MT, Fulkerson
PC, Rothenberg ME, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

The airways are lined by several distinct epithelial cells that play unique roles
in pulmonary homeostasis; however, the mechanisms controlling their
differentiation in health and disease are poorly understood. The winged helix
transcription factor, FOXA2, is expressed in the foregut endoderm and in subsets 
of respiratory epithelial cells in the fetal and adult lung. Because targeted
mutagenesis of the Foxa2 gene in mice is lethal before formation of the lung, its
potential role in lung morphogenesis and homeostasis has not been determined. We 
selectively deleted Foxa2 in respiratory epithelial cells in the developing mouse
lung. Airspace enlargement, goblet cell hyperplasia, increased mucin and
neutrophilic infiltration were observed in lungs of the Foxa2-deleted mice.
Experimental goblet cell hyperplasia caused by ovalbumin sensitization,
interleukin 4 (IL4), IL13 and targeted deletion of the gene encoding surfactant
protein C (SP-C), was associated with either absent or decreased expression of
Foxa2 in airway epithelial cells. Analysis of lung tissue from patients with a
variety of pulmonary diseases revealed a strong inverse correlation between FOXA2
and goblet cell hyperplasia. FOXA2 is required for alveolarization and regulates 
airway epithelial cell differentiation in the postnatal lung.

PMID: 14757645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Seikagaku. 2003 Dec;75(12):1493-504.

[Homeodomain transcription factor T/EBP/NKX2.1 in development and differentiation
of the thyroid and lung].

[Article in Japanese]

Kimura S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bldg. 37, Rm. 3112B, NIH, 9000
Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

PMID: 14748143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Hepatol. 2004 Feb;40(2):212-8.

The human organic anion transporting polypeptide 8 (SLCO1B3) gene is
transcriptionally repressed by hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta in hepatocellular 
carcinoma.

Vavricka SR(1), Jung D, Fried M, Grützner U, Meier PJ, Kullak-Ublick GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital, CH-8091 Zurich,
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The organic anion transporting polypeptides (OATPs) mediate the 
uptake of numerous amphipathic compounds into hepatocytes. Our aim was to study
the expression and regulation of OATP8 (OATP1B3, SLC21A8/SLCO1B3) and OATP-C
(OATP1B1, SLC21A6/SLCO1B1) in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC).
METHODS: RNA and protein levels in 13 paired HCC and adjacent non-tumor liver
samples were quantified by real-time polymerase chain reaction or Western blot,
respectively. The OATP8 and OATP-C gene promoters were characterized by
luciferase reporter assays and electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA).
RESULTS: The expression of OATP8 was decreased in 60% of HCC compared to
surrounding non-tumor liver tissue, on both the mRNA and protein levels.
Expression of the liver-enriched transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor
3beta (HNF3beta) was increased in 70% of HCC and correlated inversely with OATP8 
mRNA (r=-0.75, P<0.05) and protein. In contrast to OATP8, expression of OATP-C
was not significantly decreased in HCC. In transfected Huh7 cells, OATP8 promoter
activity was inhibited by 70% when HNF3beta was cotransfected. An HNF3beta
binding site was located at nt -39/-23 by EMSA. The OATP-C promoter was not
inhibited by HNF3beta.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF3beta represses transcription of the OATP8 but not the OATP-C
gene, providing a mechanism for reduced expression of OATP8 in HCC.

PMID: 14739090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Mar;18(3):533-48. Epub 2003 Dec 30.

Conserved transcriptional regulatory domains of the pdx-1 gene.

Gerrish K(1), Van Velkinburgh JC, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, 723 Light Hall, Nashville, Tennessee 37215, USA.

The pancreas and duodenum homeobox protein 1 (PDX-1) homeodomain-containing
transcription factor affects both pancreatic endocrine cell development and adult
islet beta-cell function. Cell-type-specific expression is controlled by
sequences 5' flanking the pdx-1 gene transcription start site. One principal
control region is located roughly between -2800 and -1600 bp and spans three
conserved, distinct, and functionally important subdomains, termed areas I, II,
and III. In this study, we found that an upstream control region in the rat pdx-1
gene located between -6200 and -5670 bp is also present in the mouse, chicken,
and human genes. This region is capable of independently directing pancreatic
beta-cell-selective reporter gene expression and potentiating area I/II-driven
activity. This newly recognized conserved subdomain has been termed area IV. The 
islet-enriched forkhead box A2 (FoxA2), NK2 homeobox 2.2 (Nkx2.2), and pancreas
and duodenum homeobox protein 1 (PDX-1) transcription factors have been shown to 
activate area IV-driven reporter gene expression as well as bind to this region
of the endogenous gene in beta-cells. Analysis of the histone H3 and H4
acetylation level also indicated that areas I-IV are within transcriptionally
active chromatin in beta-cells. Our data suggests that pdx-1 transcription is
also regulated by factors acting upon conserved area IV sequences.

PMID: 14701942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Dev Biol. 2004 Jan 1;265(1):90-104.

Inhibition of mesodermal fate by Xenopus HNF3beta/FoxA2.

Suri C(1), Haremaki T, Weinstein DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The winged-helix transcription factor HNF3beta/FoxA2 is expressed in embryonic
organizing centers of the gastrulating mouse, frog, fish, and chick. In the
mouse, HNF3beta is required for the formation of the mammalian node and
notochord, and can induce ectopic floor plate formation when misexpressed in the 
developing neural tube; HNF3beta expression in the extraembryonic endoderm is
also necessary for the proper morphogenesis of the mammalian primitive streak. In
the frog Xenopus laevis, several lines of evidence suggest that the related
winged-helix factor Pintallavis functions as the ortholog of mammalian HNF3beta
in both axial mesoderm and neurectoderm; the role of Xenopus HNF3beta itself,
however, has not been clearly defined, and is the subject of this study. HNF3beta
is widely expressed in the vegetal pole but, as previously suggested, is excluded
from the gastrula-stage mesoderm. We find that expression of an
HNF3beta-Engrailed repressor fusion protein induces ectopic axes and inhibits
head formation in Xenopus embryos, while ectopic HNF3beta inhibits mesoderm and
anterior endoderm formation in explant assays and in vivo. Our studies suggest
that HNF3beta target genes function to limit the extent of mesoderm formation in 
the Xenopus gastrula, and point to related roles for Xenopus HNF3beta and the
extraembryonic component of mammalian HNF3beta during vertebrate gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC3523336
PMID: 14697355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 16;313(3):475-81.

Involvement of Ras in extraembryonic endoderm differentiation of embryonic stem
cells.

Yoshida-Koide U(1), Matsuda T, Saikawa K, Nakanuma Y, Yokota T, Asashima M, Koide
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa 
University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells, derived from the inner cell mass of blastocyst can
differentiate into multiple cell lineages. In this study, we examined the
possible involvement of Ras in ES cell differentiation. We found that Ras was
activated upon formation of embryoid bodies (EBs), an initial step in ES cell
differentiation. When expressed during EB differentiation, a dominant-negative
mutant of Ras suppressed induction of marker genes for extraembryonic endoderm
differentiation, including GATA-4, GATA-6, alpha-fetoprotein, and hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3beta, while an activated mutant promoted their induction.
Expression of a Ras mutant that selectively activates the Raf/MEK/Erk pathway
also enhanced induction of extraembryonic endoderm markers, and treatment with a 
MEK inhibitor resulted in their decreased expression. In addition, Ras stimulated
downregulation of Nanog, a suppressor of endoderm differentiation in ES cells.
These data suggest that Ras activation during EB differentiation plays a crucial 
role in initiation of extraembryonic endoderm differentiation.

PMID: 14697213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Genome Res. 2004 Jan;14(1):170-8. Epub 2003 Dec 12.

CONREAL: conserved regulatory elements anchored alignment algorithm for
identification of transcription factor binding sites by phylogenetic
footprinting.

Berezikov E(1), Guryev V, Plasterk RH, Cuppen E.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology, 3584 CT,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. berezikov@niob.knaw.nl

Prediction of transcription-factor target sites in promoters remains difficult
due to the short length and degeneracy of the target sequences. Although the use 
of orthologous sequences and phylogenetic footprinting approaches may help in the
recognition of conserved and potentially functional sequences, correct alignment 
of the short transcription-factor binding sites can be problematic for
established algorithms, especially when aligning more divergent species. Here, we
report a novel phylogenetic footprinting approach, CONREAL, that uses
biologically relevant information, that is, potential transcription-factor
binding sites as represented by positional weight matrices, to establish anchors 
between orthologous sequences and to guide promoter sequence alignment.
Comparison of the performance of CONREAL with the global alignment programs LAGAN
and AVID using a reference data set, shows that CONREAL performs equally well for
closely related species like rodents and human, and has a clear added value for
aligning promoter elements of more divergent species like human and fish, as it
identifies conserved transcription-factor binding sites that are not found by
other methods. CONREAL is accessible via a Web interface at
http://conreal.niob.knaw.nl/.

PMCID: PMC314294
PMID: 14672977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Development. 2004 Jan;131(2):263-74. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Tcf3: a transcriptional regulator of axis induction in the early embryo.

Merrill BJ(1), Pasolli HA, Polak L, Rendl M, García-García MJ, Anderson KV, Fuchs
E.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and
Development, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The roles of Lef/Tcf proteins in determining cell fate characteristics have been 
described in many contexts during vertebrate embryogenesis, organ and tissue
homeostasis, and cancer formation. Although much of the accumulated work on these
proteins involves their ability to transactivate target genes when stimulated by 
beta-catenin, Lef/Tcf proteins can repress target genes in the absence of
stabilized beta-catenin. By ablating Tcf3 function, we have uncovered an
important requirement for a repressor function of Lef/Tcf proteins during early
mouse development. Tcf3-/- embryos proceed through gastrulation to form mesoderm,
but they develop expanded and often duplicated axial mesoderm structures,
including nodes and notochords. These duplications are preceded by ectopic
expression of Foxa2, an axial mesoderm gene involved in node specification, with 
a concomitant reduction in Lefty2, a marker for lateral mesoderm. By contrast,
expression of a beta-catenin-dependent, Lef/Tcf reporter (TOPGal), is not
ectopically activated but is faithfully maintained in the primitive streak. Taken
together, these data reveal a unique requirement for Tcf3 repressor function in
restricting induction of the anterior-posterior axis.

PMID: 14668413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Lipid Res. 2004 Jan;45(1):106-12. Epub 2003 Oct 16.

Regulation of apoA-I gene expression: mechanism of action of estrogen and
genistein.

Lamon-Fava S(1), Micherone D.

Author information: 
(1)Lipid Metabolism Laboratory, Jean Mayer USDA Human Nutrition Research Center
on Aging at Tufts University, Boston, MA 02111, USA.
stefania.lamon-fava@tufts.edu

We have previously shown that 17-beta-estradiol (E2) and genistein increase the
expression of apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I), the major protein component of HDL, in
Hep G2 cells. To elucidate the mechanism mediating the increase in apoA-I gene
expression by these compounds, plasmid constructs containing serial deletions of 
the apoA-I promoter region were generated. The smallest region maintaining
response to E2 and genistein spanned the -220 to -148 sequence, and the estrogen 
antagonist ICI182,780 completely inhibited the E2 and genistein effect. Nuclear
extracts from cells treated with E2 and genistein showed increased binding to
site B oligonucleotide (-169 to -146), and nuclear extracts from
genistein-treated cells showed increased binding to an early growth response
factor 1 (Egr-1) oligonucleotide compared to control cells. An increase in the
concentrations of Egr-1 and hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta was observed in
nuclear extracts of cells treated with both compounds compared to control cells. 
Treatment with a specific inhibitor of mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase,
but not with other inhibitors, abolished the stimulation of apoA-I gene
expression by E2 and genistein. These results indicate that the MAP kinase
pathway is involved in the regulation of apoA-I gene expression by genistein and 
E2, possibly through downstream regulation of transcription factors binding to
the promoter region.

PMID: 14563824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2003 Dec;307(3):1205-12. Epub 2003 Oct 13.

Rapid transcriptional suppression of rat cytochrome P450 genes by endotoxin
treatment and its inhibition by curcumin.

Cheng PY(1), Wang M, Morgan ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Down-regulation of constitutive hepatic cytochrome P450 (P450) mRNAs by bacterial
endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS) or other inflammatory stimuli has been
documented extensively, but the contribution of transcriptional suppression to
this effect is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that the rates of
transcription of the CYP2C11, CYP3A2, and CYP2E1 genes are reduced to 20, 30, and
10% of control levels, respectively, in rat liver within 1 to 2 h of injection of
LPS (1 mg/kg). The magnitude and rapidity of these effects indicate that
transcriptional suppression is a primary reason for the decline in P450 mRNAs.
Injection of curcumin significantly inhibited the rapid transcriptional
suppression of CYP2E1, and blocked that of CYP3A2. These effects seemed to be
independent of inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation by
curcumin, because induction of known NF-kappaB-regulated genes was not
attenuated. One hour after LPS injection, the DNA-binding activities of
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1alpha, HNF3beta, and HNF4alpha were reduced to
73, 72, and 53%, respectively, of control values. The nuclear abundances of Sp1, 
liver-enriched transcriptional inhibitory protein (LIP), HNF1alpha, and HNF3beta 
were unchanged, whereas the abundance of HNF4alpha was reduced to 87% of control 
levels. We conclude that changes in Sp1 or LIP do not contribute significantly to
the early suppression of P450 transcription in the acute phase rat liver.
Although changes in DNA-binding activities of HNF1alpha, HNF3beta, and HNF4alpha 
are too small individually to explain the observed changes in P450 transcription,
the role of each factor in concert with other factors remains to be determined.

PMID: 14557382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Sep 30;100(20):11624-9. Epub 2003 Sep 19.

Insulin regulates the activity of forkhead transcription factor Hnf-3beta/Foxa-2 
by Akt-mediated phosphorylation and nuclear/cytosolic localization.

Wolfrum C(1), Besser D, Luca E, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Metabolic Diseases and Molecular Vertebrate Embryology, The
Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Sep 30;100(20):11198-200.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 3 alpha, beta, and gamma (Foxa-1, -2, and -3) are
transcriptional activators of important metabolic genes in the liver that are
suppressed by the actions of insulin. Here, we show that the activation of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-Akt by insulin induces Foxa-2 phosphorylation,
nuclear exclusion, and inhibition of Foxa-2-dependent transcriptional activity.
Foxa-2 physically interacts with Akt, a key mediator of the phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase pathway and is phosphorylated at a single conserved site (T156) that is 
absent in Foxa-1 and Foxa-3 proteins. This Akt phosphorylation site in Foxa-2 is 
highly conserved from mammals to insects. Mutant Foxa-2T156A is resistant to
Akt-mediated phosphorylation, nuclear exclusion, and transcriptional inactivation
of Foxa-2-regulated gene expression. These results implicate an evolutionarily
conserved mechanism in the regulation of Foxa-2-dependent transcriptional control
by extracellular signals such as insulin.

PMCID: PMC208808
PMID: 14500912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Cell Sci. 2003 Oct 15;116(Pt 20):4119-30.

Differential cellular localization among mitotic cyclins from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae: a new role for the axial budding protein Bud3 in targeting Clb2 to
the mother-bud neck.

Bailly E(1), Cabantous S, Sondaz D, Bernadac A, Simon MN.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Ingenierie des Systemes Macromoleculaires CNRS UPR9027, 31
chemin Joseph Aiguier, 13402 Marseille Cedex 20, France.

The mitotic cyclin Clb2 plays a major role in promoting M-phase in budding yeast,
despite its functional redundancy with three closely related cyclins Clb1, Clb3
and Clb4. Here, we further investigate the mechanisms controlling the cellular
distribution of Clb2 in living cells. In agreement with observations recently
made by Hood et al., we find that GFP-tagged Clb2 expressed from its natural
promoter localizes to various cellular compartments, including the nucleus, the
mitotic spindle, the spindle pole bodies as well as the mother-bud neck. The neck
localization is specific to Clb2 as Clb1, Clb3 and Clb4 are never observed there,
even when over-expressed. Mutational analysis identifies a central region of
Clb2, comprising residues 213-255 and a phylogenetically conserved hydrophobic
patch, as an essential cis-acting determinant. Clb2 co-localizes with the bud
site selection protein Bud3. Consistent with a role of Bud3 in targeting Clb2 to 
the bud neck, we report a two-hybrid interaction between these proteins.
Furthermore, Clb2 is shown to be specifically delocalized in Deltabud3 cells and 
in a bud3 mutant deleted for its C-terminal Clb2-interacting domain
(bud3(Delta1221)), but not in a Deltabud10 mutant. Correlating with this
phenotype, bud3(Delta1221) cells exhibit a pronounced (15-30 minutes) delay in
cytokinesis and/or cell separation, suggesting an unanticipated function of Clb2 
in these late mitotic events. Taken together, our data uncover a new role for
Bud3 in cytokinesis that correlates with its capacity to target Clb2 at the neck,
independently of its well established cell-type-specific function in bud site
selection.

PMID: 12972503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Sep;88(9):4398-406.

Agenesis of human pancreas due to decreased half-life of insulin promoter factor 
1.

Schwitzgebel VM(1), Mamin A, Brun T, Ritz-Laser B, Zaiko M, Maret A, Jornayvaz
FR, Theintz GE, Michielin O, Melloul D, Philippe J.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, Geneva University Hospital, CH-1211
Geneva, Switzerland. valerie.schwitzgebel@medcli.unige.ch

Neonatal diabetes mellitus can be transient or permanent. The severe form of
permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus can be associated with pancreas agenesis.
Normal pancreas development is controlled by a cascade of transcription factors, 
where insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF1) plays a crucial role. Here, we describe
two novel mutations in the IPF1 gene leading to pancreas agenesis. Direct
sequence analysis of exons 1 and 2 of the IPF1 gene revealed two point mutations 
within the homeobox in exon 2. Genetic analysis of the parents showed that each
mutation was inherited from one parent. Mutations localized in helices 1 and 2,
respectively, of the homeodomain, decreased the protein half-life significantly, 
leading to intracellular IPF1 levels of 36% and 27% of wild-type levels. Both
mutant forms of IPF1 were normally translocated to the nucleus, and their DNA
binding activity on different known target promoters was similar to that of the
wild-type protein. However, transcriptional activity of both mutant IPF1
proteins, alone or in combination with HNF3 beta/Foxa2, Pbx1, or the heterodimer 
E47-beta 2 was reduced, findings accounted for by decreased IPF1 steady state
levels and not by impaired protein-protein interactions. We conclude that the
IPF1 level is critical for human pancreas formation.

PMID: 12970316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cancer Sci. 2003 Sep;94(9):757-63.

Expression of HNFs and C/EBP alpha is correlated with immunocytochemical
differentiation of cell lines derived from human hepatocellular carcinomas,
hepatoblastomas and immortalized hepatocytes.

Ishiyama T(1), Kano J, Minami Y, Iijima T, Morishita Y, Noguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki-shi, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

Objective assessment of the differentiation grade of hepatocellular carcinomas
(HCCs) is important for evaluation of the pathological diagnosis, prognosis and
therapeutic treatment. Differentiation of hepatocytes is reflected by their
expression of hepatic functional proteins in the mouse embryo, and liver-enriched
transcription factors (LETFs) have been shown to regulate hepatic functional
genes strictly. Previous reports demonstrated that the level of LETF expression
is altered in HCC or preneoplastic nodules compared with noncancerous tissues.
Therefore, LETF expression levels might be useful as a measure of HCC maturation.
In this study, to clarify the correlation between the expression of LETFs and the
differentiation grade of HCCs, we performed a quantitative analysis of the mRNA
expressions of HNFs and C/EBP alpha using real-time reverse-transcription PCR and
immunocytochemical analysis for hepatic functional proteins in twelve cell lines.
Furthermore, we examined orthotopic transplantations of the HCC cell lines in
C.B-17/Icrj-scid/scid mice and characterized the histologic and cytologic
differentiation of the tumors that developed. Our results showed that
comprehensive expressions of HNF-3beta, HNF-4 alpha, HNF-1 alpha, and C/EBP alpha
were specific to HCCs with well-differentiated function and morphology.
Furthermore, among these four transcription factors, HNF-4 alpha and HNF-1 alpha 
expressions showed synchronism and had a close relation with HCC differentiation.
These in vitro results were confirmed in tumors developed in SCID mice in vivo.
These findings suggested that HNF-4 alpha and HNF-1 alpha are useful markers to
assess the degree of HCC differentiation, which we suggest could be evaluated
objectively by the quantitative analysis of HNFs and C/EBP alpha in HCCs.

PMID: 12967472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Sep 19;309(2):324-30.

Expressions of hepatobiliary organic anion transporters and bilirubin-conjugating
enzyme in differentiating embryonic stem cells.

Tanaka Y(1), Yoshikawa M, Kobayashi Y, Kuroda M, Kaito M, Shiroi A, Yamao J,
Fukui H, Ishizaka S, Adachi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Mie University School of Medicine,
2-174 Edobashi, Tsu city 514-8507, Japan.

Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells are clonal cell lines derived from the inner cell
mass of developing blastocysts and have multi-lineage differentiation ability. We
previously reported that ES cells can be made to differentiate into hepatocytes
possessing high metabolic activities by transfection of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-3beta (HNF-3beta). In the present study, we investigated the expression of
hepatobiliary organic anion transporters and bilirubin uridine diphosphate
glucuronosyltransferase (ugt1a1) in undifferentiated and differentiating
HNF-3beta-transfected ES (HNF-3beta-ES) cells. The expression of organic anion
transporting polypeptide 1 (oatp1), multidrug resistance-associated protein 1
(mrp1), mrp2, mrp3, and ugt1a1 was not seen in the undifferentiated HNF-3beta-ES 
cells by RT-PCR, whereas all were expressed in differentiating HNF-3beta-ES
cells. Protein expression for oatp1, mrp1, mrp2, mrp3, and ugt1a1 was also
observed in the differentiating HNF-3beta-ES cells by Western blotting. An
immunofluorescence examination revealed that oatp1 was co-located with
desmoplakin, a marker for the basolateral (sinusoidal) membrane, and mrp2 was
co-localized with CD26, a marker for the apical (canalicular) membrane, though
they were both expressed throughout most of the cell membranes.

PMID: 12951053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Surgery. 2003 Aug;134(2):189-96.

Induction of hepatic differentiation in embryonic stem cells by co-culture with
embryonic cardiac mesoderm.

Fair JH(1), Cairns BA, Lapaglia M, Wang J, Meyer AA, Kim H, Hatada S, Smithies O,
Pevny L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel
Hill, NC 27599, USA.

BACKGROUND: Modifications in vitro have been used to direct embryonic stem (ES)
cells toward endodermal phenotypes including hepatocytes; however, developmental 
correlates and evidence of biologic activity is lacking, and critical cell-cell
interactions have not been investigated. In this study, we hypothesized that
cardiac mesoderm (CM) signals ES cells in co-culture to undergo differentiation
toward early hepatocyte lineage as determined by morphology and induction of
genes essential for endodermal competence and hepatocyte development.
METHODS: Green fluorescent protein ES derived from A129 mice were cultured with
or without embryonic chick cardiac mesoderm. Cultures from day 1, 2, and 4 were
analyzed for colony formation and ES morphology and 10(6) ES-derived cells were
isolated for mRNA analysis.
RESULTS: ES in co-culture with CM displayed colony formation, polymorphic
appearance, and definitive interface with CM. In addition, ES + CM co-culture
activated crucial transcription factors (sox 17alpha, HNF3beta, and GATA 4)
required for hepatocyte development by day 1. mRNA for albumin and especially
a-fetoprotein were also increased by culture days 2 and 4.
CONCLUSIONS: ES cells co-cultured with CM display morphology and gene expression 
pattern required for hepatocyte differentiation and appear to recapitulate the
molecular events of hepatogenesis.

PMID: 12947317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Thromb Haemost. 2003 Aug;1(8):1688-98.

Functional characterization of transcription factor binding sites for HNF1-alpha,
HNF3-beta (FOXA2), HNF4-alpha, Sp1 and Sp3 in the human prothrombin gene
enhancer.

Ceelie H(1), Spaargaren-Van Riel CC, De Jong M, Bertina RM, Vos HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands. hceelie@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Prothrombin is a key component in blood coagulation. Overexpression
of prothrombin leads to an increased risk of venous thrombosis. Therefore, the
study of the transcriptional regulation of the prothrombin gene may help to
identify mechanisms of overexpression.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to localize the regions within the
prothrombin enhancer responsible for its activity, to identify the proteins
binding to these regions, and to establish their functional importance.
METHODS: We constructed a set of prothrombin promoter 5' deletion constructs
containing the firefly luciferase reporter gene, which were transiently
transfected in HepG2, HuH7 and HeLa cells. Putative transcription factor (TF)
binding sites were evaluated by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The
functional importance of each TF binding site was evaluated by site directed
mutagenesis and transient transfection of the mutant constructs.
RESULTS: We confirmed the major contribution of the enhancer region to the
transcriptional activity of the prothrombin promoter. Analysis of this region
revealed putative binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor HNF4, HNF3-beta and
specificity protein(Sp)1. We identified six different TFs binding to three
evolutionary conserved sites in the enhancer: HNF4-alpha (site 1), HNF1-alpha,
HNF3-beta and an as yet unidentified TF (site 2) and the ubiquitously expressed
TFs Sp1 and Sp3 (site 3). Mutagenesis studies showed that loss of binding of
HNF3-beta resulted in a considerable decrease of enhancer activity, whereas loss 
of HNF4-alpha or Sp1/Sp3 resulted in milder reductions.
CONCLUSIONS: The prothrombin enhancer plays a major role in regulation of
prothrombin expression. Six different TFs are able to bind to this region. At
least three of these TFs, HNF4-alpha, HNF3-beta and Sp1/Sp3, are important in
regulation of prothrombin expression.

PMID: 12911579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2003 May;68(5):520-8.

Species specific hepatocarcinogen inhibition of the glucocorticoid induction of
tyrosine aminotransferase gene in mouse and rat liver.

Merkulova TI(1), Kropachev KY, Timofeeva OA, Vasiliev GV, Ilnitskaya SI,
Levashova ZB, Kobzev VF, Kaledin VI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Division of the Russian Academy
of Sciences, Novosibirsk 630090, Russia. merkti@niboch.nsc.ru

3'-methyl-4-dimethylaminoazobenzene (3'-MeDAB) is a potent hepatocarcinogen in
rats and a weak carcinogen in mice, whereas o-aminoazotoluene (OAT) is a potent
hepatocarcinogen in mice but weak hepatocarcinogen in rats. They significantly
suppress glucocorticoid induction of tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) in the liver
of sensitive animals and have minor effect on the induction of this enzyme in the
liver of resistant animals (3'-MeDAB-treated mice and OAT-treated rats). The
inhibitory effect of these carcinogens is realized at the level of gene
transcription (decreased accumulation of TAT mRNA). This effect is mediated via
reduction of DNA-binding activity of transcription factor HNF3 (without decrease 
of its content) without any involvement of the glucocorticoid receptor. It was
shown that carcinogens influence DNA-binding activity of HNF3 via an unknown
nuclear factor.

PMID: 12882633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Jul 30;1638(3):208-16.

Inhibition of human m-epoxide hydrolase gene expression in a case of
hypercholanemia.

Zhu QS(1), Xing W, Qian B, von Dippe P, Shneider BL, Fox VL, Levy D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, 2011 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH) is a bifunctional protein that plays a central
role in carcinogen metabolism and is also able to mediate the sodium-dependent
uptake of bile acids into hepatocytes. Studies have identified a subject (S-1)
with extremely elevated serum bile salt levels in the absence of observable
hepatocellular injury, suggesting a defect in bile acid uptake. In this
individual, mEH protein and mEH mRNA levels were reduced by approximately 95% and
85%, respectively, whereas the expression and amino acid sequence of another bile
acid transport protein (NTCP) was unaffected. Sequence analysis of the mEH gene
(EPHX1) revealed a point mutation at an upstream HNF-3 site (allele I) and in
intron 1 (allele II), which resulted in a significant decrease in EPHX1 promoter 
activity in transient transfection assays. Gel shift assays using a radiolabeled 
oligonucleotide from each region resulted in specific transcription factor
binding patterns, which were altered in the presence of the mutation. These
studies demonstrate that the expression of mEH is greatly reduced in a patient
with hypercholanemia, suggesting that mEH participates in sodium-dependent bile
acid uptake in human liver where its absence may contribute to the etiology of
this disease.

PMID: 12878321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Clin Invest. 2003 Aug;112(3):345-56. Epub 2003 Jul 15.

Role of Foxa-2 in adipocyte metabolism and differentiation.

Wolfrum C(1), Shih DQ, Kuwajima S, Norris AW, Kahn CR, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors-3 (Foxa-1-3) are winged forkhead transcription factors
that regulate gene expression in the liver and pancreatic islets and are required
for normal metabolism. Here we show that Foxa-2 is expressed in preadipocytes and
induced de novo in adipocytes of genetic and diet-induced rodent models of
obesity. In preadipocytes Foxa-2 inhibits adipocyte differentiation by activating
transcription of the Pref-1 gene. Foxa-2 and Pref-1 expression can be enhanced in
primary preadipocytes by growth hormone, suggesting that the antiadipogenic
activity of growth hormone is mediated by Foxa-2. In differentiated adipocytes
Foxa-2 expression leads to induction of gene expression involved in glucose and
fat metabolism, including glucose transporter-4, hexokinase-2, muscle-pyruvate
kinase, hormone-sensitive lipase, and uncoupling proteins-2 and -3. Diet-induced 
obese mice with haploinsufficiency in Foxa-2 (Foxa-2+/-) develop increased
adiposity compared with wild-type littermates as a result of decreased energy
expenditure. Furthermore, adipocytes of these Foxa-2+/- mice exhibit defects in
glucose uptake and metabolism. These data suggest that Foxa-2 plays an important 
role as a physiological regulator of adipocyte differentiation and metabolism.

PMCID: PMC166300
PMID: 12865419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Development. 2003 Aug;130(16):3891-902.

Distinct regulators of Shh transcription in the floor plate and notochord
indicate separate origins for these tissues in the mouse node.

Jeong Y(1), Epstein DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Clinical Research Building, Room 470, 415 Curie Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

The establishment of the floor plate at the ventral midline of the CNS is
dependent on an inductive signaling process mediated by the secreted protein
Sonic hedgehog (Shh). To understand molecularly how floor plate induction
proceeds we identified a Shh-responsive regulatory element that directs transgene
reporter expression to the ventral midline of the CNS and notochord in a Shh-like
manner and characterized critical cis-acting sequences regulating this element.
Cross-species comparisons narrowed the activity of the Shh floor plate enhancer
to an 88-bp sequence within intron 2 of Shh that included highly conserved
binding sites matching the consensus for homeodomain, Tbx and Foxa transcription 
factors. Mutational analysis revealed that the homeodomain and Foxa binding sites
are each required for activation of the Shh floor plate enhancer, whereas the Tbx
site was required for repression in regions of the CNS where Shh is not normally 
expressed. We further show that Shh enhancer activity was detected in the mouse
node from where the floor plate and notochord precursors derive. Shh reporter
expression was restricted to the ventral (mesodermal) layer of the node in a
pattern similar to endogenous Shh. X-gal-positive cells emerging from the node
were only detected in the notochord lineage, suggesting that the floor plate and 
notochord arise from distinct precursors in the mouse node.

PMID: 12835403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mech Dev. 2003 Jun;120(6):691-700.

Retinoic acid signaling regulates murine bronchial tubule formation.

Chazaud C(1), Dollé P, Rossant J, Mollard R.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Ontario, Toronto,
Canada.

Treatment of pseudoglandular stage fetal lungs in vitro with the pan-retinoic
acid receptor (pan-RAR) antagonist, BMS493, reduces retinoic acid receptor beta
(Rarb) gene expression within the proximal bronchial tubules and increases
explant bud formation. Treatment with retinoic acid (RA) increases Rarb
expression and reduces explant bud formation through a signaling mechanism
involving RARbeta. Together these data suggest that RA through RARbeta provides
morphogenetic stabilizing activity to the proximal tubules during lung branching 
morphogenesis. Here we further investigate RA-mediated morphogenetic
stabilization of the proximal respiratory tubules during fetal lung development. 
We demonstrate that Rarb isoform transcripts are the only known Rar transcripts
to specifically localize to the proximal tubules and that RAREhsp68lacZ reporter 
transgene activity reveals endogenous RA signaling activity within these same
proximal tubules. Furthermore, the expression patterns of the RA-producing enzyme
retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (Raldh1), as well as of transforming growth
factor-3beta (Tgfb3), Foxa2, and the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator (Cftr) within the proximal tubules are all altered by the application
of either RA or BMS493 in vitro. We therefore discuss an interbud/proximal tubule
signaling niche involving feedback between Rarb expression and Raldh1-mediated
synthesis of RA. We suggest that this feedback favors interbud morphogenetic
stability by increasing expression of morphoregulatory molecules such as TGFbeta3
and Foxa2, thus promoting bronchial tubule formation rather than continual
budding and branching. The relationship between this RAR signaling center and the
previously described distal bud signaling center is also addressed.

PMID: 12834868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jul;227(3):347-56.

435-bp liver regulatory sequence in the liver fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP)
gene is sufficient to modulate liver regional expression in transgenic zebrafish.

Her GM(1), Yeh YH, Wu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Marine Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Liver fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP) is a small protein that is thought to
play an important role in the intracellular binding and trafficking of long chain
fatty acids in the liver. Expression of the gene encoding the zebrafish liver
fatty acid binding protein is regulated by a 435-bp distal region (-1944 to
-1510) of the L-FABP promoter. The 435-bp sequence is sufficient for gene
activation in the liver primordia (or bud) and continues to be active in the
adult liver when positioned adjacent to the SV40 basal promoter and linked
directly to green fluorescent protein. The 435-bp sequence region has two
distinct liver regulatory elements, A (-1944 to -1623) and B (-1622 to -1510),
and contains multiple putative consensus binding sites. The element A sequence
includes two consensus HFH and one HNF-1alpha site and the element B sequence
includes one consensus HNF-3beta site. Deletion of an internal 435-bp fragment
(-1944 to -1510) including the A and B elements totally ablated the
liver-specific activity of the zebrafish L-FABP gene promoter. Deletion of either
of the two elements reduces the liver activity. Mutation of the HNF-1alpha site
or either of the two HFH sites in the A element or the HNF-3beta site in the B
element significantly altered specificity in the liver primordia of transient
expression embryos. The importance of the HNF-1alpha consensus binding site in
the A element and the HNF-3beta consensus binding site in the B element within
the 435-bp distal region of the L-FABP promoter region suggests that
combinatorial interactions between multiple regulatory factors are responsible
for the gene expression of L-FABP in the liver.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12815620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Hepatology. 2003 Jun;37(6):1414-24.

Elevated hepatocyte levels of the Forkhead box A2 (HNF-3beta) transcription
factor cause postnatal steatosis and mitochondrial damage.

Hughes DE(1), Stolz DB, Yu S, Tan Y, Reddy JK, Watkins SC, Diehl AM, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, Department of
Molecular Genetics, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

The Forkhead box (Fox) transcription factor Foxa2 (HNF-3beta) and related family 
members Foxa1 (HNF-3alpha) and Foxa3 (HNF-3gamma) act in concert with other
hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) to coordinately regulate liver-specific gene
expression. To circumvent the hepatic functional redundancy of the Foxa proteins,
we used the T-77 transgenic (TG) mouse line in which the -3-kb transthyretin
(TTR) promoter functioned to increase hepatocyte expression of the Foxa2 cDNA.
Adult TG mice exhibited reduced hepatic glycogen and progressive liver injury,
but maintained normal serum levels of glucose, insulin, and glucagon. In this
study, we further characterized the postnatal liver defect in TTR-FoxA2 TG mice. 
The postnatal TG mice displayed significant reduction in serum glucose levels and
in hepatocyte glycogen storage without increased serum levels of ketone bodies
and free fatty acid suggesting that they are not undergoing a starvation
response. We show that TG liver developed a substantial transient steatosis,
which reached a maximum at postnatal day 5 and is associated with increased
expression of hepatic genes involved in fatty acid and triglyceride synthesis,
lipid beta-oxidation, and amino acid biosynthesis. Furthermore, transmission
electron microscopy analysis of postnatal TG liver revealed extensive
mitochondrial membrane damage, which is likely due to reactive oxygen species
generated from lipid beta-oxidation. In conclusion, our model proposes that in
response to reduction in hepatocyte glycogen storage, the TTR-Foxa2 TG mice
survive by maintaining sufficient serum levels of glucose through gluconeogenesis
using deaminated amino acids with dicarboxylate products of peroxisomal lipid
beta-oxidation shuttled through the tricarboxylic acid cycle.

PMID: 12774021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Cytotherapy. 2003;5(2):169-73.

Derivation of lung epithelium from bone marrow cells.

Kotton DN(1), Fine A.

Author information: 
(1)The Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, MA 02118, USA.

Recent studies demonstrate the capacity of BM-derived cells to engraft as
differentiated cells of a variety of organs, including lung. In this paper, we
review the current state-of-the-art in this area. We also summarize our work
demonstrating that cultured adherent marrow cells can serve as progenitors of
lung alveolar epithelium.

PMID: 12745579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2003 Jul;285(1):G62-72. Epub 2003 Mar
19.

HNF-1alpha and endodermal transcription factors cooperatively activate Fabpl:
MODY3 mutations abrogate cooperativity.

Divine JK(1), McCaul SP, Simon TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha plays a central role in intestinal and
hepatic gene regulation and is required for hepatic expression of the liver fatty
acid binding protein gene (Fabpl). An Fabpl transgene was directly activated
through cognate sites by HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta, as well as five other
endodermal factors: CDX-1, C/EBPbeta, GATA-4, FoxA2, and HNF-4alpha. HNF-1alpha
activated the Fabpl transgene by as much as 60-fold greater in the presence of
the other five endodermal factors than in their absence, accounting for up to
one-half the total transgene activation by the group of six factors. This degree 
of synergistic interaction suggests that multifactor cooperativity is a critical 
determinant of endodermal gene activation by HNF-1alpha. Mutations in HNF-1alpha 
that result in maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY3) provide evidence for 
the in vivo significance of these synergistic interactions. An R131Q HNF-1alpha
MODY3 mutant exhibits complete loss of synergistic activation in concert with the
other endodermal transcription factors despite wild-type transactivation ability 
in their absence. Furthermore, whereas wild-type HNF-1alpha exhibited pairwise
cooperative synergy with each of the other five factors, the R131Q mutant could
synergize only with GATA-4 and C/EBPbeta. Selective loss of synergy with other
endodermal transcription factors accompanied by retention of native
transactivation ability in an HNF-1alpha MODY mutant suggests in vivo
significance for cooperative synergy.

PMID: 12646418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Development. 2003 May;130(9):1867-76.

Joint regulation of the MAP1B promoter by HNF3beta/Foxa2 and Engrailed is the
result of a highly conserved mechanism for direct interaction of homeoproteins
and Fox transcription factors.

Foucher I(1), Montesinos ML, Volovitch M, Prochiantz A, Trembleau A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05,
France.

The MAP1B (Mtap1b) promoter presents two evolutionary conserved overlapping
homeoproteins and Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (HNF3beta/Foxa2) cognate
binding sites (defining putative homeoprotein/Fox sites, HF1 and HF2).
Accordingly, the promoter domain containing HF1 and HF2 is recognized by
cerebellum nuclear extracts containing Engrailed and Foxa2 and has regulatory
functions in primary cultures of embryonic mesmetencephalic nerve cells.
Transfection experiments further demonstrate that Engrailed and Foxa2 interact
physiologically in a dose-dependent manner: Foxa2 antagonizes the
Engrailed-driven regulation of the MAP1B promoter, and vice versa. This led us to
investigate if Engrailed and Foxa2 interact directly. Direct interaction was
confirmed by pull-down experiments, and the regions participating in this
interaction were identified. In Foxa2 the interacting domain is the Forkhead box 
DNA-binding domain. In Engrailed, two independent interacting domains exist: the 
homeodomain and a region that includes the Pbx-binding domain. Finally, Foxa2 not
only binds Engrailed but also Lim1, Gsc and Hoxa5 homeoproteins and in the four
cases Foxa2 binds at least the homeodomain. Based on the involvement of conserved
domains in both classes of proteins, it is proposed that the interaction between 
Forkhead box transcription factors and homeoproteins is a general phenomenon.

PMID: 12642491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2003 Jul;285(1):L97-104. Epub 2003 Mar 7.

Side population cells and Bcrp1 expression in lung.

Summer R(1), Kotton DN, Sun X, Ma B, Fitzsimmons K, Fine A.

Author information: 
(1)The Pulmonary Center, Boston University School of Medicine, 80 E. Concord St.,
Boston, MA 02118, USA. rsummer@lung.bumc.bu.edu

Side population (SP) cells are a rare subset of cells found in various tissues
that are highly enriched for stem cell activity. SP cells can be isolated by
dual-wavelength flow cytometry because of their capacity to efflux Hoechst dye, a
process mediated by the ATP-binding cassette transporter breast cancer resistance
protein (Bcrp) 1. By performing flow cytometry of enzymedigested mouse lung
stained with Hoechst dye, we found that SP cells comprise 0.03-0.07% of total
lung cells and are evenly distributed in proximal and distal lung regions. By
RT-PCR, we found that lung SP cells express hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta, but 
not thyroid transcription factor-1. Surface marker analysis revealed lung SP
cells to be stem cell antigen 1 positive, Bcrp1 positive, lineage marker
negative, and heterogeneous at the CD45 locus. As expected, we did not detect
lung SP cells in Bcrp1-deficient animals. We, therefore, employed nonisotopic in 
situ hybridization and immunostaining for Bcrp1 as a strategy to localize these
cells in vivo. Expression was observed in distinct lung cell types: bronchial and
vascular smooth muscle cells and round cells within the distal air space. We
confirmed the expression of Bcrp1 in primary bronchial smooth muscle cell
cultures (BSMC) and in lavaged distal airway cells, but neither possessed the
capacity to efflux Hoechst dye. In BSMC, Bcrp1 was localized to an intracellular 
compartment, suggesting that the molecular site of Bcrp1 expression regulates SP 
phenotype.

PMID: 12626330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Genes Dev. 2003 Jan 15;17(2):269-81.

Tbx1 is regulated by tissue-specific forkhead proteins through a common Sonic
hedgehog-responsive enhancer.

Yamagishi H(1), Maeda J, Hu T, McAnally J, Conway SJ, Kume T, Meyers EN,
Yamagishi C, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA. Hiroyuki.Yamagishi@UTSouthwestern.edu

Haploinsufficiency of Tbx1 is likely a major determinant of cardiac and
craniofacial birth defects associated with DiGeorge syndrome. Although mice
deficient in Tbx1 exhibit pharyngeal and aortic arch defects, the developmental
program and mechanisms through which Tbx1 functions are relatively unknown. We
identified a single cis-element upstream of Tbx1 that recognized winged
helix/forkhead box (Fox)-containing transcription factors and was essential for
regulation of Tbx1 transcription in the pharyngeal endoderm and head mesenchyme. 
The Tbx1 regulatory region was responsive to signaling by Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in
vivo. We show that Shh is necessary for aortic arch development, similar to Tbx1,
and is also required for expression of Foxa2 and Foxc2 in the pharyngeal endoderm
and head mesenchyme, respectively. Foxa2, Foxc1, or Foxc2 could bind and activate
transcription through the critical cis-element upstream of Tbx1, and Foxc
proteins were required, within their expression domains, for Tbx1 transcription
in vivo. We propose that Tbx1 is a direct transcriptional target of Fox proteins 
and that Fox proteins may serve an intermediary role in Shh regulation of Tbx1.

PMCID: PMC195981
PMID: 12533514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;23(2):437-49.

Association between hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF-6) and FoxA2 DNA binding
domains stimulates FoxA2 transcriptional activity but inhibits HNF-6 DNA binding.

Rausa FM(1), Tan Y, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois 
at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

In previous studies we used transgenic mice or recombinant adenovirus infection
to increase hepatic expression of forkhead box A2 (FoxA2, previously called
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta [HNF-3beta]), which caused diminished hepatocyte 
glycogen levels and reduced expression of glucose homeostasis genes. Because this
diminished expression of FoxA2 target genes was associated with reduced levels of
the Cut-Homeodomain HNF-6 transcription factor, we conducted the present study to
determine whether there is a functional interaction between HNF-6 and FoxA2.
Human hepatoma (HepG2) cotransfection assays demonstrated that HNF-6
synergistically stimulated FoxA2 but not FoxA1 or FoxA3 transcriptional activity,
and protein-binding assays showed that this protein interaction required the
HNF-6 Cut-Homeodomain and FoxA2 winged-helix DNA binding domains. Furthermore, we
show that the HNF-6 Cut-Homeodomain sequences were sufficient to synergistically 
stimulate FoxA2 transcriptional activation by recruiting the p300/CBP coactivator
proteins. This was supported by the fact that FoxA2 transcriptional synergy with 
HNF-6 was dependent on retention of the HNF-6 Cut domain LXXLL sequence, which
mediated recruitment of the p300/CBP proteins. Moreover, cotransfection and DNA
binding assays demonstrated that increased FoxA2 levels caused a decrease in
HNF-6 transcriptional activation of the glucose transporter 2 (Glut-2) promoter
by interfering with the binding of HNF-6 to its target DNA sequence. These data
suggest that at a FoxA-specific site, HNF-6 serves as a coactivator protein to
enhance FoxA2 transcription, whereas at an HNF-6-specific site, FoxA2 represses
HNF-6 transcription by inhibiting HNF-6 DNA binding activity. This is the first
reported example of a liver-enriched transcription factor (HNF-6) functioning as 
a coactivator protein to potentiate the transcriptional activity of another liver
factor, FoxA2.

PMCID: PMC151533
PMID: 12509444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Clin Invest. 2002 Dec;110(12):1839-47.

The forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 links insulin signaling to Pdx1
regulation of pancreatic beta cell growth.

Kitamura T(1), Nakae J, Kitamura Y, Kido Y, Biggs WH 3rd, Wright CV, White MF,
Arden KC, Accili D.

Author information: 
(1)Naomi Berrie Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, College of Physicians & 
Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

Diabetes is caused by an absolute (type 1) or relative (type 2) deficiency of
insulin-producing beta cells. The mechanisms governing replication of terminally 
differentiated beta cells and neogenesis from progenitor cells are unclear. Mice 
lacking insulin receptor substrate-2 (Irs2) develop beta cell failure, suggesting
that insulin signaling is required to maintain an adequate beta cell mass. We
report that haploinsufficiency for the forkhead transcription factor Foxo1
reverses beta cell failure in Irs2(-/-) mice through partial restoration of beta 
cell proliferation and increased expression of the pancreatic transcription
factor pancreas/duodenum homeobox gene-1 (Pdx1). Foxo1 and Pdx1 exhibit mutually 
exclusive patterns of nuclear localization in beta cells, and constitutive
nuclear expression of a mutant Foxo1 is associated with lack of Pdx1 expression. 
We show that Foxo1 acts as a repressor of Foxa2-dependent (Hnf-3beta-dependent)
expression from the Pdx1 promoter. We propose that insulin/IGFs regulate beta
cell proliferation by relieving Foxo1 inhibition of Pdx1 expression in a subset
of cells embedded within pancreatic ducts.

PMCID: PMC151657
PMID: 12488434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Dev Biol. 2002 Dec 1;252(1):1-14.

A floor plate enhancer of the zebrafish netrin1 gene requires Cyclops (Nodal)
signalling and the winged helix transcription factor FoxA2.

Rastegar S(1), Albert S, Le Roux I, Fischer N, Blader P, Müller F, Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, B.P. 10142, 67404, Illkirch Cedex, C.U. de Strasbourg, France.

The floor plate is an organising centre that controls neural differentiation and 
axonogenesis in the neural tube. The axon guidance molecule Netrin1 is expressed 
in the floor plate of zebrafish embryos. To elucidate the regulatory mechanisms
underlying expression in the floor plate, we scanned the netrin1 locus for
regulatory regions and identified an enhancer that drives expression in the floor
plate and hypochord of transgenic embryos. The expression of the transgene is
ectopically activated by Cyclops (Nodal) signals but does not respond to Hedgehog
signals. The winged-helix transcription factor foxA2 (also HNF3beta, axial) is
expressed in the notochord and floor plate. We show that knock-down of FoxA2
leads to loss of floor plate, while notochord and hypochord development is
unaffected, suggesting a specific requirement of FoxA2 in the floor plate. The
transgene is ectopically activated by FoxA2, and expression of FoxA2 leads to
rescue of floor plate differentiation in mutant embryos that are deficient in
Cyclops signalling. Zebrafish and mouse use different signalling systems to
specify floor plate. The zebrafish netrin1 regulatory region also drives
expression in the floor plate of mouse and chicken embryos. This suggests that
components of the regulatory circuits controlling expression in the floor plate
are conserved and that FoxA2-given its importance for midline development also in
the mouse-may be one such component.

PMID: 12453456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cell Struct Funct. 2002 Aug;27(4):181-8.

Foxa (HNF3) up-regulates vitronectin expression during retinoic acid-induced
differentiation in mouse neuroblastoma Neuro2a cells.

Shimizu S(1), Kondo M, Miyamoto Y, Hayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Ochanomizu University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Accumulation of vitronectin protein increased in the conditioned medium of mouse 
neuroblastoma Neuro2a cells during retinoic acid-induced differentiation. To
study the regulatory mechanism of the increase in vitronectin expression during
the differentiation, the activity of the -527/+95 vitronectin promoter was
observed in Neuro2a cells with or without retinoic acid treatment. The result
showed that the -527/+95 promoter activity increased 2.7-fold with retinoic acid,
and despite deletion of regions from -527 to -49 and +54 to +95 base pairs (bp), 
the -48/+53 promoter preserved the retinoic acid response. We recently showed
that the -48/+53 region has two transcription factor Foxa (HNF3)-binding sites
(site A from -34 to -25 bp and site B from +15 to +26 bp), suggesting that Foxa
may up-regulate the vitronectin expression. Therefore, we examined the change of 
Foxa expression in Neuro2a cells during the differentiation. The expression of
Foxa1 protein was increased during the differentiation, but the expression of
Foxa2 protein was not detected. In addition, overexpression of Foxa1 increased
the amount of vitronectin protein in the conditioned medium of
Foxa1-overexpressed Neuro2a cells, but overexpression of Foxa2 only weakly
increased it. The site-A and -B double mutation of the -527/+95 promoter
remarkably reduced the promoter activity induced by Foxa overexpression,
indicating that Foxa-binding sites in the -527/+95 region are located only on
sites A and B. The mutation of site A in the -48/+53 promoter did not affect the 
retinoic acid response, but the site-B mutation abolished the constitutive
promoter activity and remarkably reduced the promoter activity with retinoic
acid. These results demonstrate that Foxa up-regulates the vitronectin expression
during the retinoic acid-induced differentiation in Neuro2a cells.

PMID: 12441652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Virol. 2002 Dec;76(24):12974-80.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta inhibits hepatitis B virus replication in vivo.

Banks KE(1), Anderson AL, Tang H, Hughes DE, Costa RH, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey
Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) transgenic mice expressing rat hepatocyte nuclear factor 
3beta (HNF3beta) were generated by breeding HBV transgenic mice with transgenic
mice that constitutively overexpress the rat HNF3beta polypeptide in the liver.
HBV 3.5-, 2.4- and 2.1-kb transcripts were reduced 2- to 4-fold in these mice
relative to the HBV transgenic mouse controls. In contrast, the abundance of
viral replication intermediates was profoundly reduced in HBV transgenic mice by 
overexpression of HNF3beta. This results, in part, from the preferential
reduction in the level of the pregenomic 3.5-kb RNA relative to the precore
3.5-kb RNA. Therefore, it is apparent that increased expression of HNF3beta
modestly reduces viral transcription and dramatically inhibits replication in
vivo in the HBV transgenic mouse. This suggests that altering the activity of
this transcription factor in vivo in chronic HBV carriers might be
therapeutically beneficial.

PMCID: PMC136732
PMID: 12438623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2003 Jan;284(1):L108-18. Epub 2002 Aug 16.

Transcriptional regulation of CCSP by interferon-gamma in vitro and in vivo.

Ramsay PL(1), Luo Z, Magdaleno SM, Whitbourne SK, Cao X, Park MS, Welty SE,
Yu-Lee LY, DeMayo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Interferon gamma (IFN-gamma), a potent cytokine inducing a wide range of
immunologic activities, is increased in the airway secondary to viral infection
or during an inflammatory response. This increase in IFN-gamma concentration may 
alter the expression of specific airway epithelial cell genes that regulate
adaptation of airway inflammatory responses. One protein induced by IFN-gamma is 
Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP), which may contribute to the attenuation of
airway inflammation. This study was done to investigate the molecular mechanism
by which IFN-gamma stimulates the expression of the CCSP gene in mouse
transformed Clara cells and transgenic mice. Deletion mapping and linker-scanning
mutations demonstrated that IFN-gamma-induced expression of CCSP was regulated,
in part, at the level of transcription. In vitro and in vivo studies verified
that the minimal IFN-gamma-responsive segment was localized to the proximal 166
bp of the 5'-flanking region. Additionally, IFN-gamma-induced expression of CCSP 
was mediated indirectly through an interferon regulatory factor-1-mediated
increase in hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta.

PMID: 12388333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mech Dev. 2002 Oct;118(1-2):147-55.

Prox1 is an early specific marker for the developing liver and pancreas in the
mammalian foregut endoderm.

Burke Z(1), Oliver G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 332 N.
Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

Although important progress has been made recently in the elucidation of the
molecular mechanisms that regulate differentiation and morphogenesis of
endoderm-derived tissues such as pancreas and liver, less is known about the
preliminary steps of early regional specification. Recent evidence supports the
proposal that the early endoderm contains a bipotential precursor cell type for
pancreas and liver. We have also previously shown that the activity of the
homeobox gene Prox1 controls hepatocyte migration during liver morphogenesis.
Using detailed comparative analysis of whole embryos and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction of dissected embryonic endoderm, we have now determined
that in the early endoderm, Prox1 expression is restricted to regions giving rise
to the mammalian pancreas and liver. This finding indicates that Prox1 is one of 
the earliest specific markers of this commonly fated region of the mammalian
endoderm.

PMID: 12351178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mech Dev. 2002 Oct;118(1-2):57-63.

Spatial and temporal 'knock down' of gene expression by electroporation of
double-stranded RNA and morpholinos into early postimplantation mouse embryos.

Mellitzer G(1), Hallonet M, Chen L, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS/INSERM/
Université Louis Pasteur, 67404 Illkirch cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Here we report the use of double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) and morpholino technologies
to specifically 'knock down' gene expression in early postimplantation mouse
embryos. Sequence specific interference mediated by either dsRNA or by morpholino
has been a useful tool for studying gene function in several organisms. However, 
specifically for the dsRNA, doubts have been raised about whether it could
successfully be applied on vertebrate embryos. We demonstrate that
electroporation of dsRNA directed against Otx2 or Foxa2 into postimplantation
mouse embryos results in specific knock down of the expression of the respective 
endogenous genes in a region- and germ-layer specific manner. We also show that
electroporation of morpholino directed against Foxa2 into the node of mouse
embryos leads to a specific down regulation of Foxa2 expression in the floor
plate. Our results demonstrate for the first time that dsRNA and morpholino
technologies can be successfully applied in early postimplantation mouse embryos 
to specifically knock down gene expression.

PMID: 12351170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. DNA Cell Biol. 2002 Aug;21(8):561-9.

The mouse alpha-fetoprotein promoter is repressed in HepG2 hepatoma cells by
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (FOXA).

Huang MC(1), Li KK, Spear BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky
40536-0298, USA.

The mouse alpha-fetoprotein gene is expressed at high levels in the fetal liver
and is transcriptionally silenced at birth. The repression is governed, at least 
in part, by the 250 base pair (bp) AFP promoter. We show here that the AFP
promoter is dramatically repressed by HNF3 in HepG2 hepatoma cells. This
repression is governed by the region between -205 and -150. Furthermore, this
fragment can confer HNF3-mediated repression on a heterologous promoter. The
repression is abolished by a mutation that is centered at -165. EMSA analyses
using in vivo and in vitro synthesized proteins indicate that HNF3 proteins do
not bind DNA from the -205 to -150 region. We propose that HNF3 represses AFP
promoter activity through indirect mechanisms that modulate the binding or
activity of a liver-enriched factor that interacts with the -165 region of the
AFP promoter.

PMCID: PMC1563500
PMID: 12215259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. FASEB J. 2002 Sep;16(11):1444-6. Epub 2002 Jul 1.

Development of hepatocytes from ES cells after transfection with the HNF-3beta
gene.

Ishizaka S(1), Shiroi A, Kanda S, Yoshikawa M, Tsujinoue H, Kuriyama S, Hasuma T,
Nakatani K, Takahashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Tissue Engineering and Department of Parasitology, Nara Medical
University, Kashihara, Nara, Japan. ishizaka@naramed-u.ac.jp

We have attempted to generate embryonic stem (ES) cell-derived hepatocytes
expressing liver-specific functional properties by use of ES cell technology. It 
was found that ES cells are allowed to differentiate into hepatocytes possessing 
high metabolic activities when hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3beta-transfected 
ES cells are cultured in alpha-MEM medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) and fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 in the three-dimensional cell
culture system at 5% CO2. The differentiated cells induced albumin,
triacylglycerol, urea, and glycogen synthesis as well as further expression of
metabolic proteins and serum factors as markers of hepatocytic differentiation
for at least 4 months. The cells differentiated from HNF-3beta-transfected ES
cells also had hepatocyte-like ultrastructural characteristics, including several
endoplasmic reticula, mitochondrion, and glycogen. Our findings indicate that
generation of hepatocytes maintaining high metabolic functions developed from
mouse ES cells will facilitate the study of the basic mechanism for hepatogenesis
and will certainly provide new opportunities for tissue transplantation.

PMID: 12205042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Virol. 2002 Sep;76(17):8572-81.

Mechanisms of inhibition of nuclear hormone receptor-dependent hepatitis B virus 
replication by hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta.

Tang H(1), McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

The nuclear hormone receptors hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) and the retinoid
X alpha (RXRalpha) plus the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha
(PPARalpha) heterodimer support hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication in
nonhepatoma cells. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) inhibits nuclear hormone
receptor-mediated viral replication. Inhibition of HBV replication by HNF3beta is
associated with the preferential reduction in the level of the pregenomic RNA
compared with that of precore RNA. Hepatitis B e antigen (HBeAg), encoded by the 
precore RNA, mediates part of the inhibition of viral replication by HNF3beta.
The amino-terminal transcriptional activation domain of HNF3beta is essential for
the inhibition of HBV replication. The activation of transcription by HNF3 from
HBV promoters downstream from the nucleocapsid promoter appears to contribute
indirectly to the reduction in the steady-state level of 3.5-kb HBV RNA, possibly
by interfering with the elongation rate of these transcripts. Therefore,
transcriptional interference mediated by HNF3 may also regulate HBV RNA synthesis
and viral replication.

PMCID: PMC136416
PMID: 12163577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Development. 2002 Sep;129(17):4065-74.

Hoxa5 overexpression correlates with IGFBP1 upregulation and postnatal dwarfism: 
evidence for an interaction between Hoxa5 and Forkhead box transcription factors.

Foucher I(1), Volovitch M, Frain M, Kim JJ, Souberbielle JC, Gan L, Unterman TG, 
Prochiantz A, Trembleau A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole normale supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05,
France.

Transgenic mice expressing the homeobox gene Hoxa5 under the control of Hoxb2
regulatory elements present a growth arrest during weeks two and three of
postnatal development, resulting in proportionate dwarfism. These mice present a 
liver phenotype illustrated by a 12-fold increase in liver insulin-like growth
factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP1) mRNA and a 50% decrease in liver insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF1) mRNA correlated with a 50% decrease in circulating IGF1.
We show that the Hoxa5 transgene is expressed in the liver of these mice, leading
to an overexpression of total (endogenous plus transgene) Hoxa5 mRNA in this
tissue. We have used several cell lines to investigate a possible physiological
interaction of Hoxa5 with the main regulator of IGFBP1 promoter activity, the
Forkhead box transcription factor FKHR. In HepG2 cells, Hoxa5 has little effect
by itself but inhibits the FKHR-dependent activation of the IGFBP1 promoter. In
HuF cells, Hoxa5 cooperates with FKHR to dramatically enhance IGFBP1 promoter
activity. This context-dependent physiological interaction probably corresponds
to the existence of a direct interaction between Hoxa5 and FKHR and
FoxA2/HNF3beta, as demonstrated by pull-down experiments achieved either in vitro
or after cellular co-expression. In conclusion, we propose that the impaired
growth observed in this transgenic line relates to a liver phenotype best
explained by a direct interaction between Hoxa5 and liver-specific Forkhead box
transcription factors, in particular FKHR but also Foxa2/HNF3beta. Because Hoxa5 
and homeogenes of the same paralog group are normally expressed in the liver, the
present results raise the possibility that homeoproteins, in addition to their
established role during early development, regulate systemic physiological
functions.

PMID: 12163409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Diabetes. 2002 Aug;51(8):2546-51.

Foxa2 controls Pdx1 gene expression in pancreatic beta-cells in vivo.

Lee CS(1), Sund NJ, Vatamaniuk MZ, Matschinsky FM, Stoffers DA, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6145, USA.

Differentiation of early foregut endoderm into pancreatic endocrine and exocrine 
cells depends on a cascade of gene activation events controlled by various
transcription factors. Prior in vitro analysis has suggested that the
forkhead/winged helix transcription factor Foxa2 (formerly HNF-3beta) is a major 
upstream regulator of Pdx1, a homeobox gene essential for pancreatic development.
Pdx1 is also essential for the maintenance of glucose homeostasis, as its human
orthologue, IPF-1, is mutated in a subset of patients with early-onset type 2
diabetes (MODY4). To analyze the Foxa2/Pdx1 regulatory cascade during pancreatic 
beta-cell differentiation, we used conditional gene ablation of Foxa2 in mice. We
demonstrated that the deletion of Foxa2 in beta-cell-specific knockout mice
results in downregulation of Pdx1 mRNA and subsequent reduction of PDX-1 protein 
levels in islets. These data represent the first in vivo demonstration that Foxa2
acts upstream of Pdx1 in the differentiated beta-cell.

PMID: 12145169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2002 Jul;82(13):894-8.

[The expression of human specific proteins in liver tissue of chimeric goats
engrafted with human hematopoitic stem cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang S(1), Yam H, Pang C, Chen M, Gong Z, Zeng F, Ling S, Zeng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Medical Genetics, Shanghai Children's Hospital, Shanghai
200040, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of human specific proteins in liver
tissue obtained from goats engrafted with human hematopoietic stem cells (hHSC).
METHODS: hHSCs derived from cord blood were transplanted into fetal goats for
production of chimerism. Liver specimens were obtained from four 10-month-old
chimeric goats and examined for their reactivity with monoclonal antibodies
against human antigens: proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and hepatocyte 
specific antigen (HSA). The presence of human HSA positive cells in the goat
liver tissue was determined by fluorescence assisted cell sorting (FACS). The
expression of human hepatocyte nuclear factor (hHNF-3beta) and human serum
albumin (hALB) mRNAs was determined by RT-PCR. Meanwhile, FISH experiment was
also performed to detect the human cells in the chimeric livers with the probe of
human p17H8.
RESULTS: Successful engraftment was confirmed by the detection of human blood
cell chimerism in the circulation of the transplanted goats. Human PCNA and HSA
were found in liver specimens of transplanted goats but not of normals. FACS
analysis showed the presence of human HSA positive cells in the liver of chimeric
goats. RT-PCR results demonstrated that hHNF-3beta and hALB mRNAs were
specifically expressed in liver tissues of chimeric goats. FISH experiment showed
two positive hybridized signals in some liver cells of the chimeric goats,
indicating that human liver-like cells were present there.
CONCLUSION: Goats engrafted with hHSC are capable to produce chimeric livers.
Growth and propagation of human cells in the liver tissue of such transplanted
goats were possible. Particularly, the human liver-like cells in chimeric goat
livers had transcriptional activity specific to human hepatocytes.

PMID: 12126514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Cell Physiol. 2002 Sep;192(3):304-14.

Exendin-4 differentiation of a human pancreatic duct cell line into endocrine
cells: involvement of PDX-1 and HNF3beta transcription factors.

Zhou J(1), Pineyro MA, Wang X, Doyle ME, Egan JM.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Section, National Institute on Aging, NIH, Baltimore, Maryland 21224,
USA.

Exendin-4 (EX-4), a long acting agonist of GLP-1, induces an endocrine phenotype 
in Capan-1 cells. Under culture conditions which include serum, approximately 10%
of the cells contain insulin and glucagon. When exposed to EX-4 (0.1 nM, up to 5 
days), the number of cells containing insulin and glucagon increased to
approximately 40%. Western blot analysis detected a progressive increase in
protein levels of glucokinase and GLUT2 over 3 days of EX-4 treatment. We
explored the sequence of activation of certain transcription factors known to be 
essential for the beta cell phenotype: PDX-1, Beta2/NeuroD, and hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3beta (HNF3beta). Double immunostaining showed that PDX-1
coexisted with insulin and glucagon in EX-4-treated cells. Treatment caused an
increase in PDX-1 protein levels by 24 h and induced its nuclear translocation.
Beta2/NeuroD protein levels also increased progressively over 24 h. HNF3beta
protein level increased twofold as early as 6 h after EX-4 treatment. EMSA
results indicated that EX-4 caused a 12-fold increase in HNF3beta binding to
PDX-1 promoter area II. Beta2/NeuroD protein levels progressively increased after
24 h treatment. Differentiation to insulin-producing cells was also seen when
Capan-1 cells were transfected with pdx-1, with 80% of these cells expressing
insulin 3 days after transfection. PDX-1 antisense totally inhibited such
conversion. During the differentiation of duct cells to endocrine cells, cAMP
levels (EX-4 is a ligand for the GLP-1, G-protein coupled receptor) and MAP
kinase activity increased. Our results indicate that EX-4 activates adenylyl
cyclase and MAP kinase which, in turn, may lead to activation of transcription
factors necessary for an endocrine phenotype.

Published 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12124776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Aug;283(2):C623-30.

Zinc depletion reduced Egr-1 and HNF-3beta expression and apolipoprotein A-I
promoter activity in Hep G2 cells.

Cui L(1), Schoene NW, Zhu L, Fanzo JC, Alshatwi A, Lei KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Maryland, College Park
20742, USA.

We examined the influence of zinc status on expression of certain transcription
factors involved in regulation of apolipoprotein A-I (apoAI) expression in human 
hepatoblastoma Hep G2 cells. A low zinc basal medium (zinc deficient, ZD)
consisting of DMEM and 10% Chelex100-treated fetal bovine serum was used to
deplete cellular zinc over one passage. Cells were also cultured for one passage 
in medium supplemented with 0.4 (ZD0.4), 4.0 (zinc normal, ZN), 16.0 (zinc
adequate, ZA), or 32.0 microM zinc (zinc supplemented, ZS). Compared with ZN
cells, cellular zinc levels were 43 and 31% lower in ZD and ZD0.4 cells but 70
and 146% higher in ZA and ZS cells, respectively. Supplementation of 0.4 microM
zinc significantly increased DNA contents per plate, from 65% in ZD cells to 83% 
in ZD0.4 cells compared with ZN cells. Addition of >4 microM zinc in medium did
not further increase DNA contents. The proportion of cells in G(1)/S and S phase 
was about fourfold higher and threefold lower, respectively, in ZD cells compared
with ZN and other groups. Nuclear Egr-1 protein was markedly decreased in ZD and 
ZD0.4 cells. Moreover, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3beta was severely
degraded in ZD and ZD0.4 cells. In contrast, HNF-4alpha remained stable in all
groups and was not significantly lower in ZD and ZD0.4 cells. Furthermore,
downregulation of trans-acting factor Egr-1 and cleavage of HNF-3beta were
associated with reduction of apoAI promoter activity in zinc-deficient Hep G2
cells. Thus zinc is critical in transcriptional regulation of apoAI gene
expression in hepatocytes.

PMID: 12107072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Curr Biol. 2002 Jun 4;12(11):938-43.

The ion channel polycystin-2 is required for left-right axis determination in
mice.

Pennekamp P(1), Karcher C, Fischer A, Schweickert A, Skryabin B, Horst J, Blum M,
Dworniczak B.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Münster, Institut für Humangenetik, Vesaliusweg 12-14,
Germany.

Generation of laterality depends on a pathway which involves the asymmetrically
expressed genes nodal, Ebaf, Leftb, and Pitx2. In mouse, node monocilia are
required upstream of the nodal cascade. In chick and frog, gap junctions are
essential prior to node/organizer formation. It was hypothesized that
differential activity of ion channels gives rise to unidirectional transfer
through gap junctions, resulting in asymmetric gene expression. PKD2, which if
mutated causes autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) in humans,
encodes the calcium release channel polycystin-2. We have generated a knockout
allele of Pkd2 in mouse. In addition to malformations described previously,
homozygous mutant embryos showed right pulmonary isomerism, randomization of
embryonic turning, heart looping, and abdominal situs. Leftb and nodal were not
expressed in the left lateral plate mesoderm (LPM), and Ebaf was absent from
floorplate. Pitx2 was bilaterally expressed in posterior LPM but absent
anteriorly. Pkd2 was ubiquitously expressed at headfold and early somite stages, 
with higher levels in floorplate and notochord. The embryonic midline, however,
was present, and normal levels of Foxa2 and shh were expressed, suggesting that
polycystin-2 acts downstream or in parallel to shh and upstream of the nodal
cascade.

PMID: 12062060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Jul;22(13):4702-13.

Conserved sequences in a tissue-specific regulatory region of the pdx-1 gene
mediate transcription in Pancreatic beta cells: role for hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3 beta and Pax6.

Samaras SE(1), Cissell MA, Gerrish K, Wright CV, Gannon M, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Pancreas duodenum homeobox 1 (PDX-1) is absolutely required for pancreas
development and the maintenance of islet beta-cell function. Temporal and
cell-type-specific transcription of the pdx-1 gene is controlled by factors
acting upon sequences found within its 5'-flanking region. Critical cis-acting
transcriptional control elements are located within a nuclease hypersensitive
site that contains three conserved subdomains, termed areas I, II, and III. We
show that area II acts as a tissue-specific regulatory region of the pdx-1 gene, 
directing transgene expression to a subpopulation of islet cells. Mutation of the
area II hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) binding element in the larger area I- 
and area II- containing PstBst fragment also decreases PB(hsplacZ) transgene
penetrance. These two results indicate possible ontogenetic and/or functional
heterogeneity of the beta-cell population. Several other potential positive- and 
negative-acting control elements were identified in area II after mutation of the
highly conserved sequence blocks within this subdomain. Pax6, a factor essential 
for islet alpha-cell development and islet hormone gene expression, was shown to 
bind in area II in vitro. Pax6 and HNF3 beta were also found to bind to this
region in vivo by using the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Collectively,
these data suggest an important role for both HNF3 beta and Pax6 in regulating
pdx-1 expression in beta cells.

PMCID: PMC133887
PMID: 12052878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biochem J. 2002 Sep 1;366(Pt 2):633-41.

Foxa3 (HNF-3gamma) binds to and activates the rat proglucagon gene promoter but
is not essential for proglucagon gene expression.

Liu Y(1), Shen W, Brubaker PL, Kaestner KH, Drucker DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Banting and Best Diabetes Centre, Toronto General
Hospital, University of Toronto, 101 College Street CCRW3-845, Toronto, Canada
M5G 2C4.

Members of the Forkhead box a (Foxa) transcription factor family are expressed in
the liver, pancreatic islets and intestine and both Foxa1 and Foxa2 regulate
proglucagon gene transcription. As Foxa proteins exhibit overlapping DNA-binding 
specificities, we examined the role of Foxa3 [hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-3gamma] in control of proglucagon gene expression. Foxa3 was detected by
reverse transcriptase PCR in glucagon-producing cell lines and binds to the rat
proglucagon gene G2 promoter element in GLUTag enteroendocrine cells. Although
Foxa3 increased rat proglucagon promoter activity in BHK fibroblasts,
augmentation of Foxa3 expression did not increase proglucagon promoter activity
in GLUTag cells. Furthermore, adenoviral Foxa3 expression did not affect
endogenous proglucagon gene expression in islet or intestinal endocrine cell
lines. Although Foxa3(-/-) mice exhibit mild hypoglycaemia during a prolonged
fast, the levels of proglucagon-derived peptides and proglucagon mRNA transcripts
were comparable in tissues from wild-type and Foxa3(-/-) mice. These findings
identify Foxa3 as a member of the proglucagon gene G2 element binding-protein
family that, unlike Foxa1, is not essential for control of islet or intestinal
proglucagon gene expression in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1222783
PMID: 12000309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Apr 12;1574(3):337-44.

Cell-type dependency of two Foxa/HNF3 sites in the regulation of vitronectin
promoter activity.

Shimizu S(1), Miyamoto Y, Hayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Ochanomizu University, Bunkyo-ku, 112-8610, Tokyo,
Japan.

The mouse vitronectin promoter has two consensus sequences of the Foxa/hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF) 3-binding site (from -34 to -25, site A, and +15 to +26 base
pairs (bp), site B). Site-directed mutagenesis of site B inhibited binding of
nuclear proteins from mouse neuroblastoma Neuro2a and reduced the promoter
activity to 4.6% in a 101-bp fragment (from -48 to +53 bp) in Neuro2a cells. The 
nuclear proteins of site B were identified as the Foxa1/HNF3alpha and
Foxa2/HNF3beta proteins by supershift assay. Next, we examined site A. Mutation
of site A in Neuro2a cells did not affect the promoter activity, and binding of
nuclear proteins was not detected. Overexpression of Foxa1 or Foxa2 protein
activated the mutated site B promoter, but failed to activate the sites A and B
double-mutated promoter in Neuro2a cells, indicating that site A is a potential
transcription regulatory site. Recombinant Foxa1 and Foxa2 proteins and nuclear
extract from mouse liver bound not only to site B, but also to site A. In human
hepatoma HepG2 cells, mutation of sites A and B decreased the promoter activity
to 82% and 38%, respectively, in the wild promoter, and double mutation of sites 
A and B decreased the wild promoter activity to 5%, indicating that sites A and B
contribute to the promoter activity in HepG2 cells. These results demonstrate
that the two Foxa-binding sites regulate the vitronectin promoter activity in
cell type-dependent manner.

PMID: 11997100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Development. 2002 May;129(10):2507-17.

Sonic hedgehog and the molecular regulation of mouse neural tube closure.

Ybot-Gonzalez P(1), Cogram P, Gerrelli D, Copp AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neural Development Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London WC1N 1EH, UK.

Neural tube closure is a fundamental embryonic event whose molecular regulation
is poorly understood. As mouse neurulation progresses along the spinal axis,
there is a shift from midline neural plate bending to dorsolateral bending. Here,
we show that midline bending is not essential for spinal closure since, in its
absence, the neural tube can close by a 'default' mechanism involving
dorsolateral bending, even at upper spinal levels. Midline and dorsolateral
bending are regulated by mutually antagonistic signals from the notochord and
surface ectoderm. Notochordal signaling induces midline bending and
simultaneously inhibits dorsolateral bending. Sonic hedgehog is both necessary
and sufficient to inhibit dorsolateral bending, but is neither necessary nor
sufficient to induce midline bending, which seems likely to be regulated by
another notochordal factor. Attachment of surface ectoderm cells to the neural
plate is required for dorsolateral bending, which ensures neural tube closure in 
the absence of sonic hedgehog signaling.

PMID: 11973281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Science. 2002 Apr 19;296(5567):541-5.

Optical projection tomography as a tool for 3D microscopy and gene expression
studies.

Sharpe J(1), Ahlgren U, Perry P, Hill B, Ross A, Hecksher-Sørensen J, Baldock R, 
Davidson D.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, Crewe
Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK. james.sharpe@hgu.mrc.ac.uk

Current techniques for three-dimensional (3D) optical microscopy (deconvolution, 
confocal microscopy, and optical coherence tomography) generate 3D data by
"optically sectioning" the specimen. This places severe constraints on the
maximum thickness of a specimen that can be imaged. We have developed a
microscopy technique that uses optical projection tomography (OPT) to produce
high-resolution 3D images of both fluorescent and nonfluorescent biological
specimens with a thickness of up to 15 millimeters. OPT microscopy allows the
rapid mapping of the tissue distribution of RNA and protein expression in intact 
embryos or organ systems and can therefore be instrumental in studies of
developmental biology or gene function.

PMID: 11964482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Hepatology. 2002 Apr;35(4):790-8.

Maintaining HNF6 expression prevents AdHNF3beta-mediated decrease in hepatic
levels of Glut-2 and glycogen.

Tan Y(1), Adami G, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois 
at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3) proteins are members of the Forkhead Box 
(Fox) family of transcription factors that play important roles in regulating
expression of genes involved in cellular proliferation, differentiation, and
metabolic homeostasis. In previous studies we increased liver expression of
HNF-3beta by using either transgenic mice (transthyretin HNF-3beta) or
recombinant adenovirus infection (AdHNF3beta), and observed diminished hepatic
levels of glycogen, and glucose transporter 2 (Glut-2), as well as the HNF-6,
HNF-3, HNF-1alpha, HNF-4alpha, and C/EBPalpha transcription factors. We conducted
the present study to determine whether maintaining HNF-6 protein expression
during AdHNF3beta infection prevents reduction of hepatic levels of glycogen and 
the earlier-mentioned genes. Here, we show that AdHNF3beta- and AdHNF6-infected
mouse liver displayed increased hepatic levels of glycogen, Glut-2, HNF-3gamma,
HNF-1alpha, and HNF-4alpha at 2 and 3 days postinfection (PI). Furthermore,
restoration of hepatic glycogen levels after AdHNF3beta and AdHNF6 coinfection
was associated with increased Glut-2 expression. AdHNF6 infection alone caused a 
2-fold increase in hepatic Glut-2 levels, suggesting that HNF 6 stimulates in
vivo transcription of the Glut-2 gene. DNA binding assays showed that only
recombinant HNF-6 protein, but not the HNF-3 proteins, binds to the mouse -185 to
-144 bp Glut-2 promoter sequences. Cotransfection assays in human hepatoma
(HepG2) cells with either HNF-3 or HNF-6 expression vectors show that only HNF-6 
provided significant transcriptional activation of the Glut-2 promoter. In
conclusion, these studies show that the hepatic Glut-2 promoter is a direct
target for HNF-6 transcriptional activation.

PMID: 11915024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 7;277(23):21061-70. Epub 2002 Mar 25.

The WNT7b promoter is regulated by TTF-1, GATA6, and Foxa2 in lung epithelium.

Weidenfeld J(1), Shu W, Zhang L, Millar SE, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Molecular Cardiology Research Center, and the
Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

In this study, we find that WNT7b is the only member of the WNT family of
autocrine/paracrine signaling molecules whose expression in the lung is
restricted to the airway epithelium during embryonic development. To study the
transcriptional mechanisms that underlie this restricted pattern of WNT7b
expression, we isolated the proximal 1.0-kb mouse WNT7b promoter and mapped the
transcriptional start sites. Transfection of the lung epithelial cell line
MLE-15, which expresses WNT7b, shows that the 1.0-kb mouse WNT7b promoter is
highly active in lung epithelial cells. This region of the WNT7b promoter
contains several DNA binding sites for the important lung-restricted
transcription factors TTF-1, GATA6, and Foxa2. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that TTF-1, GATA6, and Foxa2 can bind to a specific subset of their
consensus DNA binding sites within the WNT7b promoter. Using cotransfection
assays, we demonstrate that TTF-1, GATA6, and Foxa2 can trans-activate the WNT7b 
promoter in NIH-3T3 cells. Truncation of GATA6 or Foxa2 binding sites reduced the
ability of these transcriptional regulators to trans-activate the WNT7b promoter.
Finally, the minimal 118-bp region of the mouse WNT7b promoter containing only
TTF-1 binding sites was synergistically activated by TTF-1 and GATA6, and we show
that TTF-1 and GATA6 physically interact in vivo. Together, these results suggest
that WNT7b gene expression in the lung epithelium is regulated in a combinatorial
fashion by TTF-1, GATA6, and Foxa2.

PMID: 11914369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 19;99(6):3818-23.

Profound defects in pancreatic beta-cell function in mice with combined
heterozygous mutations in Pdx-1, Hnf-1alpha, and Hnf-3beta.

Shih DQ(1), Heimesaat M, Kuwajima S, Stein R, Wright CV, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Defects in pancreatic beta-cell function contribute to the development of type 2 
diabetes, a polygenic disease that is characterized by insulin resistance and
compromised insulin secretion. Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) -1alpha, -3beta,
-4alpha, and Pdx-1 contribute in the complex transcriptional circuits within the 
pancreas that are involved in beta-cell development and function. In mice, a
heterozygous mutation in Pdx-1 alone, but not Hnf-1alpha(+/-), Hnf-3beta(+/-), or
Hnf-4alpha(+/-), causes impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in mice. To
investigate the possible functional relationships between these transcription
factors on beta-cell activity in vivo, we generated mice with the following
combined heterozygous mutations: Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-),
Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-), Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-),
Hnf-1alpha(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-), and Hnf-3beta(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-). The greatest
loss in function was in combined heterozygous null alleles of Pdx-1 and
Hnf-1alpha (Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-)), or Pdx-1 and Hnf-3beta
(Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-)). Both double mutants develop progressively impaired
glucose tolerance and acquire a compromised first- and second-phase insulin
secretion profile in response to glucose compared with Pdx-1(+/-) mice alone. The
loss in beta-cell function in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-) mice was associated with 
decreased expression of Nkx-6.1, glucokinase (Gck), aldolase B (aldo-B), and
insulin, whereas Nkx2.2, Nkx-6.1, Glut-2, Gck, aldo-B, the liver isoform of
pyruvate kinase, and insulin expression was reduced in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-)
mice. The islet cell architecture was also abnormal in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-) 
and Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-) mice, with glucagon-expressing cells scattered
throughout the islet, a defect that may be connected to decreased E-cadherin
expression. Our data suggest that functional interactions between key islet
regulatory factors play an important role in maintaining islet architecture and
beta-cell function. These studies also established polygenic mouse models for
investigating the mechanisms contributing to beta-cell dysfunction in diabetes.

PMCID: PMC122607
PMID: 11904435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 19;99(6):3663-7. Epub 2002 Mar 12.

The embryonic stem cell transcription factors Oct-4 and FoxD3 interact to
regulate endodermal-specific promoter expression.

Guo Y(1), Costa R, Ramsey H, Starnes T, Vance G, Robertson K, Kelley M, Reinbold 
R, Scholer H, Hromas R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and The Walther Oncology Center, R4-202, 1044 West
Walnut Street, Indiana University Medical Center, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The POU homeodomain protein Oct-4 and the Forkhead Box protein FoxD3 (previously 
Genesis) are transcriptional regulators expressed in embryonic stem cells.
Down-regulation of Oct-4 during gastrulation is essential for proper endoderm
development. After gastrulation, FoxD3 is generally down-regulated during early
endoderm formation, although it specifically remains expressed in the embryonic
neural crest. In these studies, we have found that Oct-4 and FoxD3 can bind to
identical regulatory DNA sequences. In addition, Oct-4 physically interacted with
the FoxD3 DNA-binding domain. Cotransfection of Oct-4 and FoxD3 expression
vectors activated the osteopontin enhancer, which is expressed in totipotent
embryonic stem cells. FoxA1 and FoxA2 (previously HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta) are
Forkhead Box transcription factors that participate in liver and lung formation
from foregut endoderm. Although FoxD3 activated the FoxA1 and FoxA2 promoters,
Oct-4 inhibited FoxD3 activation of the FoxA1 and FoxA2 endodermal promoters.
These data indicate that Oct-4 functions as a corepressor of FoxD3 to provide
embryonic lineage-specific transcriptional regulatory activity to maintain
appropriate developmental timing.

PMCID: PMC122580
PMID: 11891324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Virology. 2002 Jan 5;292(1):87-97.

HNF-3beta is a critical factor for the expression of the Jaagsiekte sheep
retrovirus long terminal repeat in type II pneumocytes but not in Clara cells.

McGee-Estrada K(1), Palmarini M, Fan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry and Cancer Research
Institute, University of California Irvine, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

Jaagsiekte sheep retrovirus (JSRV) is the causative agent of ovine pulmonary
adenocarcinoma (OPA), a sheep lung cancer that resembles human lung
adenocarcinoma or bronchioloaveolar carcinoma (BAC). JSRV is the only retrovirus 
that shows lung tropism and induces pulmonary carcinoma. Several lines of
evidence suggest that the lung tropism for JSRV is mainly determined by the viral
long terminal repeats (LTR). In a previous study, we showed that HNF-3alpha and
-3beta were able to transactivate the JSRV LTR when cotransfected into 3T3 cells.
The JSRV LTR contains two putative HNF-3 binding sites; to investigate the
contribution of each HNF-3 binding site to transcription, we generated reporter
constructs with deletions or nucleotide substitutions in one or both of the
putative HNF-3 binding sites. In murine MLE-15 cells (derived from type II
pneumocytes), mutations within the upstream site (minus sign147 to minus sign128 
bp) resulted in a 72% reduction of the LTR activity, while mutation of the
downstream site had little effect. In contrast, transactivation of the JSRV LTR
was greatly reduced in 3T3 cells cotransfected with an HNF-3alpha or -3beta
expression plasmid when the downstream site was eliminated. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA) revealed that nuclear extracts from MLE-15 cells,
but not 3T3 cells, were able to form a retarded complex with oligonucleotides
encompassing either the upstream or the downstream sites. Anti-HNF-3beta
antiserum, but not anti-HNF-3alpha antiserum, supershifted both protein-DNA
complexes. These results indicate that the JSRV LTR is activated by the
lung-specific transcription factor HNF-3beta and that the upstream HNF-3 binding 
site is essential for expression in MLE-15 cells. In contrast, transactivation by
HNF-3beta in 3T3 cells is mediated through the downstream HNF-3 site. On the
other hand, JSRV LTR expression in a mouse lung Clara cell-derived line (mtCC1-2)
did not appear to be strongly dependent on either HNF-3 binding site. These
results support the notion that JSRV lung tropism is determined by the
transcriptional specificity of the JSRV LTR, which is governed by interactions
with lung-specific transcription factors.

PMID: 11878911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 17;277(20):17564-70. Epub 2002 Mar 1.

Foxa2 (HNF3beta ) controls multiple genes implicated in metabolism-secretion
coupling of glucose-induced insulin release.

Wang H(1), Gauthier BR, Hagenfeldt-Johansson KA, Iezzi M, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, University
Medical Center, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Haiyan.Wang@medicine.unige.ch

The transcription factor Foxa2 is implicated in blood glucose homeostasis.
Conditional expression of Foxa2 or its dominant-negative mutant DN-Foxa2 in INS-1
cells reveals that Foxa2 regulates the expression of genes important for glucose 
sensing in pancreatic beta-cells. Overexpression of Foxa2 results in blunted
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, whereas induction of DN-Foxa2 causes a left
shift of glucose-induced insulin release. The mRNA levels of GLUT2 and
glucokinase are drastically decreased after induction of Foxa2. In contrast, loss
of Foxa2 function leads to up-regulation of hexokinase (HK) I and II and
glucokinase (HK-IV) mRNA expression. The glucokinase and the low K(m) hexokinase 
activities as well as glycolysis are increased proportionally. In addition,
induction of DN-Foxa2 also reduces the expression of beta-cell K(ATP) channel
subunits Sur1 and Kir6.2 by 70%. Furthermore, in contrast to previous reports,
induction of Foxa2 causes pronounced decreases in the HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha
mRNA levels. Foxa2 fails to regulate the expression of Pdx1 transcripts. The
expression of insulin and islet amyloid polypeptide is markedly suppressed after 
induction of Foxa2, while the glucagon mRNA levels are significantly increased.
Conversely, Foxa2 is required for glucagon expression in these INS-1-derived
cells. These results suggest that Foxa2 is a vital transcription factor evolved
to control the expression of genes essential for maintaining beta-cell glucose
sensing and glucose homeostasis.

PMID: 11875061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;34(3):242-52.

Altered liver gene expression in CCl4-cirrhotic rats is partially normalized by
insulin-like growth factor-I.

Mirpuri E(1), García-Trevijano ER, Castilla-Cortazar I, Berasain C, Quiroga J,
Rodriguez-Ortigosa C, Mato JM, Prieto J, Avila MA.

Author information: 
(1)División de Hepatología y Terapia Génica, Facultad de Medicina, Departamento
de Medicina Interna, Universidad de Navarra, 31008, Pamplona, Spain.

We have previously shown that the administration of low doses of insulin-like
growth factor-I (IGF-I) to CCl4-cirrhotic rats improves liver function and
reduces fibrosis. To better understand the mechanisms behind the hepatoprotective
effects of IGF-I, and to identify those genes whose expression is affected in
cirrhosis and after IGF-1 treatment, we have performed differential display of
mRNA analysis by means of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in livers from control 
and CCl4-cirrhotic rats treated or not with IGF-I. We have identified 16 genes
that were up- or down-regulated in the cirrhotic liver. IGF-I treatment partially
normalized the expression of eight of these genes, including serine proteinase
inhibitors such as serpin-2 and alpha-1-antichymotripsin, alpha-1-acid
glycoprotein, and alpha-2u-globulin. Additionally, we show that IGF-I enhanced
the regenerative activity in the cirrhotic liver, as determined by the increased 
expression of the proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA). Finally, IGF-I
treatment partially restored the expression of growth hormone receptor (GHR) and 
the levels of global genomic DNA methylation, which are reduced in human and
experimental cirrhosis. Taken together, our observations confirm the
hepatoprotective effects of IGF-I, and suggest that this action can be exerted in
part through the normalization of liver gene expression, growth hormone (GH)
responsiveness and global genomic DNA methylation.

PMID: 11849991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Dev Biol. 2002 Mar 1;243(1):20-33.

Maintenance of the specification of the anterior definitive endoderm and
forebrain depends on the axial mesendoderm: a study using HNF3beta/Foxa2
conditional mutants.

Hallonet M(1), Kaestner KH, Martin-Parras L, Sasaki H, Betz UA, Ang SL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, C.U. de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France.

In mouse embryo, the early induction of the head region depends on signals from
the anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) and the anterior primitive streak.
Subsequently, node derivatives, including anterior definitive endoderm and axial 
mesendoderm, are thought to play a role in the maintenance and elaboration of
anterior neural character. Foxa2 encodes a winged-helix transcription factor
expressed in signaling centers required for head development, including the AVE, 
anterior primitive streak, anterior definitive endoderm, and axial mesendoderm.
To address Foxa2 function during formation of the head, we used conditional
mutants in which Foxa2 function is preserved in extraembryonic tissues during
early embryonic stages and inactivated in embryonic tissues after the onset of
gastrulation. In Foxa2 conditional mutants, the anterior neural plate and
anterior definitive endoderm were initially specified. In contrast, the axial
mesendoderm failed to differentiate. At later stages, specification of the
anterior neural plate and anterior definitive endoderm was shown to be labile. As
a result, head truncations were observed in Foxa2 conditional mutants. Our
results therefore indicate that anterior definitive endoderm alone is not
sufficient to maintain anterior head specification and that an interaction
between the axial mesendoderm and the anterior definitive endoderm is required
for proper specification of the endoderm. Foxa2 therefore plays an integral role 
in the formation of axial mesendoderm, which is required to maintain the
specification of the forebrain and the anterior definitive endoderm.

(C)2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11846474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Hepatology. 2002 Jan;35(1):30-9.

Adenovirus-mediated increase in HNF-3beta or HNF-3alpha shows differences in
levels of liver glycogen and gene expression.

Tan Y(1), Hughes D, Wang X, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, Department of
Molecular Genetics, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

We previously generated a transgenic mouse line (T-77) in which increased hepatic
expression of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta (HNF-3beta) protein was used to
assess its role in hepatocyte-specific gene transcription. The T-77 transgenic
mice displayed elevated serum bile acid and bilirubin levels and a complete
absence of hepatic glycogen storage. These postnatal liver defects were
associated with diminished expression of hepatocyte genes involved in
gluconeogenesis and bile acid transport as well as reduced levels of hepatocyte
transcription factors. In this study, we show that mouse tail vein injections of 
adenovirus expressing the rat HNF-3beta (AdHNF3beta) cDNA efficiently increased
its levels throughout the liver lobule and recapitulated the T-77 transgenic
liver phenotype within several days postinfection. Likewise, the
AdHNF3beta-infected liver phenotype was associated with reduced hepatic
expression of genes involved in glucose homeostasis, bile acid transport, and
bilirubin conjugation, which were not found with control adenovirus infections.
These studies show that adenovirus-mediated gene transfer is an effective method 
for rapid hepatic increases in transcription factor levels to determine in vivo
target genes. In contrast, AdHNF3alpha-infected liver displayed only a transient 
reduction in hepatic glycogen levels and was associated with less severe
decreases in hepatic expression of gluconeogenic and bilirubin metabolism genes. 
Consistent with these findings, only T-77 transgenic and AdHNF3beta-infected
liver exhibited diminished hepatic expression of the HNF-6 transcription factor, 
suggesting that reduced HNF-6 levels contribute to diminished HNF-3beta-specific 
transcriptional activity.

PMID: 11786957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jan;16(1):170-83.

Hepatic nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3 or Foxa2) regulates glucagon gene transcription
by binding to the G1 and G2 promoter elements.

Gauthier BR(1), Schwitzgebel VM, Zaiko M, Mamin A, Ritz-Laser B, Philippe J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Diabétologie Clinique, Centre Médical Universitaire, 1211 Genève 4,
Switzerland. benoit.gauthier@medecine.unige.ch

Glucagon gene expression in the endocrine pancreas is controlled by three
islet-specific elements (G3, G2, and G4) and the alpha-cell-specific element G1. 
Two proteins interacting with G1 have previously been identified as Pax6 and
Cdx2/3. We identify here the third yet uncharacterized complex on G1 as
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3)beta, a member of the HNF-3/forkhead
transcription family, which plays an important role in the development of
endoderm-related organs. HNF-3 has been previously demonstrated to interact with 
the G2 element and to be crucial for glucagon gene expression; we thus define a
second binding site for this transcription on the glucagon gene promoter. We
demonstrate that both HNF-3alpha and -beta produced in heterologous cells can
interact with similar affinities to either the G1 or G2 element. Pax6, which
binds to an overlapping site on G1, exhibited a greater affinity as compared with
HNF-3alpha or -beta. We show that both HNF-3beta and -alpha can transactivate
glucagon gene transcription through the G2 and G1 elements. However, HNF-3 via
its transactivating domains specifically impaired Pax6-mediated transactivation
of the glucagon promoter but had no effect on transactivation by Cdx2/3. We
suggest that HNF-3 may play a dual role on glucagon gene transcription by 1)
inhibiting the transactivation potential of Pax6 on the G1 and G3 elements and 2)
direct activation through G1 and G2.

PMID: 11773447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Gene Expr. 2001;9(6):237-48.

Adenovirus-mediated increase of HNF-3 levels stimulates expression of
transthyretin and sonic hedgehog, which is associated with F9 cell
differentiation toward the visceral endoderm lineage.

Tan Y(1), Costa RH, Kovesdi I, Reichel RR.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, Department of
Molecular Genetics, 60607-7170, USA. ytan@uic.edu

Retinoic acid-induced differentiation of mouse F9 embryonal carcinoma cells
toward the visceral endoderm lineage is accompanied by increased expression of
the Forkhead Box (Fox) transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 3a
(HNF-3alpha) and HNF-3beta, suggesting that they play a crucial role in visceral 
endoderm development. Retinoic acid stimulation results in a cascade of HNF-3
induction in which HNF-3alpha is a primary target for retinoic acid action and
its increase is required for subsequent induction of HNF-3beta expression.
Increased expression of HNF-3beta precedes activation of its known target genes, 
including transthyretin (TTR), Sonic hedgehog (Shh), HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta, and
HNF-4alpha. In order to examine whether increased HNF-3 expression is sufficient 
to induce expression of its downstream target genes without retinoic acid
stimulation, we have used adenovirus-based expression vectors to increase HNF-3
protein levels in F9 cells. We demonstrate that adenovirus-mediated increase of
HNF-3alpha levels in F9 cells is sufficient to induce activation of endogenous
HNF-3beta levels followed by increased TTR and Shh expression. Furthermore, we
show that elevated HNF-3beta levels stimulate expression of endogenous TTR and
Shh without retinoic acid stimulation. Moreover, ectopic HNF-3 levels in
undifferentiated F9 cells are insufficient to induce HNF-3alpha, HNF-1alpha,
HNF-1beta, and HNF-4alpha expression, suggesting that their transcriptional
activation required other regulatory proteins induced by the retinoic acid
differentiation program. Finally, our studies demonstrate the utility of cell
infections with adenovirus expressing distinct transcription factors to identify 
endogenous target genes, which are assembled with the appropriate nucleosome
structure.

PMID: 11763995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2001 Dec;281(6):F1082-91.

Murine and human type I Na-phosphate cotransporter genes: structure and promoter 
activity.

Soumounou Y(1), Gauthier C, Tenenhouse HS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University-Montreal Children's Hospital Research Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3Z 2Z3.

Na-phosphate (P(i)) cotransporters in the apical membrane of renal proximal
tubular cells play a major role in the maintenance of P(i) homeostasis. Although 
two such cotransporters, Npt1 and Npt2, have been identified, little is known
about the function and regulation of Npt1. We cloned and characterized the murine
(Npt1) and human (NPT1) genes, isolated the 5'-flanking region of Npt1, and
analyzed its promoter activity. Npt1 is approximately 29 kb with 12 exons,
whereas NPT1 is approximately 49 kb with one additional exon. The Npt1 promoter
has a TATA-like box but no CAAT box, and the transcription start site was
identified by primer extension and 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends.
Transfection of opossum kidney cells with Npt1 promoter-reporter gene constructs 
demonstrated significant activity in a 570-bp fragment that was completely
inhibited by cotransfection with the transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-3 beta. Deletion of 200 bp from the 3'-end of the 570-bp fragment
abrogated its promoter activity. In addition, promoter activity of a 4.5-kb
fragment, but not the 570-bp fragment, was stimulated fourfold by cotransfection 
with HNF-1 alpha. Other well-characterized cis-acting elements were identified in
the Npt1 promoter. We suggest that Npt1 expression is transcriptionally regulated
and provide a basis for the investigation of Npt1 function by targeted
mutagenesis.

PMID: 11704559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 9;288(4):833-40.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors-1alpha, -1beta, and -3beta expressed in the gonad of
tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus).

Huang WT(1), Gong HY, Lin CJ, Weng CF, Chen MH, Wu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan, 11529,
Republic of China.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) are upstream regulators of many liver-specific 
genes and are involved in many cellular functions in the body, but their
existence, expression, and function in gonads are still poorly understood. Here
we report on the first cloning of partial cDNAs of HNF-1alpha and -1beta and full
HNF-3beta cDNA from a tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus) liver cDNA library. The
deduced amino acid sequence of tilapia HNF-3beta has a 90 to 96% identity with
those of other fishes (dwarf gourami, medaka, and zebrafish), 74% with mammals
(human, rat, and mouse), and 82% with Xenopus. RT-PCR detected IGF-I and -II and 
HNF-1alpha, -1beta, and -3beta in both liver and gonads and the identity of the
PCR fragments was confirmed by PCR hybridization. Immunoprecipitation and Western
blotting also detected all three HNF proteins in both liver and gonads.
Expression of HNFs in the gonads of the tilapia suggests that multi-HNFs may form
a cascade to regulate gonadal physiology in the bony fish.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11688983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 30;276(48):44385-9. Epub 2001 Sep 24.

Transcription factor FoxA (HNF3) on a nucleosome at an enhancer complex in liver 
chromatin.

Chaya D(1), Hayamizu T, Bustin M, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

Nucleosome-like particles and acetylated histones occur near active promoters and
enhancers, and certain transcription factors can recognize their target sites on 
the surface of a nucleosome in vitro; yet it has been unclear whether
transcription factors can occupy target sites on nucleosomes in native chromatin.
We developed a method for sequential chromatin immunoprecipitation of distinct
nuclear proteins that are simultaneously cross-linked to nucleosome-sized genomic
DNA segments. We find that core histone H2A co-occupies, along with the FoxA
(hepatocyte nuclear factor-3) transcription factor, DNA for the albumin
transcriptional enhancer in native liver chromatin, where the enhancer is active.
Because histone H2A on nuclear DNA is only known to exist in nucleosomes, we
conclude that transcription factors can form a stable complex on nucleosomes at
an active enhancer element in vivo.

PMID: 11571307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 16;276(46):43031-9. Epub 2001 Sep 18.

Inhibitory cross-talk between STAT5b and liver nuclear factor HNF3beta: impact on
the regulation of growth hormone pulse-stimulated, male-specific liver cytochrome
P-450 gene expression.

Park SH(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

STAT5b is repeatedly activated in rodent liver by the male pattern of
intermittent plasma growth hormone (GH) stimulation and is required to maintain
the GH pulse-regulated, male-specific pattern of liver gene expression. We
presently investigate the interactions between STAT5b and hepatocyte-enriched
nuclear factors (HNFs) that contribute to regulation of GH pulse-inducible,
male-specific liver cytochrome P-450 (CYP) genes. STAT5 binding sites were
identified in the 5'-flank of the adult male-expressed genes CYP2A2 (nucleotides 
-2255 to -2247), CYP4A2 (nucleotides -1872 to -1864), and CYP2C11 (nucleotides
-1150 to -1142). STAT5-DNA complexes were formed by each CYP sequence with
nuclear extract from GH pulse-activated male, but not female, rat liver. The
CYP2C11 STAT5 site, which is flanked by HNF3 consensus sequences, conferred
STAT5b-inducible reporter gene activity in GH-treated HepG2 cells.
trans-Activation of the intact CYP2C11 promoter (1.8-kilobase 5'-flank) was
strongly induced by the liver nuclear factors HNF1alpha and HNF3beta but,
unexpectedly, was inhibited by GH-activated STAT5b. This STAT5b inhibitory effect
could be reversed by HNF1alpha and reflects a functional antagonism between
STAT5b and HNF3beta, as evidenced by the inhibition of HNF3beta DNA binding and
transcriptional activity by STAT5b. HNF3beta, in turn, inhibited STAT5b by a
novel mechanism that leads to suppression of GH-inducible STAT5b tyrosine
phosphorylation, DNA binding activity, and transcriptional activity. The
potential for GH-activated STAT5b to stimulate male-specific liver CYP expression
can thus be modulated by HNF3beta, highlighting the complex interrelationship
between STAT5b and liver transcription factors controlling expression of
GH-regulated CYP genes.

PMID: 11562369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 16;276(46):42812-7. Epub 2001 Sep 6.

Foxa3 (hepatocyte nuclear factor 3gamma ) is required for the regulation of
hepatic GLUT2 expression and the maintenance of glucose homeostasis during a
prolonged fast.

Shen W(1), Scearce LM, Brestelli JE, Sund NJ, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The winged helix transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factors 3alpha, -beta,
and -gamma (HNF-3, encoded by the Foxa1, -a2, and -a3 genes, respectively), are
expressed early in embryonic endoderm and play important roles in the regulation 
of gene expression in liver and pancreas. Foxa1 has been shown to be required for
glucagon secretion in the pancreas, whereas Foxa2 is critical for the regulation 
of insulin secretion in pancreatic beta-cells. Here we address the role of Foxa3 
in the maintenance of glucose homeostasis. Mice homozygous for a null mutation in
Foxa3 appear normal under fed conditions. However, when fasted, Foxa3(-/-) mice
have a significantly lower blood glucose compared with control mice. The fasting 
hypoglycemia in Foxa3(-/-) mice could not be attributed to defects in pancreatic 
hormone secretion, ketone production, or hepatic glycogen breakdown.
Surprisingly, mRNA levels for several gluconeogenic enzymes were up-regulated
appropriately in fasted Foxa3(-/-) mice, despite the fact that the corresponding 
genes had been shown to be activated by FOXA proteins in vitro. However, the mRNA
for the plasma membrane glucose transporter GLUT2 was decreased by 64% in the
fasted and 93% in the fed state, suggesting that efflux of newly synthesized
glucose is limiting in Foxa3(-/-) hepatocytes. Thus, Foxa3 is the dominating
transcriptional regulator of GLUT2 expression in hepatocytes in vivo. In
addition, we investigated the hepatic transcription factor network in Foxa3(-/-) 
mice and found that the normal activation of HNF-4alpha, HNF-1alpha, and PGC-1
induced by fasting is attenuated in mice lacking Foxa3.

PMID: 11546810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Curr Biol. 2001 Aug 21;11(16):1261-5.

Single-cell internalization during zebrafish gastrulation.

Carmany-Rampey A(1), Schier AF.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine
and Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, 540 First
Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

During gastrulation, germ layers are formed as prospective mesodermal and
endodermal cells internalize and come to underlie the ectoderm [1-9]. Despite the
pivotal role of gastrulation in animal development, the cellular interactions
underlying this process are poorly understood. In zebrafish, mesoderm and
endoderm formation requires the Nodal signals Cyclops and Squint and their
cofactor One-eyed pinhead (Oep) [10-14]. We found that marginal cells in
maternal-zygotic oep (MZoep) mutants do not internalize during gastrulation and
acquire neural and tail fates at the expense of head and trunk mesendoderm. The
lack of internalization in MZoep embryos and the cell-autonomous requirement for 
oep in Nodal signaling enabled us to test whether internalization can be achieved
by individual cells or whether it depends on interactions within a group of
cells. We found that individual MZoep mutant cells transplanted to the margin of 
wild-type blastula embryos initially internalize with their neighbors but are
unable to contribute to the mesendoderm. In the reciprocal experiment, single
wild-type cells transplanted to the margin of MZoep mutant embryos autonomously
internalize and can express the mesendodermal markers axial/foxA2 and sox17.
These results suggest that internalization and mesendoderm formation in zebrafish
can be attained autonomously by single cells.

PMID: 11525740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 12;276(41):38010-22. Epub 2001 Aug 8.

Novel transcriptional regulation of the human CYP3A7 gene by Sp1 and Sp3 through 
nuclear factor kappa B-like element.

Saito T(1), Takahashi Y, Hashimoto H, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, N12W6, Kita-ku, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan.

Human CYP3A7 and CYP3A4 are expressed in fetal and adult livers, respectively,
although the 5'-flanking regions of the two genes show 90% homology. The purpose 
of this study was to clarify the mechanism(s) responsible for the transcriptional
regulation of the CYP3A7 gene in human hepatoma HepG2 cells that showed fetal
phenotypes. Transfection studies using a series of the CYP3A7 or CYP3A4
promoter-luciferase chimeric genes identified a nuclear factor kappaB
(NF-kappaB)-like element between nucleotides -2326 and -2297 that conferred the
transcriptional activation of the CYP3A7 gene. A 1-base pair mismatch within the 
corresponding region of the CYP3A4 gene was sufficient for a differential
enhancer activity. A gel shift assay using nuclear extracts from HepG2 cells
showed that Sp1 and Sp3 bound to the NF-kappaB-like element of the CYP3A7 but not
CYP3A4 gene. Specific activation of the CYP3A7 promoter by Sp1 and Sp3 was
confirmed by a co-transfection of the p3A7NF-kappaB or p3A4NF-kappaB reporter
gene with Sp1 or Sp3 expression plasmid into Drosophila cells, which lacked
endogenous Sp family. Additionally, introduction of mutations into binding sites 
for hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta, upstream stimulatory factor 1, and a basic
transcription element in the proximal promoter attenuated luciferase activity to 
20% of the level seen with the intact CYP3A7 promoter. Thus, we conclude that the
expression of the CYP3A7 gene in HepG2 cells is cooperatively regulated by Sp1,
Sp3, hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta, and upstream stimulatory factor 1.

PMID: 11495920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Gastroenterology. 2001 Aug;121(2):317-28.

Sonic hedgehog regulates gastric gland morphogenesis in man and mouse.

van den Brink GR(1), Hardwick JC, Tytgat GN, Brink MA, Ten Kate FJ, Van Deventer 
SJ, Peppelenbosch MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands. g.r.vandenbrink@amc.uva.nl

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2001 Aug;121(2):485-7.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Gastric epithelial renewal is an asymmetric process. A stem
cell located halfway up the tubular unit gives rise to both a basal gland region 
and a luminal pit compartment, but the mechanisms responsible for the maintenance
of this asymmetry are obscure. We investigated whether Sonic hedgehog (Shh), an
established polarizing signal protein during development, is expressed and
functional in the adult human and murine stomach.
METHODS: Expression of Shh and putative transcriptional targets was investigated 
using immunoblot and immunohistochemistry. Mice were treated with the Shh
inhibitor cyclopamine and examined for expression levels of Shh targets and
proliferation of gastric epithelial cells.
RESULTS: Shh was expressed in the stomach. In cyclopamine-treated mice, we
observed decreased expression of HNF3beta, Islet (Isl)-1 and BMP4, 3 putative Shh
target genes. Inhibition of Shh markedly enhanced gastric epithelial
proliferation and affected the cell cycle of gastric epithelial gland cells,
whereas pit cells remained unaffected.
CONCLUSIONS: Shh controls the expression of at least 3 factors important for
epithelial differentiation and is a negative regulator of gastric gland cell
proliferation. Shh is a candidate polarizing signal in the maintenance of gastric
pit-gland asymmetry.

PMID: 11487541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Exp Mol Med. 2001 Jun 30;33(2):59-63.

HNF1 and/or HNF3 may contribute to the tissue specific expression of glucokinase 
gene.

Cha JY(1), Kim HI, Im SS, Li TZ, Ahn YH.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Institute of Genetic
Science, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

A possible role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) or HNF3, a predominant
trans-acting factors of hepatic or pancreatic beta-cells, was examined on the
tissue specific interdependent expression of glucokinase (GK) in liver, H4IIE,
HepG2, HIT-T15 and MIN6 cell line. The tissues or cell lines known to express GK 
showed abundant levels of HNF1 and HNF3 mRNA as observed in liver, H4IIE, HepG2, 
HIT-T15 and MIN6 cells, whereas they were not detected in brain, heart, NIH 3T3, 
HeLa cells. The promoter of glucokinase contains several HNF3 consensus sequences
and are well conserved in human, mouse and rat. Transfection of the glucokinase
promotor linked with luciferase reporter to liver or pancreatic beta cell lines
showed high interacting activities with HNF1 and HNF3, whereas minimal activities
were detected in the cells expressing very low levels of HNFs. The binding of
HNF1 or HNF3 to the GK promoter genes was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA). From these data, we propose that the expression of HNF1
and/or HNF3 may, in part, contribute to the tissue specific expression of GK

PMID: 11460882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Genes Dev. 2001 Jul 1;15(13):1706-15.

Tissue-specific deletion of Foxa2 in pancreatic beta cells results in
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia.

Sund NJ(1), Vatamaniuk MZ, Casey M, Ang SL, Magnuson MA, Stoffers DA, Matschinsky
FM, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Penn Diabetes Center, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

We have used conditional gene ablation to uncover a dramatic and unpredicted role
for the winged-helix transcription factor Foxa2 (formerly HNF-3 beta) in
pancreatic beta-cell differentiation and metabolism. Mice that lack Foxa2
specifically in beta cells (Foxa2(loxP/loxP); Ins.Cre mice) are severely
hypoglycemic and show dysregulated insulin secretion in response to both glucose 
and amino acids. This inappropriate hypersecretion of insulin in the face of
profound hypoglycemia mimics pathophysiological and molecular aspects of familial
hyperinsulinism. We have identified the two subunits of the beta-cell
ATP-sensitive K(+) channel (K(ATP)), the most frequently mutated genes linked to 
familial hyperinsulinism, as novel Foxa2 targets in islets. The Foxa2(loxP/loxP);
Ins.Cre mice will serve as a unique model to investigate the regulation of
insulin secretion by the beta cell and suggest the human FOXA2 as a candidate
gene for familial hyperinsulinism.

PMCID: PMC312732
PMID: 11445544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Gene Expr. 2001;9(4-5):217-36.

Atypical mouse cerebellar development is caused by ectopic expression of the
forkhead box transcription factor HNF-3beta.

Zhou H(1), Hughes DE, Major ML, Yoo K, Pesold C, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at Chicago, College
of Medicine, 60607, USA.

To assess the role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta (HNF-3beta) in
hepatocyte-specific gene transcription, we reported the characterization of the
liver phenotype with transgenic mice in which the -3-kb transthyretin (TTR)
promoter functioned to increase HNF-3beta expression. During breeding of the
TTR-HNF-3beta transgenic mice we noticed that they displayed severe ataxia. In
this study, we describe the analysis of our transgenic cerebellar phenotype and
demonstrate that ectopic expression of HNF-3beta disrupted cerebellar
morphogenesis and caused reduction in cerebellar size. In postnatal cerebellum,
the HNF-3beta transgene expression pattern is colocalized to glial fibrillary
acidic protein-positive cerebellar astrocytes and Bergmann glial cells. As a
result of protracted expression, the transgenic cerebella are impaired in terms
of astrocyte dispersal and formation of Bergmann glial cell processes. This
caused a disruption in neuronal cell migration to the cortical laminar layers and
Purkinje dendritic arbor maturation, thus leading to diminished foliation.
Differential hybridization of cDNA arrays was used to identify altered expression
of cerebellar genes, which is consistent with the observed defect in transgenic
cerebellar morphogenesis and size as well as glial maturation. These include
diminished expression of the brain lipid-binding protein, which is required for
glial morphological differentiation, and the basic helix-loop-helix NeuroD/Beta2 
and homeodomain Engrailed-2 transcription factors, which are required for normal 
cerebellar morphogenesis and foliation. Undetectable levels of ataxia
telangiectasia (ATM), which is required for proper development of the Purkinje
dendritic arbor, were found in postnatal transgenic cerebella. Furthermore, the
transgenic cerebella displayed levels of insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-1 elevated to 22 times greater than those measured for wild-type
cerebella, an elevation consistent with the reduction in transgenic cerebellar
size.

PMID: 11444531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Mol Biol. 2001 Jul 13;310(3):523-35.

Long-range identification of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (FoxA) high and
low-affinity binding sites with a chimeric nuclease.

Ruminy P(1), Derambure C, Chandrasegaran S, Salier JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 519 and Institut Fédératif de Recherches Multidisciplinaires sur
les Peptides, Faculté de Médecine-Pharmacie, 22 Boulevard Gambetta, Rouen cedex, 
76183, France.

Identifying the complete set of transcription factors that bind the promoter and 
other regulatory regions of a gene of interest is an essential step in functional
genomics. We have developed an original assay for the systematic detection of
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) binding sites within cloned promoters. This
assay is based on expression of a recombinant enzyme, HNF-3beta/FN, that is
comprised of the rat HNF-3beta DNA-binding domain and the non-specific nuclease
domain of the FokI restriction enzyme. Southern analysis of target plasmids with 
proven HNF-3 binding sites showed that HNF-3beta/FN was able to specifically cut 
both DNA strands in the vicinity of these binding sites, whereas mutagenized
binding sites were no longer cleaved. Likewise, as yet undescribed HNF-3 binding 
sites were detected easily over a distance spanning several thousand bases. The
functionality of such binding sites was confirmed by electromobility shift assay.
Furthermore, the extent of cleavage by HNF-3beta/FN at a given binding site was
tightly correlated with the affinity of a natural HNF-3beta molecule for this
site. This novel approach can be extended to other transcription factors for
long-range identification of functional transcription factor binding sites in
genes.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11439020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Genes Dev. 2001 May 15;15(10):1257-71.

FoxH1 (Fast) functions to specify the anterior primitive streak in the mouse.

Hoodless PA(1), Pye M, Chazaud C, Labbé E, Attisano L, Rossant J, Wrana JL.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5G 1X5.

The node and the anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) are important organizing
centers that pattern the mouse embryo by establishing the anterior-posterior
(A-P), dorsal-ventral (D-V), and left-right (L-R) axes. Activin/nodal signaling
through the Smad2 pathway has been implicated in AVE formation and in
morphogenesis of the primitive streak, the anterior end of which gives rise to
the node. The forkhead DNA-binding protein, FoxH1 (or Fast), functions as a Smad 
DNA-binding partner to regulate transcription in response to activin signaling.
Here, we show that deletion of FoxH1 in mice results in failure to pattern the
anterior primitive streak (APS) and form node, prechordal mesoderm, notochord,
and definitive endoderm. In contrast, formation of the AVE can occur in the
absence of FoxH1. The FoxH1 mutant phenotype is remarkably similar to that of
mice deficient in the forkhead protein Foxa2 (HNF3beta), and we show that Foxa2
expression is dependent on FoxH1 function. These results show that FoxH1
functions in an activin/nodal-Smad signaling pathway that acts upstream of Foxa2 
and is required specifically for patterning the APS and node in the mouse.

PMCID: PMC313796
PMID: 11358869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cancer Res. 2001 Apr 1;61(7):3176-81.

Expression profiling suggested a regulatory role of liver-enriched transcription 
factors in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xu L(1), Hui L, Wang S, Gong J, Jin Y, Wang Y, Ji Y, Wu X, Han Z, Hu G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai.

By using a cDNA array representing 14,000 cDNA clusters, we studied the
expression profiles in paired clinical hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) samples and
the distal nontumorous liver tissues from the same patients. Despite the
significant heterogeneity among the clinical samples, 72 genes (including 30
novel genes) were down-regulated and 84 genes (including 48 novel genes) were
up-regulated in >50% of the cancer samples that were identified. The alterations 
in gene expression levels were confirmed by Northern blot and
reverse-transcription PCR in all of 4 randomly selected genes. It was conspicuous
that 21 of 38 hepatocarcinoma (HCC) down-regulated genes studied previously were 
reportedly regulated by a group of liver-enriched transcription factors (LETFs), 
and 12 of 36 HCC up-regulated genes studied previously were involved in protein
translation. Reexamination of the cDNA array data further revealed that most of
the genes known to be regulated by LETFs were down-regulated in at least a
portion of the HCC samples. Among the LETFs, the expression level of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) alpha was down-regulated in cancer,
whereas hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1), HNF-3beta, HNF-4alpha, and
HNF-4gamma were up-regulated. The expression profiling thus suggested multiple
regulatory pathways involved in HCC, especially that related to LETFs.

PMID: 11306505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Int J Dev Biol. 2001;45(1):357-65.

Otx2 and HNF3beta genetically interact in anterior patterning.

Jin O(1), Harpal K, Ang SL, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Patterning the developing nervous system in the mouse has been proposed to depend
on two separate sources of signals, the anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) and the 
node or organizer. Mutation of the winged-helix gene HNF3beta leads to loss of
the node and its derivatives, while mutation of the homeobox gene Otx2 results in
loss of head structures, apparently at least partially because of defects in the 
AVE. To investigate the potential genetic interactions between the two signaling 
centers, we crossed Otx2+/- and HNF3beta+/- mice and found that very few
Otx2+/-;HNF3beta+/- double heterozygous mutants survived to weaning. Normal
Mendelian ratios of genotypes were observed during gestation, but more than half 
the double heterozygotes displayed a severe anterior patterning phenotype that
would be incompatible with postnatal survival. The phenotype was characterized by
varying degrees of holoprosencephaly, cyclopia with proboscis-like structures,
and anterior forebrain truncations. Regional marker analysis revealed that
ventral forebrain structures of Otx2+/-;HNF3beta+/- mutant embryos were most
severely affected. Shh expression was completely absent in the anterior region of
Otx2+/-;HNF3beta+/- embryos, suggesting that Otx2 and HNF3beta genetically
interact, directly or indirectly, to regulate Shh expression in the anterior
midline. In addition, the forebrain truncations suggest an involvement of both
genes in anterior patterning, through their overlapping expression domains in
either the AVE and/or the prechordal mesoderm.

PMID: 11291866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Int J Dev Biol. 2001;45(1):347-55.

Defects of the body plan of mutant embryos lacking Lim1, Otx2 or Hnf3beta
activity.

Kinder SJ(1), Tsang TE, Ang SL, Behringer RR, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Wentworthville, NSW,
Australia.

The orientation of the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis was examined in
gastrula-stage Hnf3beta, Otx2 and Lim1 null mutant embryos that display defective
axis development. In situ hybridization analysis of the expression pattern of
genes associated with the posterior germ layer tissues and the primitive streak
(T, Wnt3 and Fgf8) and anterior endoderm (Cer1 and Sox17) revealed that the A-P
axis of mutant embryos remains aligned with the proximo-distal plane of the
gastrula. Further analysis revealed that cells which express Chrd activity are
either absent in Hnf3beta mutant embryos or localised in heterotopic sites in
Lim1 and Otx2 null mutants. Lim1-expressing cells are present in the Hnf3beta
mutant embryo albeit in heterotopic sites. In all three mutants, Gsc-expressing
cells are missing from the anterior mesendoderm. These findings suggest that
although some cells with organizer activity may be present in the mutant embryo, 
they are not properly localised and fail to contribute to the axial mesoderm of
the head. By contrast, in T/T mutant embryos that display normal head fold
development, the expression domains of organizer, primitive streak and anterior
endoderm genes are regionalised correctly in the gastrula.

PMID: 11291865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mech Dev. 2001 Apr;102(1-2):57-66.

Identification of essential sequence motifs in the node/notochord enhancer of
Foxa2 (Hnf3beta) gene that are conserved across vertebrate species.

Nishizaki Y(1), Shimazu K, Kondoh H, Sasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Osaka University, 1-3 Yamada-oka, Suita, 565-0871, Osaka, Japan.

The expression of a winged-helix transcription factor, Foxa2/HNF3beta, is
essential for development of the node and the notochord. We examined the
node/notochord enhancer of mouse Foxa2 for sequence motifs conserved across
vertebrate species. We cloned Foxa2 genes from chicken and fish, and identified
the respective node/notochord enhancers that were active in transgenic mouse
embryos. Comparison of the sequences of the enhancers revealed three
evolutionally conserved sequence motifs, CS1, CS2 and CS3. Mutational analysis of
the mouse enhancer indicated that CS3 is indispensable for gene expression in the
node and the notochord, while CS1 and CS2 are required to augment enhancer
activity. These motifs do not correspond to the consensus binding sequences of
transcription factors known to be involved in node/notochord development.

PMID: 11287181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Teratology. 2001 Mar;63(3):119-26.

Mutation analysis of left-right axis determining genes in NOD and ICR, strains
susceptible to maternal diabetes.

Maeyama K(1), Kosaki R, Yoshihashi H, Casey B, Kosaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Genetic background of the fetus contributes to the pathogenesis of
congenital malformation after teratogen exposure. Such contribution is
illustrated in left-right axis malformations observed in the F1 offspring of
nonobese diabetic (NOD) mouse dams and sires from different strains. When sires
of the NOD, ICR, or C57BL/6J were mated with NOD dams, incidence varied depending
on the fetal genotype, with 65% in NOD x NOD, 24% in NOD x ICR, and 7% in NOD x
C57BL/6J.
METHODS: As a first step in elucidating the molecular basis of the interstrain
differences in susceptibility to situs defects, we compared genomic sequences of 
six genes HNF3beta, Acvr2b, Nodal, ZIC3, Lefty1, and Smad2, which are involved in
the normal development of left-right axis among NOD, ICR, and C57BL/6J strains.
RESULTS: The outbred strain ICR had 1) a 0.2-kb insertion in the putative
promoter region of the isoform E of HNF3beta together with a G to A change that
could create a potential splice acceptor in the exon 3 of HNF3beta (gene
frequency P = 0.36), 2) five single base substitutions within the 5' controlling 
element and a proline to serine substitution (P2S) of Lefty1 (P = 0.77), and 3) a
tyrosine to histidine substitution within the prodomain of Nodal (P = 0.48). The 
inbred strain NOD had the same G to A change as ICR and a three-base deletion in 
the putative promoter of isoform E of HNF3beta.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that sequence variations in HNF3beta, Lefty1, and Nodal
might account, in part, for the interstrain differences in susceptibility to
situs abnormalities among the offspring of diabetic dams.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11283968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 18;276(20):17533-40. Epub 2001 Feb 5.

A pancreatic beta -cell-specific enhancer in the human PDX-1 gene is regulated by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (HNF-3beta ), HNF-1alpha, and SPs transcription
factors.

Ben-Shushan E(1), Marshak S, Shoshkes M, Cerasi E, Melloul D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical
Center, 91120 Jerusalem, Israel.

The PDX-1 transcription factor plays a key role in pancreas development. Although
expressed in all cells at the early stages, in the adult it is mainly restricted 
to the beta-cell. To characterize the regulatory elements and potential
transcription factors necessary for human PDX-1 gene expression in beta-cells, we
constructed a series of 5' and 3' deletion fragments of the 5'-flanking region of
the gene, fused to the luciferase reporter gene. In this report, we identify by
transient transfections in beta- and non-beta-cells a novel beta-cell-specific
distal enhancer element located between -3.7 and -3.45 kilobases. DNase I
footprinting analysis revealed two protected regions, one binding the
transcription factors SP1 and SP3 and the other hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta
(HNF-3beta) and HNF-1alpha. Cotransfection experiments suggest that HNF-3beta,
HNF-1alpha, and SP1 are positive regulators of the herein-described human PDX-1
enhancer element. Furthermore, mutations within each motif abolished the binding 
of the corresponding factor(s) and dramatically impaired the enhancer activity,
therefore suggesting cooperativity between these factors.

PMID: 11278466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Diabetes. 2001 Feb;50 Suppl 1:S37-8.

Regulatory elements involved in human pdx-1 gene expression.

Marshak S(1), Ben-Shushan E, Shoshkes M, Havin L, Cerasi E, Melloul D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hadassah University Hospital,
Jerusalem, Israel.

PDX-1 was shown to be expressed early during development in cells of both
exocrine and endocrine origin; later it becomes restricted primarily to
beta-cells where it regulates the expression of beta-cell-specific genes and
mediates the glucose effect on insulin gene transcription. Therefore, it was
important to identify the molecular mechanisms that specifically govern the
expression of pdx-1 in the mature beta-cell. To address this question, we
analyzed 7 kb of the 5' flanking region of the human pdx-1 gene. By transient
transfections of beta- and non-beta-cell lines with different 5' and 3' deletions
of that region, a strong beta-cell-specific enhancer element located between
-3.71 and 3.46 kb was revealed. We also sequenced about 4.5 kb of the human 5'
flanking region and compared it with that of the mouse pdx-1 gene. This
comparison revealed three short conserved regions, designated PH1, PH2, and PH3. 
We showed that HNF-3beta can bind and stimulate the activity of the human PH1 and
PH2 elements in non-beta-cells. Results reported by Wu et al. (7) and Sharma et
al. (6) also indicate that expression of the mouse pdx-1 is controlled by an
HNF-3-like element. Thus, it can be stated that at least some aspects of pdx-1
expression rely on the transcription factor HNF-3beta. Because HNF-3beta is not
restricted to beta-cells, the selective transcription of pdx-1 is likely to rely 
on additional factors. Our findings that the PH1 enhancer element binds both
HNF-3beta and PDX-1 and that mutations in each individual site dramatically
impair its transcriptional activity suggest that these factors cooperate with one
another. We therefore propose that a possible feedback mechanism might control
the expression of pdx-1 at different stages during development.

PMID: 11272196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Diabetes. 2001 Mar;50(3):502-14.

Characterization of the mouse islet-specific glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic
subunit-related protein gene promoter by in situ footprinting: correlation with
fusion gene expression in the islet-derived betaTC-3 and hamster insulinoma tumor
cell lines.

Bischof LJ(1), Martin CC, Svitek CA, Stadelmaier BT, Hornbuckle LA, Goldman JK,
Oeser JK, Hutton JC, O'Brien RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0615, USA.

Glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) is a multicomponent system located in the
endoplasmic reticulum comprising a catalytic subunit and transporters for
glucose-6-phosphate, inorganic phosphate, and glucose. We have recently cloned a 
novel gene that encodes an islet-specific G6Pase catalytic subunit-related
protein (IGRP) (Ebert et al., Diabetes 48:543-551, 1999). To begin to investigate
the molecular basis for the islet-specific expression of the IGRP gene, a series 
of truncated IGRP-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) fusion genes were
transiently transfected into the islet-derived mouse betaTC-3 and hamster
insulinoma tumor cell lines. In both cell lines, basal fusion gene expression
decreased upon progressive deletion of the IGRP promoter sequence between -306
and -66, indicating that multiple promoter regions are required for maximal
IGRP-CAT expression. The ligation-mediated polymerase chain reaction footprinting
technique was then used to compare trans-acting factor binding to the IGRP
promoter in situ in betaTC-3 cells, which express the endogenous IGRP gene, and
adrenocortical Y1 cells, which do not. Multiple trans-acting factor binding sites
were selectively identified in betaTC-3 cells that correlate with regions of the 
IGRP promoter identified as being required for basal IGRP-CAT fusion gene
expression. The data suggest that hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 may be important
for basal IGRP gene expression, as it is for glucagon, GLUT2, and Pdx-1 gene
expression. In addition, binding sites for several trans-acting factors not
previously associated with islet gene expression, as well as binding sites for
potentially novel proteins, were identified.

PMID: 11246869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. DNA Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;20(2):67-74.

HNF-3 beta, C/EBP beta, and HNF-4 act in synergy to enhance transcription of the 
human apolipoprotein B gene in intestinal cells.

Antes TJ(1), Levy-Wilson B.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, Palo Alto Medical Foundation, and Department of Medicine, 
Stanford University, Palo Alto, California, USA.

Recently, we identified a 315-bp intestinal enhancer (IE), localized over 55 kb
upstream from the transcriptional start of the human apolipoprotein B (apoB)
gene, that confers expression of human apoB transgenes in the intestines of mice.
Four functional binding sites for the intestine-enriched transcription factors
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3beta, CAAT enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)beta,
and HNF-4 were demonstrated within the 315-bp IE. In this report, we extend these
earlier studies and examine the relative contributions of these three
transcription factors to the activity of the enhancer as well as their mechanism 
of interaction with one another. Cotransfection experiments with the expression
vectors for HNF-3beta, C/EBPbeta, and HNF-4 revealed that HNF-3beta bound to Site
1, C/EBPbeta bound to Site 2, and HNF-4 bound to Site 3 within the 315-bp IE and 
that the sites act synergistically to enhance intestinal expression of apoB. Each
one of these four binding sites was mutated, and mutant constructs were
transfected into intestine-derived CaCo-2 cells to evaluate the role of each of
these binding sites in enhancer activity. The results of the mutagenesis
experiments confirmed that the HNF-3beta and HNF-4 sites are most important for
the enhancer activity, followed by C/EBPbeta Site 2. All three factors bound to
Sites 1, 2, and 3 must act synergistically for optimal activity of the apoB IE.

PMID: 11244563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2001 Apr;280(4):L695-704.

Differential expression of forkhead box transcription factors following butylated
hydroxytoluene lung injury.

Kalinichenko VV(1), Lim L, Shin B, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at Chicago, College
of Medicine, 900 S. Ashland Ave., Rm. 2220 MBRB, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.
vkalin@uic.edu

The forkhead box (Fox) proteins are a growing family of transcription factors
that have important roles in cellular proliferation and differentiation and in
organ morphogenesis. The Fox family members hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3beta
(Foxa2) and HNF-3/forkhead homolog (HFH)-8 (FREAC-1, Foxf1) are expressed in
adult pulmonary epithelial and mesenchymal cells, respectively, but these cells
display only low expression levels of the proliferation-specific HFH-11B gene
(Trident, Foxm1b). The regulation of these Fox transcription factors in response 
to acute lung injury, however, has yet to be determined. We report here on the
use of butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT)-mediated lung injury to demonstrate that
HFH-11 protein and RNA levels were markedly increased throughout the period of
lung repair. The maximum levels of HFH-11 were observed by day 2 following BHT
injury when both bronchiolar and alveolar epithelial cells were undergoing
extensive proliferation. Although BHT lung injury did not alter epithelial cell
expression of HNF-3beta, a 65% reduction in HFH-8 mRNA levels was observed during
the period of mesenchymal cell proliferation. HFH-8-expressing cells were
colocalized with platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1-positive alveolar 
endothelial cells and with alpha-smooth muscle actin-positive peribronchiolar
smooth muscle cells.

PMID: 11238010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Development. 2001 Mar;128(6):871-81.

A bipotential precursor population for pancreas and liver within the embryonic
endoderm.

Deutsch G(1), Jung J, Zheng M, Lóra J, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, RI 02912, USA.

The pancreas emerges independently from dorsal and ventral domains of embryonic
gut endoderm. Gene inactivation experiments in mice have identified factors
required for dorsal pancreas development, but factors that initiate the ventral
pancreas have remained elusive. In this study, we investigated the hypothesis
that the emergence of the ventral pancreas is related to the emergence of the
liver. We find that the liver and ventral pancreas are specified at the same time
and in the same general domain of cells. Using embryo tissue explantation
experiments, we find that the default fate of the ventral foregut endoderm is to 
activate the pancreas gene program. FGF signalling from the cardiac mesoderm
diverts this endoderm to express genes for liver instead of those for pancreas.
No evidence was found to indicate that the cell type choice for pancreas or liver
involves a selection for growth or viability. Cardiac mesoderm or FGF induces the
local expression of sonic hedgehog, which in turn is inhibitory to pancreas but
not to liver. The bipotential precursor cell population for pancreas and liver in
embryonic development and its fate selection by FGF has features that appear to
be recapitulated in the adult pancreas and are reflected in the evolution of
these organs.

PMID: 11222142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Feb 13;98(4):1841-6. Epub 2001 Feb 6.

Transcriptional regulation of hepatitis B virus by nuclear hormone receptors is a
critical determinant of viral tropism.

Tang H(1), McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

Hepatotropism is a prominent feature of hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. Cell
lines of nonhepatic origin do not independently support HBV replication. Here, we
show that the nuclear hormone receptors, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 and retinoid
X receptor alpha plus peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha, support
HBV replication in nonhepatic cells by controlling pregenomic RNA synthesis,
indicating these liver-enriched transcription factors control a unique molecular 
switch restricting viral tropism. In contrast, hepatocyte nuclear factor 3
antagonizes nuclear hormone receptor-mediated viral replication, demonstrating
distinct regulatory roles for these liver-enriched transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC29344
PMID: 11172038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Eur J Biochem. 2001 Feb;268(3):781-91.

Atypical binding of the neuronal POU protein N-Oct3 to noncanonical DNA targets. 
Implications for heterodimerization with HNF-3 beta.

Millevoi S(1), Thion L, Joseph G, Vossen C, Ghisolfi-Nieto L, Erard M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie et de Biologie Structurale, CNRS, Toulouse, France.

The capacity of POU proteins to recognize different DNA sequences and to bind
target DNA in the form of monomers, cooperative dimers or heterodimers is
important in relation to their transcriptional regulatory properties. The N-Oct3 
neuron-specific protein binds to an octamer-like sequence (AAATAATGC) within the 
(-102/-72) neuronal promoter region of the human aromatic L-amino acid
decarboxylase (AADC) gene. In this atypical case the POUh and POUs tetrameric
subsites are spaced one nucleotide apart and in switched order as compared with
the consensus octamer. Moreover this POU binding motif overlaps the hepatocyte
nuclear factor HNF-3 beta binding site (TGCTCAGTAAA) which itself contains a
heptamer-like sequence (CTCAGTA). Using the isolated DNA binding domains (DBD) of
the two proteins, it is shown that, when binding to this unusual recognition
sequence, N-Oct3 either exhibits noncooperative homodimerization or allows the
simultaneous binding of the second transcription activator HNF-3 beta. CD studies
indicate that the binding of N-Oct3 monomers/dimers and N-Oct3-HNF-3 beta
heterodimers to the DNA induces conformational changes of both protein and DNA.
Partial proteolysis/MALDI-MS was used in conjunction with molecular modelling to 
show that the protein conformational change resulting from binary N-Oct3/DNA
complex formation occurs within the linker peptide joining the POUs and POUh
subdomains. Furthermore, modelling the N-Oct3/HNF-3 beta/DNA ternary complex
predicts a nucleotide rearrangement in the overlap region and an interaction
between both transcription factors. In the light of our findings, which
illustrate both site-dependent and site-independent protein and DNA
conformational changes, general implications for the allosteric function of DNA
response elements in transcriptional regulation are discussed.

PMID: 11168419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 20;276(16):13136-44. Epub 2001 Jan 5.

The mouse fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF) gene promoter is regulated by
three GATA elements with tandem E box and Nkx motifs, and FTF in turn activates
the Hnf3beta, Hnf4alpha, and Hnf1alpha gene promoters.

Pare JF(1), Roy S, Galarneau L, Belanger L.

Author information: 
(1)Le Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, L'Hôtel-Dieu de 
Québec, Département de Biologie Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Québec G1R 2J6,
Canada.

Fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF) is an orphan nuclear receptor that
activates the alpha(1)-fetoprotein gene during early liver developmental growth. 
Here we sought to define better the position of FTF in transcriptional cascades
leading to hepatic differentiation. The mouse FTF gene was isolated and assigned 
to chromosome 1 band E4 (one mFTF pseudogene was also found). Exon/intron mapping
shows an mFTF gene structure similar to that of its close homologue SF1, with two
more N-terminal exons in the mFTF gene; exon mapping also delimits several FTF
mRNA 5'- and 3'-splice variants. The mFTF transcription initiation site was
located in adult liver at 238 nucleotides from the first translation initiator
codon, with six canonical GATA, E box, and Nkx motifs clustered between -50/-140 
base pairs (bp) from the cap site; DNA/protein binding assays also pinpointed an 
HNF4-binding element at +36 bp and an FTF-binding element at -257 bp.
Transfection assays and point mutations showed that the mFTF promoter is
activated by GATA, HNF4alpha, FTF, Nkx, and basic helix-loop-helix factors, with 
marked cooperativity between GATA and HNF4alpha. A tandem GATA/E box activatory
motif in the proximal mFTF promoter is strikingly similar to a composite motif
coactivated by differentiation inducers in the hematopoietic lineage; a tandem
GATA-Nkx motif in the distal mFTF promoter is also similar to a composite motif
transducing differentiation signals from transforming growth factor-beta-like
receptors in the cardiogenic lineage. Three genes encoding transcription factors 
critical to early hepatic differentiation, Hnf3beta, Hnf4alpha, and Hnf1alpha,
each contain dual FTF-binding elements in their proximal promoters, and all three
promoters are activated by FTF in transfection assays. Direct DNA binding action 
and cooperativity was demonstrated between FTF and HNF3beta on the Hnf3beta
promoter and between FTF and HNF4alpha on the Hnf1alpha promoter. These combined 
results suggest that FTF is an early intermediary between endodermal
specification signals and downstream genes that establish and amplify the hepatic
phenotype.

PMID: 11145965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Mech Dev. 2001 Jan;100(1):37-43.

Pax4 regulatory elements mediate beta cell specific expression in the pancreas.

Brink C(1), Chowdhury K, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077
Göttingen, Germany.

Pax4 is a member of the Pax (Pax, paired box) family of transcription factors
with restricted expression and essential functions in the developing pancreas.
Pax4 deficient mice do not develop pancreatic beta and delta cells and thus die
after birth due to diabetes. In this study using transgenic mouse technology we
report the identification and characterization of a 0.9 kb DNA fragment in the
5'-region of the gene, which by itself is able to direct Pax4 expression in the
endocrine pancreas, recapitulating the beta-cell-specific in vivo expression
pattern of Pax4. The 0.9 kb DNA fragment contains an area spanning 407 base pairs
that is highly conserved between human and mouse showing 88% identity. This
promoter region contains sequence motifs that have been shown to be involved in
beta-cell-specific expression of insulin, Pdx1 and islet amyloid polypeptide
(IAPP). In addition, we determined a previously undescribed 5'intron.

PMID: 11118882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Hepatology. 2000 Dec;32(6):1377-85.

The promoter of the long variant of collagen XVIII, the precursor of endostatin, 
contains liver-specific regulatory elements.

Liétard J(1), Théret N, Rehn M, Musso O, Dargère D, Pihlajaniemi T, Clément B.

Author information: 
(1)Detoxication and Tissue Repair Unit, INSERM U-456, Université de Rennes I,
France.

The endostatin precursor collagen XVIII is expressed at high levels in human
livers, the main source being hepatocytes. We have studied the regulatory
elements in the promoter 2 of the Col18a1 gene that directs the transcription of 
the NC1-517 variant of collagen alpha1(XVIII), which is the main form expressed
in the liver. The 5'-flanking region of Col18a1 gene was cloned, and a series of 
5'-deletions from -3286 bp to +285 bp were linked to the luciferase reporter
gene. Transfection experiments in HepG2 cells allowed to identify a silencer-like
element containing putative HNF1 and HNF3 sites and activator elements containing
stretches of GC-rich sequences. Another putative HNF3 site in close apposition to
a NF1/CTF site was localized upstream of the silencer-like element.
Cotransfection experiments showed that the Col18a1 promoter 2 was transactivated 
by Sp1 and HNF3alpha. Gel-shift analyses showed that HNF3, NF1/CTF, and Sp1-like 
sites specifically recognized nuclear factors. Super-shift experiments indicated 
that HNF3beta was the major form of HNF3 interacting with the HNF3/NF1 site. The 
well-differentiated hepatoma cell line mhATFS315 transfected with a truncated
form of HNF3beta, which competitively blocks HNF3 transactivating activity,
expressed the Col18a1gene at a very low level. Taken together, these data
strongly suggest that Col18a1 is a liver-specific gene. Furthermore, gel-shift
analyses performed with nuclear factors prepared from well-differentiated
hepatocellular carcinomas showed increased HNF3/NF1 binding activity compared
with normal livers. Consequently, the precursor of endostatin might be
differently expressed according to the differentiated and/or transformed state of
hepatocytes.

PMID: 11093745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Development. 2001 Jan;128(1):125-35.

Multiple roles for Gata5 in zebrafish endoderm formation.

Reiter JF(1), Kikuchi Y, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0448, USA.

Previous studies have indicated that gata5, a zinc-finger transcription factor
gene, is required for the development of the zebrafish gut tube. Here, we show
that gata5 mutants also display defects in the development of other endodermal
organs such as the liver, pancreas, thyroid and thymus. gata5 is expressed in the
endodermal progenitors from late blastula stages, suggesting that it functions
early during endoderm development. We indeed find that during gastrulation
stages, gata5 mutants form fewer endodermal cells than their wild-type siblings. 
In addition, the endodermal cells that form in gata5 mutants appear to express
lower than wild-type levels of endodermal genes such as sox17 and axial/foxA2.
Conversely, overexpression of gata5 leads to expanded endodermal gene expression.
These data indicate that Gata5 is involved both in the generation of endodermal
cells at late blastula stages and in the maintenance of endodermal sox17
expression during gastrulation. We have also analyzed the relationship of Gata5
to other factors involved in endoderm formation. Using complementary mutant and
overexpression analyses, we show that Gata5 regulates endoderm formation in
cooperation with the Mix-type transcription factor Bon, that Gata5 and Bon
function downstream of Nodal signaling, and that cas function is usually required
for the activity of Gata5 in endoderm formation. Finally, we show that fau/gata5,
bon and cas exhibit dominant genetic interactions providing additional support
that they function in the same pathway. Together, these data demonstrate that
Gata5 plays multiple roles in endoderm development in zebrafish, and position
Gata5 relative to other regulators of endoderm formation.

PMID: 11092818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Development. 2000 Nov;127(22):4915-23.

Repressive and restrictive mesodermal interactions with gut endoderm: possible
relation to Meckel's Diverticulum.

Bossard P(1), Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
PA 19111, USA.

The midgut and hindgut endoderm of the mouse embryo give rise to the intestinal
epithelium, yet it is not known how the intestinal program is chosen in contrast 
to other endoderm-derived cell types. Previous tissue explant studies with
embryos at 8.5 to 11.5 days gestation (d) showed that when the gut mesoderm is
removed from the prospective intestinal endoderm, the endoderm activates the
expression of liver-specific genes such as serum albumin, demonstrating the
endoderm's pluripotence. This reversible repression of liver genes does not
affect the expression of the endodermal transcription factors HNF3 and GATA4, nor
these factors' ability to engage target sites in chromatin. We have now found
that at 13.5 d, the mesoderm gains a second inhibitory activity, resulting in the
irreversible loss of expression of HNF3 (Foxa2) and GATA factors in the endoderm 
and the absence of factors binding to their target sites in chromatin. The second
inhibitory activity causes the endoderm to lose the potential to activate a liver
gene, and this restriction precedes the normal cytodifferentiation of the
intestinal epithelium. In summary, two inhibitory interactions with mesoderm
successively restrict the developmental potential of the gut endoderm, leading to
intestinal differentiation. We also observed rare gut bud structures in
midgestation embryos that appear to represent murine examples of Meckel's
Diverticulum, a congenital abnormality in human development. The absence of
restrictive mesodermal interactions could explain how Meckel's diverticula
express diverse non-intestinal, endoderm-derived cell types.

PMID: 11044405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Diabetologia. 2000 Sep;43(9):1197-200.

Identification of missense mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta gene 
in Japanese subjects with late-onset Type II diabetes mellitus.

Zhu Q(1), Yamagata K, Yu L, Tomura H, Yamada S, Yang Q, Yoshiuchi I, Sumi S,
Miyagawa J, Takeda J, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka University, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3beta, a transcription factor
expressed in pancreatic beta cells, is an upstream regulator of HNF-1alpha/MODY3,
HNF-4alpha/MODY1 and IPF1/MODY5 genes. Our previous screening of MODY subjects
showed that mutations in the HNF-3beta gene are not a common cause of this form
of diabetes in the Japanese. We tested the hypothesis that mutations in the
HNF-3beta gene cause late-onset Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus
in this population.
METHODS: Genotyping of the polymorphic TCC repeat in the HNF-3beta gene was done 
in 112 Japanese subjects with Type II diabetes (age at diagnosis > 35 and family 
history of Type II diabetes among their second-degree relatives) and 96 Japanese 
control subjects. Furthermore, we screened 57 Type II diabetic patients for
mutations of the HNF-3beta gene. Transactivation activity of variant HNF-3beta
was investigated by transfection assay.
RESULTS: The distribution of alleles of the TCC repeat was similar between
diabetic and control groups. Mutation screening identified two missense
mutations, A86T and G114E. Neither mutation was observed in 225 control subjects.
The transactivation activity of G114E-HNF-3beta was similar to that of wild
typeHNF-3beta. In contrast, the activity of A86T-HNF-3beta was statistically
significantly reduced to 83-86 % of that of wild type.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The A86T mutation in the HNF-3beta gene might be
involved in the development of late-onset Type II diabetes in a small group of
Japanese people.

PMID: 11043867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Nov;20(21):8264-82.

Elevated levels of hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta in mouse hepatocytes influence
expression of genes involved in bile acid and glucose homeostasis.

Rausa FM(1), Tan Y, Zhou H, Yoo KW, Stolz DB, Watkins SC, Franks RR, Unterman TG,
Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular Genetics, Medicine, Physiology, and Biophysics,
College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60607-7170, USA.

The winged helix transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta
(HNF-3beta), mediates the hepatocyte-specific transcription of numerous genes
important for liver function. However, the in vivo role of HNF-3beta in
regulating these genes remains unknown because homozygous null HNF3beta mouse
embryos die in utero prior to liver formation. In order to examine the regulatory
function of HNF-3beta, we created transgenic mice in which the -3-kb
transthyretin promoter functions to increase hepatocyte expression of the rat
HNF-3beta protein. Postnatal transgenic mice exhibit growth retardation,
depletion of hepatocyte glycogen storage, and elevated levels of bile acids in
serum. The retarded growth phenotype is likely due to a 20-fold increase in
hepatic expression of insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP-1),
which results in elevated levels in serum of IGFBP-1 and limits the biological
availability of IGFs required for postnatal growth. The defects in glycogen
storage and serum bile acids coincide with diminished postnatal expression of
hepatocyte genes involved in gluconeogenesis (phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
and glycogen synthase) and sinusoidal bile acid uptake (Ntcp), respectively.
These changes in gene transcription may result from the disruptive effect of
HNF-3beta on the hepatic expression of the endogenous mouse HNF-3alpha,-3beta,
-3gamma, and -6 transcription factors. Furthermore, adult transgenic livers lack 
expression of the canalicular phospholipid transporter, mdr2, which is consistent
with ultrastructure evidence of damage to transgenic hepatocytes and bile
canaliculi. These transgenic studies represent the first in vivo demonstration
that the HNF-3beta transcriptional network regulates expression of
hepatocyte-specific genes required for bile acid and glucose homeostasis, as well
as postnatal growth.

PMCID: PMC86435
PMID: 11027295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Endocrinol. 2000 Oct;167(1):R1-5.

Gene expression of the three members of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 is
differentially regulated by nutritional and hormonal factors.

Imae M(1), Inoue Y, Fu Z, Kato H, Noguchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8657 Japan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) belongs to a large family of forkhead
transcription factors and is made up of three members (HNF-3alpha, -3beta and
-3gamma). It has been shown that HNF-3 regulates a number of metabolically
important genes. However, the mechanisms underlying this regulation of HNF-3
activity by hormones and nutrition have not yet been well elucidated. In
attempting to explore the regulation of gene expression of HNF-3 members by
physiological status, we analyzed the effects of insulin, dexamethasone and
protein malnutrition on the hepatic mRNA level of each member. Male Wistar rats
were fed on a 12% casein diet, 12% gluten diet (deficient in lysine and
threonine) or a protein-free diet for 1 week. The protein-free diet and gluten
diet caused a 3. 7-fold increase in HNF-3g mRNA in the liver and did not affect
the mRNA level of either HNF-3alpha or HNF-3beta. Daily administration of
dexamethasone caused the mRNA levels of HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta to increase
(2.3- and 1.4-fold, respectively), but had no effect on the HNF-3gamma mRNA
level. In diabetic rats that had been injected with streptozotocin, an elevation 
of the hepatic mRNA levels of HNF-3beta and HNF-3gamma was observed (1.6-and
1.9-fold, respectively). Insulin replacement in the diabetic rats decreased both 
mRNA levels in a dose-dependent manner. HNF-3alpha mRNA was not affected by
insulin status. These results show that the genes of the three members of the
HNF-3 family respond differently to hormonal and nutritional factors suggesting
that the activities of HNF-3 members are regulated, at least in part, by the
levels of their gene expression.

PMID: 11018767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(20):7583-90.

Functional conservation of regulatory elements in the pdx-1 gene: PDX-1 and
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta transcription factors mediate beta-cell-specific 
expression.

Marshak S(1), Benshushan E, Shoshkes M, Havin L, Cerasi E, Melloul D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology & Metabolism, Hadassah University Hospital, 91120 
Jerusalem, Israel.

The PDX-1 transcription factor plays a key role in pancreatic development and in 
the regulation of the insulin gene in the adult beta cell. As its functions
appear to be similar in humans and mice, we analyzed the functional conservation 
of homologous sequences important for the maintenance and the cell-specific
regulation of the pdx-1 gene. Apart from the proximal promoter region, three
highly homologous (PH1 to PH3) sequences were apparent in the human and mouse 5' 
flanking regions of the gene. By transient transfections in beta and non-beta
cells, we show that mainly PH1 and PH2 preferentially confer beta-cell-specific
activation on a heterologous promoter. DNase I footprinting and binding analyses 
revealed that both bind to and are transactivated by hepatocyte nuclear factor
3beta (HNF-3beta). Furthermore, the PH1 enhancer element also binds the PDX-1
transcription factor itself, which acts cooperatively with adjacent HNF-3beta to 
regulate its transcriptional potency. This finding suggests a possible
autoregulatory loop as a mechanism for PDX-1 to control its own expression.

PMCID: PMC86312
PMID: 11003654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Diabetes. 2000 Feb;49(2):306-8.

Genetic variation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta gene (HNF3B) does not
contribute to maturity-onset diabetes of the young in French Caucasians.

Abderrahmani A(1), Chèvre JC, Otabe S, Chikri M, Hani EH, Vaxillaire M, Hinokio
Y, Horikawa Y, Bell GI, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Propre de Recherche de l'Enseignement Supérieur Associée au Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS UPRES-A) 8090, Institut de Biologie
de Lille, France.

Mutations in genes encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) are responsible for
three of the five subtypes of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). This
observation and molecular studies indicate that the HNF network is required for
normal function of pancreatic beta-cells. This suggests that transcription
factors involved in this complex network are candidates for genetic defects in
MODY. Because the HNF-3beta gene is implicated in this network, we screened it
for mutations in 21 probands of French ancestry with clinical diagnosis of MODY
and early-onset type 2 diabetes. All of the five known MODY genes, HNF-4alpha,
glucokinase, HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta, and IPF1, were previously excluded as being
the cause of diabetes in these families. By direct sequencing, we identified two 
transitions, an A-to-G at position -213 and a C-to-T at position -63 in the
promoter and exon 1, respectively, of the HNF-3beta gene. A G-to-C transversion
at position +32 in the intron 1 and three transitions, C-to-T at position 291,
A-to-G at position 837, and G-to-A at position 1188 in the exon 3, resulting in
noncoding mutations Ala97Ala, Gly279Gly, and Gln396Gln, respectively, were also
identified. The allele frequencies were not significantly different between a
control group and MODY probands. Familial segregation studies and linkage
analysis showed that genetic variation in the HNF-3beta gene is unlikely to be
the cause of early-onset type 2 diabetes in these Caucasian families.

PMID: 10868949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Diabetes. 2000 Feb;49(2):302-5.

Beta-cell transcription factors and diabetes: no evidence for diabetes-associated
mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta gene (HNF3B) in Japanese
patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Hinokio Y(1), Horikawa Y, Furuta H, Cox NJ, Iwasaki N, Honda M, Ogata M, Iwamoto 
Y, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Mutations in the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha and
-1alpha, insulin promoter factor-1, and HNF-1beta are the causes of four forms of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1 and 3-5, respectively). The
winged-helix transcription factor HNF-3beta has been implicated in the regulation
of expression of each of these MODY genes, suggesting that mutations in the
HNF-3beta gene (HNF3B) may also cause MODY. We have tested this hypothesis by
screening a panel of 57 unrelated Japanese subjects with a clinical diagnosis of 
MODY for mutations in HNF3B. This analysis revealed four frequent polymorphisms
that were not associated with MODY, including one in the promoter region
(-213A/G), two silent mutations in the codons for Ala 97 (291C/T) and Gly 279
(837A/G), and one in the 3'-untranslated region (1424C/T). Two rare substitutions
in the 5'-untranslated region, -156C/T and -67A/C, were found in a heterozygous
state in two subjects, and two subjects were heterozygous for putative missense
mutations, S109N (326G > A) and A328V (983C>T). The two missense mutations were
not found in 106 normal chromosomes from nondiabetic subjects. It was not
possible to test for co-segregation of these mutations with diabetes and thus, it
is unclear whether or not these mutations can cause MODY. The results of our
study suggest that mutations in HNF3B are not a common cause of MODY in Japanese 
subjects.

PMID: 10868948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Diabetes Care. 2000 Mar;23(3):302-4.

Mutations in the genes for hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, -4alpha,
-1beta, and -3beta; the dimerization cofactor of HNF-1; and insulin promoter
factor 1 are not common causes of early-onset type 2 diabetes in Pima Indians.

Baier LJ(1), Permana PA, Traurig M, Dobberfuhl A, Wiedrich C, Sutherland J,
Thuillez P, Luczy-Bachman G, Hara M, Horikawa Y, Hinokio Y, Hanson RL, Bogardus
C.

Author information: 
(1)Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical Research Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Arizona 85016, USA. lbaier@phx.niddk.nih.gov

OBJECTIVE: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically
heterogeneous subtype of type 2 diabetes characterized by an early age at onset
and autosomal dominant inheritance. MODY can result from heterozygous mutations
in at least five genes. The purpose of this study was to determine whether
alterations in known MODY genes and two MODY candidate genes contribute to the
development of early-onset type 2 diabetes in Pima Indians.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The coding regions of the known MODY genes
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-4alpha, HNF-1beta, and insulin
promoter factor 1 and the coding regions of two MODY candidate genes, HNF-3beta
and the dimerization cofactor of HNF-1, were sequenced in genomic DNA from Pima
Indians. The primary "affected" study population consisted of 46 Pima Indians
whose age at onset of type 2 diabetes was < or =20 years. DNA sequence variants
identified in the affected group were then analyzed in a group of 80 "unaffected"
Pima Indians who were at least 40 years old and had normal glucose tolerance.
RESULTS: A total of 11 polymorphisms were detected in these genes. However, none 
of the polymorphisms differed in frequency among Pima Indians with an early age
at onset of diabetes compared with older Pima Indians with normal glucose
tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in these known MODY or MODY candidate genes are not a
common cause of early-onset diabetes in Pima Indians.

PMID: 10868855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Jul;20(14):5175-83.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (Foxa2) is dispensable for maintaining the
differentiated state of the adult hepatocyte.

Sund NJ(1), Ang SL, Sackett SD, Shen W, Daigle N, Magnuson MA, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6145, USA.

Liver-specific gene expression is controlled by a heterogeneous group of
hepatocyte-enriched transcription factors. One of these, the winged helix
transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (HNF3beta or Foxa2) is
essential for multiple stages of embryonic development. Recently, HNF3beta has
been shown to be an important regulator of other hepatocyte-enriched
transcription factors as well as the expression of liver-specific structural
genes. We have addressed the role of HNF3beta in maintenance of the hepatocyte
phenotype by inactivation of HNF3beta in the liver. Remarkably, adult mice
lacking HNF3beta expression specifically in hepatocytes are viable, with
histologically normal livers and normal liver function. Moreover, analysis of
>8,000 mRNAs by array hybridization revealed that lack of HNF3beta affects the
expression of only very few genes. Based on earlier work it appears that HNF3beta
plays a critical role in early liver development; however, our studies
demonstrate that HNF3beta is not required for maintenance of the adult hepatocyte
or for normal liver function. This is the first example of such functional
dichotomy for a tissue specification transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC85966
PMID: 10866673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 25;275(34):26637-48.

Identification and characterization of a 315-base pair enhancer, located more
than 55 kilobases 5' of the apolipoprotein B gene, that confers expression in the
intestine.

Antes TJ(1), Goodart SA, Huynh C, Sullivan M, Young SG, Levy-Wilson B.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, Palo Alto Medical Foundation, Palo Alto, California 94301,
USA.

We recently reported that an 8-kilobase (kb) region, spanning from -54 to -62 kb 
5' of the human apolipoprotein B (apoB) gene, contains intestine-specific
regulatory elements that control apoB expression in the intestines of transgenic 
mice. In this study, we further localized the apoB intestinal control region to a
3-kb segment (-54 to -57 kb). DNaseI hypersensitivity studies uncovered a
prominent DNaseI hypersensitivity site, located within a 315-base pair (bp)
fragment at the 5'-end of the 3-kb segment, in transcriptionally active CaCo-2
cells but not in transcriptionally inactive HeLa cells. Transient transfection
experiments with CaCo-2 and HepG2 cells indicated that the 315-bp fragment
contained an intestine-specific enhancer, and analysis of the DNA sequence
revealed putative binding sites for the tissue-specific transcription factors
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4, and CAAT
enhancer-binding protein beta. Binding of these factors to the 315-bp enhancer
was demonstrated in gel retardation experiments. Transfection of deletion mutants
of the 315-bp enhancer revealed the relative contributions of these transcription
factors in the activity of the apoB intestinal enhancer. The corresponding
segment of the mouse apoB gene (located -40 to -83 kb 5' of the structural gene) 
exhibited a high degree of sequence conservation in the binding sites for the key
transcriptional activators and also exhibited enhancer activity in transient
transfection assays with CaCo-2 cells. In transgenic mouse expression studies,
the 315-bp enhancer conferred intestinal expression to human apoB transgenes.

PMID: 10859308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 May 22;9(9):1273-81.

A transcription-activating polymorphism in the ACHE promoter associated with
acute sensitivity to anti-acetylcholinesterases.

Shapira M(1), Tur-Kaspa I, Bosgraaf L, Livni N, Grant AD, Grisaru D, Korner M,
Ebstein RP, Soreq H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem 91904, Israel,

Hypersensitivity to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (anti-AChEs) causes severe
nervous system symptoms under low dose exposure. In search of direct genetic
origin(s) for this sensitivity, we studied six regions in the extended 22 kb
promoter of the ACHE gene in individuals who presented adverse responses to
anti-AChEs and in randomly chosen controls. Two contiguous mutations, a T-->A
substitution, disrupting a putative glucocorticoid response element, and a 4-bp
deletion, abolishing one of two adjacent HNF3 binding sites, were identified 17
kb upstream of the transcription start site. Allele frequencies for these
mutations were 0.006 and 0.012, respectively, in 333 individuals of various
ethnic origins, with a strong linkage between the deletion and the biochemically 
neutral H322N mutation in the coding region of ACHE. Heterozygous carriers of the
deletion included a proband who presented with acute hypersensitivity to the
anti-AChE pyridostigmine and another with unexplained excessive vomiting during a
fourth pregnancy following three spontaneous abortions. Electromobility shift
assays, transfection studies and measurements of AChE levels in immortalized
lymphocytes as well as in peripheral blood from both carriers and non-carriers,
revealed functional relevance for this mutation both in vitro and in vivo and
showed it to increase AChE expression, probably by alleviating competition
between the two hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 binding sites. Moreover,
AChE-overexpressing transgenic mice, unlike normal FVB/N mice, displayed
anti-AChE hypersensitivity and failed to transcriptionally induce AChE production
following exposure to anti-AChEs. Our findings point to promoter polymorphism(s) 
in the ACHE gene as the dominant susceptibility factor(s) for adverse responses
to exposure or to treatment with anti-AChEs.

PMID: 10814709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Biol Chem. 2000 May 12;275(19):14717-21.

The molecular physiology of hepatic nuclear factor 3 in the regulation of
gluconeogenesis.

Wang JC(1), Stafford JM, Scott DK, Sutherland C, Granner DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0615, USA.

Glucocorticoids stimulate gluconeogenesis by increasing the rate of transcription
of genes that encode gluconeogenic enzymes such as phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase. Previous studies have shown that
hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) is required as an accessory factor for several
glucocorticoid-stimulated genes, including PEPCK. Here, we show that
adenovirus-mediated expression of an HNF3beta protein with a deleted C-terminal
transactivation domain (HNF3betaDeltaC) reduces the glucocorticoid-induced
expression of the PEPCK and glucose-6-phosphatase genes in H4IIE hepatoma cells. 
Furthermore, expression of this truncated HNF3 protein results in a proportionate
reduction of glucocorticoid-stimulated glucose production from lactate and
pyruvate in these cells. The expression of HNF3betaDeltaN, in which the
N-terminal transactivation domain is deleted, does not exhibit any of these
effects. These results provide direct evidence that members of the HNF3 family
are required for proper regulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis. Modulation of the 
function of the HNF3 family of proteins might be used to reduce the excessive
hepatic production of glucose that is an important pathophysiologic feature of
diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 10799560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Gene. 2000 Apr 4;246(1-2):311-20.

HNF3beta and GATA-4 transactivate the liver-enriched homeobox gene, Hex.

Denson LA(1), McClure MH, Bogue CW, Karpen SJ, Jacobs HC.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. lee.denson@yale.edu

The orphan homeobox gene, Hex, has a limited domain of expression which includes 
the developing and adult mouse liver. Hex is expressed in the developing liver
coincident with the forkhead/winged helix transcription factor, Hepatocyte
Nuclear Factor 3beta (HNF3beta). Although preliminary characterization of the
mouse Hex promoter has recently been reported, the identity of the molecular
regulators that drive liver expression is not known. We hypothesized that
putative HNF3beta and GATA-4 elements within the Hex promoter would confer
liver-enriched expression. A series of Hex promoter-driven luciferase reporter
constructs were transfected in liver-derived HepG2 and fibroblast-like Cos
cells+/-HNF3beta or GATA expression plasmids. The Hex promoter region from nt
-235/+22 conferred basal activity in both HepG2 and Cos cells, with the region
from -103/+22 conferring liver-enriched activity. HNF3beta and GATA-4
transactivated the promoter via response elements located within nt -103/+22,
whereas Sp1 activated the -235/+22 construct. Mutation of the HNF3 element
significantly reduced promoter activity in HepG2 cells, whereas this element in
isolation conferred HNF3beta responsiveness to a heterologous promoter.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were performed to confirm transcription
factor:DNA binding. We conclude that HNF3beta and GATA-4 contribute to
liver-enriched expression of Hex.

PMID: 10767553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 16;275(24):18418-23.

Transducin-like enhancer of split proteins, the human homologs of Drosophila
groucho, interact with hepatic nuclear factor 3beta.

Wang JC(1), Waltner-Law M, Yamada K, Osawa H, Stifani S, Granner DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology & Biophysics, Vanderbilt University School 
of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0615, USA.

Members of the hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) family, including HNF3alpha,
HNF3beta, and HNF3gamma, play important roles in embryonic development, the
establishment of tissue-specific gene expression, and the regulation of gene
expression in differentiated tissues. We found, using the glutathione
S-transferase pull-down method, that the transducin-like Enhancer of split (TLE) 
proteins, which are the human homologs of Drosophila Groucho, directly associate 
with HNF3beta. Conserved region II of HNF3beta (amino acids 361-388) is
responsible for the interaction with TLE1. A mammalian two-hybrid assay was used 
to confirm that this interaction occurs in vivo. Overexpression of TLE1 in HepG2 
and HeLa cells decreases transactivation mediated through the C-terminal domain
of HNF3beta, and Grg5, a naturally occurring dominant negative form of
Groucho/TLE, also increases the transcriptional activity of this region of HNF3. 
These results lead us to suggest that TLE proteins could influence the expression
of mammalian genes regulated by HNF3.

PMID: 10748198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 16;275(24):18358-65.

Identification of transacting factors responsible for the tissue-specific
expression of human glucose transporter type 2 isoform gene. Cooperative role of 
hepatocyte nuclear factors 1alpha and 3beta.

Cha JY(1), Kim H, Kim KS, Hur MW, Ahn Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Institute of Genetic 
Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, 
Seoul 120-752, South Korea.

We investigated transacting factors binding to the cis-element important in
tissue-specific expression of the human glucose transporter type 2 isoform
(GLUT2) gene. By transient transfection assay, we determined that the 227-base
pair fragment upstream of the ATG start site contained promoter activity and that
the region from +87 to +132 (site C) was responsible for tissue-specific
expression. DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
indicated that site C contained one binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 
(HNF1) and two binding sites for HNF3. The mutations at positions +101 and +103, 
which are considered to be critical in binding HNF1 and HNF3, resulted in a 53%
decrease in promoter activity, whereas the mutation of the proximal HNF3 binding 
site (+115 and +117) reduced promoter activity by 28%. The mutations of these
four sites resulted in marked decrease (70%) in promoter activity as well as
diminished bindings of HNF1 and HNF3. A to G mutation, which causes conversion of
the HNF1 and HNF3 binding sequence to the NF-Y binding site, resulted in a 22%
decrease in promoter activity. We identified that both HNF1 and HNF3 function as 
transcriptional activators in GLUT2 gene expression. Coexpression of the pGL+74
(+74 to +301) construct with the HNF1alpha and HNF3beta expression vectors in NIH
3T3 cells showed the synergistic effect on GLUT2 promoter activity compared with 
the expression of HNF1alpha, HNF3beta, or a combination of HNF1beta and HNF3beta.
These data suggest that HNF1alpha and HNF3beta may be the most important players 
in the tissue-specific expression of the human GLUT2 gene.

PMID: 10748140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Diabetologia. 2000 Jan;43(1):121-4.

Cloning of cDNA and the gene encoding human hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3
beta and mutation screening in Japanese subjects with maturity-onset diabetes of 
the young.

Yamada S(1), Zhu Q, Aihara Y, Onda H, Zhang Z, Yu L, Jin L, Si YJ, Nishigori H,
Tomura H, Inoue I, Morikawa A, Yamagata K, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Gunma University, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Molecular defects of the genes for transcription factors,
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 alpha, HNF-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta and insulin
promoter factor-1 cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1, 3, 5, and 4,
respectively). This suggests the HNF-related transcription cascade is important
in insulin secretion which is induced by glucose. These genes and the gene
encoding glycolytic enzyme glucokinase (MODY2) are, however, responsible for only
15-20% of cases of MODY in the Japanese. Searching for a novel form of MODY in
this population, we cloned a new candidate gene encoding human HNF-3 beta, a
winged helix transcription factor, which also belongs to the same
HNF-transcription cascade.
METHODS: The cDNA clone for human HNF-3 beta was isolated from a liver cDNA
library. The gene was also cloned from a genomic library and its organization and
chromosomal localization were determined. We screened 68 Japanese subjects with
MODY/early-onset diabetes for mutations in this gene.
RESULTS: Human HNF-3 beta is composed of 457 amino acids. The human gene, which
was mapped to the segment 30 cR from SHGC-37039 on chromosome 20p by radiation
hybrid mapping, spans approximately 4.5 kb and consists of three exons. Direct
sequencing of the exons and flanking regions identified one missense mutation
A328 V and seven polymorphisms, although the functional significance of the
mutation in the pathogenesis of diabetes is not known.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The characterization of the structure of the HNF-3
beta gene and its mapping in the framework of markers will be helpful in genetic 
studies of the various forms of diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 10672453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Biol Chem. 2000 Feb 4;275(5):3485-92.

Pancreatic beta cell-specific transcription of the pdx-1 gene. The role of
conserved upstream control regions and their hepatic nuclear factor 3beta sites.

Gerrish K(1), Gannon M, Shih D, Henderson E, Stoffel M, Wright CV, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology, Vanderbilt Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

To identify potential transactivators of pdx-1, we sequenced approximately 4.5
kilobases of the 5' promoter region of the human and chicken homologs, assuming
that sequences conserved with the mouse gene would contain critical
cis-regulatory elements. The sequences associated with hypersensitive site 1
(HSS1) represented the principal area of homology within which three conserved
subdomains were apparent: area I (-2694 to -2561 base pairs (bp)), area II (-2139
to -1958 bp), and area III (-1879 to -1799 bp). The identities between the mouse 
and chicken/human genes are very high, ranging from 78 to 89%, although only
areas I and III are present within this region in chicken. Pancreatic beta
cell-selective expression was shown to be controlled by mouse and human area I or
area II, but not area III, from an analysis of pdx-1-driven reporter activity in 
transfected beta- and non-beta cells. Mutational and functional analyses of
conserved hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF3)-like sites located within area I and
area II demonstrated that activation by these regions was mediated by HNF3beta.
To determine if a similar regulatory relationship might exist within the context 
of the endogenous gene, pdx-1 expression was measured in embryonic stem cells in 
which one or both alleles of HNF3beta were inactivated. pdx-1 mRNA levels induced
upon differentiation to embryoid bodies were down-regulated in homozygous null
HNF3beta cells. Together, these results suggest that the conserved sequences
represented by areas I and II define the binding sites for factors such as
HNF3beta, which control islet beta cell-selective expression of the pdx-1 gene.

PMID: 10652343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Dev Biol. 1999 Dec 15;216(2):535-49.

Neural induction and patterning in the mouse in the absence of the node and its
derivatives.

Klingensmith J(1), Ang SL, Bachiller D, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. kling@cellbio.duke.edu

The signals which induce vertebrate neural tissue and pattern it along the
anterior-posterior (A-P) axis have been proposed to emanate from Spemann's
organizer, which in mammals is a structure termed the node. However, mouse
embryos mutant for HNF3 beta lack a morphological node and node derivatives yet
undergo neural induction. Gene expression domains occur at their normal A-P axial
positions along the mutant neural tubes in an apparently normal temporal manner, 
including the most anterior and posterior markers. This neural patterning occurs 
in the absence of expression of known organizer genes, including the neural
inducers chordin and noggin. Other potential signaling centers in gastrulating
mutant embryos appear to express their normal constellation of putative secreted 
factors, consistent with the possibility that neural-inducing and -patterning
signals emanate from elsewhere or at an earlier time. Nevertheless, we find that 
the node and the anterior primitive streak, from which the node derives, are
direct sources of neural-inducing signals, as judged by expression of the early
midbrain marker Engrailed, in explant-recombination experiments. Similar
experiments showed the neural-inducing activity in HNF3 beta mutants to be
diffusely distributed. Our results indicate that the mammalian organizer is
capable of neural induction and patterning of the neural plate, but that
maintenance of an organizer-like signaling center is not necessary for either
process.

PMID: 10642791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Jan 7;267(1):64-70.

OTX2 directly interacts with LIM1 and HNF-3beta.

Nakano T(1), Murata T, Matsuo I, Aizawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology, Kumamoto University School of Medicine,
2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan.

Otx2 is a paired-class homeobox gene, and its functions in anterior visceral
endoderm and/or anterior mesendoderm have been suggested to be vital for head
development in mammals. Several transcription factors are expressed in these
tissues, and mutant mice analyses have suggested the interactions of the Otx2
gene cascade with the Lim1 or HNF-3beta cascade. Here we show that OTX2 directly 
associates with LIM1 and HNF-3beta; OTX2 binds to the LIM1 homeodomain (HD) with 
its C-terminal region, whereas both HD and C-terminal regions of OTX2 bind to the
HNF-3beta fork head domain or OTX2 HD. The luciferase assay with the P3C
sequence, a specific DNA binding sequence for paired-class homeobox genes, has
demonstrated that LIM1 enhances, but HNF-3beta represses, OTX2-directed gene
expression. Direct interactions of OTX2 with LIM1 or HNF-3beta may play important
roles in anterior visceral endoderm and/or anterior mesendoderm to constitute
transcriptional regulatory networks for head development.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10623575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;11(6):678-82.

Molecular mechanisms of liver development and differentiation.

Darlington GJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Huffington Center of
Aging, Houston, TX 77030, USA. gretchen@bcm.tcm.edu.

Recent advances in identifying molecular signals that dictate liver development
and differentiation have come from analysis of several experimental systems
including the developing embryo, cell and tissue culture, knockout mice and
transplantation of hepatic precursor cells. Fibroblast growth factors and several
families of transcription factors including hepatocyte nuclear factors 1, 3 and 4
and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein have been shown to be important components of 
the differentiation process that culminates in the fully functional liver.

PMID: 10600708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mech Dev. 1999 Dec;89(1-2):185-8.

The nuclear receptor fetoprotein transcription factor is coexpressed with its
target gene HNF-3beta in the developing murine liver, intestine and pancreas.

Rausa FM(1), Galarneau L, Bélanger L, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics (MIC 669), University of Illinois at Chicago,
College of Medicine, 900 S. Ashland Ave, Rm 2220 MBRB, Chicago 60607-7170, USA.

During organogenesis, the winged helix hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta
(HNF-3beta) protein participates in regulating gene transcription in the
developing esophagus, trachea, liver, lung, pancreas, and intestine. Hepatoma
cell transfection studies identified a critical HNF-3beta promoter factor, named 
UF2-H3beta, and here, we demonstrate that UF2-H3beta is identical to the
fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF). In situ hybridization studies of mouse
embryos demonstrate that FTF expression initiates in the foregut endoderm during 
liver and pancreatic morphogenesis (day 9) and that earlier expression of FTF is 
observed in the yolk sac endoderm, branchial arch and neural crest cells (day 8).
Abundant FTF hybridization signals are observed throughout morphogenesis of the
liver, pancreas, and intestine and its expression continues in the epithelial
cells of these adult organs. In day 17 mouse embryos and adult pancreas, however,
expression of FTF becomes restricted to the exocrine acinar and ductal epithelial
cells.

PMID: 10559496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Dev Biol. 1999 Nov 15;215(2):343-57.

casanova plays an early and essential role in endoderm formation in zebrafish.

Alexander J(1), Rothenberg M, Henry GL, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Programs in Developmental Biology and Human Genetics, Department of
Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California at San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143-0448, USA.

The cellular and molecular mechanisms that regulate endoderm development in
vertebrates have only recently begun to be explored. Here we show that the
zebrafish locus casanova plays an early and essential role in this process.
casanova mutants lack a gut tube and do not express any molecular markers of
endoderm differentiation. The early endodermal expression of genes such as axial,
gata5, and fkd2 does not initiate in casanova mutants, indicating that the
endoderm is defective from the onset of gastrulation. Mosaic analysis
demonstrates that casanova functions cell autonomously within the endodermal
progenitors. We also report the isolation of a zebrafish homologue of Mixer, a
gene important for early endoderm formation in Xenopus. casanova does not encode 
zebrafish Mixer, and mixer expression is normal in casanova mutants, indicating
that casanova acts downstream of, or parallel to, mixer to promote endoderm
formation. We further find that the forerunner cells, a specialized group of
noninvoluting dorsal mesendodermal cells, do not form in casanova mutants.
Studies of casanova mutants do not support an important role for the forerunner
cells in either dorsal axis or tail development, as has been previously proposed.
In addition, although different populations of mesodermal precursors are
generated normally in casanova mutants, morphogenetic defects in the heart,
vasculature, blood, and kidney are apparent, suggesting a possible role for the
endoderm in morphogenesis of these organs.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10545242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochem J. 1999 Nov 1;343 Pt 3:687-95.

Delineation of the insulin-responsive sequence in the rat cytosolic aspartate
aminotransferase gene: binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 and nuclear 
factor I.

Beurton F(1), Bandyopadhyay U, Dieumegard B, Barouki R, Aggerbeck M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 490, Université René Descartes, 45 Rue des Saints Pères, 75270
Paris cedex 06, France.

Expression of the rat cytosolic aspartate aminotransferase gene is stimulated by 
glucocorticoids and repressed by insulin in the liver. The regulation by insulin 
and part of the glucocorticoid effect are mediated by a distal region in the
promoter. A 142 bp fragment (-1844 to -1702) confers hormonal sensitivity to the 
heterologous thymidine kinase promoter in transient-transfection assays in
H4IIEC3 hepatoma cells. Footprinting and gel-shift assays showed that several
nuclear proteins bind to this region at conserved CCAAT-enhancer binding protein 
(C/EBP), activator protein (AP-1) and E-box sequences. Hepatocyte nuclear
factor-3alpha (HNF-3)alpha and beta bind to sequences upstream of a
glucocorticoid-responsive element (GRE) half-site as demonstrated by supershift
experiments. Nuclear factor I (NFI)-like proteins bind downstream of the GRE
half-site. These sites around the GRE motif overlap with five insulin responsive 
element (IRE) -like sequences (TG/ATTT). The effect of insulin was not prevented 
by any single mutation in the IRE-like sites. However, mutation of two IRE sites 
(namely IREc and d) prevented the insulin effect although only marginally
affecting the glucocorticoid effect. The results suggest that the effect of
insulin is due to a complex interplay of factors requiring the synergistic
contribution of at least two sites and underline the contribution of HNF-3 and
NFI-like proteins.

PMCID: PMC1220603
PMID: 10527950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Jul;45(5):493-503.

Experimental analysis of the emergence of left-right asymmetry of the body axis
in early postimplantation mouse embryos.

Tsang TE(1), Kinder SJ, Tam PP.

Author information: 
(1)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, Wentworthville, NSW,
Australia.

The lateral asymmetry of the body axis of mouse embryo is revealed first by the
asymmetric expression of genes such as nodal, lefty2 and Pitx2 in the lateral
plate mesoderm of the neurulating embryo and subsequently by the looping of the
heart tube, the rotation of the body axis and situ solitus of specific visceral
organs. Analysis of gene expression in the early gastrula shows that there is a
transient asymmetric localization of the transcripts of Cerrl, Fgf8, Hesx1 and
Hnf3beta gene in the anterior visceral endoderm, Otx2 and Sox2 in the epiblast
and Lim1 in the nascent mesoderm. However, the asymmetric expression is not
consistent and varies among the embryos, which may be reflecting the lability of 
the mechanism for specifying the laterality of the body axis during gastrulation.
The plasticity of the process that determines laterality is further manifested by
the ability to randomise the expression of the Pitx2 gene in the lateral plate
mesoderm in embryos that are grown in vitro. The expression of laterality
requires the presence of the node and its axial mesodermal derivatives. In mutant
embryos that lack the node and in node-ablated embryos, the loss of the axial
notochord is associated with isomerism of the body axis, which is revealed either
by the expression of the Pitx2 gene in the lateral plate mesoderm of both sides
of the body or the complete absence of expression. Our results are therefore
consistent with the concept that the specification of the laterality of the body 
axis goes through a dynamic phase during gastrulation and the activity of the
node and its derivatives is instrumental in the conferment of left-right identity
of the embryonic tissues.

PMID: 10512182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Pediatr Surg. 1999 Sep;34(9):1322-6.

TTF-1 and HNF-3beta in the developing tracheoesophageal fistula: further evidence
for the respiratory origin of the distal esophagus'.

Crisera CA(1), Connelly PR, Marmureanu AR, Li M, Rose MI, Longaker MT, Gittes GK.

Author information: 
(1)New York University Medical Center, NY 10016, USA.

Comment in
    J Pediatr Surg. 2000 May;35(5):811-2.

PURPOSE: Using an established rat model of esophageal atresia with
tracheoesophageal fistula (EA-TEF), the authors have studied the organogenesis of
this congenital anomaly. The authors previously have proposed that the "distal
esophagus" actually is of respiratory lineage. In this report this hypothesis is 
tested by examining the expression of two foregut patterning transcription
factors, thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and hepatocyte nuclear
factor-3beta (HNF-3beta), within the developing TEF.
METHODS: Pregnant Sprague-Dawley rats were injected with 2.2 mg/kg of Adriamycin 
intraperitoneally on days 6 to 9 of gestation. Using microdissection, the
trachea, blind-ending esophagus, TEF, and stomach were isolated from embryos of
various gestional ages. Immunohistochemistry was performed using polyclonal
antibodies to TTF-1 and HNF-3beta.
RESULTS: TTF-1 is a homeodomain protein that previously has been shown to be
expressed in the lung and trachea but not in the gastrointestinal tract, and
which, when deleted in a developing lung, results in a mouse with no peripheral
lung parenchyma. TTF-1 was expressed strongly in the lung, fistula, and distal
esophagus, but not in the proximal esophagus. HNF-3beta is a forkhead
transcription factor important in foregut patterning that binds and activates the
TTF-1 promotor sequence. HNF-3beta was expressed globally in the fistula and lung
as well as the esophagus.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of the lung-specific transcription factor TTF-1
within the TEF strongly implies that the "distal esophagus" is a
respiratory-derived structure and thus supports our theory of TEF organogenesis. 
The conservation of HNF-3beta expression both in the TEF as well as the normal
developing trachea and esophagus suggests that global foregut patterning is
intact in the formation of this anomaly, and the defect lies at the level of the 
respiratory versus gastrointestinal commitment.

PMID: 10507421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Development. 1999 Oct;126(20):4499-511.

HNF3beta and Lim1 interact in the visceral endoderm to regulate primitive streak 
formation and anterior-posterior polarity in the mouse embryo.

Perea-Gómez A(1), Shawlot W, Sasaki H, Behringer RR, Ang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, BP163, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Recent embryological and genetic experiments have suggested that the anterior
visceral endoderm and the anterior primitive streak of the early mouse gastrula
function as head- and trunk-organising centers, respectively. Here, we report
that HNF3beta and Lim1 are coexpressed in both organising centers suggesting
synergistic roles of these genes in regulating organiser functions and hence axis
development in the mouse embryo. To investigate this possibility, we generated
compound HNF3beta and Lim1 mutant embryos. An enlarged primitive streak and a
lack of axis formation were observed in HNF3beta (-)(/)(-);Lim1(-)(/)(-), but not
in single homozygous mutant embryos. Chimera experiments indicate that the
primary defect in these double homozygous mutants is due to loss of activity of
HNF3beta and Lim1 in the visceral endoderm. Altogether, these data provide
evidence that these genes function synergistically to regulate organiser activity
of the anterior visceral endoderm. Moreover, HNF3beta (-)(/)(-);Lim1(-)(/)(-)
mutant embryos also exhibit defects in mesoderm patterning that are likely due to
lack of specification of anterior primitive streak cells.

PMID: 10498685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Lipid Res. 1999 Sep;40(9):1709-18.

Transcription factors and age-related decline in apolipoprotein A-I expression.

Nakamura T(1), Fox-Robichaud A, Kikkawa R, Kashiwagi A, Kojima H, Fujimiya M,
Wong NC.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, T2N 4N1.

Apolipoprotein (apo)A-I alone or as a component of high density lipoprotein
particles has antiatherogenic properties. The age-dependent decline in abundance 
of this protein may underlie the higher risk for developing occlusive coronary
artery disease (CAD) in older individuals. Similar to humans, expression of rat
apoA-I also declines with age. Results in rats showed that levels of serum apoA-I
protein, hepatic mRNA, and transcription of the gene were decreased to 39%, 18%, 
and 38%, respectively, in 180-day-old animals compared to those of newborn rats. 
These findings suggest that a nuclear mechanism(s) may account for the decline in
apoA-I expression. Accordingly, we examined hepatic nuclear binding activity to
four specific cis-acting elements of the rat apoA-I promoter. There were
age-dependent changes of binding activity to two proximal sites, B and C, but not
to the more distal elements, IRCE and A. Decreased B-site binding activity
correlated with lower mRNA levels encoding the activator, HNF-3beta. The
age-dependent change in the pattern of binding to site C was due to a switch from
the activator, HNF-4, to the repressor, ARP-1. In summary, the age-related
decline in apoA-I expression may arise from a reduction in the activity of both
cis-acting elements, B and C.

PMID: 10484619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Apr;13(4):604-18.

The phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene glucocorticoid response unit:
identification of the functional domains of accessory factors HNF3 beta (hepatic 
nuclear factor-3 beta) and HNF4 and the necessity of proper alignment of their
cognate binding sites.

Wang JC(1), Strömstedt PE, Sugiyama T, Granner DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0615, USA.

Complete induction of hepatic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene
transcription by glucocorticoids requires a complex glucocorticoid response unit 
(GRU). The GRU is comprised of two glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-binding sites
(GR1 and GR2) and four accessory factor-binding sites [AF1, AF2, AF3, and cAMP
response element (CRE)] that bind distinct transcription factors. Hepatic nuclear
factor 4 (HNF4) and chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor
(COUP-TF) bind to the AF1 element and account for AF1 activity. Members of the
hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) family bind to the AF2 element and provide AF2
activity. In this report, we show that the functions of AF1 and AF2 are dependent
on their positions in the promoter, since they cannot substitute for each other
nor can they be exchanged without a reduction in the response to glucocorticoids.
We also identified the domains of HNF4 and HNF3 beta that are required for the
AF1 and AF2 activities, respectively. The carboxy-terminal transactivation domain
of HNF4 (amino acids 128-374) confers most of the AF1 activity, while the
carboxyterminal transactivation domain of HNF3 beta (amino acids 361-458)
mediates AF2 activity. These domains of HNF4 and HNF3 beta appear to have
distinct roles in the response to glucocorticoids, as there are unique structural
requirements for each, as judged by the failure of most other classes of
transactivation domains to serve as accessory factors. These results suggest that
the regulation of the PEPCK gene by glucocorticoids requires specific
interactions between GR, accessory factors, and coactivators, and that the
transactivation domains of AF1 and AF2 are of fundamental importance in the
assembly of this multiprotein complex.

PMID: 10194766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;18(2):157-64.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (winged helix domain) activates trefoil factor gene
TFF1 through a binding motif adjacent to the TATAA box.

Beck S(1), Sommer P, dos Santos Silva E, Blin N, Gött P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Anthropology and Human Genetics, 
University of Tübingen, Germany.

The winged helix transcription factors HNF-3/FKH (forkhead homologs) activate
endodermal-derived and acute-phase gene expression and control gut development in
Drosophila. Trefoil factor family (TFFs) peptides are vertebrate products
secreted by mucin-producing epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract
involved in restitution and repair of the mucosa. They are positively regulated
in ulcerative and neoplastic conditions. We describe a consensus sequence in
human and rodent TFF promoters close to the TATAA box showing striking similarity
to the binding site of the HNF-3/FKH family. In gel retardation assays, HNF-3
alpha and beta bound predominantly to the site in TFF1 (formerly pS2) and, to a
lesser extent, to the sites in TFF2 or TFF3. Mutations generated in this motif
severely impaired transcription of TFF1 reporter genes. Cotransfection with
expression vectors of HNF-3alpha and beta, but not the related HFH 11A and B,
specifically activated the wild-type TFF1 reporter genes. Activation of
endogenous expression of TFF1 by HNF-3 alpha and beta gene products was more than
1000 fold in the pancreatic cell line Capan-2 and fivefold in the gastric cell
line MKN-45, whereas the intestinal cell lines HUTU 80 and HT-29 displayed no
effect. Thus, HNF-3/FKH factors contribute causally to cell-specific regulation
of TFF genes and may explain the acute-phase response of TFF peptides.

PMID: 10073575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Biochem J. 1999 Mar 1;338 ( Pt 2):241-9.

Upstream region of rat serum albumin gene promoter contributes to promoter
activity: presence of functional binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor-3.

Hsiang CH(1), Marten NW, Straus DS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Division and Biology Department, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521-0121, USA.

Transcription of the serum albumin gene occurs almost exclusively in the liver
and is controlled in part by a strong liver-specific promoter. The upstream
region of the serum albumin gene promoter is highly conserved among species and
is footprinted in vitro by a number of nuclear proteins. However, the role of the
upstream promoter region in regulating transcription and the identity of the
transcription factors that bind to this region have not been established. In the 
present study, deletion analysis of the rat serum albumin promoter in transiently
transfected HepG2 cells demonstrated that elimination of the region between -207 
and -153 bp caused a two-fold decrease in promoter activity (P<0.05). Additional 
analysis of the -207 to -124 bp promoter interval led to the identification of
two potential binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) located at
-168 to -157 bp (site X) and -145 to -134 bp (site Y). Electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays performed with the HNF-3 X and Y sites demonstrated that
both sites are capable of binding HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta. Placement of a single
copy of the HNF-3 X site upstream from a minimal promoter increased promoter
activity by about four-fold in HepG2 cells, and the reporter construct containing
this site could be transactivated if co-transfected with an HNF-3 expression
construct. Furthermore, inactivation of the HNF-3 X site by site-directed
mutagenesis within the context of the -261 bp albumin promoter construct resulted
in a 40% decrease in transcription (P<0.05). These results indicate that the
positive effect of the -207 to -153 bp promoter interval is attributable to the
presence of the HNF-3 X site within this interval. Additional results obtained
with transfected HepG2 cells suggest that the HNF-3 Y site plays a lesser role in
activation of transcription than the X site.

PMCID: PMC1220048
PMID: 10024498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Gene. 1998 Dec 11;224(1-2):97-107.

Exon-I is involved in positive as well as negative regulation of human
angiotensinogen gene expression.

Cui Y(1), Narayanan CS, Zhou J, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.

Angiotensinogen is the glycoprotein precursor of one of the most potent
vasoactive hormones, angiotensin-II. Angiotensinogen gene is primarily expressed 
in the liver, and this gene locus is linked with human essential hypertension. We
show here that a mutation in exon-I reduces the basal expression of the human
angiotensinogen gene in liver cells. We also show that a nucleotide sequence in
exon-I binds to liver-enriched transcription factor HNF-3 and a ubiquitous factor
AP4. Our studies also show that transient transfection of an expression vector
containing AP4 coding sequence downregulates the expression of reporter
constructs containing human angiotensinogen gene promoter. By contrast,
co-transfection of an expression vector containing HNF-3beta coding sequence
increases the expression of these reporter constructs. The human angiotensinogen 
gene has a C/A polymorphism located at -20, and we have shown that estrogen
receptor-alpha binds to this sequence when nucleoside A is present at this site. 
We show here that co-transfection of an expression vector containing AP4 coding
sequence reduces estrogen-induced promoter activity of reporter constructs
containing human angiotensinogen gene promoter (with nucleoside A at -20)
attached to the CAT gene. These studies partly explain the molecular mechanisms
involved in tissue-specific expression of the human angiotensinogen gene.

PMID: 9931457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Gene. 1998 Dec 28;225(1-2):77-87.

Cloning, sequencing and characterization of the rat hereditary hemochromatosis
promoter: comparison of the human, mouse and rat HFE promoter regions.

Sánchez M(1), Queralt R, Bruguera M, Rodés J, Oliva R.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Barcelona,
Institut de Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Casanova 143, 08036,
Barcelona, Spain.

We have cloned and sequenced 1398bp of the rat HFE gene promoter region. The
alignment of the rat promoter HFE sequence with the HFE promoter sequence from
human and mouse detected several highly conserved sequences present at
orthologous or heterologous positions in the three species. Subsequent analysis
of the conserved promoter sequences identified the presence of 10 novel
transcription elements present in the promoter regions of the human, mouse and
rat HFE genes (GATA, NF-IL6, AP1, AP2, CREB, PEA3, gamma-IRE, GFI1, HNF-3beta,
HFH2). Different gel retardation analyses performed with rat-liver nuclear
extracts have confirmed the presence of factors binding to some of these
transcription elements. This represents the first data concerning the
identification of potential transcriptional elements of the HFE promoter in these
three species. The expression pattern of the transcription factors corresponding 
to the novel elements identified in the HFE promoter is consistent with the
potential role of the HFE promoter in the transcription regulation and function
of the HFE gene. Knowledge of the identified conserved elements in the HFE
promoter from human, mouse and rat provides the basis for subsequent in-vitro or 
in-vivo studies leading to identification of the detailed mechanisms involved in 
the regulation of the iron metabolism and the design of potential future
alternative therapies.

PMID: 9931446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 29;274(5):2665-71.

OC-2, a novel mammalian member of the ONECUT class of homeodomain transcription
factors whose function in liver partially overlaps with that of hepatocyte
nuclear factor-6.

Jacquemin P(1), Lannoy VJ, Rousseau GG, Lemaigre FP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, Louvain University Medical School and the
Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology, Avenue Hippocrate 75, B-1200
Brussels, Belgium.

Transcription factors of the ONECUT class, whose prototype is hepatocyte nuclear 
factor (HNF)-6, are characterized by the presence of a single cut domain and by a
peculiar homeodomain (Lannoy, V. J., Bürglin, T. R., Rousseau, G. G., and
Lemaigre, F. P. (1998) J. Biol. Chem. 273, 13552-13562). We report here the
identification and characterization of human OC-2, the second mammalian member of
this class. The OC-2 gene is located on human chromosome 18. The distribution of 
OC-2 mRNA in humans is tissue-restricted, the strongest expression being detected
in the liver and skin. The amino acid sequence of OC-2 contains several regions
of high similarity to HNF-6. The recognition properties of OC-2 for binding sites
present in regulatory regions of liver-expressed genes differ from, but overlap
with, those of HNF-6. Like HNF-6, OC-2 stimulates transcription of the hnf-3beta 
gene in transient transfection experiments, suggesting that OC-2 participates in 
the network of transcription factors required for liver differentiation and
metabolism.

PMID: 9915796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;18(11):6305-15.

Glucocorticoid receptor, C/EBP, HNF3, and protein kinase A coordinately activate 
the glucocorticoid response unit of the carbamoylphosphate synthetase I gene.

Christoffels VM(1), Grange T, Kaestner KH, Cole TJ, Darlington GJ, Croniger CM,
Lamers WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, University of Amsterdam, 1105 AZ
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

A single far-upstream enhancer is sufficient to confer hepatocyte-specific,
glucocorticoid- and cyclic AMP-inducible periportal expression to the
carbamoylphosphate synthetase I (CPS) gene. To identify the mechanism of
hormone-dependent activation, the composition and function of the enhancer have
been analyzed. DNase I protection and gel mobility shift assays revealed the
presence of a cyclic AMP response element, a glucocorticoid response element
(GRE), and several sites for the liver-enriched transcription factor families
HNF3 and C/EBP. The in vivo relevance of the transcription factors interacting
with the enhancer in the regulation of CPS expression in the liver was assessed
by the analysis of knockout mice. A strong reduction of CPS mRNA levels was
observed in glucocorticoid receptor- and C/EBPalpha-deficient mice, whereas the
CPS mRNA was normally expressed in C/EBPbeta knockout mice and in HNF3alpha and
-gamma double-knockout mice. (The role of HNFbeta could not be assessed, because 
the corresponding knockout mice die at embryonic day 10). In hepatoma cells, most
of the activity of the enhancer is contained within a 103-bp fragment, which
depends for its activity on the simultaneous occupation of the GRE, HNF3, and
C/EBP sites, thus meeting the requirement of a glucocorticoid response unit. In
fibroblast-like CHO cells, on the other hand, the GRE in the CPS enhancer does
not cooperate with the C/EBP and HNF3 elements in transactivation of the CPS
promoter. In both hepatoma and CHO cells, stimulation of expression by cyclic AMP
depends mainly on the integrity of the glucocorticoid pathway, demonstrating
cross talk between this pathway and the cyclic AMP (protein kinase A) pathway.

PMCID: PMC109217
PMID: 9774647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Methods. 1998 Sep;16(1):29-41.

In situ hybridization with 33P-labeled RNA probes for determination of cellular
expression patterns of liver transcription factors in mouse embryos.

Rausa FM(1), Ye H, Lim L, Duncan SA, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, 60612-7334, USA.

Erratum in
    Methods 1998 Nov;16(3):359-60.

Murine hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta (HNF-3beta) protein is a member of a large
family of developmentally regulated transcription factors that share homology in 
the winged helix/fork head DNA binding domain and that participate in embryonic
pattern formation. HNF-3beta also mediates cell-specific transcription of genes
important for the function of hepatocytes, intestinal and bronchiolar epithelium,
and pancreatic acinar cells. We have previously identified a hepatocyte and
pancreatic cut-homeodomain transcription factor, HNF-6, which is required for
HNF-3beta promoter activity. In this study, we used in situ hybridization studies
of stage-specific embryos to demonstrate that HNF-6 and its target gene,
HNF-3beta, are coexpressed in the foregut endoderm and in the pancreatic and
hepatic diverticulum. More detailed analysis of HNF-6 and HNF-3beta's
developmental expression patterns provides evidence of colocalization in
hepatocytes, intestinal epithelium, and pancreatic ductal epithelium and exocrine
acinar cells. In support of the role of HNF-6 in regulating HNF-3beta expression 
in developing hepatocytes, their liver expression levels are both transiently
reduced between 14 and 15 days of gestation. At day 18 of gestation and in adult 
pancreas, HNF-6 and HNF-3beta transcripts remain colocalized in the exocrine
acinar cells, but their expression patterns diverge in endocrine cells. HNF-3beta
expression is restricted to the endocrine cells of the islets of Langerhans,
whereas the ductal epithelium expresses HNF-6. We discuss these expression
patterns with respect to specification of hepatocytes and differentiation of the 
endocrine and exocrine pancreas.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9774514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Dev Biol. 1998 Sep 15;201(2):185-201.

Ethanol impairs migration of the prechordal plate in the zebrafish embryo.

Blader P(1), Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Illkirch, 67404, France.

Exposure of vertebrate embryos to ethanol causes cyclopia, but little is known
about the underlying mechanisms of this effect. Here we show that cyclopia can be
induced in the zebrafish by a short ethanol treatment during early gastrula
stages and is accompanied by loss of gene expression characteristic of the
ventral aspects of the fore- and midbrain. Interestingly, defects in the
expression of ventral brain markers are linked to impaired migration of the
prechordal plate mesoderm indicating that the correct position of the prechordal 
plate mesoderm under the anterior neural plate in the zebrafish embryo is
required for specification of the anterior neural midline. Ethanol-induced
cyclopia does not, however, impair the induction of anterior neuroectodermal
structures in general. Finally, as genes like goosecoid and islet-1 are expressed
in prechordal plate cells in a temporal pattern similar to control embryos
despite the ectopic position of expressing cells, it appears that regulation of
prechordal plate-specific gene expression is largely independent of the final
position of the prechordal plate.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9740658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Mech Dev. 1998 Jul;75(1-2):107-15.

Alteration of limb and brain patterning in early mouse embryos by
ultrasound-guided injection of Shh-expressing cells.

Liu A(1), Joyner AL, Turnbull DH.

Author information: 
(1)Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University Medical
Center, 540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

A basic limitation of the study of development in the mouse is the
inaccessibility of the embryos, which are encased in the maternal uterus. We
demonstrate the first use of ultrasound backscatter microscopy for guiding
injections of cells and other agents into early stage mouse embryos. Cells were
injected into the mouse neural tube cavity as early as 9.5 days post coitus
(E9.5), and into the developing limb buds as early as E10.5. Furthermore, a
cell-line engineered to express the secreted factor Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) was
injected into early developing mouse brains or limbs. The Shh-expressing cells
were found to induce ectopic expression of the Shh target genes Patched and
Hnf3beta in the dorsal brain, and to alter digit patterning in the anterior limb 
bud. These results show that gene misexpression studies can be performed in mouse
embryos using ultrasound-guided injection of transfected cells or retroviruses.
In combination with the many available mouse mutants, this method offers a new
approach for analyzing genetic interactions through gain-of-function studies
performed in mutant mouse backgrounds.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 9739117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Endocrinol. 1998 Sep;12(9):1343-54.

Inhibition by insulin of glucocorticoid-induced gene transcription: involvement
of the ligand-binding domain of the glucocorticoid receptor and independence from
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways.

Pierreux CE(1), Ursø B, De Meyts P, Rousseau GG, Lemaigre FP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, Louvain University Medical School,
Christian de Duve Institute of Cellular Pathology, Brussels, Belgium.

Insulin can inhibit the stimulatory effect of glucocorticoid hormones on the
transcription of genes coding for enzymes involved in glucose metabolism. We
reported earlier that insulin inhibits the glucocorticoid-stimulated
transcription of the gene coding for liver 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase (PFK-2). To
elucidate the mechanism of these hormonal effects, we have studied the regulatory
regions of the PFK-2 gene in transfection experiments. We found that both
glucocorticoids and insulin act via the glucocorticoid response unit (GRU)
located in the first intron. Footprinting experiments showed that the GRU binds
not only the glucocorticoid receptor (GR), but also ubiquitous [nuclear factor I 
(NF-I)] and liver-enriched [hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3, HNF-6,
CAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)] transcription factors. Site-directed
mutational analysis of the GRU revealed that these factors modulate
glucocorticoid action but that none of them seems to be individually involved in 
the inhibitory effect of insulin. We did not find an insulin response element in 
the GRU, but we showed that insulin targets the GR. Insulin-induced inhibition of
the glucocorticoid stimulation required the ligand-binding domain of the GR.
Finally, the insulin-signaling cascade involved was independent of the
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase and mitogen-activated protein kinase pathways.
Together, these results suggest that insulin acts on the PFK-2 gene via another
pathway and targets either the GR in its ligand-binding domain or a cofactor
interacting with this domain.

PMID: 9731703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 1998;81(3-4):174-5.

Assignment of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 genes to rat chromosome bands
6q23-->q24 (alpha: Hnf3a), 3q41 (beta: Hnf3b) and 1q21-->q22 (gamma: Hnf3g) by in
situ hybridization.

Van Reeth T(1), Van Vooren P, Szpirer C, Szpirer J.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Rhode-St-Genèse, Belgium. tvanreet@dbm.ulb.ac.be

PMID: 9730593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Seikagaku. 1998 Jun;70(6):434-6.

[Hepatocyte nuclear factor 6: a novel class of liver-enriched transcription
factor].

[Article in Japanese]

Oda H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University.

PMID: 9758552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Science. 1998 Jul 31;281(5377):692-5.

Regulation of a transcription factor network required for differentiation and
metabolism.

Duncan SA(1), Navas MA, Dufort D, Rossant J, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Cell Biology and Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller
University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) are a heterogeneous class of evolutionarily
conserved transcription factors that are required for cellular differentiation
and metabolism. Mutations in HNF-1alphaand HNF-4alpha genes impair insulin
secretion and cause type 2 diabetes. Regulation of HNF-4/HNF-1 expression by
HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta was studied in embryoid bodies in which one or both
HNF-3alpha or HNF-3beta alleles were inactivated. HNF-3beta positively regulated 
the expression of HNF-4alpha/HNF-1alpha and their downstream targets, implicating
a role in diabetes. HNF-3beta was also necessary for expression of HNF-3alpha. In
contrast, HNF-3alpha acts as a negative regulator of HNF-4alpha/HNF-1alpha
demonstrating that HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta have antagonistic transcriptional
regulatory functions in vivo. HNF-3alpha does not appear to act as a classic
biochemical repressor but rather exerts its negative effect by competing for
HNF-3 binding sites with the more efficient activator HNF-3beta. In addition, the
HNF-3alpha/HNF-3beta ratio is modulated by the presence of insulin, providing
evidence that the HNF network may have important roles in mediating the action of
insulin.

PMID: 9685261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Histochem Cytochem. 1998 Aug;46(8):955-62.

Temporal-spatial distribution of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta in developing
human lung and other foregut derivatives.

Stahlman MT(1), Gray ME, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Departments of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

We assessed the temporal-spatial distribution of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta 
(HNF-3beta) in developing human lung and other foregut derivatives. Tissue from
31 fetuses (10-40 weeks) and 24 infants with hyaline membrane disease (HMD) or
bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) (2 days to 7 months) was studied. HNF-3beta was 
detected in nuclei of epithelial cells of trachea and of conducting and terminal 
airways at 10 weeks. Thereafter, epithelial nuclei were immunolabeled more widely
in peripheral than proximal airways. HNF-3beta was confined to
bronchiolo-alveolar portals and Type II cells in nonfetal lung. In infants with
BPD, HNF-3beta was expressed abundantly in regenerating epithelial cells at the
periphery of lung lobules. HNF-3beta was also detected in fetal esophagus,
pancreas, duodenum, stomach, and gallbladder, suggesting that it is a marker for 
progenitor cells in foregut derivatives. The pattern of expression of HNF-3beta
in the lung was similar to that of thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) at all 
ages. The temporal-spatial patterns of HNF-3beta and TTF-1 in the developing and 
regenerating lung are consistent with their proposed role in epithelial cell
differentiation, regeneration, and surfactant protein gene expression. (J
Histochem Cytochem 46:955-962, 1998)

PMID: 9671445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Development. 1998 Aug;125(16):3015-25.

The transcription factor HNF3beta is required in visceral endoderm for normal
primitive streak morphogenesis.

Dufort D(1), Schwartz L, Harpal K, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada, M5G 1X5.

During early embryogenesis, the transcription factor HNF3beta is expressed in
visceral and definitive endoderm, node, notochord and floorplate. A targeted
mutation in the HNF3&bgr ; gene results in the lack of a definitive node and
notochord. Furthermore, lack of HNF3beta results in failure of proper primitive
streak elongation. To address whether HNF3beta is required in visceral endoderm, 
we have used tetraploid embryo-ES cell aggregations to generate chimeric mouse
embryos with wild-type visceral endoderm and homozygous mutant HNF3beta embryonic
ectoderm or vice versa. Replacing the visceral endoderm of mutant HNF3beta
embryos rescued proper primitive streak elongation and, conversely, mutant
visceral endoderm imposed a severe embryonic-extraembryonic constriction on
wild-type embryonic ectoderm. Restoration of normal streak morphogenesis was not 
sufficient to allow formation of the node and notochord in HNF3beta mutant
embryos. Thus, our results demonstrate that HNF3beta has two separate roles in
primitive streak formation. One is to act within the visceral endoderm to promote
proper streak morphogenesis. The second is autonomous to the node and its
precursors and involves specification of node and notochord cell fates. HNF3beta 
mutant embryos rescued for the embryonic-extraembryonic constriction developed
further than mutant embryos, allowing examination of later roles for HNF3beta. We
show that such mutant embryos lack foregut and midgut endoderm. In addition,
left-right asymmetry is affected in the mutant embryos.

PMID: 9671576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Jul;18(7):4245-51.

Targeted disruption of the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 3gamma results
in reduced transcription of hepatocyte-specific genes.

Kaestner KH(1), Hiemisch H, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania Medical School,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6145, USA.

The winged helix transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 3gamma
(HNF3gamma) is expressed in embryonic endoderm and its derivatives liver,
pancreas, stomach, and intestine, as well as in testis and ovary. We have
generated mice carrying an Hnf3g-lacZ fusion which deletes most of the HNF3gamma 
coding sequence as well as 5.5 kb of 3' flanking region. Mice homozygous for the 
mutation are fertile, develop normally, and show no morphological defects. The
mild phenotype change of the Hnf3g-/- mice can be explained in part by an
upregulation of HNF3alpha and HNF3beta in the liver of the mutant animals.
Analysis of steady-state mRNA levels as well as transcription rates showed that
levels of expression of several HNF3 target genes (phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase, transferrin, tyrosine aminotransferase) were reduced by 50 to 70%,
indicating that HNF3gamma is an important activator of these genes in vivo.

PMCID: PMC109008
PMID: 9632808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Development. 1998 Jul;125(14):2533-43.

Diminished Sonic hedgehog signaling and lack of floor plate differentiation in
Gli2 mutant mice.

Ding Q(1), Motoyama J, Gasca S, Mo R, Sasaki H, Rossant J, Hui CC.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology and Division of Endocrinology, Research
Institute, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada.

Floor plate cells at the midline of the neural tube are specified by high-level
activity of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) secreted by notochord, whereas motor neurons are
thought to be specified by a lower level activity of Shh secreted in turn by
floor plate cells. In Drosophila, the Gli zinc finger protein Cubitus interruptus
functions as a transcription factor activating Hedgehog-responsive genes. We
report that the expression of known Shh-responsive genes such as Ptc and Gli1 is 
downregulated in mutant mice lacking Gli2 function. Gli2 mutants fail to develop 
a floor plate yet still develop motor neurons, which occupy the ventral midline
of the neural tube. Our results imply that Gli2 is required to mediate high level
but not low level Shh activity and show that the development of motor neurons can
occur in the absence of floor plate induction.

PMID: 9636069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Apr 1;26(7):1761-8.

E1A represses apolipoprotein AI enhancer activity in liver cells through a pRb-
and CBP-independent pathway.

Kilbourne EJ(1), Evans MJ, Karathanasis SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Receptors, Wyeth-Ayerst Research, 145 King of Prussia
Road, Radnor, PA 19087, USA.

The apolipoprotein AI (apoAI) promoter/enhancer contains multiple cis -acting
elements on which a variety of hepatocyte-enriched and ubiquitous transcription
factors function synergistically to regulate liver-specific transcription.
Adenovirus E1A proteins repress tissue-specific gene expression and disrupt the
differentiated state in a variety of cell types. In this study expression of E1A 
12Sor 13S in hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells repressed apoAI enhancer activity 8-fold.
Deletion mapping analysis showed that inhibition by E1A was mediated by the apoAI
promoter site B. E1A selectively inhibited the ability of HNF3beta and HNF3alpha 
to transactivate reporter genes controlled by the apoAI site B and the HNF3
binding site from the transthyretin promoter. The E1A-mediated repression of HNF3
activity was not reversed by overexpression of HNF3beta nor did E1A alter nuclear
HNF3beta protein levels or inhibit HNF3 binding to DNA in mobility shift assays. 
Overexpression of two cofactors known to interact with E1A, pRb and CBP failed to
overcome inhibition of HNF3 activity. Similarly, mutations in E1A that disrupt
its interaction with pRb or CBP did not compromise its ability to repress
HNF3beta transcriptional activity. These data suggest that E1A inhibits HNF3
activity by inactivating a limiting cofactor(s) distinct from pRb or CBP.

PMCID: PMC147459
PMID: 9512550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1998 May;56(1-2):227-37.

Winged helix hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 and POU-domain protein brn-2/N-oct-3
bind overlapping sites on the neuronal promoter of human aromatic L-amino acid
decarboxylase gene.

Raynal JF(1), Dugast C, Le Van Thaï A, Weber MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire Eucaryote, CNRS UPR 9006, 118 route de
Narbonne, F31062 Toulouse Cedex, France.

The neuronal promoter of human aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase gene has been 
analysed to elucidate the mechanisms of neuron type-specific expression. The
(-560/+92) promoter segment was sufficient to direct luciferase expression at a
higher level in SK-N-BE neuroblastoma cells, than in CHP126 neuroepithelia, HepG2
hepatoma or SK-Hep1 epithelioma cells. Deletions experiments showed that this
segment contained a neuronal-specific (element T1) and a SK-N-BE-specific
(element N1) cis-activating sequences. Element T1 (-72/-36) bound Sp1 and NF-Y
proteins, and unidentified neuronal-specific factors. Element N1 (-102/-72) bound
cell-specific factors, identified as HNF-3, N-Oct-3/Brn-2 and N-Oct-2. HNF-3
proteins recognized the sequence TCAGTAAATA that matches the consensus motif.
Oct-1, N-Oct-2 and N-Oct-3 bound the AAATAATGC sequence that overlaps the HNF-3
binding site. In addition, we show that the HNF-3 binding sites from aldolase C
and HNF-3beta gene promoters also bind N-Oct-2 and N-Oct-3 proteins. These data
suggest a functional interplay of winged helix/forkhead and POU-domain
transcription factors on a variety of neuronal gene promoters.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 9602135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 10;273(15):9270-8.

Estrogen regulation of the apolipoprotein AI gene promoter through transcription 
cofactor sharing.

Harnish DC(1), Evans MJ, Scicchitano MS, Bhat RA, Karathanasis SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Receptors, Wyeth-Ayerst Research, Radnor, Pennsylvania
19087, USA.

Estrogen replacement therapy increases plasma concentrations of high density
lipoprotein and its major protein constituent, apolipoprotein AI (apoAI). Studies
with animal model systems, however, suggest opposite effects. In HepG2 cells
stably expressing estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha), 17beta-estradiol (E2)
potently inhibited apoAI mRNA steady state levels. ApoAI promoter deletion
mapping experiments indicated that ERalpha plus E2 inhibited apoAI activity
through the liver-specific enhancer. Although the ERalpha DNA binding domain was 
essential but not sufficient for apoAI enhancer inhibition, ERalpha binding to
the apoAI enhancer could not be detected by electrophoretic mobility shift
assays. Western blotting and cotransfection assays showed that ERalpha plus E2
did not influence the abundance or the activity of the hepatocyte-enriched
factors HNF-3beta and HNF-4, two transcription factors essential for apoAI
enhancer function. Expression of the ERalpha coactivator RIP140 dramatically
repressed apoAI enhancer function in cotransfection experiments, suggesting that 
RIP140 may also function as a coactivator on the apoAI enhancer. Moreover,
estrogen regulation of apoAI enhancer activity was dependent upon the balance
between ERalpha and RIP140 levels. At low ratios of RIP140 to ERalpha, E2
repressed apoAI enhancer activity, whereas at high ratios this repression was
reversed. Regulation of the apoAI gene by estrogen may thus vary in direction and
magnitude depending not only on the presence of ERalpha and E2 but also upon the 
intracellular balance of ERalpha and coactivators utilized by ERalpha and the
apoAI enhancer.

PMID: 9535920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Dev Growth Differ. 1997 Dec;39(6):667-76.

Distribution pattern of HNF-3beta proteins in developing embryos of two mammalian
species, the house shrew and the mouse.

Yasui K(1), Sasaki H, Arakaki R, Uemura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy, Kagoshima University Dental School, Sakuragaoka,
Japan.

The pattern of expression of HNF-3beta in organizing centers and axial structures
during early vertebrate development suggests an important role for this protein
in the establishment of the vertebrate body plan. To establish whether the
pattern of expression during embryogenesis is species specific, a comparative
immunohistochemical study of two mammalian species, the house shrew, insectivore,
and the mouse was carried out; it is difficult to obtain accurate morphological
differences from the study of remotely related animals. The earliest expression
of HNF-3beta appeared in the node and hypoblast (or endoderm) in both species,
where the presumptive foregut endoderm showed intense immunoreactivity prior to
the formation of the axial mesoderm, suggesting a role different from that in
axial formation. The anterior extension of immunopositive axial mesoderm and the 
median band of the neural plate varied between the two species, and was delayed
in the house shrew. HNF-3beta in the anterior end of the foregut disappeared
transiently in the house shrew but persisted in the mouse embryo. An asymmetric
pattern of distribution in the primitive streak was also observed in the mouse
but not in the house shrew. The present immunohistochemical study elucidated that
the distribution of HNF-3beta is conserved initially but soon manifests species
specificities in development even between mammalian species.

PMID: 9493826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Genes Dev. 1998 Jan 1;12(1):5-10.

Nucleosome positioning by the winged helix transcription factor HNF3.

Shim EY(1), Woodcock C, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cellular Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA.

Nucleosome positioning at genetic regulatory sequences is not well understood.
The transcriptional enhancer of the mouse serum albumin gene is active in liver, 
where regulatory factors occupy their target sites on three nucleosome-like
particles designated N1, N2, and N3. The winged helix transcription factor HNF3
binds to two sites near the center of the N1 particle. We created dinucleosome
templates using the albumin enhancer sequence and found that site-specific
binding of HNF3 protein resulted in nucleosome positioning in vitro similar to
that seen in liver nuclei. Thus, binding of a transcription factor can position
an underlying nucleosome core.

PMCID: PMC316403
PMID: 9420326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Dev Biol. 1998 Jan 1;193(1):77-89.

No turning, a mouse mutation causing left-right and axial patterning defects.

Melloy PG(1), Ewart JL, Cohen MF, Desmond ME, Kuehn MR, Lo CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Patterning along the left/right axes helps establish the orientation of visceral 
organ asymmetries, a process which is of fundamental importance to the viability 
of an organism. A linkage between left/right and axial patterning is indicated by
the finding that a number of genes involved in left/right patterning also play a 
role in anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning. We have recovered a
spontaneous mouse mutation causing left/right patterning defects together with
defects in anteroposterior and dorsoventral patterning. This mutation is
recessive lethal and was named no turning (nt) because the mutant embryos fail to
undergo embryonic turning. nt embryos exhibit cranial neural tube closure defects
and malformed somites and are caudally truncated. Development of the heart
arrests at the looped heart tube stage, with cardiovascular defects indicated by 
ballooning of the pericardial sac and the pooling of blood in various regions of 
the embryo. Interestingly, in nt embryos, the direction of heart looping was
randomized. Nodal and lefty, two genes that are normally expressed only in the
left lateral plate mesoderm, show expression in the right and left lateral plate 
mesoderm. Lefty, which is normally also expressed in the floorplate, is not found
in the prospective floor plate of nt embryos. This suggests the possibility of
notochordal defects. This was confirmed by histological analysis and the
examination of sonic hedgehog, Brachyury, and HNF-3 beta gene expression. These
studies showed that the notochord is present in the early nt embryo, but
degenerates as development progresses. Overall, these findings support the
hypothesis that the notochord plays an active role in left/right patterning. Our 
results suggest that nt may participate in this process by modulating the
notochordal expression of HNF-3 beta.

PMID: 9466889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Cell Physiol. 1998 Mar;174(3):273-84.

Alteration of expression of liver-enriched transcription factors in the
transition between growth and differentiation of primary cultured rat
hepatocytes.

Mizuguchi T(1), Mitaka T, Hirata K, Oda H, Mochizuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical University
School of Medicine, Japan.

In the present study, we showed the role of the liver-enriched transcription
factors in the transition during which proliferating hepatocytes become
quiescent. We used primary rat hepatocytes cultured in modified L-15 medium. The 
cells proliferated and, after the addition of 2% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) from
day 4, they stopped growing and gradually differentiated. During hepatic
proliferation, expression of hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF)1alpha, HNF4, C/EBP 
alpha, and C/EBP beta mRNAs was depressed, whereas that of HNF3alpha and HNF3beta
transcripts was enhanced. After the addition of DMSO, the expression of
HNF1alpha, HNF3gamma, and HNF4 returned to the level in isolated cells and
HNF1beta mRNA expression gradually increased. However, expression of C/EBP alpha 
and C/EBP beta mRNAs was partially recovered. The mitoinhibitory agents,
IL-1beta, IL-6, TGF-beta, and activin A, were examined to determine whether they 
could induce differentiation of proliferating hepatocytes as shown in cells
treated with DMSO. Although these factors inhibited cell growth, the cells did
not differentiate. The expression pattern of HNF3gamma mRNA was quite different
in the cells cultured with DMSO and those cultured with cytokines. Therefore,
hepatic differentiation requires not only inhibition of DNA synthesis but also
induction of appropriate transcription factors. Thus, expression of HNF3gamma,
C/EBP alpha, and C/EBP beta may be necessary for hepatocytes to acquire highly
differentiated functions in addition to coexpression of certain amounts of
transcripts of HNF1alpha, HNF1beta, HNF3alpha, HNF3beta, and HNF4 as well as
suppression of C/EBP delta.

PMID: 9462689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Dev Dyn. 1997 Dec;210(4):431-45.

Genetic patterning of the developing mouse tail at the time of posterior
neuropore closure.

Gofflot F(1), Hall M, Morriss-Kay GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy, University of Oxford, United Kingdom.

Posterior neuropore (PNP) closure coincides with the end of gastrulation, marking
the end of primary neurulation and primary body axis formation. Secondary
neurulation and axis formation involve differentiation of the tail bud
mesenchyme. Genetic control of the primary-secondary transition is not
understood. We report a detailed analysis of gene expression in the caudal region
of day 10 mouse embryos during primary neuropore closure. Embryos were collected 
at the 27-32 somite stage, fixed, processed for whole mount in situ
hybridisation, and subsequently sectioned for a more detailed analysis. Genes
selected for study include those involved in the key events of gastrulation and
neurulation at earlier stages and more cranial levels. Patterns of expression
within the tail bud, neural plate, recently closed neural tube, notochord,
hindgut, mesoderm, and surface ectoderm are illustrated and described.
Specifically, we report continuity of expression of the genes Wnt5a, Wnt5b, Evx1,
Fgf8, RARgamma, Brachyury, and Hoxb1 from primitive streak and node into
subpopulations of the tail bud and caudal axial structures. Within the caudal
notochord, developing floorplate, and hindgut, HNF3alpha, HNF3beta, Shh, and
Brachyury expression domains correlate directly with known genetic roles and
predicted tissue interdependence during induction and differentiation of these
structures. The patterns of expression of Wnt5a, Hoxb1, Brachyury, RARgamma, and 
Evx1, together with observations on proliferation, reveal that the caudal
mesoderm is organised at a molecular level into distinct domains delineated by
longitudinal and transverse borders before histological differentiation.
Expression of Wnt5a in the ventral ectodermal ridge supports previous evidence
that this structure is involved in epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. These
results provide a foundation for understanding the mechanisms facilitating
transition from primary to secondary body axis formation, as well as the factors 
involved in defective spinal neurulation.

PMID: 9415428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mech Dev. 1997 Nov;68(1-2):45-57.

Cerberus-like is a secreted factor with neutralizing activity expressed in the
anterior primitive endoderm of the mouse gastrula.

Belo JA(1), Bouwmeester T, Leyns L, Kertesz N, Gallo M, Follettie M, De Robertis 
EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
University of California, Los Angeles 90095-1662, USA.

We report the isolation of mouse cerberus-like (cer-l), a gene encoding a novel
secreted protein that is specifically expressed in the anterior visceral endoderm
during early gastrulation. Expression in the primitive endoderm starts before the
appearance of the primitive streak and lasts until the head-fold stage. In later 
stages, a second region of expression is found in newly formed somites. Mouse
cer-l shares some sequence similarity with Xenopus cerberus (Xcer). In Xenopus
assays cer-l, like Xcer, mRNA acts as a potent neuralizing factor that induces
forebrain markers and endoderm, but is unable to induce ectopic head-like
structures as Xcer does. In addition to cer-l, anterior visceral endoderm was
found to express the transcription factors Lim1, goosecoid and HNF-3beta that are
also present in trunk organizer cells. A model of how head and trunk development 
might be regulated is discussed. Given its neuralizing activity, the secreted
protein Cer-l is a candidate for mediating inductive activities of anterior
visceral endoderm.

PMID: 9431803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Dev Biol. 1997 Dec 15;192(2):432-45.

Early postnatal lethality in Hoxa-5 mutant mice is attributable to respiratory
tract defects.

Aubin J(1), Lemieux M, Tremblay M, Bérard J, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, Canada.

To uncover roles for the Hoxa-5 gene during embryogenesis, we have focused on
identifying structural and functional defects in organ systems underlying the
perinatal lethality in Hoxa-5 homozygous mutants. Analysis of the mutant
phenotype shows that Hoxa-5 is essential for normal organogenesis and function of
the respiratory tract. In homozygous newborn mutants, improper tracheal and lung 
morphogenesis can lead to tracheal occlusion, and to respiratory distress
associated with a marked decrease in the production of surfactant proteins.
Collectively, these defects likely underlie the pronounced mortality of
homozygous mutant pups. Furthermore, the loss of Hoxa-5 function results in
altered TTF-1, HNF-3 beta, and N-myc gene expression in the pulmonary epithelium.
Since expression of Hoxa-5 is confined to the mesenchymal component of the
developing trachea and lung, the effects observed in epithelial cells may result 
from a disruption of normal epithelial-mesenchymal interactions.

PMID: 9441679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Dev Biol. 1997 Dec 15;192(2):247-57.

HNF-6 is expressed in endoderm derivatives and nervous system of the mouse embryo
and participates to the cross-regulatory network of liver-enriched transcription 
factors.

Landry C(1), Clotman F, Hioki T, Oda H, Picard JJ, Lemaigre FP, Rousseau GG.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, International Institute of Cellular and
Molecular Pathology, Brussels, Belgium.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-6 (HNF-6) is a liver-enriched transcription factor that
contains a single cut domain and a novel type of homeodomain. Here we have
studied the developmental expression pattern of HNF-6 in the mouse. In situ
hybridization experiments showed that HNF-6 mRNA is detected in the liver at
embryonic day (E) 9, at the onset of liver differentiation. HNF-6 mRNA
disappeared transiently from the liver between E12.5 and E15. In transfection
experiments HNF-6 stimulated the expression of HNF-4 and of HNF-3 beta, two
transcription factors known to be involved in liver development and
differentiation. HNF-6 was detected in the pancreas from E10.5 onward, where it
was restricted to the exocrine cells. HNF-6 was also detected in the developing
nervous system. Both the brain and the spinal cord started to express HNF-6 at
E9-9.5 in postmitotic neuroblasts. Later on, HNF-6 was restricted to brain
nuclei, to the retina, to the ventral horn of the spinal cord, and to dorsal root
ganglia. Our observations that HNF-6 contributes to the control of the expression
of transcription factors and is expressed at early stages of liver, pancreas, and
neuronal differentiation suggest that HNF-6 regulates several developmental
programs.

PMID: 9441665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Dev Biol. 1997 Dec 15;192(2):228-46.

The cut-homeodomain transcriptional activator HNF-6 is coexpressed with its
target gene HNF-3 beta in the developing murine liver and pancreas.

Rausa F(1), Samadani U, Ye H, Lim L, Fletcher CF, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Costa 
RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Illinois at
Chicago 60612-7334, USA.

Murine hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 beta (HNF-3 beta) protein is a member of a
large family of developmentally regulated transcription factors that share
homology in the winged helix/fork head DNA binding domain and that participate in
embryonic pattern formation. HNF-3 beta also mediates cell-specific transcription
of genes important for the function of hepatocytes, intestinal and bronchiolar
epithelial, and pancreatic acinar cells. We have previously identified a
liver-enriched transcription factor, HNF-6, which is required for HNF-3 beta
promoter activity and also recognizes the regulatory region of numerous
hepatocyte-specific genes. In this study we used the yeast one-hybrid system to
isolate the HNF-6 cDNA, which encodes a cut-homeodomain-containing transcription 
factor that binds with the same specificity as the liver HNF-6 protein.
Cotransfection assays demonstrate that HNF-6 activates expression of a reporter
gene driven by the HNF-6 binding site from either the HNF-3 beta or transthyretin
(TTR) promoter regions. We used interspecific backcross analysis to determine
that murine Hnf6 gene is located in the middle of mouse chromosome 9. In situ
hybridization studies of staged specific embryos demonstrate that HNF-6 and its
potential target gene, HNF-3 beta, are coexpressed in the pancreatic and hepatic 
diverticulum. More detailed analysis of HNF-6 and HNF-3 beta's developmental
expression patterns provides evidence of colocalization in hepatocytes,
intestinal epithelial, and in the pancreatic ductal epithelial and exocrine
acinar cells. The expression patterns of these two transcription factors do not
overlap in other endoderm-derived tissues or the neurotube. We also found that
HNF-6 is also abundantly expressed in the dorsal root ganglia, the marginal
layer, and the midbrain. At day 18 of gestation and in the adult pancreas, HNF-6 
and HNF-3 beta transcripts colocalize in the exocrine acinar cells, but their
expression patterns diverge in other pancreatic epithelium. HNF-6, but not HNF-3 
beta, expression continues in the pancreatic ductal epithelium, whereas only
HNF-3 beta becomes restricted to the endocrine cells of the islets of Langerhans.
We discuss these expression patterns with respect to specification of hepatocytes
and differentiation of the endocrine and exocrine pancreas.

PMID: 9441664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;16(12):1407-18.

Liver-enriched transcription factors, HNF-1, HNF-3, and C/EBP, are major
contributors to the strong activity of the chicken CYP2H1 promoter in chick
embryo hepatocytes.

Dogra SC(1), May BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, South Australia.

Chicken CYP2H1 promoter constructs express strongly in chick embryo hepatocytes
at a level comparable with that of Rous sarcoma viral promoter. We have
identified the transcription factors responsible for the active CYP2H1 promoter. 
Binding sites for transcription factors were located within the first 160 bp of
promoter sequence using promoter deletion experiments and DNase I footprint
analysis. Sequence analysis revealed characteristic sites for the liver-enriched 
transcription factors of the HNF-1, HNF-3, and C/EBP families and for the
ubiquitous factor, USF. Protein binding to these sites was established by gel
mobility shift assays. Mutagenesis and transient transfection experiments
demonstrated that these sites, in combination, were responsible for the strong
promoter activity with a substantial contribution from HNF-1 and HNF-3. The
promoter was also active in mammalian HepG2 and COS-1 cell lines where expression
was dependent on the identified transcription factor binding sites but promoter
activity in the HeLa cells was low. Transactivation experiments revealed that
promoter expression could be activated through the appropriate binding sites by
exogenously expressed rat HNF-1alpha or HNF-1beta, rat HNF-3alpha or HNF-3beta
and chicken C/EBP alpha. Transcriptional synergism between HNF-1 and C/EBP was
observed in these transactivation experiments. A Barbie box-like sequence
overlapped the USF element but was not functional. The results demonstrate that
liver-enriched transcription factors and USF direct strong expression of the
CYP2H1 promoter in transiently transfected cells. By comparison, in vivo
expression of this gene in uninduced chick embryo hepatocytes is low but markedly
increased by phenobarbital. Drug induction may therefore substantially reflect
derepression of this inherently active promoter.

PMID: 9428789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Dev Dyn. 1997 Nov;210(3):305-14.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta limits cellular diversity in the developing
respiratory epithelium and alters lung morphogenesis in vivo.

Zhou L(1), Dey CR, Wert SE, Yan C, Costa RH, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta (HNF-3beta), a nuclear protein of the winged
helix family of transcription factors, is known to play a critical role in the
formation of the embryonic node, notochord, and foregut endoderm. HNF-3beta
influences the expression of a number of target genes in the respiratory
epithelium, activating transcription of thyroid transcription factor-1,
surfactant protein-B and clara cell secretory protein. In order to discern the
role of HNF-3beta in differentiation and gene expression in the lung, HNF-3beta
was expressed in developing respiratory epithelial cells of transgenic mice,
under the control of the human surfactant protein C gene promoter. Pulmonary
abnormalities were observed in the lungs of fetal mice bearing the HNF-3beta
transgene. Differentiation of distal respiratory epithelial cells was arrested in
the early pseudoglandular stage. Branching morphogenesis and vasculogenesis were 
markedly disrupted in association with decreased E-cadherin and vascular
endothelial growth factor expression. HNF-3beta limits cellular diversity of
developing respiratory epithelium and alters lung morphogenesis in vivo,
suggesting that precise temporal-spatial regulation of HNF-3beta expression is
critical for respiratory epithelial cell differentiation and lung morphogenesis.

PMID: 9389455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Exp Neurol. 1997 Oct;147(2):525-31.

Expression of floor plate in dispersed mesencephalic cultures: role in
differentiation of tyrosine hydroxylase neurons.

Cohen BR(1), Sladek CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Finch University of Health
Sciences/The Chicago Medical School, North Chicago, Illinois 60064, USA.

The availability of sufficient numbers of dopaminergic neurons for
transplantation has been an important issue. Recently, it has been shown that the
ventral floor plate (FP4-positive) cells and the transcription factor HNF-3beta
are important in the signals that terminate proliferation and produce
differentiation of the dopaminergic phenotype. In this study, dispersed
mesencephalon from embryonic rats at Day 11 postcoitus (E-11), 1 day prior to the
birth of TH cells, were cultured for 48 h and 1 week to evaluate TH neuronal
differentiation and/or proliferation in vitro. The number of TH cells increased
14x between 48 h and 1 week in culture. In dispersed E-14 cultures, the presence 
of FP4 and HNF-3beta markers was demonstrated using immunohistochemistry. The
majority of FP4-positive cell clusters were associated with TH neurons,
suggesting that floor plate cells may have participated in TH neuron
differentiation in culture. Antisense oligonucleotide probe for HNF-3beta mRNA
added daily to cultured E-14 cells blocked the HNF-3beta expression, but had no
effect on the FP4 or TH expression. These studies suggest a potentially important
role for floor plate cells in the differentiation of TH cells, and
differentiation and/or proliferation of TH cells in dispersed cultures of E-11 is
demonstrated.

PMID: 9344577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Oct;17(10):6002-13.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta is involved in pancreatic beta-cell-specific
transcription of the pdx-1 gene.

Wu KL(1), Gannon M, Peshavaria M, Offield MF, Henderson E, Ray M, Marks A, Gamer 
LW, Wright CV, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt Medical Center, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

The mammalian homeobox gene pdx-1 is expressed in pluripotent precursor cells in 
the dorsal and ventral pancreatic bud and duodenal endoderm, which will produce
the pancreas and the rostral duodenum. In the adult, pdr-1 is expressed
principally within insulin-secreting pancreatic islet beta cells and cells of the
duodenal epithelium. Our objective in this study was to localize sequences within
the mouse pdx-1 gene mediating selective expression within the islet. Studies of 
transgenic mice in which a genomic fragment of the mouse pdx-1 gene from kb -4.5 
to +8.2 was used to drive a beta-galactosidase reporter showed that the control
sequences sufficient for appropriate developmental and adult specific expression 
were contained within this region. Three nuclease-hypersensitive sites, located
between bp -2560 and -1880 (site 1), bp -1330 and -800 (site 2), and bp -260 and 
+180 (site 3), were identified within the 5'-flanking region of the endogenous
pdx-1 gene. Pancreatic beta-cell-specific expression was shown to be controlled
by sequences within site 1 from an analysis of the expression pattern of various 
pdr-1-herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase promoter expression constructs in
transfected beta-cell and non-beta-cell lines. Furthermore, we also established
that this region was important in vivo by demonstrating that expression from a
site 1-driven beta-galactosidase reporter construct was directed to islet
beta-cells in transgenic mice. The activity of the site 1-driven constructs was
reduced substantially in beta-cell lines by mutating a hepatocyte nuclear factor 
3 (HNF3)-like site located between nucleotides -2007 and -1996. Gel shift
analysis indicated that HNF3beta present in islet beta cells binds to this
element. Immunohistochemical studies revealed that HNF3beta was present within
the nuclei of almost all islet beta cells and subsets of pancreatic acinar cells.
Together, these results suggest that HNF3beta, a key regulator of endodermal cell
lineage development, plays an essential role in the cell-type-specific
transcription of the pdx-1 gene in the pancreas.

PMCID: PMC232449
PMID: 9315659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Exp Cell Res. 1997 Aug 1;234(2):277-84.

Differential induction of HNF-3 transcription factors during neuronal
differentiation.

Jacob A(1), Budhiraja S, Reichel RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, The Chicago Medical School, 
Illinois 60064, USA.

We have investigated the regulation of transcription factors HNF-3alpha and
HNF-3beta during the retinoic acid-mediated differentiation of mouse P19 cells.
Retinoic acid treatment converts P19 stem cells into neurons and astrocytes and
we have clearly shown that gene expression of both HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta is
activated during this process. HNF-3alpha transcription was detected 2 h after
addition of retinoic acid and took place in the absence of de novo protein
synthesis. This suggests that HNF-3alpha is a primary target for retinoic acid
action. HNF-3alpha induction displays a biphasic profile and HNF-3alpha mRNA
reaches maximal levels at 2 and 6 days postdifferentiation. Additional
experiments strongly suggest that the second peak is due to HNF-3alpha induction 
in postmitotic neurons. P19 stem cells, on the other hand, do not contain any
detectable HNF-3alpha mRNA. According to our studies, the retinoic acid-mediated 
induction of HNF-3alpha occurs at the level of transcriptional initiation and is 
conferred by distal promoter sequences. In comparison to HNF-3alpha, HNF-3beta
induction is a subsequent event and detectable levels of HNF-3beta mRNA
materialize approximately 1 day after addition of retinoic acid to P19 stem
cells. Time course studies firmly demonstrate that HNF-3beta mRNA peaks at about 
2 days postdifferentiation and then declines to virtually unreadable levels. This
temporal pattern is consistent with HNF-3beta being a secondary target for
retinoic acid. In analogy to HNF-3alpha, HNF-3beta activation also takes place at
the level of transcriptional initiation. Recent studies implicate HNF-3alpha and 
HNF-3beta in early mammalian neurogenesis. The detection of HNF-3alpha/beta
activation during P19 cell differentiation provides us with a convenient cell
culture system to elucidate the induction mechanism and the precise role of both 
transcriptional regulators in the formation of neuronal cells.

PMID: 9260895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Diabetes. 1997 Aug;46(8):1364-7.

Pancreatic islet expression studies and polymorphic DNA markers in the genes
encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and -6.

Vaisse C(1), Kim J, Espinosa R 3rd, Le Beau MM, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021, USA.

The genes encoding the functionally related hepatocyte nuclear factors HNF-1alpha
and HNF-4alpha play a critical role in normal pancreatic beta-cell function.
Mutations in these liver-enriched transcription factors result in two forms of
early-onset type 2 diabetes (maturity-onset diabetes of the young [MODY]), MODY3 
and MODY1, which are characterized by impaired glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion, early disease onset, and autosomal dominant inheritance. The
transcriptional hierarchy of HNFs suggests that other proteins of the regulatory 
cascade might be responsible for other forms of MODY and/or late-onset type 2
diabetes. In this study, we show that HNF-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and
-6 are expressed in pancreatic beta-cells. We report the identification and
characterization of simple tandem repeat DNA polymorphisms in the genes encoding 
HNF-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and -6 and the mapping of HNF-6 to
chromosome bands 15q21.1-21.2 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. These
markers will be useful to study the role of genetic variation in these genes in
the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 9231664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Biol Chem. 1997 Jul 11;272(28):17327-32.

Protein kinase A activation of the surfactant protein B gene is mediated by
phosphorylation of thyroid transcription factor 1.

Yan C(1), Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Medical Center, Divisions of Neonatology and Pulmonary
Biology, The Children's Hospital Research Foundations, Cincinnati, Ohio
45229-3039, USA.

Thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1) is a homeodomain-containing nuclear
transcription factor expressed in epithelial cells of the lung and thyroid. TTF-1
binds to and activates the transcription of genes expressed selectively in the
respiratory epithelium including pulmonary surfactant A, B, C and Clara cell
secretory protein. Transfection with a plasmid encoding the cyclic AMP-dependent 
protein kinase (protein kinase A; PKA) catalytic subunit, Cat-beta, stimulated
the phosphorylation of a TTF-1-flag fusion protein 6-7-fold in H441 pulmonary
adenocarcinoma cells. Recombinant TTF-1 was phosphorylated by purified PKA
catalytic subunit in the presence of [gamma-32P]ATP. PKA catalytic subunit family
members, Cat-alpha and Cat-beta, markedly enhanced the transcriptional activation
of surfactant B gene promoters by TTF-1 in vitro. Peptide mapping was used to
identify a PKA phosphorylation site at the NH2 terminus of TTF-1. A 17-amino acid
synthetic peptide comprising this site completely inhibited the PKA-dependent
phosphorylation of TTF-1 in vitro. A substitution mutation of TTF-1 (Thr9 two
head right arrow Ala) abolished phosphorylation by PKA and reduced
transactivation of the surfactant B gene promoter. Transfection with a plasmid
encoding the cAMP regulatory element binding factor inhibited transcriptional
activity of the surfactant protein B gene promoter. Phosphorylation of TTF-1
mediates PKA-dependent activation of surfactant protein B gene transcription.

PMID: 9211870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cell Biol Toxicol. 1997 Jul;13(4-5):257-62.

Zonal distribution of transcripts of four hepatic transcription factors in the
mature rat liver.

Lindros KO(1), Oinonen T, Issakainen J, Nagy P, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)National Public Health Institute, Department of Alcohol Research, Helsinki,
Finland.

Within the liver acinus the majority of genes are expressed in an ascending or
descending gradient from the portal to the central vein. The regulatory factors
involved in this spatial pattern of gene expression are still poorly understood. 
Many liver genes are regulated by liver-enriched transcription factors. Here we
report on mRNA distribution of four transcription factors in cell lysates
obtained from either the periportal or the perivenous region after zone-specific 
digitonin infusion and by in-situ hybridization. Northern blot analysis revealed 
that there were slightly more transcripts of C/EBP, HNF1 beta (n.s.) and HNF4 (p 
< 0.05), but fewer of HNF3 gamma (n.s.), in perivenous than in periportal
lysates. A somewhat stronger staining in the perivenous region of HNF4 was also
seen by in-situ hybridization. The moderate acinar zonation of the mRNAs of these
transcription factors suggests that at best they could modulate but not govern
the zonated expression of liver genes in the mature liver.

PMID: 9298246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. EMBO J. 1997 Jul 1;16(13):3955-64.

Axial (HNF3beta) and retinoic acid receptors are regulators of the zebrafish
sonic hedgehog promoter.

Chang BE(1), Blader P, Fischer N, Ingham PW, Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)IGBMC, CNRS/INSERM/ULP, BP 163, Illkirch, France.

The signalling molecule Sonic hedgehog is involved in a multitude of distinct
patterning processes during vertebrate embryogenesis. In the nascent body axis of
the zebrafish embryo, sonic hedgehog is co-expressed with axial (HNF3beta in
mammals), a transcription regulator of the winged helix family. We show here that
misexpression of axial leads to ectopic activation of sonic hedgehog expression
in the zebrafish, suggesting that axial is a regulator of sonic hedgehog
transcription. The sonic hedgehog gene was cloned from zebrafish and its promoter
was characterized with respect to activation by axial. Expression of axial or rat
HNF3beta in HeLa cells results in activation of co-transfected sonic hedgehog
promoter-CAT fusion genes. This effect is mediated by two Axial (HNF3beta)
recognition sequences. We furthermore identified a retinoic acid response element
(RARE) in the sonic hedgehog upstream region which can be bound by retinoic acid 
receptor (RAR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR) heterodimers in vitro and confers
retinoic acid inducibility to the sonic hedgehog promoter in the HeLa cell
system. Our results suggest that both Axial (HNF3beta) and retinoic acid
receptors are direct regulators of the sonic hedgehog gene.

PMCID: PMC1170019
PMID: 9233805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Development. 1997 Jul;124(14):2843-54.

Goosecoid and HNF-3beta genetically interact to regulate neural tube patterning
during mouse embryogenesis.

Filosa S(1), Rivera-Pérez JA, Gómez AP, Gansmuller A, Sasaki H, Behringer RR, Ang
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur/Collège de France, Illkirch, CU de
Strasbourg.

The homeobox gene goosecoid (gsc) and the winged-helix gene Hepatic Nuclear
Factor-3beta (HNF-3beta) are co-expressed in all three germ layers in the
anterior primitive streak and at the rostral end of mouse embryos during
gastrulation. In this paper, we have tested the possibility of functional
synergism or redundancy between these two genes during embryogenesis by
generating double-mutant mice for gsc and HNF-3beta. Double-mutant embryos of
genotype gsc(-/-);HNF-3beta(+/-) show a new phenotype as early as embryonic days 
8.75. Loss of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and HNF-3beta expression was observed in the
notochord and ventral neural tube of these embryos. These results indicate that
gsc and HNF-3beta interact to regulate Shh expression and consequently
dorsal-ventral patterning in the neural tube. In the forebrain of the mutant
embryos, severe growth defects and absence of optic vesicles could involve loss
of expression of fibroblast growth factor-8, in addition to Shh. Our results also
suggest that interaction between gsc and HNF-3beta regulates other signalling
molecules required for proper development of the foregut, branchial arches and
heart.

PMID: 9226455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Development. 1997 Jul;124(13):2537-52.

Gli1 is a target of Sonic hedgehog that induces ventral neural tube development.

Lee J(1), Platt KA, Censullo P, Ruiz i Altaba A.

Author information: 
(1)The Skirball Institute, Developmental Genetics Program and Department of Cell 
Biology, NYU Medical Center, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The vertebrate zinc finger genes of the Gli family are homologs of the Drosophila
gene cubitus interruptus. In frog embryos, Gli1 is expressed transiently in the
prospective floor plate during gastrulation and in cells lateral to the midline
during late gastrula and neurula stages. In contrast, Gli2 and Gli3 are absent
from the neural plate midline with Gli2 expressed widely and Gli3 in a graded
fashion with highest levels in lateral regions. In mouse embryos, the three Gli
genes show a similar pattern of expression in the neural tube but are coexpressed
throughout the early neural plate. Because Gli1 is the only Gli gene expressed in
prospective floor plate cells of frog embryos, we have investigated a possible
involvement of this gene in ventral neural tube development. Here we show that
Shh signaling activates Gli1 transcription and that widespread expression of
endogenous frog or human glioma Gli1, but not Gli3, in developing frog embryos
results in the ectopic differentiation of floor plate cells and ventral neurons
within the neural tube. Floor-plate-inducing ability is retained when cytoplasmic
Gli1 proteins are forced into the nucleus or are fused to the VP16
transactivating domain. Thus, our results identify Gli1 as a midline target of
Shh and suggest that it mediates the induction of floor plate cells and ventral
neurons by Shh acting as a transcriptional regulator.

PMID: 9216996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jul;17(7):3817-22.

Involvement of hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 in endoderm differentiation of
embryonic stem cells.

Levinson-Dushnik M(1), Benvenisty N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Givat-Ram, Israel.

The transcription factors of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) family, which
are active in the liver, are expressed early during endoderm differentiation. To 
study their involvement in early murine development, we examined their role in
embryonic stem (ES) cells. HNF3alpha or HNF3beta mRNA transcripts were not
detected in ES cells before differentiation, and only low levels of HNF3beta mRNA
were detected at a late stage of differentiation of ES cells to embryoid bodies
(EB) (20 days after induction of differentiation). To examine the consequences of
overexpressing HNF3alpha or -beta in ES cells, we transfected the two genes into 
these cells and determined the levels of expression of tissue-specific genes
during EB differentiation. Specifically, we examined expression of albumin,
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR), phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase (PEPCK), alpha1-antitrypsin, transthyretin, zeta-globin, and
neurofilament 68kd as markers for different cell lineages. Overexpression of
HNF3beta (and to a lesser extent of HNF3alpha) induced the expression of genes
associated with endodermal lineage, namely, the genes for CFTR and albumin, but
did not induce the expression of genes involved in late endoderm differentiation,
such as the genes for PEPCK and alpha1-antitrypsin. Moreover, expression of
HNF1beta was highly induced in HNF3-overexpressing cells, while expression of
HNF1alpha and HNF4 was only mildly induced in these cells. Therefore, HNF3alpha
and -beta seem to be involved in early endoderm differentiation of ES cells and
together with other developmental factors are apparently needed for the induction
of the endodermal lineage in vivo.

PMCID: PMC232233
PMID: 9199315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Am J Physiol. 1997 Jun;272(6 Pt 1):L1142-51.

Interferon-gamma regulation of Clara cell gene expression: in vivo and in vitro.

Magdaleno SM(1), Wang G, Jackson KJ, Ray MK, Welty S, Costa RH, DeMayo FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA.

This report demonstrates that Clara cell 10-kDa protein (CC10) mRNA levels are
regulated by interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma). An analysis of total lung RNA from
mice given IFN-gamma intratracheally showed increased levels of CC10 mRNA
compared to control animals but no significant increases in surfactant proteins B
and C. These results were confirmed in a Clara cell line, mtCC1-2, generated from
the lungs of a transgenic mouse expressing the SV40 large T antigen under the
control of a Clara cell-specific promoter. Significant increases in mtCC1-2 CC10 
mRNA levels were observed in a time- and a dose-dependent manner. The expression 
of transacting factors hepatocyte nuclear factors 3 alpha and 3 beta (HNF-3 alpha
and HNF-3 beta) were also analyzed, and a transient increase in the expression of
HNF-3 beta but not HNF-3 alpha was detected. Deoxyribonuclease I footprint
analysis identified a signal transducer and activator of transcription (STAT)
binding site (at nucleotides -293 to -284 of CC10) adjacent to two thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) binding sites, suggesting a potential interaction 
between STAT1 and TTF-1. This report reinforces the hypothesis that CC10
functions as an anti-inflammatory protein and that increases in CC10 protein may 
provide additional protection from inflammation and disease in the lung.

PMID: 9227516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2598-604.

Hormonal regulation of an islet-specific enhancer in the pancreatic homeobox gene
STF-1.

Sharma S(1), Jhala US, Johnson T, Ferreri K, Leonard J, Montminy M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92037,
USA.

The homeobox protein STF-1 appears to function as a master control switch for
expression of the pancreatic program during development. Here we characterize a
composite enhancer which directs STF-1 expression to pancreatic islet cells via
two functional elements that recognize the nuclear factors HNF-3beta and BETA-2. 
In keeping with their inhibitory effects on islet cell maturation,
glucocorticoids were found to repress STF-1 gene expression by interfering with
HNF-3beta activity on the islet-specific enhancer. Overexpression of HNF-3beta
suppressed glucocorticoid receptor-mediated inhibition of the STF-1 gene, and our
results suggest that the expansion of pancreatic islet precursor cells during
development may be restricted by hormonal cues which regulate STF-1 gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC232109
PMID: 9111329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Apr;17(4):1805-16.

Characterization of a novel protein kinase C response element in the glucagon
gene.

Fürstenau U(1), Schwaninger M, Blume R, Kennerknecht I, Knepel W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Göttingen, Germany.

To maintain glucose levels in blood within narrow limits, the synthesis and
secretion of pancreatic islet hormones are controlled by a variety of neural,
hormonal, and metabolic messengers that act through multiple signal transduction 
pathways. Glucagon gene transcription is stimulated by cyclic AMP and
depolarization-induced calcium influx. In this study, the effect of protein
kinase C on glucagon gene transcription was investigated. After transient
transfection of a glucagon-reporter fusion gene into the glucagon-producing islet
cell line alphaTC2, activation of protein kinase C by
12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate (TPA) stimulated glucagon gene
transcription. By 5' deletions, 3' deletions, internal deletion, and
oligonucleotide cassette insertion, the TPA-responsive element was mapped to the 
G2 element (from -165 to -200). Like TPA, overexpression of oncogenic Ras (V-12
Ras) stimulated G2-mediated transcription whereas overexpression of a dominant
negative Ras mutant (N-17 Ras) blocked the effect of TPA. A mutational analysis
of G2 function and nuclear protein binding indicated that protein kinase C and
Ras responsiveness is conferred to the glucagon gene by HNF-3beta functionally
interacting with a protein that binds to a closely associated site with sequence 
similarity to binding sites of Ets family proteins. HNF-3beta belongs to the
winged-helix family of transcription factors and has been implicated in the
control of cell-specific and developmental gene expression. The results of the
present study show that the cell lineage-specific transcription factor HNF-3beta 
is an essential component of a novel protein kinase C response element in the
glucagon gene.

PMCID: PMC232027
PMID: 9121428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Development. 1997 Apr;124(7):1313-22.

A binding site for Gli proteins is essential for HNF-3beta floor plate enhancer
activity in transgenics and can respond to Shh in vitro.

Sasaki H(1), Hui C, Nakafuku M, Kondoh H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Biology, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.
hsasaki@imcb.osaka-u.ac.jp

The floor plate plays important roles in ventral pattern formation and axonal
guidance within the neural tube of vertebrate embryos. A critical event for floor
plate development is the induction of a winged helix transcription factor,
Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor-3beta (HNF-3beta). The enhancer for floor plate
expression of HNF-3beta is located 3' of the transcription unit and consists of
multiple elements. HNF-3beta induction depends on the notochord-derived signal,
Sonic hedgehog (Shh). Genetic analysis in Drosophila has led to the
identification of genes involved in the Hh signalling pathway, and cubitus
interruptus (ci), encoding a protein with five zinc finger motifs, was placed
downstream. In the present work, we test the involvement of Gli proteins, the
mouse homologues of Ci, in activation of the floor plate enhancer of HNF-3beta.
Transgenic analysis shows that a Gli-binding site is required for the activity of
the minimal floor plate enhancer of HNF-3beta in vivo. Three Gli genes are
differentially expressed in the developing neural tube. Gli expression is
restricted to the ventral part, while Gli2 and Gli3 are expressed throughout the 
neural tube and dorsally, respectively. Strong Gli and Gli2, and weak Gli3
expressions transiently overlap with HNF-3beta at the time of its induction.
Consistent with ventrally localized expression, Gli expression can be
up-regulated by Shh in a cell line. Finally, the Gli-binding site acts as a Shh
responsive element, and human GLI, but not GLI3, can activate this binding site
in tissue culture. Taken together, these findings suggest that Gli, and probably 
also Gli2, are good candidates for transcriptional activators of the HNF-3beta
floor plate enhancer, and the binding site for Gli proteins is a key element for 
response to Shh signalling. These results also support the idea that Gli/Ci are
evolutionary conserved transcription factors in the Hedgehog signalling pathway.

PMID: 9118802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mech Dev. 1997 Mar;62(2):197-211.

Winged-helix, Hedgehog and Bmp genes are differentially expressed in distinct
cell layers of the murine yolk sac.

Farrington SM(1), Belaoussoff M, Baron MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

The visceral yolk sac plays a critical role in normal embryogenesis, yet little
is known about the specific molecules that regulate its development. We show here
that four winged-helix genes (HNF-3alpha, HNF-3beta, HNF-3gamma and HFH-4) are
restricted to visceral endoderm. In the absence of HNF-3beta, visceral endoderm
forms but the morphogenetic movements by which the embryo becomes enclosed within
its yolk sac are disrupted and serum protein gene transcription is greatly
reduced. Hedgehog and Bmp genes, which encode signaling molecules known to play
multiple roles in embryonic development, are also differentially expressed in the
closely apposed yolk sac mesoderm and endoderm layers. Our results suggest that
similar mechanisms may be utilized to mediate inductive interactions in both
extraembryonic and embryonic tissues.

PMID: 9152011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Genomics. 1997 Feb 1;39(3):417-9.

Assignment of the human genes for hepatocyte nuclear factor 3-alpha, -beta, and
-gamma (HNF3A, HNF3B, HNF3G) to 14q12-q13, 20p11, and 19q13.2-q13.4.

Mincheva A(1), Lichter P, Schütz G, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Organisation komplexer Genome, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum,
Heidelberg, Germany.

PMID: 9119385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Biol Chem. 1996 Dec 13;271(50):31846-54.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta stimulates the transcription of the human
insulin-like growth factor I gene in a direct and indirect manner.

Nolten LA(1), Steenbergh PH, Sussenbach JS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, Utrecht University, Graduate School of
Developmental Biology, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.
steenbergh@med.ruu.nl

Promoter 1 (P1) of the human insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) gene is most
active in adult liver. In this study we show that HNF-3beta, a member of the
winged helix protein family of liver-enriched transcription factors, has a strong
stimulatory effect on the activity of P1. Transient transfection experiments in
combination with bandshift and DNase I footprinting analysis revealed the
presence of two HNF-3 binding sites in the proximal promoter region of P1. Both
binding sites, which are well conserved in evolution, are required for maximal
transactivation. Studies employing HNF-3 mutant constructs indicated that IGF-I
expression is also regulated indirectly by HNF-3beta as a consequence of enhanced
expression of HNF-1alpha. This liver-enriched transcription factor has previously
been shown to transactivate P1. Thus, HNF-3beta regulates the expression of the
human IGF-I gene via two distinct mechanisms.

PMID: 8943227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Int J Dev Biol. 1996 Dec;40(6):1081-8.

Coexpression of HNF-3 beta and Isl-1/2 and mixed distribution of ventral cell
types in the early neural tube.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine,
New York, USA. ria@saturn.med.nyu.edu

Pattern formation in the vertebrate ventral neural tube has been proposed to
depend on the ability of notochord-derived signals to induce the differentiation 
of distinct cell types in a distance-dependent manner. To determine whether the
distribution of early differentiating cell types in the ventral neural tube is
consistent with the operation of such a mechanism in vivo, the early localization
of Isl-1/2+ motor neurons in relation to HNF-3 beta+ floor plate cells has been
investigated. In the most immature regions of the caudal spinal cord of early rat
and chick embryos, an initial mixed distribution of cell types was detected that 
develops into a distribution characteristic of the final embryonic pattern where 
different cell types are found at distinct locations. In addition, a number of
cells that coexpress both markers are detected within the floor plate. At later
stages, coexpression is also detected in the hindbrain in the boundary region
between HNF-3 beta+ ventricular cells and Isl-1/2+ motor neurons. The mixed
distribution of early differentiating cells expressing HNF-3 beta and Isl-1/2 and
the coexpression of these markers in single cells within the floor plate suggest 
that secondary cellular interactions are important in the generation of the final
embryonic pattern of the neural tube.

PMID: 9032013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8813-20.

A functional hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 binding site is a critical component of 
the duck hepatitis B virus major surface antigen promoter.

Welsheimer T(1), Newbold JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 27599-7290, USA.

The gene coding for the S protein, the smaller of the two envelope antigens of
the duck hepatitis B virus (DHBV), is transcribed from a TATA-less promoter. In
this study, we localized the promoter to a 245-bp segment of the genome that was 
capable of efficiently driving expression of a linked reporter gene upon
transient transfection into the differentiated hepatoma cell lines LMH and HepG2.
However, no measurable activity from this construct could be detected in similar 
assays with the dedifferentiated cell line HepG2.1 or the nonhepatic cell line
HeLa. Located at position -25 relative to the transcriptional start site was a
sequence conforming to the consensus binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 3
(HNF3). Deletion of this region reduced activity of the reporter gene to barely
detectable levels in LMH cells. The results of electrophoretic mobility shift
analysis (EMSA) demonstrated that a double-stranded oligonucleotide containing
this sequence formed a specific complex with DNA-binding proteins from LMH and
HepG2 cells but not with nuclear extracts obtained from HepG2.1 or HeLa cells.
Cotransfection of HepG2.1 cells with DHBV S promoter constructs and a rat
HNF3beta expression plasmid resulted in transactivation of only those constructs 
in which the candidate HNF3 site was present. Furthermore, EMSA using HepG2.1
nuclear extracts containing exogenously expressed HNF3 formed complexes with the 
same migration and competition properties as those in which the proteins were
derived from the differentiated hepatoma cells. Thus, several lines of evidence
suggest a critical role for HNF3 in activity from the DHBV S promoter.

PMCID: PMC190978
PMID: 8971010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Exp Cell Res. 1996 Nov 25;229(1):27-34.

Endoderm-specific gene expression in embryonic stem cells differentiated to
embryoid bodies.

Abe K(1), Niwa H, Iwase K, Takiguchi M, Mori M, Abé SI, Abe K, Yamamura KI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Department of Developmental
Genetics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Japan.

Mouse embryonic stem cells can differentiate into various cell types within cell 
aggregates called embryoid bodies (EBs). This structure consists of ectodermal,
mesodermal, and endodermal tissues, which resemble the embryo of egg-cylinder
stage. After 8-10 days in culture, about half of the EBs expand into large cystic
structures homologous to visceral yolk sac of postimplantation embryos. To study 
endoderm differentiation at molecular level, we examined expression of endoderm
marker genes during the processes of EB development. alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP) and 
transthyretin (TTR) transcripts increased at the stage when embryoid bodies began
to form yolk-sac-like structures and were expressed strongly thereafter.
Expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4, a variant form of HNF1 (also
called HNF1beta), and HNF3beta started before the onset of AFP and TTR
expression. HNF1 (also called HNF1alpha) expression began a few days after the
onset of the expression of the transcription factors described above. Serum
albumin (ALB) transcript was only found in late large cystic EBs. Also, AFP gene 
expression preceded ALB gene expression. These results suggest that the patterns 
of endoderm gene expression during EB development reflect the order found during 
mouse development in vivo, and EB formation may serve as an in vitro system to
study the differentiation process.

PMID: 8940246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Int J Dev Biol. 1996 Oct;40(5):929-40.

Expression of axial and sonic hedgehog in wildtype and midline defective
zebrafish embryos.

Strähle U(1), Blader P, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)ICRF Developmental Biology Unit, Department of Zoology, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

We present a description of the expression of the HNF-3 beta homolog axial (axl) 
in the developing zebrafish up to larva stages and compare it with that of sonic 
hedgehog (shh). Both genes are expressed in derivatives of all three germ layers 
in dynamic patterns that show substantial overlap, consistent with mutual
regulatory interactions between the two genes. However, we also describe unique
sites of expression of both axl and shh indicating that some aspects of their
regulation are independent of one another. In no tail (ntl, zebrafish Brachyury) 
and floating head (flh, zebrafish Xnot1) mutants, both of which affect notochord 
development, early expression of axl in the organizer is unaffected, excluding a 
function for these genes in establishment of axl expression. At later stages, ntl
and flh mutants show different effects on the expression of both axl and shh in
the neuroectoderm of the trunk and tail reflecting their distinct contributions
to the development of the midline mesoderm; in contrast to flh and ntl mutations 
whose effects are restricted to the trunk and tail, mutation of cyclops (cyc)
affects axl and shh expression along the entire midline of the neuroectoderm.
Endodermal expression of axl and shh is not affected by the mutations showing
that development of the endoderm is under distinct control.

PMID: 8946241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Histochem Cytochem. 1996 Oct;44(10):1183-93.

Thyroid transcription factor-1, hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta, surfactant
protein B, C, and Clara cell secretory protein in developing mouse lung.

Zhou L(1), Lim L, Costa RH, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

We used immunohistochemical analysis to localize thyroid transcription factor-1
(TTF-1), hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta (HNF-3beta), prosurfactant proteins B
and C (pro-SP-B, pro-SP-C), surfactant protein B (SP-B), and Clara cell secretory
protein (CCSP) in developing mouse lung. TTF-1 and HNF-3beta were expressed at
the onset of lung morphogenesis (gestational Day 10) and throughout fetal lung
development, being detected in the nuclei of airway epithelial cells. TTF-1 was
most prominent in distal airway epithelial cells in embryonic lung and HNF-3beta 
in proximal bronchial and bronchiolar epithelial cells. Pro-SP-B and pro-SP-C
were first detected on gestational Day 11, being localized to the cytoplasm of
airway epithelial cells. Expression of both pro-proteins was confined to distal
airway epithelial cells from gestational Day 12 to Day 16. From gestational Day
17 and thereafter, pro- SP-B was detectable in Type II cells and bronchiolar
epithelial cells, whereas pro-SP-C was restricted to Type II cells. SP-B peptide 
was first detected on gestational Day 17 in the cytoplasm of Type II cells and
within the lumen of distal airways. SP-B peptide was detectable only in the
cytoplasm of Type II cells in adult lung. CCSP was first detected on gestational 
Day 17, being localized to the cytoplasm of columnar epithelial cells lining the 
conducting airways. Pro-SP-B, SF-B, pro-SP-C, and CCSP staining increased before 
birth. The early expression of TTF-1 and HNF-3beta, preceding and overlapping
that of pro-SP-B, mature SP-B, pro-SP-C, and CCSP, supports a regulatory role for
TTF-1 and HNF-3beta in lung-specific gene expression.

PMID: 8813084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Biol Chem. 1996 Sep 6;271(36):21859-69.

Purification and properties of rat liver nuclear proteins that interact with the 
hepatitis B virus enhancer 1.

Kosovsky MJ(1), Huan B, Siddiqui A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center,
Denver, Colorado 80262, USA.

The hepatitis B virus enhancer 1 element plays a fundamental role in the
liver-specific regulation of hepatitis B virus gene expression. A central region 
of enhancer 1, the enhancer core domain, contains at least four cis-acting
sequence motifs that are essential for enhancer 1 activity. In this study, we
have investigated an essential motif within the core domain previously defined as
footprint V (FPV). Transient transfection analyses demonstrate that FPV is
capable of independently functioning in a liver-specific manner to activate
transcription. Therefore, to further examine the liver-specific properties of
FPV-mediated enhancer 1 activity, we have carried out the biochemical
purification and characterization of FPV binding activity from rat liver nuclei. 
This study has conclusively identified hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta
(HNF-3beta), a liver-enriched member of the HNF-3/forkhead gene family, as the
predominant purified protein that interacts with the FPV motif. Moreover, a
cellular protein(s) that copurified with HNF-3beta specifically interacts with a 
novel sequence motif that partially overlaps FPV. Since this novel motif contains
a palindromic sequence, we have tentatively referred to the protein(s) that binds
to this site as palindrome-binding factor (PBF). Additional evidence indicates
that HNF-3beta and PBF cooperatively interact with enhancer 1. Therefore, this
study supports the hypothesis that FPV-mediated enhancer activity involves a
cooperative interplay between HNF-3beta and at least one other enhancer 1-binding
protein, PBF.

PMID: 8702987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Development. 1996 Sep;122(9):2885-94.

Antagonizing cAMP-dependent protein kinase A in the dorsal CNS activates a
conserved Sonic hedgehog signaling pathway.

Epstein DJ(1), Marti E, Scott MP, McMahon AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
MA 02138, USA.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling plays a significant role in defining the polarity of a
variety of tissue types along the anterior/posterior and dorsal/ventral axes in
both vertebrate and invertebrate organisms. The pathway through which Hh
transduces its signal is still obscure, however, recent data have implicated the 
cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A as a negative regulator of the Hh signal
transduction pathway. One of the vertebrate Hh family members, Sonic hedgehog
(Shh), can induce ventral neural cell types both in vivo and in vitro; high
concentrations induce floor plate and lower concentrations motor neurons. To
investigate whether PKA plays an active role in the suppression of ventral neural
differentiation, we generated transgenic embryos expressing a dominant negative
form of PKA (dnPKA) in primarily dorsal aspects of the mouse CNS. Similar to our 
earlier results with Shh, we observed the induction of floor plate and motor
neuron markers in embryos expressing the dominant negative PKA transgene and the 
loss of dorsal gene expression at rostral levels. Thus suppression of PKA
activity is sufficient to activate targets of the Shh signaling pathway in the
vertebrate CNS suggesting that induction of ventral cell types occurs via the
antagonistic action of Shh on PKA activity. Two mammalian target genes that are
strongly expressed in ectopic dorsal locations in response to dnPKA are Ptc and
Gli. As both of these are targets of Drosophila Hh signaling, our data point to
an evolutionary conservation in both the mechanisms of signaling and the
effectors of the signaling pathway.

PMID: 8787761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Jul;10(7):794-800.

Hepatic nuclear factor 3 is an accessory factor required for the stimulation of
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene transcription by glucocorticoids.

Wang JC(1), Strömstedt PE, O'Brien RM, Granner DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Transcription of the hepatic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene is stimulated
by glucocorticoids and inhibited by insulin. The glucocorticoid response is
mediated by a complex glucocorticoid response unit that consists of two
glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-binding sites (GR1 and GR2) and two accessory
factor-binding sites (AF1 and AF2). The complete unit is required for the full
glucocorticoid response. The dominant insulin effect is mediated in part through 
an insulin response sequence that is coincident with the AF2 element. Members of 
the hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) and CCAAT enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)
families bind to the AF2 element; however, there is no correlation between
binding of these factors and the ability of the AF2 element to mediate an insulin
response. We show here that binding of HNF3 does correlate with the stimulation
of the glucocorticoid response by the AF2 element and that C/EBP is apparently
not involved in this effect. This requirement for HNF3 is quite specific since
the substitution of elements known to enhance the action of the GR in other
promoters fails to recapitulate AF2 accessory factor activity. By contrast, an
HNF3-binding site from the transthyretin gene is able to substitute for the wild 
type AF2 sequence and elicit a maximal glucocorticoid response. Based on current 
and previous observations, the glucocorticoid response unit consists of four DNA 
elements that bind four different proteins. These are: AF1 (hepatic nuclear
factor 4/chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor), AF2 (HNF3),
GR1 (GR), and GR2 (GR).

PMID: 8813720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Biol Chem. 1996 Jun 7;271(23):13621-8.

Control of apolipoprotein AI gene expression through synergistic interactions
between hepatocyte nuclear factors 3 and 4.

Harnish DC(1), Malik S, Kilbourne E, Costa R, Karathanasis SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Molecular Biology, Lederle Laboratories, Pearl
River, New York 10965, USA.

Apolipoprotein AI (apoAI) gene expression in liver depends on synergistic
interactions between transcription factors bound to three distinct sites (A, B,
and C) within a hepatocyte-specific enhancer in the 5'-flanking region of the
gene. In this study, we showed that a segment spanning sites A and B retains
substantial levels of enhancer activity in hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells and that
sites A and B are occupied by the liver-enriched hepatocyte nuclear factors
(HNFs) 4 and 3, respectively, in these cells. In non-hepatic CV-1 cells, HNF-4
and HNF-3beta activated this minimal enhancer synergistically. This synergy was
dependent upon simultaneous binding of these factors to their cognate sites, but 
it was not due to cooperativity in DNA binding. Separation of these sites by
varying helical turns of DNA did not affect simultaneous binding of HNF-3beta and
HNF-4 nor did it influence their functional synergy. The synergy was, however,
dependent upon the cell type used for functional analysis. In addition, this
synergy was further potentiated by estrogen treatment of cells cotransfected with
the estrogen receptor. These data indicate that a cell type-restricted
intermediary factor jointly recruited by HNF-4 and HNF-3 participates in
activation of the apoAI enhancer in liver cells and suggest that the activity of 
this factor is regulated by estrogen.

PMID: 8662915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Development. 1996 Jun;122(6):1693-702.

Evidence from normal expression and targeted misexpression that bone
morphogenetic protein (Bmp-4) plays a role in mouse embryonic lung morphogenesis.

Bellusci S(1), Henderson R, Winnier G, Oikawa T, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232-2175, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions are critical for the branching and
differentiation of the lung, but the mechanisms involved are still unclear. To
investigate this problem in mouse embryonic lung, we have studied the temporal
and spatial expression of genes implicated in the morphogenesis of other organs. 
At 11.5 days p.c., hepatocyte nuclear factor-3beta (Hnf-3beta) is expressed
uniformly throughout the epithelium, while Wnt-2 expression is confined to the
distal mesenchyme. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) transcripts are found throughout the
epithelium, with high levels in the distal tips of the terminal buds, while bone 
morphogenetic protein-4 (Bmp-4) transcripts are localized at high levels in the
distal tips of the epithelium, with lower levels in the adjacent mesenchyme.
Epithelial expression is also seen for Bmp-7, but transcripts are less
dramatically upregulated at the distal tips. The Type I Bone morphogenetic
protein receptor gene (Bmpr/Tfr-11/Brk-1) is expressed at low levels in the
epithelium and in the distal mesenchyme. To investigate the role of Bmp-4 in lung
development, we have misexpressed the gene throughout the distal epithelium of
transgenic lungs using a surfactant protein C enhancer/promoter. From 15.5 days
p.c., transgenic lungs are smaller than normal, with grossly distended terminal
buds and, at birth, contain large air-filled sacs which do not support normal
lung function. Labeling with BrdU reveals an inhibition of epithelia]
proliferation in 15.5 days p.c. transgenic lungs. A small but significant
stimulation of proliferation of mesenchymal cells is also observed, but this is
accompanied by an increase in cell death. In situ hybridization with riboprobes
for the proximal airway marker, CC10, and the distal airway marker, SP-C, shows
normal differentiation of bronchiolar Clara cells but a reduction in the number
of differentiated Type II cells in transgenic lungs. A model is proposed for the 
role of BMP4 and other signalling molecules in embryonic lung morphogenesis.

PMID: 8674409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Nature. 1996 May 9;381(6578):155-8.

Relationship between asymmetric nodal expression and the direction of embryonic
turning.

Collignon J(1), Varlet I, Robertson EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1996 May 9;381(6578):116-7.

Growth factors related to TGF-beta provide important signals for patterning the
vertebrate body plan. One such family member, nodal, is required for formation of
the primitive streak during mouse gastrulation. Here we have used a nodal-lacZ
reporter allele to demonstrate asymmetric nodal expression in the mouse node, a
structure thought to be the functional equivalent of the frog and chick
'organizer', and in lateral place mesoderm cells. We have also identified two
additional genes acting with nodal in a pathway determining the left-right body
axis. Thus we observe in inv mutant embryos that the sidedness of nodal
expression correlates with the direction of heart looping and embryonic turning. 
In contrast, HNF3-beta(+/-) nodal(lacZ/+) double-heterozygous embryos display
LacZ staining on both left and right sides, and frequently exhibit defects in
body situs. Taken together, these experiments, along with similar findings in
chick, demonstrate that elements of the genetic pathway that establish the
left-right body axis are conserved in vertebrates.

PMID: 8610012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Nature. 1996 May 9;381(6578):116-7.

Left, right, left... turn.

Beddington R.

Comment on
    Nature. 1996 May 9;381(6578):151-5.
    Nature. 1996 May 9;381(6578):158-61.
    Nature. 1996 May 9;381(6578):155-8.

PMID: 8610005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Mar 7;220(1):86-93.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta participates in the transcriptional regulation of
the thyroperoxidase promoter.

Sato K(1), Di Lauro R.

Author information: 
(1)Stazione Zoologica A. Dohrn, Villa Communale, 80121 Napoli, Italy.

The promoters of the thyroglobulin (Tg) and thyroperoxidase (TPO) genes both
contain sequences that match the consensus recognized by the fork-head family of 
transcription factors. The fork-head recognition element in the TPO promoter is
recognized by two proteins, one of which is the transcription factor HNF-3beta, a
member of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3) family, and the other is a
thyroid-specific binding activity previously described as thyroid transcription
factor 2 (TTF-2). Differently, only TTF-2 is capable of recognizing the fork-head
recognition element in the thyroglobulin promoter, HNF-3beta protein is present
in cultured thyroid cells and in the adult thyroid gland, suggesting that it does
indeed have a role in modulating thyroid-specific gene expression. The
transcriptional activities of TPO promoter mutants impaired in either TTF-2 or
HNF-3beta binding suggest that both factors participate in regulating
transcription from the TPO promoter.

PMID: 8602863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Carcinogenesis. 1996 Mar;17(3):609-12.

Expression of hepatocyte-enriched nuclear transcription factors in mouse liver
tumours.

Kalkuhl A(1), Kaestner K, Buchmann A, Schwarz M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University of Tübingen, Germany.

Preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions in rodent liver show alterations in the
expression of various enzymes which can be used for their identification. To
address the question whether these enzymatic alterations result from specific
changes in the levels of hepatocyte-enriched nuclear factors (HNF), we analysed
the mRNA levels of six different HNFs (HNF-1alpha, beta, HNF-3alpha, beta, gamma,
and HNF-4) by RNase protection assay in chemically induced liver tumours and
corresponding normal liver tissue from mice of three different strains. When
compared with the normal liver tissue, HNF-1beta, HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta showed
unchanged expression levels in the various liver tumours, which HNF-1alpha and
HNF-4 mRNAs were lowered by 20-30%, and HNF-3gamma mRNA was increased by 50%.
There were no significant differences in HNF-expression between tumours
harbouring point mutations at codon 61 of the Ha-ras protooncogene and tumours
without detectable Ha-ras mutations.

PMID: 8631153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Biochem Soc Trans. 1996 Feb;24(1):106S.

Cloning of an Atlantic salmon transcription factor.

Stenson C(1), McNair A, Byrnes L, Gannon F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University College Galway.

PMID: 8674586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. FASEB J. 1996 Feb;10(2):267-82.

Liver-enriched transcription factors and hepatocyte differentiation.

Cereghini S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Liver-specific gene expression in adult hepatocytes relies on four families of
evolutionary conserved transcription factors that are liver-enriched but not
restricted to this tissue. These factors function in unique combinations, often
synergistically, to stimulate cell-specific transcription. Each family is
composed of several members displaying similar, if not identical, DNA recognition
properties and sharing structural homology in their DNA binding domains. The
homo- and heterodimerization between members of a particular transcription factor
family adds an additional level of complexity in gene regulation. The
consequences of inactivating different family members in the mouse by homologous 
recombination, together with recent studies of their regulation, suggest a model 
for liver differentiation involving a regulatory network rather than a completely
hierarchical genetic circuitry. These studies also indicate that individual
regulators appear to serve multiple developmental functions. Their possible role 
in the progression through different stages of hepatic cell commitment and
differentiation is discussed.

PMID: 8641560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Genes Cells. 1996 Jan;1(1):59-72.

Enhancer analysis of the mouse HNF-3 beta gene: regulatory elements for
node/notochord and floor plate are independent and consist of multiple
sub-elements.

Sasaki H(1), Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, TN 37232-2175, USA.

BACKGROUND: Axial pattern formation in vertebrate embryos depends on signals from
the node and, later, from the notochord and floor plate. Previous studies have
shown that HNF-3 beta, a member of the winged-helix transcription factor family, 
plays key roles in the development of all three organizing centres.
RESULTS: Enhancer analysis of HNF-3 beta has therefore been performed using lacZ 
reporter gene constructs in transgenic mouse embryos. This has led to the
identification of independent node/notochord and floor plate enhancers, at
positions far upstream (-15 to -14 kb) and downstream (+6 to +11 kb) of the
transcription star site, respectively. The node/notochord enhancer activity has
been localized to a 520 bp fragment. Floor plate gene expression requires a
combination of two separate fragments of the enhancer. Deletion analysis of one
of these fragments (400 bp) has identified subregions required for the initiation
and the maintenance of floor plate expression, and for the suppression of ectopic
expression within the neural tube.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that HNF-3 beta gene expression in the node/notochord and
in the floor plate are controlled through different enhancers, which consist of
positive and negative elements.

PMID: 9078367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Gene Expr. 1996;6(1):23-33.

Identification of a transthyretin enhancer site that selectively binds the
hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 beta isoform.

Samadani U(1), Qian X, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago 60612-7334, USA.

The upstream proximal region of the transthyretin (TTR) promoter and a distal
enhancer are sufficient to drive liver-specific expression of the TTR gene, as
demonstrated by experiments in transgenic mice. Previous analyses have
characterized the binding of a number of liver-enriched transcription factors of 
the TTR promoter including hepatocyte nuclear factors one (HNF-1), HNF-4, and
three distinct HNF-3 proteins (alpha, beta, and gamma), which are members of the 
winged helix (fork head) family. The TTR enhancer was shown to bind members of
the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) family at two distinct sites (TTR-2
and TTR-3), and an oligonucleotide containing the activation protein one (AP-1)
binding sequence competed for recognition to a third enhancer site (TTR-1). In
this study, we have carried out a detailed analysis of the transcription factors 
that recognize the TTR enhancer elements (TTR-1, TTR-2, and TTR-3 oligonucleotide
sequences). Analysis of the TTR-1 site demonstrates that the putative AP-1 site
in the TTR enhancer binds a ubiquitously expressed factor that is distinct from
the AP-1 family of proteins. Next we demonstrate, via gel shift analysis, that
the TTR-3 site is recognized by the C/EBP family in liver nuclear extracts. We
also show that whereas the TTR-2 enhancer site is capable of binding recombinant 
C/EBP proteins, it does not bind C/EBP proteins from liver nuclear extracts. The 
TTR-2 site does, however, contain a variant HNF-3 recognition sequence that
exclusively binds the HNF-3 beta isoform. Mutation of this HNF-3 beta-specific
recognition sequence caused reductions in TTR enhancer activity. We had
previously observed a 95% decrease in HNF-3 alpha expression and a 20% reduction 
in HNF-3 beta expression in acute phase livers, which correlated with a 60%
decrease in TTR gene transcription. We propose that the HNF-3 beta-specific
binding site in the TTR enhancer may play a role in maintaining TTR gene
expression during the acute phase response in spite of the dramatic reduction in 
HNF-3 alpha protein levels.

PMID: 8931989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Gene Expr. 1996;6(1):15-22.

Expression of transcription factors and stem cell factor precedes hepatocyte
differentiation in rat pancreas.

Rao MS(1), Yukawa M, Omori M, Thorgeirsson SS, Reddy JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.

Multiple foci of morphologically and functionally differentiated hepatocytes are 
induced in the pancreas of adult rats subjected to a copper depletion-repletion
regimen. Differentiation of hepatocytes in pancreas is preceded by irreversible
depletion of over 90% of pancreatic acinar cells. Progressive acinar cell loss
during 4-6 weeks of copper deficiency results in the proliferation of oval cells,
some of which may serve as the hepatocyte precursor or stem cells. Albumin mRNA
is detected in oval cells at 5 and 6 weeks by in situ hybridization at which time
no morphologically identifiable hepatocytes are evident in the pancreas.
Immunocytochemical analysis demonstrated the presence of stem cell factor (SCF)
in proliferating oval cells during 6 weeks of copper depletion, and Northern blot
analysis revealed the expression of liver-enriched transcription factors in the
rat pancreas during this 4-6-week period of copper deficiency. CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein alpha (C/EBP alpha) mRNA was detected first at 4 weeks of copper 
deficiency. By 5 and 6 weeks of copper deficiency, the expression of mRNAs of
C/EBP alpha, beta, and delta, and hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 factor (HNF-3 beta)
was markedly enhanced. This enhanced expression of liver-enriched transcription
factors and the SCF during oval cell proliferation in the pancreas preceding the 
expression of albumin mRNA and subsequent differentiation of hepatocyte phenotype
further supports the identity of these oval cells as hepatocyte precursors or
stem cells.

PMID: 8931988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Immunol. 1996 Jan 1;156(1):168-75.

Promoter region of the human gene coding for beta-chain of C4b binding protein.
Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 and nuclear factor-I/CTF transcription factors are
required for efficient expression of C4BPB in HepG2 cells.

Arenzana N(1), Rodríguez de Córdoba S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Biological Research (CSIC), Madrid,
Spain.

Differential expression of the human genes coding for the alpha and beta
polypeptides of the human C component C4b binding protein (C4BP) modulates the
levels of C4BP molecules containing C4BP beta polypeptides, providing a mechanism
to avoid the potential harmful effects of elevated concentrations of C4BP beta in
plasma. To understand how the expression of the C4BPB gene is controlled, we have
examined, in the major promoter of the human C4BP B gene, potential regulatory
elements. A region from nucleotide -126 to +25 was able to drive high expression 
of a reporter gene in the human hepatoma cell line HepG2. A small subfragment of 
this region (from -126 to -90) is responsible for more than 90% of the promoter
activity. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed that transcription
factors of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) and nuclear factor-I (NFI/CTF)
families were able to bind to this region in a sequence-specific manner. We have 
characterized binding sites for these transcription factors and determined their 
relative contribution to the activity of the C4BPB promoter. The results suggest 
that cooperative interaction between HNF-3 and NF-I/CTF is required to obtain a
full C4BPB promoter activity. Comparison of the structures of the C4BPA and C4BPB
promoters reveals significant differences that could explain the differential
transcription of the C4BP alpha and C4BP beta polypeptides during the acute phase
response.

PMID: 8598458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Virology. 1995 Dec 20;214(2):371-8.

HNF3 binds and activates the second enhancer, ENII, of hepatitis B virus.

Li M(1), Xie Y, Wu X, Kong Y, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry, Academia Sinica, People's Republic of
China.

The basic functional unit of hepatitus B virus (HBV) enhancer II (ENII) is
located within nt 1687-1774, which is defined as the B fragment in our previous
papers. A major trans-acting factor binding site has been identified within the B
fragment. The sequence corresponding to this binding site was named B2. In this
paper, several point mutations were introduced into the B2 subunit by
PCR-mediated site-directed mutagenesis. CAT analysis indicated that the TGTTTGTTT
motif within the B2 subunit was critical for the activity of ENII. Mutations of
individual nucleotides within this motif could decrease the activity of ENII.
Electrophoresis mobility shift assay revealed that the liver-enriched
transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 3 alpha and HNF3 beta bound
to the B2 subunit specifically and the TGTTTGTTT motif was essential for
DNA-protein interaction. Anti-HNF3 alpha and anti-HNF3 beta antisera could block 
such binding ability. Moreover, HNF3 beta could switch on the activity of ENII in
HeLa cells and the activity of ENII could be suppressed by antisense HNF3 alpha
and antisense HNF3 beta mRNA in HepG2 cells. These results prompted the
conclusion that HNF3 was crucial for the liver-specific activity of ENII, which
in turn contributed significantly to the liver specificity of HBV.

PMID: 8553537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Oct;15(10):5453-60.

Overproduction of a truncated hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 protein inhibits
expression of liver-specific genes in hepatoma cells.

Vallet V(1), Antoine B, Chafey P, Vandewalle A, Kahn A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U129, Institut
Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Université René Descartes, Paris, France.

Transcription of hepatocyte-specific genes requires the interaction of their
regulatory regions with several nuclear factors. Among them is the hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) family, composed of the HNF3 alpha, HNF3 beta, and HNF3
gamma proteins, which are expressed in the liver and have very similar fork head 
DNA binding domains. The regulatory regions of numerous hepatocyte-specific genes
contain HNF3 binding sites. We examined the role of HNF3 proteins in the
liver-specific phenotype by turning off the HNF3 activity in well-differentiated 
mhAT3F hepatoma cells. Cells were stably transfected with a vector allowing the
synthesis of an HNF3 beta fragment consisting of the fork head DNA binding domain
without the transactivating amino- and carboxy-terminal domains. The truncated
protein was located in the nuclei of cultured hepatoma cells and competed with
endogenous HNF3 proteins for binding to cognate DNA sites. Overproduction of this
truncated protein, lacking any transactivating activity, induced a dramatic
decrease in the expression of liver-specific genes, including those for albumin, 
transthyretin, transferrin, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, and aldolase B,
whereas the expression of the L-type pyruvate kinase gene, containing no HNF3
binding sites, was unaltered. Neither were the concentrations of various
liver-specific transcription factors (HNF3, HNF1, HNF4, and C/EBP alpha)
affected. In partial revertants, with a lower ratio of truncated to full-length
endogenous HNF3 proteins, previously extinguished genes were re-expressed. Thus, 
the transactivating domains of HNF3 proteins are needed for the proper expression
of a set of liver-specific genes but not for expression of the genes encoding
transcription factors found in differentiated hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC230795
PMID: 7565696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Dev Biol. 1995 Aug;170(2):299-313.

Early stages of notochord and floor plate development in the chick embryo defined
by normal and induced expression of HNF-3 beta.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1), Placzek M, Baldassare M, Dodd J, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Columbia University, New York, New York
10032, USA.

We have cloned a cDNA encoding the chick HNF-3 beta gene and have used RNA and
antibody probes that detect HNF-3 beta to monitor the normal and induced
expression of the gene in early embryos. HNF-3 beta expressed in Koller's sickle,
at the onset of primitive streak formation, and later in Hensen's node. At neural
plate and neural tube stages, HNF-3 beta is expressed transiently in the
notochord and is then expressed by floor plate cells. Prospective floor plate
cells that are located in the epiblast immediately anterior to Hensen's node
prior to its regression do not express HNF-3 beta, providing evidence that floor 
plate fate is normally determined only after these cells populate the midline of 
the neural plate and overlie the notochord. Removal of the notochord in vivo
prevents floor plate development and in this condition HNF-3 beta is not
expressed by cells at the ventral midline of the neural tube. Notochord grafts
induce ectopic floor plate development and ectopic neural expression of HNF-3
beta. In vitro, neural plate explants are induced to express HNF-3 beta by
notochord cells in a contact-dependent but cycloheximide-resistant manner,
providing evidence that expression of HNF-3 beta is a direct response of neural
plate cells to notochord-derived inducing signals.

PMID: 7649364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 1995 Aug;20(1-2):129-40.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-3/forkhead transcription regulatory family in
development, inflammation, and neoplasia.

Hromas R(1), Costa R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana University Medical
Center, Indianapolis 46202, USA.

HNF-3/FKH genes are a large family of transcriptional activators. They are
expressed in specific developmental and tissue patterns. Indeed, several of them 
are known to be essential for normal development (e.g. Dfkh and slp-1,2).
Mutation within one of these genes produces mutant fruitfly embryos that are
unable to survive. This family shares conserved DNA binding and transcriptional
activation domains. The DNA binding domain has been crystallized, and its
structure determined. Although it has resemblance to helices of homeodomains and 
H5 histones, it represents a new DNA binding motif, which has been called the
'winged helix,' because it contains additional interactive peptide regions called
termed wings. Subtle amino acid variations in a region adjacent to the DNA
recognition helix influence the recognition specificity of each HNF-3/FKH protein
and therefore confer selectivity in promoter regulation. Members of this family
are important in regulating the inflammatory response of the liver (the three
HNF-3 genes). In addition, several members may be important in blood cell
development (H3 and 5-3). Finally, two of these genes have been found to produce 
neoplasia (qin and FKHR). As investigation progresses, the mechanism by which
these genes regulate development, inflammation and neoplasia will become more
clear.

PMID: 7576194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Cell Growth Differ. 1995 Jul;6(7):879-90.

Cytokine regulation of the liver transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-3
beta is mediated by the C/EBP family and interferon regulatory factor 1.

Samadani U(1), Porcella A, Pani L, Johnson PF, Burch JB, Pine R, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Chicago 60612-7334, USA.

Three distinct hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) proteins (alpha, beta, and
gamma) regulate the transcription of numerous liver-enriched genes. The HNF-3
proteins bind DNA via a homologous winged helix motif common to a number of
proteins known to be critical for determination events in embryogenesis. We have 
demonstrated previously that two binding sites in the -184 HNF-3 beta promoter
are recognized by widely distributed factors and that there is also a critical
autoregulatory site, we identified a binding site for a cell-specific factor,
LF-H3 beta, that may function in restricting HNF-3 beta gene expression to
hepatocytes. Our present study demonstrates that members of the C/EBP and proline
and acidic amino acid-rich subfamilies of basic region leucine zipper
transcription factors bind the LF-H3 beta site, and cotransfection of HepG2 cells
shows that these factors are able to activate an HNF-3 beta promoter reporter
construct. The LF-H3 beta-C/EBP binding sequence also confers HNF-3 beta promoter
stimulation in response to interleukin (IL)-1 and IL-6. Upstream of this HNF-3
beta proximal promoter region, an IFN-stimulated response element core sequence
(-231 to -210) was found that mediates transcriptional induction by IFN-gamma but
not IFN-alpha. Gel mobility supershift assay demonstrates that an
IFN-gamma-induced protein-DNA complex is disrupted by an antibody specific for
interferon regulatory factor-1/interferon-stimulated gene factor-2. Consistent
with this finding, we observed that IFN-gamma induction requires ongoing protein 
synthesis. Surprisingly, the effect of the three cytokines (IL-1, IL-6, and
IFN-gamma) in combination as assayed by the same model is not synergistic.
HNF-3beta joins the C/EBP family on the list of liver-enriched transcription
factors, the expression of which is modulated by cytokines.

PMID: 7547510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jul;15(7):3848-56.

Molecular analysis of the distal enhancer of the mouse alpha-fetoprotein gene.

Millonig JH(1), Emerson JA, Levorse JM, Tilghman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Princeton University, New Jersey 08544, USA.

The mouse alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene is transcribed at high levels in the
visceral endoderm of the yolk sac and fetal liver and at much lower rates in the 
endoderm of the fetal gut. Expression of the gene in vivo requires the presence
of at least one of three enhancers which lie in its 5' flanking region. In this
report, we establish that the most distal AFP enhancer directed consistent
expression of a linked AFP minigene in all three endodermal tissues in transgenic
mice. The enhancer is composed of three domains, each of which is essential for
full enhancer function by transient transfection assays. DNase I footprinting
identified three regions of the enhancer which are protected by human hepatoma
nuclear extracts, one of which corresponded to a consensus site for HNF-3
binding. Site-directed mutations in this site caused a 10-fold reduction in
enhancer function by transient transfection. In transgenic mice, however, the
mutation resulted in sporadic expression of the transgene, dependent on the site 
of integration. A similar acquisition of position-dependent sporadic expression
of the transgene was observed with a mutation in a second protein binding site,
despite the fact that this mutation had very little effect on enhancer function
as assessed by transient transfection. These studies underscore the value of
examining the functions of specific protein binding sites in vivo.

PMCID: PMC230624
PMID: 7540720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Virol. 1995 Jun;69(6):3265-72.

Regulation of transcription from the hepatitis B virus large surface antigen
promoter by hepatocyte nuclear factor 3.

Raney AK(1), Zhang P, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

The influence of hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) on the level of
transcriptional activity from the four hepatitis B virus promoters was
investigated by transient-transfection analysis in the dedifferentiated hepatoma 
cell line, HepG2.1. It was found that the large surface antigen promoter and, to 
a much lesser extent, the nucleocapsid promoter were transactivated in the
presence of HNF3. DNase I footprinting analysis demonstrated that purified
recombinant HNF3 alpha protects one region of the large surface antigen promoter.
Gel retardation analysis showed that a double-stranded oligonucleotide containing
this HNF3-binding site formed a specific complex with DNA-binding proteins in the
differentiated hepatoma cell lines, Huh7 and HepG2. The complex formed with Huh7 
cell extract comigrated with exogenously expressed HNF3 beta in HeLa S3 extracts 
and was specifically inhibited from forming by the addition of HNF3 beta
antiserum. The promoter element which appears to mediate the HNF3 transactivation
was functionally mapped by mutational analysis to a region between nucleotides
-65 and -54 relative to the transcriptional start site. This regulatory sequence 
is within the region protected from DNase I digestion by HNF3 alpha and contains 
10 of 12 nucleotides homologous to the HNF3-binding-site consensus sequence. A
synthetic promoter construct containing this HNF3-binding site was able to
mediate transactivation by HNF3 beta. These and previous results suggest that the
hepatitis B virus large surface antigen promoter is regulated by at least two
liver-enriched transcription factors, HNF1 and HNF3, which together may
contribute to the differentiated liver cell type specificity of this promoter.

PMCID: PMC189037
PMID: 7745673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Biochem J. 1995 May 15;308 ( Pt 1):197-202.

Role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 alpha and hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 beta in
Clara cell secretory protein gene expression in the bronchiolar epithelium.

Bingle CD(1), Hackett BP, Moxley M, Longmore W, Gitlin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Edward Mallinckrodt Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA.

The 5' flanking region of the Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP) gene contains
two cis-acting elements which bind hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3 alpha and
HNF-3 beta in vitro. To determine the role of these proteins in mediating CCSP
gene expression in the bronchiolar epithelium, chimeric CCSP-reporter gene
constructs containing various regions of the CCSP 5' flanking region were
co-transfected into H-441 cells with HNF-3 alpha or HNF-3 beta expression
plasmids. These studies indicate that each of these transcription factors
positively regulates CCSP gene expression and revealed that CCSP region I (-132
to -76) is sufficient to mediate this effect. Gel-mobility-shift assays with
oligonucleotides corresponding to CCSP region I, nuclear extract from bronchiolar
epithelial cells and HNF-3-specific antibodies indicate that HNF-3 alpha and
HNF-3 beta are the only proteins in bronchiolar epithelial cells which directly
interact with this region. Consistent with these observations, HNF-3 alpha and
HNF-3 beta transcripts were found to be enriched in this cell population and in
situ hybridization of adult lung revealed HNF-3 gene expression in non-ciliated
bronchiolar epithelial cells expressing the CCSP gene. Finally, experiments with 
CCSP region I and a heterologous promoter indicate that this region acts in a
promoter-specific context, suggesting that additional factors interacting via the
minimal CCSP promoter region are essential in determining the effects of HNF-3 on
cell-specific CCSP gene expression in the bronchiolar epithelium.

PMCID: PMC1136863
PMID: 7755566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. DNA Cell Biol. 1995 May;14(5):385-96.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 determines the amplitude of the glucocorticoid
response of the rat tyrosine aminotransferase gene.

Roux J(1), Pictet R, Grange T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod du CNRS, Université Paris 7, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) recognizes two apparently distinct classes of 
sequence. However, a detailed mutational analysis of a representative binding
site of each class reveals that these sequences display common features. We
propose a unified consensus sequence for HNF3-binding sites. The basis of the
sequence specificity of the interaction of HNF3 with DNA is analyzed in light of 
the recently determined structure of an HNF3-DNA complex (Clark et al., Nature
364, 412-420, 1993). Particularly, our study reveals that the DNA site used for
this structural analysis is too short to account for all HNF3-DNA interactions.
The better knowledge of the sequence determinant recognized by HNF3 has allowed
us to analyze its function in the glucocorticoid response of the rat tyrosine
aminotransferase (TAT) gene. This response is mediated through a complex array of
neighboring and overlapping transcription factor binding sites. Selective
inactivation of the HNF3-binding sites in this glucocorticoid response unit (GRU)
allows us to demonstrate unambiguously that they play a major role in the
amplitude of the glucocorticoid response. Furthermore, HNF3 beta overexpression
results in a stimulation of the glucocorticoid response that is dependent on the 
integrity of its binding sites. We also show that the relative level of HNF3
determines the extent of the contribution of one of the glucocorticoid receptor
binding sites. Our results indicate that HNF3 accounts for most of the
liver-specific activity of this GRU.

PMID: 7748488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Apr 11;23(7):1184-91.

Analysis of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 beta protein domains required for
transcriptional activation and nuclear targeting.

Qian X(1), Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago 60612-7334, USA.

Three distinct hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3) proteins (alpha, beta and
gamma) regulate transcription of the transthyretin (TTR) and numerous other
liver-specific genes. The HNF-3 proteins bind DNA via a homologous winged helix
motif common to a number of developmental regulatory proteins including the
Drosophila homeotic fork head (fkh) protein. The mammalian HNF-3/fkh family
consists of at least thirty distinct members and is expressed in a variety of
different cellular lineages. In addition to the winged helix motif, several
HNF-3/fkh family members also share homology within transcriptional activation
region II and III sequences. In the present study we further define the sequence 
boundaries of the HNF-3 beta N-terminal transcriptional activation domain to
extend from amino acids 14 to 93 and include conserved region IV and V sequences.
We also demonstrate that activity of the HNF-3 N-terminal domain was diminished
by mutations which altered a putative alpha-helical structure located between
amino acid residues 14 and 19. However, transcriptional activity was not affected
by mutations which eliminated two conserved casein kinase I sites or increased
the number of acidic amino acid residues in the N-terminal domain. Furthermore,
we determined that the nuclear localization signal overlaps with the winged helix
DNA-binding motif. These results suggest that conserved sequences within the
winged helix motif of the HNF-3/fkh family may be involved not only in DNA
recognition, but also in nuclear targeting.

PMCID: PMC306829
PMID: 7739897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Apr;15(4):1933-41.

Binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 beta or 3 gamma and pancreas
transcription factor 1 are required for efficient expression of the gene encoding
pancreatic alpha-amylase.

Cockell M(1), Stolarczyk D, Frutiger S, Hughes GJ, Hagenbüchle O, Wellauer PK.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Epalinges/Lausanne.

Efficient expression of genes under the control of alpha-amylase 2 5'-flanking
sequences in exocrine pancreatic cells requires, in addition to the pancreas
transcription factor 1 binding site (M. Cockell, B.J. Stevenson, M. Strubin, O.
Hagenbüchle, and P. K. Wellauer, Mol. Cell. Biol. 9:2464-2476, 1989), another
cis-acting element at positions -60 to -86. This DNA element, which contains an
AT-rich core, site for nuclear proteins present not only in the pancreas but also
in other tissues and cell lines derived from the endoderm. Purification of
binding activities from pancreatic cells by DNA affinity chromatography reveals
several distinct proteins ranging in size from 45 to 54 kDa (p45, p47/48, and
p54). All of these proteins interact with the specific DNA sequence upon
renaturation in vitro. Protein sequencing, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, 
and immunoblot analyses identify p54 and p47/48 as members of the hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3 (HNF3 [forkhead]) family of transcription factors. p54 belongs
to the subfamily of HNF3 beta proteins, while p47/48 binding activity includes
HNF3 gamma. The cDNAs for two HNF3 beta proteins differing only in N-terminal
amino acid sequences were isolated from a pancreatic cDNA library. The mRNAs
encoding the two protein species accumulate to different steady-state levels in
poly(A)+ RNA of pancreatic cells. Our results support a model by which the
pancreas-specific expression of the alpha-amylase gene is mediated by a
combination of cell-specific and cell lineage-specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC230419
PMID: 7891687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Mar;9(3):368-74.

Hepatocyte-nuclear factor 3 beta gene transcripts generate protein isoforms with 
different transactivation properties on the glucagon gene.

Philippe J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology and Medicine Centre Médical
Universitaire, Geneva, Switzerland.

Hepatocyte-nuclear factor 3 beta (HNF-3 beta), a member of the HNF-3 gene family,
is expressed in glucagon-producing islet cells and represses glucagon gene
expression. We show here that at least three different HNF-3 beta transcripts
that encode HNF-3 beta protein variants are present in glucagon-producing cells, 
HNF-3 beta 1, HNF-3 beta 2, and HNF-3 beta 3. Compared with the HNF-3 beta 1
cDNA, HNF-3 beta 2 cDNA lacks sequences of exon 1 while exons 1 and 4 are absent 
from the HNF-3 beta 3 cDNA. The deduced amino-acid (aa) sequence of HNF-3 beta 2 
and HNF-3 beta 3 proteins differs from HNF-3 beta 1 by a 6-aa amino-terminal
extension and by the absence of the first 30 aa, respectively. HNF-3 beta 1,
HNF-3 beta 2, and HNF-3 beta 3 bind to the major enhancer of the rat glucagon
gene G2 with similar affinity. By contrast to HNF-3 beta 1, which represses
glucagon gene expression when overexpressed in the glucagon-producing cell line
InR1G9, HNF-3 beta 2 and HNF-3 beta 3 do not affect transcriptional activity.
Furthermore, cotransfection of HNF-3 beta 2 or HNF-3 beta 3 along with HNF-3 beta
1 decreases the negative effects of HNF-3 beta 1. We conclude that glucagon gene 
expression may be regulated by the relative abundance of the three different
HNF-3 beta variants in alpha-cells.

PMID: 7776982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1747-58.

Hepatic nuclear factor 3- and hormone-regulated expression of the
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 
1 genes.

O'Brien RM(1), Noisin EL, Suwanichkul A, Yamasaki T, Lucas PC, Wang JC, Powell
DR, Granner DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee 37232.

The rate of transcription of the hepatic phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
(PEPCK) and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein 1 (IGFBP-1) genes is
stimulated by glucocorticoids and inhibited by insulin. In both cases, the effect
of insulin is dominant, since it suppresses both basal and
glucocorticoid-stimulated PEPCK or IGFBP-1 gene transcription. Analyses of both
promoters by transfection of PEPCK or IGFBP-1-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
fusion genes into rat hepatoma cells has led to the identification of insulin
response sequences (IRSs) in both genes. The core IRS, T(G/A)TTTTG, is the same
in both genes, but the PEPCK promoter has a single copy of this element whereas
the IGFBP-1 promoter has two copies arranged as an inverted palindrome. The
IGFBP-1 IRS and PEPCK IRS both bind the alpha and beta forms of hepatic nuclear
factor 3 (HNF-3), although the latter does so with a sixfold-lower relative
affinity. Both the PEPCK and the IGFBP-1 IRSs also function as accessory factor
binding sites required for the full induction of gene transcription by
glucocorticoids. A combination of transient transfection and DNA binding studies 
suggests that HNF-3 is the accessory factor that supports glucocorticoid-induced 
gene transcription. In both genes, the HNF-3 binding site overlaps the IRS core
motif(s). A model in which insulin is postulated to mediate its negative effect
on glucocorticoid-induced PEPCK and IGFBP-1 gene transcription indirectly by
inhibiting HNF-3 action is proposed.

PMCID: PMC230399
PMID: 7532283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Genomics. 1995 Jan 20;25(2):388-93.

Murine chromosomal location of eight members of the hepatocyte nuclear factor
3/fork head winged helix family of transcription factors.

Avraham KB(1), Fletcher C, Overdier DG, Clevidence DE, Lai E, Costa RH, Jenkins
NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

A 100-amino-acid DNA-binding motif, known as the winged helix, was first
identified in the mammalian hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) and Drosophila
fork head family of transcription factors. Subsequently, more than 40 different
genes that contain the winged helix motif have been identified. In the studies
described here, we have determined the murine chromosomal location of eight
members of this gene family, HFH-1, HFH-3, HFH-4, HFH-5, HFH-6, HFH-8, BF-1, and 
BF-2, by interspecific backcross analysis. These genes, designated HNF-3 fork
head homolog 1 (Hfh1), Hfh3, Hfh4, Hfh5, Hfh6, Hfh8, Hfh9, and Hfh10,
respectively, mapped to 6 different mouse autosomes and are thus well dispersed
throughout the mouse genome. Based on this mapping information, we predict the
chromosomal location of these genes in humans and discuss the potential of these 
genes as candidates for uncloned mouse mutations.

PMID: 7789972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Prog Growth Factor Res. 1995;6(2-4):119-29.

A novel DNA/protein complex interacts with the insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-1 (IGFBP-1) insulin response sequence and is required for maximal effects
of insulin and glucocorticoids on promoter function.

Unterman T(1), Oehler D, Ngyuen H, Sengupta P, Lacson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois College of Medicine at Chicago 
60612, USA.

Glucocorticoids stimulate and insulin inhibits hepatic production of IGFBP-1 at
the level of gene transcription. We previously identified contiguous insulin and 
glucocorticoid response sequences in the proximal rat IGFBP-1 promoter. This
insulin response sequence (IRS) is palindromic (CAAAACAAACTTATTTTG) and each half
resembles an IRS in the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene. We have
reported that both the IGFBP-1 and PEPCK IRSs bind hepatocyte nuclear factor-3
(HNF-3) proteins [1]. We now report that IRSs from the IGFBP-1 and PEPCK, as well
as an IRS which also binds HNF-3 in the rat tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) gene,
also interact with another DNA/protein complex in gel shift studies. Further,
methylation interferences studies, gel shift and transient transfection studies
with site-specific mutations identified a single base in the first half of the
IRS that is critical both for interactions with proteins in this complex, and for
maximal effects of insulin and glucocorticoids, on promoter function. Of note, a 
250-fold excess of an oligo containing a C/EBP binding site (but not other
AT-rich sequences) inhibits the formation of this complex in gel shift assays.
Nevertheless, interactions with this C/EBP site are negligible at lower titers (<
or = 100-fold excess), and antibodies against known C/EBP proteins do not react
with this complex. Similarly, preincubation with CHOP, a truncated member of the 
C/EBP family which contains a beta-leucine zipper domain, does not prevent or
alter the mobility of this novel DNA/protein complex, indicating that components 
of this complex do not form heterodimers with beta-ZIP proteins. We conclude that
HNF-3 proteins and this novel C/EBP-related DNA/protein complex may play an
important role in mediating interactions between glucocorticoids and insulin in
the regulation of IGFBP-1 and perhaps multiple hepatic genes.

PMID: 8817653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Prog Growth Factor Res. 1995;6(2-4):93-101.

Multiple proteins bind the insulin response element in the human IGFBP-1
promoter.

Powell DR(1), Allander SV, Scheimann AO, Wasserman RM, Durham SK, Suwanichkul A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

An insulin response element (IRE) has been identified approximately 100 base
pairs (bp) 5' to the transcription start site of the human insulin-like growth
factor binding protein-1 (hIGFBP-1) gene. This cis element appears crucial to the
multihormonal regulation of hIGFBP-1 expression in liver, since (i) an intact IRE
is required for maximal stimulation of hIGFBP-1 promoter activity by
dexamethasone, and (ii) the IRE confers insulin inhibition of both basal and
dexamethasone-stimulated hIGFBP-1 promoter activity. Further progress in
understanding how the IRE confers insulin and glucocorticoid effects requires
identification of transcription factors confering effects of these hormones.
D-site binding protein (DBP), and members of the hepatic nuclear factor 3 (HNF 3)
and high mobility group I/Y (HMG I/Y) protein families, each known to bind DNA
elements similar in sequence to the IRE, were tested for IRE binding. DBP, HMGI
and HNF 3 beta each protected the hIGFBP-1 IRE from DNAseI digestion. Additional 
studies are required to establish whether binding of any of these proteins to the
IRE is important to the regulation of hIGFBP-1 expression by insulin and/or
glucocorticoids.

PMID: 8817651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Virology. 1994 Nov 15;205(1):127-32.

Regulation of hepatitis B virus ENI enhancer activity by hepatocyte-enriched
transcription factor HNF3.

Chen M(1), Hieng S, Qian X, Costa R, Ou JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles
90033.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) ENI enhancer can activate the expression of HBV and
non-HBV genes in a liver-specific manner. By performing the electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays, we demonstrated that the three related, liver-enriched,
transcription factors, HNF3 alpha, HNF3 beta, and HNF3 gamma could all bind to
the 2c site of HBV ENI enhancer. Mutations introduced in the 2c site to abolish
the binding by HNF3 reduced the enhancer activity approximately 15-fold.
Moreover, expression of HNF3 antisense sequences to suppress the expression of
HNF3 in Huh-7 hepatoma cells led to reduction of the ENI enhancer activity. These
results indicate that HNF3 positively regulates the ENI enhancer activity and
this regulation is most likely mediated through the 2c site. The requirement of
HNF3 for the ENI enhancer activity could explain the liver specificity of this
enhancer element.

PMID: 7975208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Biol Chem. 1994 Nov 11;269(45):28220-6.

Activation of apolipoprotein AI gene transcription by the liver-enriched factor
HNF-3.

Harnish DC(1), Malik S, Karathanasis SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Molecular Biology, Lederle Laboratories, Pearl
River, New York 10965.

Liver-specific expression of the apolipoprotein AI (apoA-I) gene is controlled by
the coordinate action of transcription factors bound to three sites (A, B, and C)
located within a powerful liver-specific enhancer which spans the -222 to -110
region upstream of the apoA-I gene transcription start site (+1). Sites A and C
bind various members of the nuclear receptor superfamily including the
liver-enriched factor HNF-4. In the current report, enhancer derivatives with
mutagenized protein-binding sites were tested for their ability to stimulate the 
apoA-I basal promoter in hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells. The results revealed that
occupation of both sites A and B, but not C is essential for high level
expression. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that in HepG2 cells site
B is occupied by the liver-enriched factor HNF-3 beta. Binding of HNF-3 beta to
site B transactivates the apoA-I basal promoter in hepatic and nonhepatic cells. 
HNF-3 beta binding and transactivation were dependent upon the close proximity of
two HNF-3 beta binding motifs within site B. Furthermore, HNF-3 beta and HNF-4,
bound to their cognate sites within the apoA-I enhancer exhibited strong synergy 
in transactivation of the apoA-I basal promoter in nonhepatic cells, highlighting
the central role of HNF-3 beta in liver-specific transcription of the apoA-I
gene. It is concluded that cooperative binding of HNF-3 beta to site B and
synergistic interactions between HNF-4 and HNF-3 beta bound to their cognate
sites in the apoA-I enhancer may play a fundamental role in apoA-I gene
expression in liver.

PMID: 7961760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Neuron. 1994 Nov;13(5):1039-53.

Regulatory gene expression boundaries demarcate sites of neuronal differentiation
in the embryonic zebrafish forebrain.

Macdonald R(1), Xu Q, Barth KA, Mikkola I, Holder N, Fjose A, Krauss S, Wilson
SW.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, Randall Institute, Kings College
London, England.

During development of the zebrafish forebrain, a simple scaffold of axon pathways
is pioneered by a small number of neurons. We show that boundaries of expression 
domains of members of the eph, forkhead, pax, and wnt gene families correlate
with the positions at which these neurons differentiate and extend axons.
Analysis of genetically or experimentally altered forebrains indicates that if a 
boundary is maintained, there is appropriate neural differentiation with respect 
to the boundary. Conversely, in the absence of a boundary, there is concomitant
disruption of neural patterning. We also show that a strip of cells within the
dorsal diencephalon shares features with ventral midline cells. This strip of
cells fails to develop in mutant fish in which specification of the ventral CNS
is disrupted, suggesting that its development may be regulated by the same
inductive pathways that pattern the ventral midline.

PMID: 7946344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mamm Genome. 1994 Nov;5(11):663-9.

Deleted chromosome 20 from a patient with Alagille syndrome isolated in a cell
hybrid through leucine transport selection: study of three candidate genes.

Deleuze JF(1), Dhorne S, Hazan J, Borghi E, Raynaud N, Pollet N, Meunier-Rotival 
M, Deschatrette J, Alagille D, Hadchouel M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 347, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France.

Alagille syndrome (AGS) is a well-defined genetic entity assigned to the short
arm of Chromosome (Chr) 20 by a series of observations of AGS patients associated
with microdeletions in this region. By fusing lymphoblastoid cells of an AGS
patient that exhibited a microdeletion in the short arm of Chr 20 encompassing
bands p11.23 to p12.3 with rodent thermosensitive mutant cells (CHOtsH1-1)
deficient in-leucyl-tRNA synthetase, we isolated a somatic cell hybrid
segregating the deleted human Chr 20. This hybrid clone, designated NR2, was
characterized by several methods, including PCR, with eight pairs of
oligonucleotides mapped to Chr 20: D20S5, D20S41, D20S42, D20S56, D20S57, D20S58,
adenosine deaminase (ADA), and Prion protein (PRIP); Restriction Fragment Length 
Polymorphism (RFLP) analyses with four genomic anonymous probes (D20S5, cD3H12,
D20S17, D20S18); and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) with total human
DNA and D20Z1, a sequence specific to the human Chr 20 centromere, as probes. The
NR2 hybrid allowed us to exclude three candidate genes for AGS: hepatic nuclear
factor 3 beta (HNF3 beta), paired box 1 (PAX1), and cystatin C (CST3) as shown by
their localization outside of the deletion. The NR2 hybrid is a powerful tool for
the mapping of new probes of this region, as well as for obtaining new
informative probes specific for the deletion by subtractive cloning of the
region. Such markers will be useful for linkage analysis and screening of cDNA
libraries.

PMID: 7873876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Exp Cell Res. 1994 Oct;214(2):634-41.

Delayed activation of HNF-3 beta upon retinoic acid-induced teratocarcinoma cell 
differentiation.

Reichel RR(1), Budhiraja S, Jacob A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Biology, Chicago Medical School,
Illinois 60064.

We have investigated the retinoic acid-mediated activation of the transcriptional
regulator HNF-3 beta during differentiation of mouse F9 embryonal carcinoma
cells. Using gel shifts, HNF-3 beta DNA binding activity was clearly detected in 
differentiated cells, while F9 stem cells were devoid of this activity. We also
demonstrated that HNF-3 beta mRNA is specific for differentiated cells. Addition 
of retinoic acid to F9 stem cells results in delayed activation of HNF-3 beta
mRNA which can be detected 1-2 days after the initiation of differentiation.
HNF-3 beta mRNA concentrations are maximal at approximately 4 days
postdifferentiation and stay at elevated levels for at least 4 additional days.
Nuclear run-on experiments clearly show that HNF-3 beta is activated at the level
of transcriptional initiation, suggesting that the increases of beta-specific DNA
binding activity and mRNA concentration are merely a reflection of this
activation mechanism. F9 cells can give rise to three distinct differentiated
cell types, visceral endoderm, parietal endoderm, and primitive endoderm, and we 
have observed HNF-3 beta stimulation during the formation of all three tissues.
HNF-3 beta stimulation upon visceral endoderm differentiation is accompanied by
the activation of HNF-3 target genes such as transthyretin, suggesting that HNF-3
beta is involved in the developmental activation of this gene. In contrast, HNF-3
beta target genes in parietal and primitive endoderm have yet to be identified.
However, the stimulation of HNF-3 beta during primitive endoderm formation, which
is an extremely early event during murine embryogenesis, points toward a role for
the factor in crucial determination processes that occur early during
development.

PMID: 7925656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Oct 1;225(1):441-8.

Estrogen-inducible derivatives of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4, hepatocyte nuclear
factor-3 and liver factor B1 are differently affected by pure and partial
antiestrogens.

Drewes T(1), Clairmont A, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany.

The tissue-specific transcription factors of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4
(HNF4), hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF3), and liver factor B1 (LFB1) families
are thought to play a role in the development of internal organs and in the
tissue-specific expression of many distinct genes. We have now constructed
derivatives of these proteins by introducing the hormone-binding domain of the
estrogen receptor and show that in transient transfections these chimeric
proteins act as estrogen-inducible transcription factors with the DNA sequence
specificity of the original factors. These chimeric transcription factors are
differently affected by the partial estrogen antagonist 4-hydroxytamoxifen and
the pure antiestrogen N-n-butyl-11-(3,17-dihydroxy-estra-1,3,5(10)-trien- 7
alpha-yl)N-methyl-undecamide (ICI 164384); 4-hydroxytamoxifen activates, at least
partially, all the chimeric factors and the estrogen receptor, while ICI 164384
surprisingly activates the transcription factors derived from HNF3 and LFB1 and
inhibits only the estrogen receptor and the HNF4 derivative. Together with the
DNA-sequence-binding specificity, the different response to estrogen and
anti-estrogens makes our estrogen receptor fusion proteins useful tools for the
investigation of the roles of HNF4, HNF3 and LFB1 in gene expression,
differentiation and developmental processes.

PMID: 7925467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Curr Biol. 1994 Oct 1;4(10):903-6.

Mouse development. Winged-helix in axial patterning.

McMahon AP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02138.

Analysis of HNF-3beta mutant mice demonstrates that the HNF-3beta transcription
factor is an important regulator of the gastrulating mouse embryo.

PMID: 7850424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1994 Sep 30;203(3):1835-41.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3) binds to the insulin response sequence in the
IGF binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) promoter and enhances promoter function.

Unterman TG(1), Fareeduddin A, Harris MA, Goswami RG, Porcella A, Costa RH,
Lacson RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun 1994 Dec 15;205(2):1496.

IGF binding protein-1 is an important short-term modulator of IGF
bioavailability. Hepatic transcription of IGFBP-1 is increased by glucocorticoids
and suppressed by insulin. We previously identified adjacent glucocorticoid and
insulin response sequences approximately 90 bp 5' to the RNA cap site in the
IGFBP-1 promoter. This insulin response sequence contains a sequence highly
related (10/12 bases) to a consensus HNF-3 binding sequence. Gel shift and
supershift studies confirm that this sequence binds HNF-3 alpha, beta and gamma. 
Co-expression of HNF-3 beta enhances IGFBP-1 promoter activity in NIH-3T3 cells. 
Mutation of this HNF-3 binding sequence disrupts this effect as well as the
ability of glucocorticoids to stimulate and of insulin to inhibit IGFBP-1
promoter activity in H4IIE and HepG2 hepatoma cells. HNF-3 binding at this site
may play an important role in the multihormonal regulation of hepatic IGFBP-1
gene expression.

PMID: 7524494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 2;269(35):22211-6.

Two members of the HNF-3 family have opposite effects on a lung transcriptional
element; HNF-3 alpha stimulates and HNF-3 beta inhibits activity of region I from
the Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP) promoter.

Sawaya PL(1), Luse DS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Ohio 45267-0524.

Region I of the Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP; also called CC10) promoter
contains at least three functional factor binding sites, an upstream HNF-3 site
and a downstream overlapping AP-1/HNF-3 site (Sawaya, P.L., Stripp, B. R.,
Whitsett, J.A., and Luse, D. S. Mol. Cell. Biol. (1993) 13, 3860-3871). Fragments
containing -320/+58 of the rat CCSP promoter were mutagenized to eliminate one or
two factor binding sites in region I, cloned into a luciferase reporter cassette,
and assayed for activity by transfection into cultured lung (H441) cells. We
found that the HNF-3 sites alone can account for the activity of region I in H441
cells. The activity of the two HNF-3 sites is synergistic; this effect depends on
the presence of an upstream factor binding site. We had shown previously that
H441 cells contain exclusively the HNF-3 alpha form of HNF-3, whereas HeLa cells 
have essentially no HNF-3. Co-transfection of an HNF-3 alpha expression plasmid
with a CCSP reporter containing four copies of region I in HeLa cells stimulated 
CCSP activity 4-fold, whereas co-expression of HNF-3 beta inhibited activity
8-fold. HNF-3 beta was also inhibitory to region I expression in H441 cells, but 
to a lesser extent than in HeLa cells, presumably because of the high levels of
HNF-3 alpha already present in H441 cells. We have thus identified a gene
regulatory element through which two members of the HNF-3 transcription factor
family, HNF-3 alpha and HNF-3 beta, exert opposite effects.

PMID: 8071346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Sep;14(9):5671-81.

The lung-specific surfactant protein B gene promoter is a target for thyroid
transcription factor 1 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3, indicating common factors
for organ-specific gene expression along the foregut axis.

Bohinski RJ(1), Di Lauro R, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-2899.

We used the lung epithelial cell-specific surfactant protein B (SPB) gene
promoter as a model with which to investigate mechanisms involved in
transcriptional control of lung-specific genes. In a previous study, we showed
that the SPB promoter specifically activated expression of a linked reporter gene
in the continuous H441 lung cell line and that H441 nuclear proteins specifically
protected a region of this promoter from bp -111 to -73. In this study, we
further show that this region is a complex binding site for thyroid transcription
factor 1 (TTF-1) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3). Whereas TTF-1 bound two
highly degenerate and closely spaced sites, HNF-3 proteins bound a TGT3 motif
(TGTTTGT) that is also found in several liver-specific gene regulatory regions,
where it appears to be a weak affinity site for HNF-3. Point mutations of these
binding sites eliminated factor binding and resulted in significant decreases in 
transfected SPB promoter activity. In addition, we developed a cotransfection
assay and showed that a family of lung-specific gene promoters that included the 
SPB, SPC, SPA, and Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP) gene promoters were
specifically activated by cotransfected TTF-1. We conclude that TTF-1 and HNF-3
are major activators of lung-specific genes and propose that these factors are
involved in a general mechanism of lung-specific gene transcription. Importantly,
these data also show that common factors are involved in organ-specific gene
expression along the mammalian foregut axis.

PMCID: PMC359092
PMID: 8065304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Cell. 1994 Aug 26;78(4):575-88.

The winged-helix transcription factor HNF-3 beta is required for notochord
development in the mouse embryo.

Weinstein DC(1), Ruiz i Altaba A, Chen WS, Hoodless P, Prezioso VR, Jessell TM,
Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, New
York 10021.

HNF-3 beta, a transcription factor of the winged-helix family, is expressed in
embryonic and adult endoderm and also in midline cells of the node, notochord,
and floor plate in mouse embryos. To define the function of HNF-3 beta, a
targeted mutation in the HNF-3 beta locus was generated by homologous
recombination in embryonic stem cells. Mice lacking HNF-3 beta die by embryonic
day (E) 10-11. Mutant embryos examined from E6.5 to E9.5 do not form a distinct
node and lack a notochord. In addition, mutant embryos show marked defects in the
organization of somites and neural tube that may result from the absence of the
notochord. The neural tube of mutant embryos exhibits overt anteroposterior
polarity but lacks a floor plate and motor neurons. Endodermal cells are present 
but fail to form a gut tube in mutant embryos. These studies indicate that HNF-3 
beta has an essential role in the development of axial mesoderm in mouse embryos.

PMID: 8069910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Cell. 1994 Aug 26;78(4):561-74.

HNF-3 beta is essential for node and notochord formation in mouse development.

Ang SL(1), Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

HNF-3 beta, a member of the HNF-3/fork head family of transcription factors, is
expressed in the node, notochord, floor plate, and gut in mouse embryos. A null
mutation of this gene leads to embryonic lethality. The primary defect of HNF-3
beta -/- embryos is an absence of organized node and notochord formation, which
leads to secondary defects in dorsal-ventral patterning of the neural tube. In
contrast, patterning along the anterior-posterior axis was surprisingly little
affected. Although HNF-3 beta is required for node and notochord formation, some 
organizer activity persists in the absence of these structures. HNF-3 beta is not
required for the development of definitive endoderm cells, but foregut
morphogenesis is severely affected in HNF-3 beta -/- embryos.

PMID: 8069909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Biochemistry. 1994 Aug 23;33(33):9889-97.

Transactivation of the rat CYP2C13 gene promoter involves HNF-1, HNF-3, and
members of the orphan receptor subfamily.

Legraverend C(1), Eguchi H, Ström A, Lahuna O, Mode A, Tollet P, Westin S,
Gustafsson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.

The rat CYP2C13 gene (2C13) encodes one of the constitutive male forms of
cytochrome P-450 that are involved in steroid metabolism. In addition to being
developmentally regulated, the expression of 2C13 is restricted to the liver and 
suppressed by the female pattern of growth hormone (GH) secretion at the
transcriptional initiation level. In this study, we show that the liver-specific 
expression, but not the regulation by GH, can be reconstituted with 117 bp to 2
kb of 2C13 5' flank. Transactivation of the 2C13 promoter requires both HNF-1 and
HNF-3 and is influenced by members of the orphan receptor subfamily of
transcription factors. Although HNF-4, ARP-1, EAR-2, and COUP-TF bind to the 2C13
promoter in vitro, overexpression of EAR-2 and COUP-TF, but not of HNF-4 or
ARP-1, results in the potentiation of the HNF-3- and HNF-1-supported activity in 
non-liver cells.

PMID: 8060996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;126(1):223-33.

Expression of hepatic transcription factors during liver development and oval
cell differentiation.

Nagy P(1), Bisgaard HC, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0037.

The oval cells are thought to be the progeny of a liver stem cell compartment and
strong evidence now exists indicating that these cells can participate in liver
regeneration by differentiating into different hepatic lineages. To better
understand the regulation of this process we have studied the expression of
liver-enriched transcriptional factors (HNF1 alpha and HNF1 beta, HNF3 alpha,
HNF3 beta, and HNF3 gamma, HNF4, C/EBP, C/EBP beta, and DBP) in an experimental
model of oval cell proliferation and differentiation and compared the expression 
of these factors to that observed during late stages of hepatic ontogenesis. The 
steady-state mRNA levels of four (HNF1 alpha, HNF3 alpha, HNF4, and C/EBP beta)
"liver-enriched" transcriptional factors gradually decrease during the late
period of embryonic liver development while three factors (HNF1 beta, HNF3 beta, 
and DBP) increase. In the normal adult rat liver the expression of all the
transcription factors are restricted to the hepatocytes. However, during early
stages of oval cell proliferation both small and large bile ducts start to
express HNF1 alpha and HNF1 beta, HNF3 gamma, C/EBP, and DBP but not HNF4. At the
later stages all of these factors are also highly expressed in the proliferating 
oval cells. Expression of HNF4 is first observed when the oval cells
differentiate morphologically and functionally into hepatocytes and form
basophilic foci. At that time the expression of some of the other factors is also
further increased. Based on these data we suggest that the upregulation of the
"establishment" factors (HNF1 and -3) may be an important step in oval cell
activation. The high levels of these factors in the oval cells and embryonic
hepatoblasts further substantiates the similarity between the two cell
compartments. Furthermore, the data suggest that HNF4 may be responsible for the 
final commitment of a small portion of the oval cells to differentiate into
hepatocytes which form the basophilic foci and eventually regenerate the liver
parenchyma.

PMCID: PMC2120103
PMID: 8027180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 May;14(5):3514-23.

Glucagon gene expression is negatively regulated by hepatocyte nuclear factor 3
beta.

Philippe J(1), Morel C, Prezioso VR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics & Microbiology, Centre Médical Universitaire, Geneva,
Switzerland.

Pancreatic expression of the glucagon gene depends on multiple transcription
factors interacting with at least three DNA control elements: G1, the upstream
promoter element, and G2 and G3, two enhancer-like sequences. We report here that
the major enhancer of the rat glucagon gene, G2, interacts with three protein
complexes, A1, A2, and A3. A2 is detected only in islet cells, and impairment of 
its binding to mutant G2 causes a marked decrease in transcriptional activity. We
identify A1 as hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 beta (HNF-3 beta), a member of the
HNF-3 DNA-binding protein family found in abundance in the liver which has been
proposed to play a role in the formation of gut-related organs. HNF-3 beta binds 
G2 on a site which overlaps A2 and acts as a repressor of glucagon gene
expression, as demonstrated by mutational analyses of G2 and by cotransfection of
HNF-3 beta cDNA along with reporter genes containing G2 into glucagon-producing
cells. Our data implicate HNF-3 beta in the control of glucagon gene expression
and strengthen the idea of endodermal origin of the islet cells.

PMCID: PMC358715
PMID: 8164696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Apr;14(4):2755-66.

The DNA-binding specificity of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/forkhead domain is
influenced by amino-acid residues adjacent to the recognition helix.

Overdier DG(1), Porcella A, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago 60612-7334.

Three distinct hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3) proteins (HNF-3 alpha, -3
beta, and -3 gamma) are known to regulate the transcription of liver-specific
genes. The HNF-3 proteins bind to DNA as a monomer through a modified
helix-turn-helix, known as the winged helix motif, which is also utilized by a
number of developmental regulators, including the Drosophila homeotic forkhead
(fkh) protein. We have previously described the isolation, from rodent tissue, of
an extensive family of tissue-specific HNF-3/fkh homolog (HFH) genes sharing
homology in their winged helix motifs. In this report, we have determined the
preferred DNA-binding consensus sequence for the HNF-3 beta protein as well as
for two divergent family members, HFH-1 and HFH-2. We show that these HNF-3/fkh
proteins bind to distinct DNA sites and that the specificity of protein
recognition is dependent on subtle nucleotide alterations in the site. The HNF-3,
HFH-1, and HFH-2 consensus binding sequences were also used to search DNA
regulatory regions to identify potential target genes. Furthermore, an analysis
of the DNA-binding properties of a series of HFH-1/HNF-3 beta protein chimeras
has allowed us to identify a 20-amino-acid region, located adjacent to the DNA
recognition helix, which contributes to DNA-binding specificity. These sequences 
are not involved in base-specific contacts and include residues which diverge
within the HNF-3/fkh family. Replacement of this 20-amino-acid region in HNF-3
beta with corresponding residues from HFH-1 enabled the HNF-3 beta recognition
helix to bind only HFH-1-specific DNA-binding sites. We propose a model in which 
this 20-amino-acid flanking region influences the DNA-binding properties of the
recognition helix.

PMCID: PMC358641
PMID: 8139574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Genomics. 1994 Apr;20(3):377-85.

The HNF-3 gene family of transcription factors in mice: gene structure, cDNA
sequence, and mRNA distribution.

Kaestner KH(1), Hiemisch H, Luckow B, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

The rat HNF-3 (hepatocyte nuclear factor 3) gene family encodes three
transcription factors known to be important in the regulation of gene expression 
in liver and lung. We have cloned and characterized the mouse genes and cDNAs for
HNF-3 alpha, beta, and gamma and analyzed their expression patterns in various
adult tissues and mouse embryonic stages. The HNF-3 proteins are highly conserved
between mouse and rat, with the exception of the amino terminus of HNF-3 gamma,
which in mouse is more similar to those of HNF-3 alpha and beta than to the amino
termini of the rat HNF-3 gamma protein. The mouse HNF-3 genes are small and
contain only two or three (HNF-3 beta) exons with conserved intron-exon
boundaries. The proximal promoter of the mouse HNF-3 beta gene is remarkably
similar to that of the previously cloned rat HNF-3 beta gene, but is different
from the promoters of the HNF-3 alpha and gamma genes. The mRNA distribution of
the mouse HNF-3 genes was analyzed by quantitative RNase protection with
gene-specific probes. While HNF-3 alpha and beta are restricted mainly to
endoderm-derived tissues (lung, liver, stomach, and small intestine), HNF-3 gamma
is more extensively expressed, being present additionally in ovary, testis,
heart, and adipose tissue, but missing from lung. Transcripts for HNF-3 beta and 
alpha are detected most abundantly in midgestation embryos (Day 9.5), while HNF-3
gamma expression peaks around Day 15.5 of gestation.

PMID: 8034310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Cell. 1994 Jan 14;76(1):103-15.

HNF-3 beta as a regulator of floor plate development.

Sasaki H(1), Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2175.

The transcription factor gene HNF-3 beta is expressed in the ventral midline of
the mouse embryonic neural tube, including the floor plate, a structure important
for dorsoventral patterning and axonal guidance. To assess HNF-3 beta function,
the gene has been ectopically expressed in the midbrain/hindbrain of transgenic
embryos using an En-2 promoter/enhancer. By 18.5 days postcoitum, transgenic
brains show a range of abnormalities, including absent inferior colliculus and
reduced cerebellum. Earlier, several genes normally expressed in the floor plate 
(BMP-1, Steel factor, and HNF-3 alpha) are induced within the same ectopic dorsal
domain as HNF-3 beta, and autoactivation of the endogenous HNF-3 beta is
observed. Conversely, expression of the dorsal gene Pax-3 is suppressed. Ectopic 
dorsal neuronal differentiation and abnormal dorsal axonal projections are also
seen. These results suggest that HNF-3 beta is an important regulator of floor
plate development in vivo.

PMID: 8287471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Dec 15;90(24):11583-7.

DNA-binding properties and secondary structural model of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor 3/fork head domain.

Li C(1), Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas 75235.

An 84-amino acid segment of QRF-1 [glutamine (Q)-rich factor 1], a newly cloned, 
B-cell-derived DNA-binding protein, shows significant sequence homology with the 
DNA-binding domains of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head family of
proteins. Here we demonstrate that this 84-amino acid domain is necessary and
sufficient for DNA binding. We also propose a secondary structural model for the 
domain. At the N-terminal portion of the model, a basic hook structure is
followed by two amphipathic helices separated by a turn. Invariant amino acid
residues within the two proposed helices form the hydrophobic cores. An aromatic 
kink and a third amphipathic helix comprise the center of the domain. At the C
terminus, two variable-length loops flank a putative 7-amino acid helix followed 
by a short basic region.

PMCID: PMC48028
PMID: 8265594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Development. 1993 Dec;119(4):1301-15.

The formation and maintenance of the definitive endoderm lineage in the mouse:
involvement of HNF3/forkhead proteins.

Ang SL(1), Wierda A, Wong D, Stevens KA, Cascio S, Rossant J, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Canada.

Little is known about genes that govern the development of the definitive
endoderm in mammals; this germ layer gives rise to the intestinal epithelium and 
various other cell types, such as hepatocytes, derived from the gut. The
discovery that the rat hepatocyte transcription factor HNF3 is similar to the
Drosophila forkhead gene, which plays a critical role in gut development in the
fly, led us to isolate genes containing the HNF3/forkhead (HFH) domain that are
expressed in mouse endoderm development. We recovered mouse HNF3 beta from an
embryo cDNA library and found that the gene is first expressed in the anterior
portion of the primitive streak at the onset of gastrulation, in a region where
definitive endoderm first arises. Its expression persists in axial structures
derived from the mouse equivalent of Hensen's node, namely definitive endoderm
and notochord, and in the ventral region of the developing neural tube.
Expression of the highly related gene, HNF3 alpha, appears to initiate later than
HNF3 beta and is first seen in midline endoderm cells. Expression subsequently
appears in notochord, ventral neural tube, and gut endoderm in patterns similar
to HNF3 beta. Microscale DNA binding assays show that HNF3 proteins are
detectable in the midgut at 9.5 days p.c. At later stages HNF3 mRNAs and protein 
are expressed strongly in endoderm-derived tissues such as the liver. HNF3 is
also the only known hepatocyte-enriched transcription factor present in a highly 
de-differentiated liver cell line that retains the capacity to redifferentiate to
the hepatic phenotype. Taken together, these studies suggest that HNF3 alpha and 
HNF3 beta are involved in both the initiation and maintenance of the endodermal
lineage. We also discovered a novel HFH-containing gene, HFH-E5.1, that is
expressed transiently in posterior ectoderm and mesoderm at the primitive streak 
stage, and later predominantly in the neural tube. HFH-E5.1 is highly similar in 
structure and expression profile to the Drosophila HFH gene FD4, suggesting that 
HFH family members have different, evolutionarily conserved roles in development.

PMID: 8306889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mech Dev. 1993 Dec;44(2-3):91-108.

Sequential expression of HNF-3 beta and HNF-3 alpha by embryonic organizing
centers: the dorsal lip/node, notochord and floor plate.

Ruiz i Altaba A(1), Prezioso VR, Darnell JE, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032.

Axial patterning in the nervous system of vertebrate embryos depends on inductive
signals that derive from the organizer region (the dorsal lip in amphibians and
the node in birds and mammals) and leter from the notochord and floor plate.
Previous studies have shown that Pintallavis, a member of the HNF-3/fork head
transcription factor family, is expressed selectively by these cell groups in
frog embryos and may be involved in regulating neural development. We report here
that in early rat and mouse embryos, the embryonic endoderm, the node, the
notochord and the floor plate express two related transcription factors, HNF-3
alpha and HNF-3 beta, which also function in the control of liver cell
differentiation. Early embryonic tissues express variant forms of HNF-3 beta
which derive from the use of 5' alternative exons. Within the organizer region
and notochord, HNF-3 beta and HNF-3 alpha have distinct temporal patterns of
expression and appear in partially overlapping domains. The early expression
pattern of mammalian HNF-3 beta in the node, notochord and midline neural plate
cells is similar to that of Pintallavis in frog embryos. There does not appear to
be a Pintallavis homologue in mice. This prompted us to isolate and analyze the
expression of the frog HNF-3 beta gene. In frog embryos, HNF-3 beta is expressed 
in the dorsal lip, pharyngeal endoderm and floor plate. In contrast to mammalian 
HNF-3 beta, the onset of frog HNF-3 beta expression in neural tissue occurs after
neural tube closure. Thus, the combined expression patterns of Pintallavis and
HNF-3 beta in frogs is equivalent to that of HNF-3 beta in rats and mice. Within 
neural tissue, the onset of expression of these regulatory genes define
successive stages in the differentiation of floor plate cells. The results
reported here show that closely related members of the HNF-3/fork head gene
family are expressed by axial midline cell groups involved in neural induction
and patterning and suggest the involvement of these genes in the development of
the vertebrate neuraxis.

PMID: 8155584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Nov 15;90(22):10421-3.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head or "winged helix" proteins: a family of
transcription factors of diverse biologic function.

Lai E(1), Clark KL, Burley SK, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10021.

A family of transcription factors, first identified as hepatocyte nuclear factors
(HNF-3 alpha, -3 beta, and -3 gamma) and as a homeotic Drosophila mutant, fork
head, has been intensively studied for the past 4 years. Important findings have 
emerged about the structure of the DNA-binding portion of the proteins as well as
biologic discoveries about the diversity of the family and its implied role in
early development.

PMCID: PMC47788
PMID: 8248124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Development. 1993 Nov;119(3):567-78.

Postimplantation expression patterns indicate a role for the mouse forkhead/HNF-3
alpha, beta and gamma genes in determination of the definitive endoderm,
chordamesoderm and neuroectoderm.

Monaghan AP(1), Kaestner KH, Grau E, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Division Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

The HNF-3 alpha, beta and gamma genes constitute a family of transcription
factors that are required for hepatocyte-specific gene expression of a number of 
genes, e.g. transthyretin, alpha-1 antitrypsin and tyrosine aminotransferase.
These genes share a highly conserved DNA-binding domain first found in the
Drosophila gene, forkhead, which is required for the normal patterning of the
developing gut and central nervous system in Drosophila. In adult mouse tissues, 
transcripts from HNF-3 alpha and beta have been localised to the liver, intestine
and lung, whereas HNF-3 gamma is found in the liver, intestine and testis. In
light of the early developmental significance of forkhead in Drosophila, we have 
compared the patterns of expression of HNF-3 alpha, beta and gamma mRNAs during
murine embryogenesis. We find that these genes are sequentially activated during 
development in the definitive endoderm. HNF-3 beta mRNA is expressed in the node 
at the anterior end of the primitive streak in all three germ layers and is the
first gene of this family to be activated. Subsequently, HNF-3 alpha is
transcribed in the primitive endoderm in the region of the invaginating foregut
and HNF-3 gamma appears upon hindgut differentiation. These genes have different 
anterior boundaries of mRNA expression in the developing endoderm and transcripts
are found in all endoderm-derived structures that differentiate posterior to this
boundary. Therefore, we propose that these genes define regionalization within
the definitive endoderm. Furthermore, differential mRNA expression of HNF-3 alpha
and beta is detected in cells of the ventral neural epithelium, chordamesoderm
and notochord. In the neural epithelium, expression of HNF-3 alpha and beta mRNA 
becomes localised to cells of the floor plate. We propose that, in addition to
their characterised requirement for liver-specific gene expression, HNF-3 alpha
and beta are required for mesoderm and neural axis formation. We also conclude
that HNF-3 beta is the true orthologue of the Drosophila forkhead gene.

PMID: 8187630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Biochem J. 1993 Oct 1;295 ( Pt 1):227-32.

Identification of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 binding sites in the Clara cell
secretory protein gene.

Bingle CD(1), Gitlin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Edward Mallinckrodt Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110.

To determine the mechanisms of cell-specific gene expression in the developing
pulmonary epithelium the Clara cell secretory protein (CCSP) gene promoter was
analysed by DNAase I footprinting. A prominent site of protein-DNA interaction
was detected from nucleotides -132 to -76 using nuclear extract from mouse lung
and human H441 cells. Mobility shift analysis revealed that an oligonucleotide
corresponding to this region interacted with multiple proteins from lung and H441
cell nuclear extracts. Analysis of the nucleotide sequence of this region
identified two potential binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3),
and consistent with this finding binding to this CCSP oligonucleotide was
specifically competed for by an oligonucleotide corresponding to the
HNF-3-binding site from the mouse transthyretin gene. Mobility shift of the CCSP 
oligonucleotide was supershifted using antisera specific to HNF-3 alpha and HNF-3
beta, and HNF-3 alpha and HNF-3 beta translated in vitro were found to bind
specifically to this same oligonucleotide. Co-transfection of HNF-3 alpha- and
HNF-3 beta-expression plasmids increased cell-specific reporter gene activity in 
H441 cells transfected with a CCSP-CAT gene chimeric construct containing this
-132 to -76 region. Taken together, these results suggest a role for HNF-3 in
mediating cell-specific CCSP gene expression within the bronchiolar epithelium.
These findings support the hypothesis that members of the HNF-3 'forkhead' family
of transcription factors determine gene expression and cell fate in multiple cell
lineages derived from the primitive gut endoderm.

PMCID: PMC1134843
PMID: 8216221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Am J Physiol. 1993 Sep;265(3 Pt 1):G506-13.

HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta expression in mouse intestinal crypts.

Serfas MS(1), Tyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago
60612.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1 alpha and 1 beta (HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta) are
homologous homeodomain-containing transcription factors that form homodimers or
heterodimers that bind the same consensus sequence in the promoters of several
genes expressed in liver. Many of these genes, including the mouse
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene, are also expressed in the intestinal epithelium.
AFP expression is restricted to the enteroendocrine cell lineage in the adult
small intestine, and we have investigated the distribution of HNF-1 alpha and
HNF-1 beta mRNA in the mouse intestine to determine whether expression of either 
of these regulatory factors colocalizes with AFP. We found that transcripts
encoding both factors are expressed at the highest levels in crypts of small and 
large intestine. Quantitation shows that the relative ratio of HNF-1 alpha to
HNF-1 beta mRNAs appears lower in the colon, where AFP is not expressed.
Alterations in the ratio of HNF-1 alpha to HNF-1 beta along the length of the
intestine may influence HNF-1 dimer formation and expression of target genes.
Although HNF-1 is necessary for transcription of the AFP gene, other factors must
be involved in eliciting the cell type-specific pattern of AFP expression in the 
intestine.

PMID: 7692743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Aug;13(8):4494-504.

The distal enhancer implicated in the developmental regulation of the tyrosine
aminotransferase gene is bound by liver-specific and ubiquitous factors.

Nitsch D(1), Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Division Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

Tyrosine aminotransferase gene expression is confined to parenchymal cells of the
liver, is inducible by glucocorticoids and glucagon, and is repressed by insulin.
Three enhancers control this tissue-specific and hormone-dependent activity, one 
of which, located at -11 kb, is implicated in establishing an active expression
domain. We have studied in detail this important regulatory element and have
identified a 221-bp fragment containing critical enhancer sequences which
stimulated the heterologous thymidine kinase promoter more than 100-fold in
hepatoma cells. Within this region, we have characterized two essential
liver-specific enhancer domains, one of which was bound by proteins of the
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) family. Analyses with the dedifferentiated
hepatoma cell line HTC suggested that HNF3 alpha and/or -gamma, but not HNF3
beta, are involved in activating the tyrosine aminotransferase gene via the
-11-kb enhancer. Genomic footprinting and in vitro protein-DNA binding studies
documented cell-type-specific binding of ubiquitous factors to the second
essential enhancer domain, which by itself stimulated the thymidine kinase
promoter preferentially in hepatoma cells. These results will allow further
characterization of the role of these enhancer sequences in developmental
activation of the tyrosine aminotransferase gene.

PMCID: PMC360060
PMID: 8101632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. FEBS Lett. 1993 Jul 12;326(1-3):171-6.

MFH-1, a new member of the fork head domain family, is expressed in developing
mesenchyme.

Miura N(1), Wanaka A, Tohyama M, Tanaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Yamada-Oka,
Japan.

We have isolated a novel mouse gene, MFH-1 (mesenchyme fork head 1) that is
related to the Drosophila fork head and rat HNF3 genes. MFH-1 encodes a distinct 
fork head domain that is classified into a distinct subfamily. A recombinant
MFH-1 protein could bind to the HNF3 binding site. MFH-1 is expressed temporally 
in developing embryos, first in the non-notochordal mesoderm and later in areas
of mesenchymal condensation in the trunk, head, and limbs. Our results suggest
that MFH-1 might be involved in the formation of special mesenchymal tissues.

PMID: 8325367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Genes Dev. 1993 Jul;7(7B):1436-46.

Axial, a zebrafish gene expressed along the developing body axis, shows altered
expression in cyclops mutant embryos.

Strähle U(1), Blader P, Henrique D, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Molecular Embryology Laboratory and Developmental
Genetics Laboratory, University of Oxford, UK.

Here, we report the cloning of a cDNA from zebrafish encoding a member of the
fork head/HNF3 gene family. The gene, which we have called Axial, begins to be
expressed just before gastrulation in a narrow region on the dorsal side of the
embryo, the fish equivalent of the amphibian organizer. Expression can be
detected in the involuted cells comprising the mesendoderm of the developing
axis. At the end of gastrulation expression is turned on in the ventral neural
plate in cells adjacent to the Axial-expressing mesodermal cells. Thus, Axial
appears to be a target of both mesoderm induction and neural induction, leading
to expression in cells of all three germ layers along the developing axis. Like
the Brachyury gene. Axial is strongly induced by activin A, suggesting a role for
endogenous activins in specifying the overlapping domains of expression of these 
two genes along the axis. Axial-expressing cells in the neuroectoderm include
those of the future floor plate and cells of the ventral forebrain. In embryos
homozygous for the cyclops mutation, expression is normal in mesendodermal cells 
but is absent from the ventral neural tube. The primary defects of cyclops
mutants (lack of floor plate, deficiencies in the brain and cyclopia) correlate
well with the expression domain of the Axial gene in wild-type neuroectoderm. The
lack of Axial expression in cyclops neuroectoderm suggests that activation of
Axial may be an immediate response of cyclops gene activity. Taken together, our 
data suggest that Axial plays a crucial role in specification of both the axial
mesendoderm and the ventral central nervous system.

PMID: 7687227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 May 1;90(9):3948-52.

Identification of nine tissue-specific transcription factors of the hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3/forkhead DNA-binding-domain family.

Clevidence DE(1), Overdier DG, Tao W, Qian X, Pani L, Lai E, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry (M/C 536), University of Illinois College of
Medicine, Chicago 60612.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3 alpha, -3 beta, and -3 gamma are liver
transcription factors that mediate the coordinate expression of a number of
hepatocyte-specific genes. The HNF-3 proteins share DNA-binding-domain homology
among themselves and with the Drosophila homeotic protein forkhead (fkh). The
HNF-3/fkh DNA-binding domain constitutes an uncharacterized protein motif that
recognizes its cognate DNA binding site as a monomer. Additional
HNF-3/fkh-related proteins are known to be required for determination events
during embryogenesis in Drosophila and Xenopus. In this report, we describe the
isolation of nine additional HNF-3/fkh homologue (HFH) clones from rodent tissue 
cDNAs by using both low-stringency hybridization and a polymerase chain reaction 
protocol. Many of the HFH genes exhibit a tissue-restricted expression pattern
and are transcribed in tissues other than liver, including brain, kidney, lung,
and intestine. The HNF-3/fkh motif therefore comprises a large gene family of
transcription factors that play a role in tissue-specific gene regulation and
development.

PMCID: PMC46423
PMID: 7683413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Sep;12(9):3723-32.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 beta contains two transcriptional activation domains,
one of which is novel and conserved with the Drosophila fork head protein.

Pani L(1), Overdier DG, Porcella A, Qian X, Lai E, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois College of Medicine,
Chicago 60612.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3) gene family is composed of three proteins
(alpha, beta, and gamma) that are transcription factors involved in the
coordinate expression of several liver genes. All three proteins share strong
homology in their DNA binding domains (region I) and are able to recognize the
same DNA sequence. They also possess two similar stretches of amino acids at the 
carboxyl terminus (regions II and III) and a fourth segment of homology at the
amino terminus (region IV). Furthermore, the HNF-3 proteins demonstrate homology 
with the Drosophila homeotic gene fork head in regions I, II, and III, suggesting
that HNF-3 may be its mammalian homolog. In order to define HNF-3 beta protein
domains involved in transcriptional activation, we have used a reporter gene,
whose transcription is dependent on HNF-3 binding, for hepatoma cell
cotransfection assays with expression vectors that produced different truncated
HNF-3 beta proteins. A position-independent activation domain which contained
conserved regions II and III was identified at the carboxyl terminus of the HNF-3
beta protein (amino acids 361 to 458). Moreover, site-directed mutations that
altered the sequences within regions II and III demonstrated their importance to 
transactivation. The region II-III domain does not possess amino acid sequences
in common with other transcription factors and may define a novel activation
motif. HNF-3 beta amino-terminal sequences defined by conserved region IV also
contributed to transactivation, but region IV activity required the participation
of the region II-III domain. Region IV is abundant in serine amino acids and
contains two putative casein kinase I phosphorylation sites, a feature similar to
protein motifs described for the transcription factors Pit-1/GHF-1 and HNF-1.

PMCID: PMC360231
PMID: 1324404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Genomics. 1992 Jun;13(2):264-8.

Murine chromosomal location of four hepatocyte-enriched transcription factors:
HNF-3 alpha, HNF-3 beta, HNF-3 gamma, and HNF-4.

Avraham KB(1), Prezioso VR, Chen WS, Lai E, Sladek FM, Zhong W, Darnell JE Jr,
Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, National Cancer Institute--Frederick Cancer
Research and Development Center, Maryland 21702.

The genes for rat hepatocyte nuclear factors 3 and 4 (HNF-3 alpha, HNF-3 beta,
HNF-3 gamma, and HNF-4) have been mapped in mouse by analysis of restriction
fragment length polymorphisms in interspecific backcross mice. These
hepatocyte-enriched transcription factors are positive-acting transcription
factors with binding sites in regulatory regions of many genes expressed in
hepatocytes. Both HNF-3 alpha, beta, and gamma and HNF-4 are also expressed in
intestine. They have recently been implicated as potential participants in
endodermal development from early gut cells because of their close homology to
Drosophila genes, which themselves are expressed in the developing gut. Despite
having similar functional roles and highly conserved DNA binding domains, the
three loci from the Hnf-3 family of genes mapped to three different mouse
chromosomes, suggesting that the Hnf-3 family has become widely dispersed during 
evolution and implying the necessity for independent activation of each member of
the HNF-3 family.

PMID: 1612587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Feb;12(2):552-62.

The restricted promoter activity of the liver transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor 3 beta involves a cell-specific factor and positive
autoactivation.

Pani L(1), Quian XB, Clevidence D, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois College of Medicine,
Chicago 60612.

The transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3) is involved in the
coordinate expression of several liver genes. HNF-3 DNA binding activity is
composed of three different liver proteins which recognize the same DNA site. The
HNF-3 proteins (designated alpha, beta, and gamma) possess homology in the DNA
binding domain and in several additional regions. To understand the
cell-type-specific expression of HNF-3 beta, we have defined the regulatory
sequences that elicit hepatoma-specific expression. Promoter activity requires
-134 bp of HNF-3 beta proximal sequences and binds four nuclear proteins,
including two ubiquitous factors. One of these promoter sites interacts with a
novel cell-specific factor, LF-H3 beta, whose binding activity correlates with
the HNF-3 beta tissue expression pattern. Furthermore, there is a binding site
for the HNF-3 protein within its own promoter, suggesting that an autoactivation 
mechanism is involved in the establishment of HNF-3 beta expression. We propose
that both the LF-H3 beta and HNF-3 sites play an important role in the
cell-type-specific expression of the HNF-3 beta transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC364229
PMID: 1732730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Sep;11(9):4405-14.

The extracellular matrix coordinately modulates liver transcription factors and
hepatocyte morphology.

DiPersio CM(1), Jackson DA, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912.

The extracellular matrix (ECM) promotes tissue morphogenesis, cell migration, and
the differentiation of a variety of cell types. However, the mechanisms by which 
ECM causes differentiated gene expression have been unknown. In this report, we
show that culturing the hepatocyte-derived cell line H2.35 on an ECM gel changes 
cell morphology and selectively stimulates the transcription of a subset of
liver-specific genes, including serum albumin. Transcriptional activation by ECM 
also occurs with transfected plasmids bearing the transcriptional enhancer of the
albumin gene. ECM substrates of different composition activated the albumin
enhancer only when the ECM promoted a cuboidal, differentiated cell morphology.
Enhancer activation by the ECM was mediated by two liver transcription factors,
HNF3 alpha and eH-TF, which appear to be regulated differently by matrix.
Specifically, we found that a collagen gel substratum caused a selective increase
in the factor HNF3 alpha at the levels of mRNA accumulation and DNA-binding
activity in nuclear extracts, both in H2.35 cells and in the hepatoma cell line
HepG2. We conclude that the ECM can stimulate cell differentiation by selectively
activating transcriptional regulatory factors and that such regulation occurs
coordinately with ECM-promoted changes in cell shape.

PMCID: PMC361303
PMID: 1875930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Aug 11;19(15):4139-45.

Site-directed mutagenesis of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) binding sites in the
mouse transthyretin (TTR) promoter reveal synergistic interactions with its
enhancer region.

Costa RH(1), Grayson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry (M/C 536), University of Illinois, College of
Medicine, Chicago 60612.

The transthyretin (TTR) gene is regulated by two DNA regions which elicit
hepatocyte-specific expression: a proximal promoter and distal enhancer. The TTR 
promoter and enhancer are composed of at least eight DNA binding sites for three 
different hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP), and AP-1/cJun. Site directed mutations within each of the HNF binding
sites in the TTR promoter were introduced to evaluate their contribution to
transcriptional activity in hepatoma cells. The data indicate that the strong
affinity HNF-3-S binding site (-106 to -94) is absolutely required for TTR
promoter activity since several mutations in this site eliminate TTR expression
in the context of its enhancer. Conversion of a second weak affinity HNF3-W site 
(-140 to -131) in the TTR promoter to a high affinity site resulted in higher
levels of expression. TTR mutations that disrupted several weak affinity sites
(HNF1, HNF3-W, and HNF4) only slightly diminished expression levels in the
presence of the TTR enhancer. In contrast, when we deleted the TTR enhancer from 
these HNF mutant constructs, TTR expression decreased to undetectable levels.
This result suggests cooperation between the factors binding to the TTR promoter 
and enhancer regions. These results also demonstrate that the HNF3-S site alone
is not sufficient to activate TTR transcription, but rather requires the
participation of three cell-specific factors to elicit minimal promoter activity.
The complexity of this promoter design and the requirement for a minimal number
of cell-specific factors to achieve transcription allows us to propose a model
which may explain the maintenance of tissue-specific expression of TTR.

PMCID: PMC328553
PMID: 1870969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. New Biol. 1991 Mar;3(3):289-96.

Differential regulation of hepatocyte-enriched transcription factors explains
changes in albumin and transthyretin gene expression among hepatoma cells.

Herbst RS(1), Nielsch U, Sladek F, Lai E, Babiss LE, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.

To investigate the regulation of genes whose expression is enriched in liver we
studied expression of the albumin and transthyretin (TTR) genes in a series of
rat hepatoma cell lines (FaO, C2, C2rev7, and H5) that express these genes at
different rates. The level of expression of albumin and TTR was compared to the
expression and DNA-binding activity of four transcription factors, HNF1/LFB1,
C/EBP, HNF3, and HNF4, that are found at high concentrations in liver. We
conclude that the levels of these factors are controlled both transcriptionally
(HNF-3, HNF-4, and C/EBP) and post-transcriptionally (HNF-1/LFB1), and that the
cellular concentration of these DNA-binding proteins helps explain the level of
transcriptional activity observed for the genes they regulate.

PMID: 1878351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Genes Dev. 1991 Mar;5(3):416-27.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 alpha belongs to a gene family in mammals that is
homologous to the Drosophila homeotic gene fork head.

Lai E(1), Prezioso VR, Tao WF, Chen WS, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York 10021.

By analysis of cDNA clones that cross-hybridized with a portion of the cDNA
encoding the recently described rat protein hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 alpha
(HNF-3 alpha, previously called HNF-3A), we now describe two additional members, 
HNF-3 beta and HNF-3 gamma, of this gene family. A 110-amino-acid region in the
DNA-binding domain of this family is not only very highly conserved in rodents
(HNF-3 alpha, -3 beta, and -3 gamma are identical in 93 of 110 amino acids in
this region) but also in Drosophila where the homeotic gene fork head has 88 of
the 93 residues that are identical in the three rat genes. The HNF-3 family in
rodents is expressed in cells that derive from the lining of the primitive gut;
some of the embryonic Drosophila cells in which fork head is expressed also give 
rise to gut and salivary glands. Thus, it appears that this gene family, the
DNA-binding portion of which is unlike that of any previously recognized
DNA-binding proteins, may contribute to differentiation of cells in internal
organs in both vertebrates and invertebrates.

PMID: 1672118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Cell Growth Differ. 1990 Jan;1(1):47-52.

Transcriptional activators in hepatocytes.

Johnson PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)NCI-Frederick Cancer Research Facility BRI-Basic Research Program, Maryland
21701.

PMID: 2078499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


