
1. BMC Nephrol. 2016 Mar 21;17(1):32. doi: 10.1186/s12882-016-0246-2.

Glomerulopathy in patients with distal duplication of chromosome 6p.

Jankauskiene A(1), Koczkowska M(2), Bjerre A(3), Bernaciak J(4), Schaefer F(5),
Lipska-Zietkiewicz BS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Vilnius University, Children hospital affiliate of Vilnius university hospital
"Santariskiu klinikos", Santariskiu 4, LT-08406, Vilnius, Lithuania.
augustinajankauskiene@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical
University of Gdansk, Debinki 1, 80211, Gdansk, Poland. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. (4)Department of Medical
Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland. (5)Division of Pediatric
Nephrology, Center for Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Duplication of the distal part of chromosome 6p is a rare genetic
syndrome. Renal involvement has been reported in the majority of patients,
including a wide range of congenital abnormalities of kidney and urinary tract
and, occasionally, a proteinuric glomerulopathy.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here, we report a 13-year-old girl with 6p25.3p22.1
duplication who presented with proteinuria in infancy, was later diagnosed as
focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, progressed to end-stage renal disease and was
successfully transplanted.
CONCLUSION: A systematic literature review suggests that 15-20 % of individuals
with distal 6p duplication develop progressive proteinuric glomerulopathy.
Monitoring of kidney function should be recommended in all cases.

PMCID: PMC4802583
PMID: 27000031  [PubMed - in process]


2. Science. 2016 Feb 5;351(6273):613-7. doi: 10.1126/science.aad5440.

Foxc1 reinforces quiescence in self-renewing hair follicle stem cells.

Wang L(1), Siegenthaler JA(2), Dowell RD(3), Yi R(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of
Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Denver-Anschutz
Medical Campus, University of Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA. (3)Department of
Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
CO 80309, USA. BioFrontiers Institute, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309,
USA. (4)Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology, University 
of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309, USA. yir@colorado.edu.

Comment in
    Science. 2016 Feb 5;351(6273):559-60.

Stem cell quiescence preserves the cell reservoir by minimizing cell division
over extended periods of time. Self-renewal of quiescent stem cells (SCs)
requires the reentry into the cell cycle. In this study, we show that murine hair
follicle SCs induce the Foxc1 transcription factor when activated. Deleting Foxc1
in activated, but not quiescent, SCs causes failure of the cells to reestablish
quiescence and allows premature activation. Deleting Foxc1 in the SC niche of
gene-targeted mice leads to loss of the old hair without impairing quiescence. In
self-renewing SCs, Foxc1 activates Nfatc1 and bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
signaling, two key mechanisms that govern quiescence. These findings reveal a
dynamic, cell-intrinsic mechanism used by hair follicle SCs to reinforce
quiescence upon self-renewal and suggest a unique ability of SCs to maintain cell
identity.

Copyright © 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 26912704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 24. pii: 201601569. [Epub ahead of print]

FOXC1 maintains the hair follicle stem cell niche and governs stem cell
quiescence to preserve long-term tissue-regenerating potential.

Lay K(1), Kume T(2), Fuchs E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and
Development, The Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10065; (2)Department of
Medicine, Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Northwestern University
School of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60611. (3)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and Development, The Rockefeller University,
New York, NY 10065; fuchslb@rockefeller.edu.

Adult tissue stem cells (SCs) reside in niches, which orchestrate SC behavior.
SCs are typically used sparingly and exist in quiescence unless activated for
tissue growth. Whether parsimonious SC use is essential to conserve long-term
tissue-regenerating potential during normal homeostasis remains poorly
understood. Here, we examine this issue by conditionally ablating a key
transcription factor Forkhead box C1 (FOXC1) expressed in hair follicle SCs
(HFSCs). FOXC1-deficient HFSCs spend less time in quiescence, leading to markedly
shortened resting periods between hair cycles. The enhanced hair cycling
accelerates HFSC expenditure, and impacts hair regeneration in aging mice.
Interestingly, although FOXC1-deficient HFs can still form a new bulge that
houses HFSCs for the next hair cycle, the older bulge is left unanchored. As the 
new hair emerges, the entire old bulge, including its reserve HFSCs and
SC-inhibitory inner cell layer, is lost. We trace this mechanism first, to a
marked increase in cell cycle-associated transcripts upon Foxc1 ablation, and
second, to a downstream reduction in E-cadherin-mediated inter-SC adhesion.
Finally, we show that when the old bulge is lost with each hair cycle, overall
levels of SC-inhibitory factors are reduced, further lowering the threshold for
HFSC activity. Taken together, our findings suggest that HFSCs have restricted
potential in vivo, which they conserve by coupling quiescence to
adhesion-mediated niche maintenance, thereby achieving long-term tissue
homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC4801248
PMID: 26912458  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Oncol Lett. 2016 Feb;11(2):933-938. Epub 2015 Dec 3.

Correlation of FOXC1 protein with clinicopathological features in serous ovarian 
tumors.

Wang LY(1), Li LS(1), Yang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Chengdu Women and Children's
Hospital, Chengdu, Sichuan 610091, P.R. China. (2)Department of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing
400010, P.R. China.

Transcriptional factor FOXC1 has been demonstrated to play a key role in
embryogenesis in animal studies and may participate in tumorigenesis. However,
the specific function of this gene in ovarian tumors has not been fully
determined. In this study, potential correlations between FOXC1 expression and
clinicopathological features of serous ovarian tumors were investigated. FOXC1
expression was analyzed in SKOV-3 and HO-8910 cell lines and serous ovarian tumor
tissues. A significant correlation was observed between FOXC1 protein expression 
and pathological subtype as well as FIGO stage (P<0.05) in serous ovarian tumors 
in our retrospective study. No significant association was revealed between FOXC1
protein expression and the clinicopathological factors of age, histological grade
and volume of ascites (P>0.05). The results suggest that high expression of FOXC1
protein may serve as a marker for benign serous ovarian tumors and a suggest a
trend towards good prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4734046
PMID: 26893671  [PubMed]


5. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2016 Feb;9(1):4-5. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.116.001360.

Unraveling De Novo Copy Number Variants in Congenital Heart Defects: The Bottom
of the Iceberg Is Under Attack.

Bouvagnet P(1).

Author information: 
(1)From Laboratoire Cardiogénétique, INMG, CNRS UMR 5310, INSERM U1217 and
Université Lyon 1, Lyon, France and Laboratoire Cardiogénétique, Hospices Civils 
de Lyon, Lyon, France. patrice.bouvagnet@univ-lyon1.fr.

PMID: 26884608  [PubMed - in process]


6. Stem Cells Int. 2016;2016:4565612. doi: 10.1155/2016/4565612. Epub 2015 Dec 29.

Evaluating the Impact of Human Amnion Epithelial Cells on Angiogenesis.

Zhu D(1), Muljadi R(1), Chan ST(1), Vosdoganes P(2), Lo C(3), Mockler JC(1),
Wallace EM(1), Lim R(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Ritchie Centre, Hudson Institute of Medical Research, Monash University,
Clayton, VIC, Australia; Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, Australia. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia. (3)Monash Microimaging, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC, Australia.

The effects of human amnion epithelial cells (hAECs) on angiogenesis remain
controversial. It is yet unknown if the presence of inflammation and/or
gestational age of hAEC donors have an impact on angiogenesis. In this study, we 
examined the differences between term and preterm hAECs on angiogenesis in vitro 
and in vivo. Conditioned media from term hAECs induced the formation of longer
huVEC tubules on Matrigel. Both term and preterm hAECs expressed VEGFA, PDGFB,
ANGPT1, and FOXC1, which significantly increased after TNFa and IFN<U+03B3> stimulation.
In the presence of TNFa and IFN<U+03B3>, coculture with term hAECs reduced gene
transcription of Tie-2 and Foxc1 in huVECs, while coculture with preterm hAECs
increased gene transcription of PDGFRa and PDGFRß and reduced gene transcription 
of FOXC1 in huVECs. In vivo assessment of angiogenesis using vWF immunostaining
revealed that hAEC treatment decreased angiogenesis in a bleomycin model of lung 
fibrosis but increased angiogenesis in a neonatal model of hyperoxia-induced lung
injury. In summary, our findings suggested that the impact of hAECs on
angiogenesis may be influenced by the presence of inflammation and underlying
pathology.

PMCID: PMC4736214
PMID: 26880964  [PubMed]


7. Development. 2016 Mar 1;143(5):872-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.128017. Epub 2016 Feb 2.

Endothelial cell specification in the somite is compromised in Pax3-positive
progenitors of Foxc1/2 conditional mutants, with loss of forelimb myogenesis.

Mayeuf-Louchart A(1), Montarras D(1), Bodin C(1), Kume T(2), Vincent SD(1),
Buckingham M(3).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 3738, Department of Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Institut
Pasteur, 28 Rue du Dr Roux, Paris 75015, France. (2)Feinberg Cardiovascular
Research Institute, Northwestern University School of Medicine, Chicago, IL
60611, USA. (3)CNRS UMR 3738, Department of Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, 
Institut Pasteur, 28 Rue du Dr Roux, Paris 75015, France
margaret.buckingham@pasteur.fr.

Pax3 and Foxc2 have been shown genetically to mutually repress each other in the 
mouse somite. Perturbation of this balance in multipotent cells of the
dermomyotome influences cell fate; upregulation of Foxc2 favours a vascular fate,
whereas higher levels of Pax3 lead to myogenesis. Foxc1 has overlapping functions
with Foxc2. In Foxc1/2 double-mutant embryos, somitogenesis is severely affected,
precluding analysis of somite derivatives. We have adopted a conditional approach
whereby mutations in Foxc1 and Foxc2 genes were targeted to Pax3-expressing
cells. Inclusion of a conditional reporter allele in the crosses made it possible
to follow cells that had expressed Pax3. At the forelimb level, endothelial and
myogenic cells migrate from adjacent somites into the limb bud. This population
of endothelial cells is compromised in the double mutant, whereas excessive
production of myogenic cells is observed in the trunk. However, strikingly,
myogenic progenitors fail to enter the limbs, leading to the absence of skeletal 
muscle. Pax3-positive migratory myogenic progenitors, marked by expression of
Lbx1, are specified in the somite at forelimb level, but endothelial progenitors 
are absent. The myogenic progenitors do not die, but differentiate prematurely
adjacent to the somite. We conclude that the small proportion of somite-derived
endothelial cells in the limb is required for the migration of myogenic limb
progenitors.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26839363  [PubMed - in process]


8. Joint Bone Spine. 2016 Jan 29. pii: S1297-319X(15)00281-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jbspin.2015.09.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of upstream regulators for synovial expression signature genes in 
osteoarthritis.

Fei Q(1), Lin J(1), Meng H(1), Wang B(1), Yang Y(1), Wang Q(1), Su N(1), Li J(1),
Li D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, 95, Yong'an Road, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Department of
Orthopaedics, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, 95,
Yong'an Road, Beijing 100050, China. Electronic address: spinefei@163.com.

OBJECTIVES: The detection of transcription factors (TFs) for OA signature genes
provides better clues to the underlying regulatory mechanisms and therapeutic
applications.
METHODS: We searched GEO database for synovial expression profiling from
different OA microarray studies to perform a systematic analysis. Functional
annotation of DEGs was conducted, including gene ontology (GO) enrichment
analysis and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment
analysis. Based on motif databases and the results from integrated analysis of
current gene expression data, a global transcriptional regulatory network was
constructed, and the upstream TFs were identified for OA signature genes.
RESULTS: Six GEO datasets were obtained. Totally, 805 genes across the studies
were consistently differentially expressed in OA (469 up-regulated and 336
down-regulated genes) with FDR=0.01. Supporting an involvement of ECM in the
development of OA, we showed that ECM-receptor interaction was the most
significant pathway in our KEGG analysis (P=5.92E-12). Sixty-one differentially
expressed TFs were identified with FDR=0.05. The constructed OA-specific
regulatory networks consisted of 648 TF-target interactions between 51 TFs and
429 DEGs in the context of OA. The top 10 TFs covering the most downstream DEGs
were identified as crucial TFs involved in the development of OA, including
ARID3A, NFIC, ZNF354C, NR4A2, BRCA1, EHF, FOXL1, FOXC1, EGR1, and HOXA5.
CONCLUSION: This integrated analysis has identified the OA signature, providing
clues to pathogenesis of OA at the molecular level, which may be also used as
diagnostic markers for OA. Some crucial upstream regulators, such as NR4A2, EHF, 
and EGR1 may be considered as potential new therapeutic targets for OA.

Copyright © 2015 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26832188  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


9. Stem Cells. 2016 Jan 29. doi: 10.1002/stem.2301. [Epub ahead of print]

Foxc1 Regulates Early Cardiomyogenesis and Functional Properties of Embryonic
Stem Cell Derived Cardiomyocytes.

Lambers E(1), Arnone B(1), Fatima A(1), Qin G(1), Wasserstrom JA(1), Kume T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs) hold great potential for regeneration of damaged
myocardium, however the molecular circuitry that guides ESC differentiation into 
cardiomyocytes remains poorly understood. This is exemplified by the elusive role
of the transcription factor, Foxc1, during cardiac development. The only known
Foxc1 target during heart development is Tbx1. Because Foxc1 null mice contain
heart mutations that are far more severe than Tbx1 null mice, it is likely that
Foxc1 has additional regulatory roles during heart development. The goal of our
study was to test whether Foxc1 is critical for ESC differentiation into
functional cardiomyocytes through proper regulation of specific downstream gene
networks. Converging evidence from Foxc1 deficient and overexpression ESC models 
reveals a close relationship between Foxc1 levels and early cardiomyogenic
factors Isl1, Mef2c, and Nkx2.5 and also the production of functional
cardiomyocytes. We show Foxc1 regulates early cardiomyogenesis during a specific 
window of differentiation, D4-D6. Through whole transcriptome RNA-sequencing
analysis, we report pathways regulated by Foxc1 involved in cardiac function
including actin cytoskeleton, cell adhesion, tight and gap junctions, and calcium
signaling. Our data indicate a novel Foxc1 direct gene target, Myh7, which
encodes the predominant myosin heavy chain isoform, MHCß, expressed during
cardiac development. These data lead us to conclude that Foxc1 regulates both
early cardiomyogenesis and the functional properties of ESC-derived
cardiomyocytes. Our findings shed light on the molecular circuitry governing
cardiomyogenesis that may lead to the development of better translational
strategies for the use of pluripotent stem cells in regenerative medicine towards
repairing damaged myocardium. This article is protected by copyright. All rights 
reserved.

© 2016 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26824887  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Nat Genet. 2016 Feb;48(2):189-94. doi: 10.1038/ng.3482. Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Genome-wide association analysis identifies TXNRD2, ATXN2 and FOXC1 as
susceptibility loci for primary open-angle glaucoma.

Bailey JN(1), Loomis SJ(2), Kang JH(3), Allingham RR(4), Gharahkhani P(5), Khor
CC(6,)(7), Burdon KP(8,)(9), Aschard H(10), Chasman DI(11), Igo RP Jr(1), Hysi
PG(12), Glastonbury CA(12), Ashley-Koch A(13), Brilliant M(14), Brown AA(15),
Budenz DL(16), Buil A(15), Cheng CY(7,)(17,)(18), Choi H(19), Christen WG(11),
Curhan G(3,)(20), De Vivo I(3), Fingert JH(21,)(22), Foster PJ(23,)(24), Fuchs
C(3,)(25), Gaasterland D(26), Gaasterland T(27), Hewitt AW(28,)(29), Hu
F(10,)(30), Hunter DJ(10,)(31), Khawaja AP(32), Lee RK(33), Li Z(6), Lichter
PR(34), Mackey DA(8,)(35), McGuffin P(36), Mitchell P(37), Moroi SE(34), Perera
SA(17,)(38), Pepper KW(39), Qi Q(40), Realini T(41), Richards JE(34,)(42), Ridker
PM(11), Rimm E(3,)(10,)(30), Ritch R(43), Ritchie M(44), Schuman JS(45), Scott
WK(46), Singh K(47), Sit AJ(48), Song YE(1), Tamimi RM(3), Topouzis F(49),
Viswanathan AC(23), Verma SS(44), Vollrath D(50), Wang JJ(37), Weisschuh N(51),
Wissinger B(51), Wollstein G(45), Wong TY(7,)(17), Yaspan BL(52), Zack DJ(53),
Zhang K(54), Study EN(55); ANZRAG Consortium, Weinreb RN(54), Pericak-Vance
MA(46), Small K(12), Hammond CJ(12), Aung T(17,)(18), Liu Y(55,)(56), Vithana
EN(17,)(18), MacGregor S(5), Craig JE(9), Kraft P(10,)(31), Howell G(39), Hauser 
MA(4,)(13), Pasquale LR(2,)(3), Haines JL(1), Wiggs JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Institute for Computational
Biology, Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio,
USA. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Eye
and Ear Infirmary, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (3)Channing Division of Network
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (5)QIMR Berghofer Medical Research
Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. (6)Division of Human Genetics, Genome
Institute of Singapore, Singapore. (7)Department of Ophthalmology, Yong Loo Lin
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore. (8)Menzies
Institute for Medical Research, University of Tasmania, Hobart, Tasmania,
Australia. (9)Department of Ophthalmology, Flinders University, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia. (10)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public
Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (11)Division of Preventive Medicine, Brigham 
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(12)Department of Twin Research and Genetic Epidemiology, King's College London, 
London, UK. (13)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham,
North Carolina, USA. (14)Center for Human Genetics, Marshfield Clinic Research
Foundation, Marshfield, Wisconsin, USA. (15)Department of Genetic Medicine and
Development, University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland.
(16)Department of Ophthalmology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina, USA. (17)Singapore Eye Research Institute, Singapore National Eye
Centre, Singapore. (18)Eye Academic Clinical Program, Duke-National University of
Singapore Graduate Medical School, Singapore. (19)Section of Rheumatology and
Clinical Epidemiology Unit, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (20)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (21)Department of Ophthalmology,
University of Iowa, College of Medicine, Iowa City, Iowa, USA. (22)Department of 
Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Iowa, College of Medicine, Iowa City,
Iowa, USA. (23)National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre 
at Moorfields Eye Hospital, London, UK. (24)Department of Ophthalmology,
University College London, London, UK. (25)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
(26)Eye Doctors of Washington, Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA. (27)Scripps Genome
Center, University of California at San Diego, San Diego, California, USA.
(28)Centre for Eye Research Australia, University of Melbourne, Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia. (29)Department of Ophthalmology, Royal Victorian Eye and Ear
Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (30)Department of Nutrition, Harvard
School of Public Health, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (31)Program in Genetic
Epidemiology and Statistical Genetics, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. (32)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, Institute
of Public Health, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, Cambridge,
UK. (33)Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, University of Miami Miller School of
Medicine, Miami, Florida, USA. (34)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual
Sciences, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. (35)Centre for
Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Lions Eye Institute, University of Western
Australia, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. (36)Medical Research Council
Social Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Research Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London, London, UK. (37)Centre for Vision Research,
Westmead Millennium Institute, University of Sydney, Westmead, New South Wales,
Australia. (38)Duke-National University of Singapore Graduate Medical School,
Singapore. (39)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine, USA. (40)Department of 
Epidemiology and Population Health, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx,
New York, USA. (41)Department of Ophthalmology, West Virginia University Eye
Institute, Morgantown, West Virginia, USA. (42)Department of Epidemiology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. (43)Einhorn Clinical Research
Center, Department of Ophthalmology, New York Eye and Ear Infirmary of Mount
Sinai, New York, New York, USA. (44)Center for Systems Genomics, Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA. (45)Department of
Ophthalmology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
(46)Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, 
Miami, Florida, USA. (47)Department of Ophthalmology, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Palo Alto, California, USA. (48)Department of Ophthalmology, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA. (49)Department of Ophthalmology, School of
Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, AHEPA Hospital, Thessaloniki,
Greece. (50)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo 
Alto, California, USA. (51)Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Centre for
Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. (52)Genentech, San
Francisco, California, USA. (53)Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University
Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (54)Hamilton Glaucoma Center, Shiley Eye
Institute, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California, USA.
(55)Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Georgia Regents University,
Augusta, Georgia, USA. (56)James and Jean Culver Vision Discovery Institute,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, Georgia, USA.

Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is a leading cause of blindness worldwide. To 
identify new susceptibility loci, we performed meta-analysis on genome-wide
association study (GWAS) results from eight independent studies from the United
States (3,853 cases and 33,480 controls) and investigated the most significantly 
associated SNPs in two Australian studies (1,252 cases and 2,592 controls), three
European studies (875 cases and 4,107 controls) and a Singaporean Chinese study
(1,037 cases and 2,543 controls). A meta-analysis of the top SNPs identified
three new associated loci: rs35934224[T] in TXNRD2 (odds ratio (OR) = 0.78, P =
4.05 × 10(-11)) encoding a mitochondrial protein required for redox homeostasis; 
rs7137828[T] in ATXN2 (OR = 1.17, P = 8.73 × 10(-10)); and rs2745572[A] upstream 
of FOXC1 (OR = 1.17, P = 1.76 × 10(-10)). Using RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry, 
we show TXNRD2 and ATXN2 expression in retinal ganglion cells and the optic nerve
head. These results identify new pathways underlying POAG susceptibility and
suggest new targets for preventative therapies.

PMCID: PMC4731307 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26752265  [PubMed - in process]


11. Bioconjug Chem. 2016 Mar 16;27(3):594-603. doi: 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.5b00601. 
Epub 2016 Jan 19.

Carotenoid Nanovector for Efficient Therapeutic Gene Knockdown of Transcription
Factor FOXC1 in Liver Cancer.

Misra SK(1), Ray T(2), Ostadhossein F(1), Kim B(2), Ray PS(2), Pan D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Beckman Institute, Materials Science and
Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and Carle Cancer Center ,
502 North Busey, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United States. (2)Department of Surgery,
University of Illinois College of Medicine, Division of Surgical Oncology, Carle 
Cancer Center , 509 West University Avenue, Urbana, Illinois 61801, United
States.

Transcription factor FOXC1 has been implicated to play a critical role in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression, but targeting FOXC1 for therapeutic
benefit remains a challenge owing to its location inside the cell nucleus. Herein
we report successful therapeutic gene knockdown of transcription factor FOXC1 in 
liver cancer cells through efficient delivery of siFOXC1 using novel carotenoid
functionalized dendritic nanoparticles (CDN). This delivery system also displayed
a markedly reduced toxicity profile compared to a standard siRNA transfection
agent. We were able to achieve ~90% FOXC1 knockdown using the CDN-siFOXC1
complex. Additionally, it was found to have ~18% greater delivery efficiency
compared to treatments with particles which have no carotenoid tagging, thereby
emphasizing the role of carotenoid mediated cell internalization in the efficient
delivery of CDN-siFOXC1 complex in liver cancer cells.

PMID: 26720420  [PubMed - in process]


12. Development. 2016 Feb 1;143(3):504-15. doi: 10.1242/dev.126920. Epub 2015 Dec 30.

Yap and Taz play a crucial role in neural crest-derived craniofacial development.

Wang J(1), Xiao Y(2), Hsu CW(3), Martinez-Traverso IM(4), Zhang M(3), Bai Y(3),
Ishii M(5), Maxson RE(5), Olson EN(6), Dickinson ME(7), Wythe JD(8), Martin
JF(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA Cardiovascular Research Institute,
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA junw@bcm.edu
jfmartin@bcm.edu. (2)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor
College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA Institute of
Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. (3)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of Molecular
Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston,
TX 77030, USA Interdepartmental Graduate Program in Translational Biology and
Molecular Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (5)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, USC/Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (6)Department of Molecular Biology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(7)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA Cardiovascular Research Institute,
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Interdepartmental Graduate Program in Translational Biology and Molecular
Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. (8)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics,
Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Cardiovascular Research Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, 
Houston, TX 77030, USA Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (9)Department of Molecular
Physiology and Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston,
TX 77030, USA Cardiovascular Research Institute, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA Institute of Biosciences and Technology,
Texas A&M Health Science Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA Interdepartmental
Graduate Program in Translational Biology and Molecular Medicine, Baylor College 
of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA Program in Developmental
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA
Texas Heart Institute, Houston, TX 77030, USA junw@bcm.edu jfmartin@bcm.edu.

The role of the Hippo signaling pathway in cranial neural crest (CNC) development
is poorly understood. We used the Wnt1(Cre) and Wnt1(Cre2SOR) drivers to
conditionally ablate both Yap and Taz in the CNC of mice. When using either Cre
driver, Yap and Taz deficiency in the CNC resulted in enlarged, hemorrhaging
branchial arch blood vessels and hydrocephalus. However, Wnt1(Cre2SOR) mutants
had an open cranial neural tube phenotype that was not evident in Wnt1(Cre)
mutants. In O9-1 CNC cells, the loss of Yap impaired smooth muscle cell
differentiation. RNA-sequencing data indicated that Yap and Taz regulate genes
encoding Fox transcription factors, specifically Foxc1. Proliferation was reduced
in the branchial arch mesenchyme of Yap and Taz CNC conditional knockout (CKO)
embryos. Moreover, Yap and Taz CKO embryos had cerebellar aplasia similar to
Dandy-Walker spectrum malformations observed in human patients and mouse embryos 
with mutations in Foxc1. In embryos and O9-1 cells deficient for Yap and Taz,
Foxc1 expression was significantly reduced. Analysis of Foxc1 regulatory regions 
revealed a conserved recognition element for the Yap and Taz DNA binding
co-factor Tead. ChIP-PCR experiments supported the conclusion that Foxc1 is
directly regulated by the Yap-Tead complex. Our findings uncover important roles 
for Yap and Taz in CNC diversification and development.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4760309 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26718006  [PubMed - in process]


13. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Dec 14. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25464. [Epub ahead of print]

Foxc1 Expression in Early Osteogenic Differentiation Is Regulated by BMP4-SMAD
Activity.

Hopkins A(1), Mirzayans F(2), Berry F(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
(2)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

FOXC1 is an important regulator of the initial steps in intramembranous and
endochondral ossification processes. As BMP signalling is a key initiator of
these processes we sought to determine whether Foxc1 expression is regulated by
such signalling factors. BMP4 treatment of C2C12 cells resulted in an induction
in Foxc1 mRNA levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that SMAD
proteins interacted with the mouse Foxc1 promoter approximately 300 bp upstream
of the transcription start site. This ChIP positive region was cloned into a
luciferase reporter and demonstrated to be responsive to BMP4 stimulation.
Reduction of Foxc1 levels in C2C12 cells though siRNA impaired BMP4 osteogenic
differentiation. In contrast, BMP4 treatment repressed Foxc1 expression in 10T1/2
or D1-ORL mesenchymal cells and MC3T3 preosteoblasts. Finally, siRNA knock-down
of Foxc1 in MC3T3 cells resulted in an induction of markers of osteoblast
differentiation and an accelerated mineralization. These data indicate that Foxc1
expression is regulated by BMP4 and FOXC1 functions in the commitment of
progenitor cells to the osteoblast fate and its expression is reduced when
differentiation proceeds. This article is protected by copyright. All rights
reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26666591  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Life Sci. 2016 Jan 1;144:194-201. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2015.12.001. Epub 2015 Dec
2.

Forkhead box transcription factors in embryonic heart development and congenital 
heart disease.

Zhu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Biology, Hunan University, 1 
Denggao Road, Yuelu District, Changsha, Hunan 410082, PR China. Electronic
address: zhuh6477@126.com.

Embryonic heart development is a very complicated process regulated precisely by 
a network composed of many genes and signaling pathways in time and space.
Forkhead box (Fox, FOX) proteins are a family of transcription factors
characterized by the presence of an evolutionary conserved "forkhead"or
"winged-helix" DNA-binding domain and able to organize temporal and spatial gene 
expression during development. They are involved in a wide variety of cellular
processes, such as cell cycle progression, proliferation, differentiation,
migration, metabolism and DNA damage response. An abundance of studies in model
organisms and systems has established that Foxa2, Foxc1/c2, Foxh1 and Foxm1,
Foxos and Foxps are important components of the signaling pathways that instruct 
cardiogenesis and embryonic heart development, playing paramount roles in heart
development. The previous studies also have demonstrated that mutations in some
of the forkhead box genes and the aberrant expression of forkhead box gene are
heavily implicated in the congenital heart disease (CHD) of humans. This review
primarily focuses on the current understanding of heart development regulated by 
forkhead box transcription factors and molecular genetic mechanisms by which
forkhead box factors modulate heart development during embryogenesis and
organogenesis. This review also summarizes human CHD related mutations in
forkhead box genes as well as the abnormal expression of forkhead box gene, and
discusses additional possible regulatory mechanisms of the forkhead box genes
during embryonic heart development that warrant further investigation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26656470  [PubMed - in process]


15. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2016 Feb;9(1):86-94. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.115.001213.
Epub 2015 Dec 7.

Search for Rare Copy-Number Variants in Congenital Heart Defects Identifies Novel
Candidate Genes and a Potential Role for FOXC1 in Patients With Coarctation of
the Aorta.

Sanchez-Castro M, Eldjouzi H, Charpentier E, Busson PF, Hauet Q, Lindenbaum P,
Delasalle-Guyomarch B, Baudry A, Pichon O, Pascal C, Lefort B, Bajolle F, Pezard 
P, Schott JJ, Dina C, Redon R, Gournay V, Bonnet D, Le Caignec C.

BACKGROUND: Congenital heart defects are the most frequent malformations among
newborns and a frequent cause of morbidity and mortality. Although genetic
variation contributes to congenital heart defects, their precise molecular bases 
remain unknown in the majority of patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We analyzed, by high-resolution array comparative genomic
hybridization, 316 children with sporadic, nonsyndromic congenital heart defects,
including 76 coarctation of the aorta, 159 transposition of the great arteries,
and 81 tetralogy of Fallot, as well as their unaffected parents. We identified by
array comparative genomic hybridization, and validated by quantitative real-time 
polymerase chain reaction, 71 rare de novo (n=8) or inherited (n=63) copy-number 
variants (CNVs; 50 duplications and 21 deletions) in patients. We identified 113 
candidate genes for congenital heart defects within these CNVs, including BTRC,
CHRNB3, CSRP2BP, ERBB2, ERMARD, GLIS3, PLN, PTPRJ, RLN3, and TCTE3. No de novo
CNVs were identified in patients with transposition of the great arteries in
contrast to coarctation of the aorta and tetralogy of Fallot (P=0.002; Fisher
exact test). A search for transcription factor binding sites showed that 93% of
the rare CNVs identified in patients with coarctation of the aorta contained at
least 1 gene with FOXC1-binding sites. This significant enrichment (P<0.0001;
permutation test) was not observed for the CNVs identified in patients with
transposition of the great arteries and tetralogy of Fallot. We hypothesize that 
these CNVs may alter the expression of genes regulated by FOXC1. Foxc1 belongs to
the forkhead transcription factors family, which plays a critical role in
cardiovascular development in mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that deregulation of FOXC1 or its downstream
genes play a major role in the pathogenesis of coarctation of the aorta in
humans.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26643481  [PubMed - in process]


16. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2015;115:413-58. doi: 10.1016/bs.ctdb.2015.07.011.

Mouse Models of Rare Craniofacial Disorders.

Achilleos A(1), Trainor PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, USA. (2)Stowers
Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, USA; Department of Anatomy
& Cell Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.
Electronic address: pat@stowers.org.

A rare disease is defined as a condition that affects less than 1 in 2000
individuals. Currently more than 7000 rare diseases have been documented, and
most are thought to be of genetic origin. Rare diseases primarily affect
children, and congenital craniofacial syndromes and disorders constitute a
significant proportion of rare diseases, with over 700 having been described to
date. Modeling craniofacial disorders in animal models has been instrumental in
uncovering the etiology and pathogenesis of numerous conditions and in some cases
has even led to potential therapeutic avenues for their prevention. In this
chapter, we focus primarily on two general classes of rare disorders,
ribosomopathies and ciliopathies, and the surprising finding that the disruption 
of fundamental, global processes can result in tissue-specific craniofacial
defects. In addition, we discuss recent advances in understanding the
pathogenesis of an extremely rare and specific craniofacial condition known as
syngnathia, based on the first mouse models for this condition. Approximately 1% 
of all babies are born with a minor or major developmental anomaly, and
individuals suffering from rare diseases deserve the same quality of treatment
and care and attention to their disease as other patients.

© 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26589934  [PubMed - in process]


17. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Dec 25;468(4):863-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.11.045. Epub 2015 Nov 14.

miR-4792 inhibits epithelial-mesenchymal transition and invasion in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma by targeting FOXC1.

Li Y(1), Chen X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Zhengzhou Central Hospital Affiliated to
Zhengzhou University, Tongbai Road 195#, Zhengzhou, Henan 450007, PR China.
Electronic address: liyspring001@163.com. (2)Medical College of Shenzhen
University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518060, PR China.

Through analysis of a published micro-array-based high-throughput assessment, we 
discovered that miR-4792 was markedly down-regulated in nasopharyngeal carcinoma 
(NPC) tissues. However, little is known about its effect and mechanism involved
in NPC development and progression. Here, we reported the role of miR-4792 in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and invasion in NPC. We identified an
inverse correlation between miR-4792 expression level and NPC cell EMT and
invasion, and up-regulation of miR-4792 inhibited NPC cell EMT and invasion.
Moreover, we identified and validated that FOXC1 was a direct target of miR-4792,
and miR-4792 regulated EMT and invasion in NPC by acting directly on the 3'UTR of
FOXC1 mRNA. We also performed the animal experiments to explore the anti-tumor
effect of miR-4792, and found that overexpression of miR-4792 inhibited the
growth of nasopharyngeal tumors in vivo. These findings suggest that miR-4792
functions as a tumor suppressor in NPC development and progression by targeting
FOXC1, which could act as a novel potential therapeutic target for NPC treatment,
and miR-4792/FOXC1 pathway that we studied might be used for NPC treatment in
future.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26585487  [PubMed - in process]


18. Cell Rep. 2015 Nov 3;13(5):1046-58. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.09.063.

FOXC1 Activates Smoothened-Independent Hedgehog Signaling in Basal-like Breast
Cancer.

Han B(1), Qu Y(1), Jin Y(1), Yu Y(1), Deng N(2), Wawrowsky K(3), Zhang X(2), Li
N(4), Bose S(5), Wang Q(6), Sakkiah S(7), Abrol R(7), Jensen TW(8), Berman BP(6),
Tanaka H(1), Johnson J(1), Gao B(1), Hao J(9), Liu Z(2), Buttyan R(10), Ray
PS(8), Hung MC(11), Giuliano AE(1), Cui X(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. (2)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Research 
Center, Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles,
CA 90048, USA. (3)Department of BioMedical Sciences, Samuel Oschin Cancer
Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. (4)Vancouver 
Prostate Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6H 3Z6, Canada.
(5)Department of Pathology, Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical 
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. (6)Department of Medicine, Samuel Oschin
Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
(7)Department of BioMedical Sciences, Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA; Department of Medicine, 
Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA
90048, USA. (8)Department of Surgery, University of Illinois College of Medicine 
at Urbana Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA. (9)College of Veterinary Medicine,
Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA 91766, USA. (10)Vancouver
Prostate Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V6H 3Z6, Canada;
Department of Urologic Sciences, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC
V6H 3Z6, Canada. (11)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, the
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Center for
Molecular Medicine and Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology, China Medical
University, Taichung 402, Taiwan. (12)Department of Surgery, Samuel Oschin Cancer
Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical
Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. Electronic address: xiaojiang.cui@cshs.org.

The mesoderm- and epithelial-mesenchymal transition-associated transcription
factor FOXC1 is specifically overexpressed in basal-like breast cancer (BLBC),
but its biochemical function is not understood. Here, we demonstrate that FOXC1
controls cancer stem cell (CSC) properties enriched in BLBC cells via activation 
of Smoothened (SMO)-independent Hedgehog (Hh) signaling. This non-canonical
activation of Hh is specifically mediated by Gli2. Furthermore, we show that the 
N-terminal domain of FOXC1 (aa 1-68) binds directly to an internal region (aa
898-1168) of Gli2, enhancing the DNA-binding and transcription-activating
capacity of Gli2. FOXC1 expression correlates with that of Gli2 and its targets
in human breast cancers. Moreover, FOXC1 overexpression reduces sensitivity to
anti-Hedgehog (Hh) inhibitors in BLBC cells and xenograft tumors. Together, these
findings reveal FOXC1-mediated non-canonical Hh signaling that determines the
BLBC stem-like phenotype and anti-Hh sensitivity, supporting inhibition of FOXC1 
pathways as potential approaches for improving BLBC treatment.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4806384
PMID: 26565916  [PubMed - in process]


19. Neurogenetics. 2016 Jan;17(1):17-23. doi: 10.1007/s10048-015-0462-0. Epub 2015
Oct 21.

Whole exome sequencing identifies a heterozygous missense variant in the PRDM5
gene in a family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

Micheal S(1), Siddiqui SN(2), Zafar SN(2), Venselaar H(3), Qamar R(4,)(5), Khan
MI(6), den Hollander AI(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9101,
6500 HB, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Shazia.Micheal@radboudumc.nl. (2)Department
of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Al-Shifa Eye Trust Hospital Jhelum Road, Rawalpindi, 
Pakistan. (3)Center for Molecular and Biomolecular Informatics, Radboud Institute
for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. (4)Department of Biosciences, COMSATS Institute of Information
Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan. (5)Al-Nafees Medical College and Hospital, Isra 
University, Islamabad, Pakistan. (6)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (7)Department of
Ophthalmology, Radboud University Medical Center, P.O. Box 9101, 6500 HB,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Anneke.denHollander@radboudumc.nl. (8)Department of
Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Anneke.denHollander@radboudumc.nl.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is a disorder affecting the anterior segment of
the eye, often leading to secondary glaucoma and several systemic malformations. 
It is inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion that has been associated with
genetic defects in PITX2 and FOXC1. Known genes CYP1b1, PITX2, and FOXC1 were
excluded by Sanger sequencing. The purpose of current study is to identify the
underlying genetic causes in ARS family by whole exome sequencing (WES). WES was 
performed for affected proband of family, and variants were prioritized based on 
in silico analyses. Segregation analysis of candidate variants was performed in
family members. A novel heterozygous PRDM5 missense variant (c.877A>G;
p.Lys293Glu) was found to segregate with the disease in an autosomal dominant
fashion. The novel missense variant was absent from population-matched controls, 
the Exome Variant Server, and an in-house exome variant database. The Lys293Glu
variant is predicted to be pathogenic and affects a lysine residue that is
conserved in different species. Variants in the PRDM5 gene were previously
identified in anterior segment defects, i.e., autosomal recessive brittle cornea 
syndrome and keratoconus. The results of this study suggest that genetic variants
in PRDM5 can lead to various syndromic and nonsyndromic disorders affecting the
anterior segment of the eye.

PMCID: PMC4701771
PMID: 26489929  [PubMed - in process]


20. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Dec;12(6):8003-9. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4427. Epub 2015 Oct 12.

Forkhead box C1 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition and is a potential
therapeutic target in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Ou-Yang L(1), Xiao SJ(2), Liu P(1), Yi SJ(1), Zhang XL(3), Ou-Yang S(4), Tan
SK(5), Lei X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of
Guilin Medical University, Guilin, Guangxi 541001, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Pathology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Guilin Medical University, Guilin,
Guangxi 541199, P.R. China. (3)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Basic Medical
Science, Guilin Medical University, Guilin, Guangxi 541004, P.R. China. (4)The
liver Disease Center of The PLA, The 458th Hospital of The PLA, Guangzhou,
Guangdong 510602, P.R. China. (5)Department of Public Health College, Guilin
Medical University, Guilin, Guangxi 541004, P.R. China.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a highly invasive malignancy with cervical
lymphopathy as the initial presentation. Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT),
a process by which epithelial cells lose cell-cell adhesion and gain migratory
and invasive properties, has a pivotal role in metastasis. Forkhead box C1
(FoxC1), a member of the forkhead family of transcription factors, induces EMT
and has a critical role in metastasis of multiple human cancers. However, the
role of FoxC1 in the progression of NPC has remained elusive. The present study
revealed that the expression of FoxC1 was markedly elevated in NPC tissues
compared with that in chronically inflamed nasopharyngeal tissues and was closely
correlated with vimentin, fibronectin and N-cadherin expression as indicated by
immunohistochemical assays. In addition, high FoxC1 expression was positively
associated with lymph node metastasis, distant metastasis and an advanced
clinical stage in patients with NPC. Furthermore, FoxC1 expression was high in
NPC cell lines while being low in an immortalized normal nasopharyngeal
epithelial cell line. In vitro, knockdown of FoxC1 in the CNE2 human NPC cell
line by small interfering RNA downregulated vimentin, fibronectin and N-cadherin 
expression and reduced the migratory and invasive capacity of CNE2 cells. In
conclusion, the present study indicated that FoxC1 has a pivotal role in EMT
through the upregulation of vimentin, fibronectin and N-cadherin expression.
Thus, FoxC1 may be a potential therapeutic target in NPC.

PMCID: PMC4758279
PMID: 26461269  [PubMed - in process]


21. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 25;10(9):e0138416. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138416.
eCollection 2015.

Aberrantly Expressed OTX Homeobox Genes Deregulate B-Cell Differentiation in
Hodgkin Lymphoma.

Nagel S(1), Ehrentraut S(1), Meyer C(1), Kaufmann M(1), Drexler HG(1), MacLeod
RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ, German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

In Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) we recently reported that deregulated homeobox gene MSX1
mediates repression of the B-cell specific transcription factor ZHX2. In this
study we investigated regulation of MSX1 in this B-cell malignancy. Accordingly, 
we analyzed expression and function of OTX homeobox genes which activate MSX1
transcription during embryonal development in the neural plate border region. Our
data demonstrate that OTX1 and OTX2 are aberrantly expressed in both HL patients 
and cell lines. Moreover, both OTX loci are targeted by genomic gains in
overexpressing cell lines. Comparative expression profiling and subsequent
pathway modulations in HL cell lines indicated that aberrantly enhanced
FGF2-signalling activates the expression of OTX2. Downstream analyses of OTX2
demonstrated transcriptional activation of genes encoding transcription factors
MSX1, FOXC1 and ZHX1. Interestingly, examination of the physiological expression 
profile of ZHX1 in normal hematopoietic cells revealed elevated levels in T-cells
and reduced expression in B-cells, indicating a discriminatory role in
lymphopoiesis. Furthermore, two OTX-negative HL cell lines overexpressed ZHX1 in 
correlation with genomic amplification of its locus at chromosomal band 8q24,
supporting the oncogenic potential of this gene in HL. Taken together, our data
demonstrate that deregulated homeobox genes MSX1 and OTX2 respectively impact
transcriptional inhibition of (B-cell specific) ZHX2 and activation of (T-cell
specific) ZHX1. Thus, we show how reactivation of a specific embryonal gene
regulatory network promotes disturbed B-cell differentiation in HL.

PMCID: PMC4583255
PMID: 26406991  [PubMed - in process]


22. Neurogenetics. 2016 Jan;17(1):1-9. doi: 10.1007/s10048-015-0458-9. Epub 2015 Sep 
17.

Disruptions in a cluster of computationally identified enhancers near FOXC1 and
GMDS may influence brain development.

Haliburton GD(1,)(2), McKinsey GL(3), Pollard KS(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institutes, 1650 Owens Street, San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA.
(2)Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA. (3)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA. (4)Gladstone Institutes, 1650 Owens Street,
San Francisco, CA, 94158, USA. katherine.pollard@gladstone.ucsf.edu. (5)Institute
for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA,
USA. katherine.pollard@gladstone.ucsf.edu. (6)Division of Biostatistics,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA.
katherine.pollard@gladstone.ucsf.edu.

Regulatory elements are more evolutionarily conserved and provide a larger
mutational target than coding regions of the human genome, suggesting that
mutations in non-coding regions contribute significantly to development and
disease. Using a computational approach to predict gene regulatory enhancers, we 
found that many known and predicted embryonic enhancers cluster in genomic loci
harboring development-associated genes. One of the densest clusters of predicted 
enhancers in the human genome is near the genes GMDS and FOXC1. GMDS encodes a
short-chain mannose dehydrogenase enzyme involved in the regulation of hindbrain 
neural migration, and FOXC1 encodes a developmental transcription factor required
for brain, heart, and eye development. We experimentally validate four novel
enhancers in this locus and demonstrate that these enhancers show consistent
activity during embryonic development in domains that overlap with the expression
of FOXC1 and GMDS. These four enhancers contain binding motifs for several
transcription factors, including the ZIC family of transcription factors. Removal
of the ZIC binding sites significantly alters enhancer activity in three of these
enhancers, reducing expression in the eye, hindbrain, and limb, suggesting a
mechanism whereby ZIC family members may transcriptionally regulate FOXC1 and/or 
GMDS expression. Our findings uncover novel enhancer regions that may control
transcription in a topological domain important for embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC4701781
PMID: 26382291  [PubMed - in process]


23. Cancer Cell. 2015 Sep 14;28(3):329-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.07.017.

Frequent Derepression of the Mesenchymal Transcription Factor Gene FOXC1 in Acute
Myeloid Leukemia.

Somerville TD(1), Wiseman DH(1), Spencer GJ(1), Huang X(1), Lynch JT(1), Leong
HS(2), Williams EL(1), Cheesman E(3), Somervaille TC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Biology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The
University of Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. (2)Computational Biology
Support Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of
Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. (3)Department of Diagnostic Paediatric
Pathology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester M13 9WL, UK.
(4)Leukaemia Biology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The
University of Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. Electronic address:
tim.somervaille@cruk.manchester.ac.uk.

Through in silico and other analyses, we identified FOXC1 as expressed in at
least 20% of human AML cases, but not in normal hematopoietic populations. FOXC1 
expression in AML was almost exclusively associated with expression of the HOXA/B
locus. Functional experiments demonstrated that FOXC1 contributes to a block in
monocyte/macrophage differentiation and enhances clonogenic potential. In in vivo
analyses, FOXC1 collaborates with HOXA9 to accelerate significantly the onset of 
symptomatic leukemia. A FOXC1-repressed gene set identified in murine leukemia
exhibited quantitative repression in human AML in accordance with FOXC1
expression, and FOXC1(high) human AML cases exhibited reduced morphologic
monocytic differentiation and inferior survival. Thus, FOXC1 is frequently
derepressed to functional effect in human AML.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26373280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Genet Couns. 2015;26(2):237-41.

A VARIANT CASE OF 6p24 DELETION SYNDROME (OMIM #612582).

Ergin RN, Cigerciogullari E, Alanay Y, Yayla M.

The 6p24 deletion syndrome, a contiguous gene deletion syndrome is characterized 
by a wide spectrum of clinical presentations. In this case report we present an
antenatal case of 6p 24 deletion syndrome variant involving FOXC1 gene. First
trimester fetal screening of a 34 year old pregnant female revealed
ultrasonographic anomalies and chorionic villus sampling was performed to rule
out any chromosomal anomaly. Cytogenetic examination resulted in normal 46,XY
karyotype. In the following weeks further anomalies like cleft palate/lip, thick 
nuchal fold, ventral septal defect and low set ear were detected with
ultrasonography. At 20 weeks of gestation, amniocentesis and whole genome
array-CGH analysis revealed a 9.6 Mb interstitial deletion in the 6p25.2p24.1
region which has many genes including an important gene, FOXC1 and 119 Kb
interstitial deletion at 9q22.31. The pregnancy was terminated. Postmortem
morphological examination revealed turricephaly, hypertelorism, depressed nasal
bridge, broad nasal tip, left sided cleft lip, low-set small ears, micrognathia, 
short neck, increased nuchal fold, short broad distal phalanges, broad thumbs,
broad halluces and broad toes.

PMID: 26349195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Oct;36(4):1111-7. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2015.2325. Epub 2015 Aug 
24.

Mutation analysis of the genes associated with anterior segment dysgenesis,
microcornea and microphthalmia in 257 patients with glaucoma.

Huang X(1), Xiao X(1), Jia X(1), Li S(1), Li M(1), Guo X(1), Liu X(1), Zhang
Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510060, P.R. China.

Genetic factors have an important role in the development of glaucoma; however,
the exact genetic defects remain to be identified in the majority of patients.
Glaucoma is frequently observed in patients with anterior segment
dysgenesis (ASD), microcornea or microphthalmia. The present study aimed to
detect the potential mutations in the genes associated with ASD, microcornea and 
microphthalmia in 257 patients with glaucoma. Variants in 43 of the 46 genes,
which are associated with ASD, microcornea or microphthalmia, were available in
whole-exome sequencing. Candidate variants in the 43 genes were selected
following multi-step bioinformatic analysis and were subsequently confirmed by
Sanger sequencing. Confirmed variants were further validated by segregation
analysis and analysis of controls. Overall, 70 candidate variants were selected
from whole-exome sequencing, of which 53 (75.7%) were confirmed by Sanger
sequencing. In total, 27 of the 53 were considered potentially pathogenic based
on bioinformatic analysis and analysis of controls. Of the 27, 6 were identified 
in BEST1, 4 in EYA1, 3 in GDF6, 2 in BMP4, 2 in CRYBA4, 2 in HCCS, and 1 in each 
of CRYAA, CRYGC, CRYGD, COL4A1, FOXC1, GJA8, PITX2 and SHH. The 27 variants were 
detected in 28 of 257 (10.9%) patients, including 11 of 125 patients with primary
open-angle glaucoma and 17 of 132 patients with primary angle-closure glaucoma.
Variants in these genes may be a potential risk factor for primary glaucoma.
Careful clinical observation and analysis of additional patients in different
populations are expected to further these findings.

PMID: 26310487  [PubMed - in process]


26. Gastroenterology. 2015 Oct;149(4):861-3. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.08.032. Epub 
2015 Aug 21.

FoxC1: Novel Regulator of Inflammation-Induced Metastasis in Hepatocellular
Carcinoma.

Aravalli RN(1), Greten TF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota. Electronic address: aravalli@umn.edu. (2)Gastrointestinal Malignancy
Section, Thoracic and Gastrointestinal Oncology Branch, Center for Cancer
Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland.

Comment on
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Oct;149(4):1053-67.e14.

PMID: 26302490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Neurol Med Chir (Tokyo). 2015;55(8):640-6. doi: 10.2176/nmc.ra.2015-0075. Epub
2015 Jul 31.

Molecular Biology of Pediatric Hydrocephalus and Hydrocephalus-related Diseases.

Yamasaki M(1), Kanemura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Takatsuki General Hospital.

We are beginning to understand the molecular biology of hydrocephalus and its
related diseases. X-linked hydrocephalus (XLH), holoprosencephaly (HPE),
Dandy-Walker malformation (DWM), and neural tube defect (NTD) can all be
discussed with respect to their available molecular genetics knowledge base and
its clinical applications. XLH is single gene disorder caused by mutations in the
neural cell adhesion molecule-encoding L1CAM (L1) gene. Our knowledge of the
molecular basis of XLH is already being applied clinically in disease diagnosis, 
disease classification, and prenatal diagnosis. However, the molecular mechanism 
underlying XLH-related hydrocephalus still needs to be clarified. Sixteen
causative genes for HPE have been identified, of which mutations are most often
found in SHH, ZIC2, SIX3, and TGIF. Genetic interactions, gene complexity, and
the wide variety of HPE phenotypes and genotypes are topics for future study. For
DWM, two important loci, 3q24, which includes the FOXC1 gene, and 6q25.3, which
includes the ZIC1 and ZIC4 genes, were recently identified as causative areas.
The planar cell polarity (PCP) genes CELSR1, CELSR2, VANGL1, and VANGL2 have been
implicated in NTD; these genes have roles in neural tube closure and ependymal
ciliary movement.

PMCID: PMC4628154
PMID: 26227058  [PubMed - in process]


28. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Jul 29. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.169. [Epub ahead of print]

Rare FOXC1 variants in congenital glaucoma: identification of translation
regulatory sequences.

Medina-Trillo C(1), Aroca-Aguilar JD(1), Méndez-Hernández CD(2), Morales L(2),
García-Antón M(3), García-Feijoo J(2), Escribano J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Área de Genética, Facultad de Medicina/Instituto de Investigación en
Discapacidades Neurológicas (IDINE), Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete,
Spain [2] Cooperative Research Network on Age-Related Ocular Pathology, Visual
and Life Quality, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. (2)1] Cooperative
Research Network on Age-Related Ocular Pathology, Visual and Life Quality,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain [2] Servicio de Oftalmología,
Hospital San Carlos, SPAIN/Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital
Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain. (3)1] Cooperative Research Network on
Age-Related Ocular Pathology, Visual and Life Quality, Instituto de Salud Carlos 
III, Madrid, Spain [2] Servicio de Oftalmología, Hospital San Carlos,
SPAIN/Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos,
Madrid, Spain [3] Instituto de Investigaciones Oftalmológicas Ramón Castroviejo, 
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is the cause of a significant proportion of
inherited visual loss in children, but the underlying mechanism is poorly
understood. In this study, we assessed the relationship between PCG and FOXC1
variants by Sanger sequencing the proximal promoter and transcribed sequence of
FOXC1 from a cohort of 133 PCG families with no known CYP1B1 or MYOC mutations.
The pathogenicity of the identified variants was evaluated by functional
analyses. Ten patients (7.5%) with no family history of glaucoma carried five
different rare heterozygous FOXC1 variants with both increased (rs77888940:C>G,
c.-429C>G, rs730882054:c.1134_144del(CGGCGGCGCGG), p.(G380Rfs*144) and
rs35717904:A>T, c.*734A>T) and decreased (rs185790394: C>T, c.-244C>T and
rs79691946:C>T, p.(P297S)) transactivation, ranging from 50 to 180% of the
wild-type activity. The five variants did not show monogenic segregation, and
four of them were absent in a control group (n=233). To the best of our
knowledge, one of these variants (p.(G380Rfs*144)) has not previously been
described. One of the FOXC1 variant carriers (p.(P297S)) also coinherited a
functionally altered rare PITX2 heterozygous variant (rs6533526:C>T, c.*454C>T). 
Bioinformatics and functional analyses provided novel information on three of
these variants. c.-429C>G potentially disrupts a consensus sequence for a
terminal oligopyrimidine tract, whereas c.-244C>T may alter the RNA secondary
structure in the 5'-untranslated region (UTR) that affects mRNA translation. In
addition, p.(G380Rfs*144) led to increased protein stability. In summary, these
data reveal the presence of translation regulatory sequences in the UTRs of FOXC1
and provide evidence for a possible role of rare FOXC1 variants as modifying
factors of goniodysgenesis in PCG.European Journal of Human Genetics advance
online publication, 29 July 2015; doi:10.1038/ejhg.2015.169.

PMID: 26220699  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


29. Tumour Biol. 2015 Jul 22. [Epub ahead of print]

MicroRNA-495 downregulates FOXC1 expression to suppress cell growth and migration
in endometrial cancer.

Xu YY(1), Tian J, Hao Q, Yin LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, The Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University,
Tianjin, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of noncoding RNAs and function as key regulators
of gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. In this study, we found
that miR-495 reduces cell growth, induces apoptosis and suppresses the migration 
of endometrial cancer by directly inhibiting FOXC1 expression. Further analysis
revealed that FOXC1 promotes growth and migration and functions as an oncogene in
vitro. FOXC1 overexpression reversed the cellular responses mediated by miR-495
in endometrial cancer cells. We also found that miR-495 suppresses the growth of 
endometrial cancer in vivo. Altogether, these results indicate that miR-495 acts 
as a tumour suppressor gene by targeting FOXC1 at the post-transcriptional level 
in endometrial cancer.

PMID: 26198045  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


30. Front Immunol. 2015 Jun 12;6:301. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00301. eCollection
2015.

CXCL12/SDF-1 and CXCR4.

Nagasawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology and Hematology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University , Kyoto , Japan ; Core Research for Evolutional
Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST) , Kyoto
, Japan.

PMCID: PMC4464259
PMID: 26124757  [PubMed]


31. Gastroenterology. 2015 Oct;149(4):1053-67.e14. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2015.05.058.
Epub 2015 Jun 9.

Interleukin-8 Induces Expression of FOXC1 to Promote Transactivation of CXCR1 and
CCL2 in Hepatocellular Carcinoma Cell Lines and Formation of Metastases in Mice.

Huang W(1), Chen Z(2), Zhang L(2), Tian D(3), Wang D(3), Fan D(2), Wu K(2), Xia
L(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive
Diseases, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, People's
Republic of China; Department of Gastroenterology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei
Province, People's Republic of China. (2)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology
and Xijing Hospital of Digestive Diseases, Fourth Military Medical University,
Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of
Gastroenterology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University 
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, People's Republic of China.
(4)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive
Diseases, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, People's
Republic of China; Department of Gastroenterology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei
Province, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: xialimin@fmmu.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2015 Oct;149(4):861-3.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Inflammation regulated by interleukin (IL) 8 promotes
metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The transcription factor forkhead
box C1 (FOXC1) promotes metastasis by activating the epithelial to mesenchymal
transition; its levels in liver tumors have been associated with shorter survival
times of patients. We investigated whether FOXC1 activates inflammation signaling
pathways in HCC cell lines.
METHODS: We performed studies in the human HCC cell lines Huh-7 and SMMC7721, as 
well as the metastatic cell lines MHCC97H and HCCLM3. Cell lines were incubated
with IL8 and transcription of reporter genes was measured; cells were also
incubated with kinase inhibitors. Levels of FOXC1 or IL8 were knocked down with
small interfering messenger RNAs in Huh7 cells; cells were analyzed in vitro in
migration and invasion assays. To study metastasis, HCC cells were injected into 
flanks of BALB/C nude mice; 4 weeks later, the subcutaneous tumor fragments were 
collected and implanted into livers of the nude mice, and number and size tumors 
formed were measured. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays were used to measure
binding of transcription factors promoter regions of genes. We measured levels of
FOXC1, IL8, CXCR1, and CCL2 in 2 groups of human HCC tissues collected from the
Xijing or Tongji Hospitals in China (n = 690 and n = 312 samples, respectively)
using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Incubation of HCC cells with IL8 led to increased expression of FOXC1,
via activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinase signaling to AKT and
hypoxia-inducible factor 1a. Knockdown of FOXC1 in HCC cells that overexpressed
IL8 reduced the numbers of metastases formed in mice, compared with cells without
FOXC1 knockdown. Transgenic overexpression of FOXC1 in HCC cells with IL8
knockdown increased the numbers of metastases formed in mice compared with cells 
without FOXC1 overexpression. CXCR1 and CCL2 were direct transcriptional targets 
of FOXC1. Knockdown of the combination of CXCR1 and CCL2 reduced the invasive
activities of HCC cells that overexpress FOXC1 and formation of lung metastases
in mice, and transgenic overexpression of CXCR1 increased cell's invasive and
metastatic abilities after knockdown of FOXC1. Liver metastases grown from cells 
that overexpressed FOXC1 were infiltrated by tumor-associated macrophages, and
CCL2 knockdown decreased tumor-associated macrophage infiltration; depletion of
macrophages from mice significantly reduced growth of metastases by cells that
overexpressed FOXC1. In human HCC tissues, level of FOXC1 correlated with levels 
of IL8 and CXCR1 and CCL2 and infiltration of tumors by macrophage. In
multivariate analysis, detection of FOXC1 and CCL2 were independent predictors
for postoperative recurrence of HCC and overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: In HCC cell lines, IL8 activates expression of FOXC1 via the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase signaling to AKT and hypoxia-inducible factor 1a. FOXC1
expression leads to transactivation of CXCR1 and CCL2, promoting inflammation and
the invasive and metastatic abilities of HCC cells.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26065367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Oncotarget. 2015 Jun 30;6(18):16638-52.

Dual regulation by microRNA-200b-3p and microRNA-200b-5p in the inhibition of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in triple-negative breast cancer.

Rhodes LV(1), Martin EC(2), Segar HC(2), Miller DF(3), Buechlein A(4), Rusch
DB(4), Nephew KP(3), Burow ME(2,)(5), Collins-Burow BM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Florida Gulf Coast University, Fort Myers, 
FL, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology and Medical Oncology,
Tulane University, New Orleans, LA, USA. (3)Medical Sciences and Department of
Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Bloomington, IN, USA. (4)Indiana University Center for Genomics and
Bioinformatics, Bloomington, IN, USA. (5)Department of Pharmacology, Tulane
University, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) involves loss of an epithelial
phenotype and activation of a mesenchymal one. Enhanced expression of genes
associated with a mesenchymal transition includes ZEB1/2, TWIST, and FOXC1.
miRNAs are known regulators of gene expression and altered miRNA expression is
known to enhance EMT in breast cancer. Here we demonstrate that the tumor
suppressive miRNA family, miR-200, is not expressed in triple negative breast
cancer (TNBC) cell lines and that miR-200b-3p over-expression represses EMT,
which is evident through decreased migration and increased CDH1 expression.
Despite the loss of migratory capacity following re-expression of miR-200b-3p, no
subsequent loss of the conventional miR-200 family targets and EMT markers ZEB1/2
was observed. Next generation RNA-sequencing analysis showed that enhanced
expression of pri-miR-200b lead to ectopic expression of both miR-200b-3p and
miR-200b-5p with multiple isomiRs expressed for each of these miRNAs.
Furthermore, miR-200b-5p was expressed in the receptor positive, epithelial
breast cancer cell lines but not in the TNBC (mesenchymal) cell lines. In
addition, a compensatory mechanism for miR-200b-3p/200b-5p targeting, where both 
miRNAs target the RHOGDI pathway leading to non-canonical repression of EMT, was 
demonstrated. Collectively, these data are the first to demonstrate dual
targeting by miR-200b-3p and miR-200b-5p and a previously undescribed role for
microRNA processing and strand expression in EMT and TNBC, the most aggressive
breast cancer subtype.

PMCID: PMC4599295
PMID: 26062653  [PubMed - in process]


33. Curr Opin Hematol. 2015 Jul;22(4):330-6. doi: 10.1097/MOH.0000000000000153.

The critical and specific transcriptional regulator of the microenvironmental
niche for hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.

Omatsu Y(1), Nagasawa T.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Immunobiology and Hematology, Institute for Frontier Medical
Sciences, Kyoto University bJapan Science and Technology Agency (JST), Core
Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Kyoto, Japan.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: It has been assumed that the special microenvironments known
as niches in the marrow play an essential role in maintaining hematopoietic stem 
and progenitor cells (HSPCs), and the identity of the HSPC niche has been a
subject of long-standing debate. Recent studies identified cells, which create
microenvironments meeting the criteria for HSPC niches and the critical
transcriptional regulators of their development and maintenance.
RECENT FINDINGS: Osterix as well as Ebf2 and Bmi1 are critical but not specific
transcriptional regulators of HSPC niche development. The transcription factor
Foxc1 is expressed preferentially in a population of adipo-osteogenic
progenitors, termed CXCL12-abundant reticular (CAR) cells, which create HSPC
niches and are largely equivalent to stem cell factor and Lepr-expressing cells, 
in developing and adult bone marrow. Foxc1 is essential for CAR cell development 
and maintenance of bone marrow niches for HSPCs upregulating CXCL12 and SCF
expression and inhibition of adipogenic processes in CAR cell progenitors.
SUMMARY: Foxc1 is the first critical and specific transcriptional regulator that 
is required for development and maintenance of cells creating HSPC niches,
including a specialized population of adipo-osteogenic progenitors in bone
marrow.

PMID: 26049754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Jun 3;107(8). pii: djv148. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv148.
Print 2015 Aug.

Diagnosis of Basal-Like Breast Cancer Using a FOXC1-Based Assay.

Jensen TW(1), Ray T(1), Wang J(1), Li X(1), Naritoku WY(1), Han B(1), Bellafiore 
F(1), Bagaria SP(1), Qu A(1), Cui X(1), Taylor CR(1), Ray PS(2).

Author information: 
(1): Interdisciplinary Health Sciences Initiative (TWJ, PSR), Department of
Statistics (AQ), Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology (PSR),
University of Illinois Cancer Center (PSR), and Department of Surgery, University
of Illinois College of Medicine (PSR), University of Illinois at Urbana
Champaign, Urbana Champaign, IL; Onconostic Technologies, Inc., Champaign, IL
(TR); John Wayne Cancer Institute, Santa Monica, CA (JW); Department of Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, Keck USC/LAC and USC Medical Center/VAGLAHS, Los
Angeles, CA (XL, WYN); Departments of Surgery and Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA (BH,
XC); Department of Pathology, Carle Foundation Hospital, Urbana, IL (FB);
Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL (SPB); Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA (CRT); Division of Surgical Oncology, Carle 
Cancer Center, Urbana, IL (PSR). (2): Interdisciplinary Health Sciences
Initiative (TWJ, PSR), Department of Statistics (AQ), Beckman Institute for
Advanced Science and Technology (PSR), University of Illinois Cancer Center
(PSR), and Department of Surgery, University of Illinois College of Medicine
(PSR), University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, Urbana Champaign, IL;
Onconostic Technologies, Inc., Champaign, IL (TR); John Wayne Cancer Institute,
Santa Monica, CA (JW); Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Keck
USC/LAC and USC Medical Center/VAGLAHS, Los Angeles, CA (XL, WYN); Departments of
Surgery and Obstetrics and Gynecology, Samuel Oschin Cancer Institute,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA (BH, XC); Department of Pathology,
Carle Foundation Hospital, Urbana, IL (FB); Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic,
Jacksonville, FL (SPB); Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA (CRT);
Division of Surgical Oncology, Carle Cancer Center, Urbana, IL (PSR).
psray@illinois.edu.

BACKGROUND: Diagnosis of basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) remains a bottleneck to 
conducting effective clinical trials for this aggressive subtype. We postulated
that elevated expression of Forkhead Box transcription factor C1 (FOXC1) is a
simple and accurate diagnostic biomarker for BLBC.
METHODS: Accuracy of FOXC1 expression in identifying BLBC was compared with the
PAM50 gene expression panel in gene expression microarray (GEM) (n = 1992) and
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) (n = 349) datasets. A 
FOXC1-based immunohistochemical (IHC) assay was developed and assessed in 96
archival formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) breast cancer samples that also
underwent PAM50 profiling. All statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: A FOXC1-based two-tier assay (IHC +/- qRT-PCR) accurately identified
BLBC (AUC = 0.88) in an independent cohort of FFPE samples, validating the
accuracy of FOXC1-defined BLBC in GEM (AUC = 0.90) and qRT-PCR (AUC = 0.88)
studies, when compared with platform-specific PAM50-defined BLBC. The hazard
ratio (HR) for disease-specific survival in patients having FOXC1-defined BLBC
was 1.71 (95% CI = 1.31 to 2.23, P < .001), comparable to PAM50 assay-defined
BLBC (HR = 1.74, 95% CI = 1.40 to 2.17, P < .001). FOXC1 expression also
predicted the development of brain metastasis. Importantly, unlike
triple-negative or Core Basal IHC definitions, a FOXC1-based definition is able
to identify BLBC in both ER+ and HER2+ patients.
CONCLUSION: A FOXC1-based two-tier assay, by virtue of being rapid, simple,
accurate, and cost-effective may emerge as the diagnostic assay of choice for
BLBC. Such a test could substantially improve clinical trial enrichment of BLBC
patients and accelerate the identification of effective chemotherapeutic options 
for this aggressive disease.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4554196 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 26041837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Neurol. 2015 Dec;262(12):2601-16. doi: 10.1007/s00415-015-7794-4. Epub 2015 Jun
3.

Monogenic causes of stroke: now and the future.

Tan RY(1), Markus HS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Stroke Research Group, Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Box
83, R3 Neurosciences, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2
0QQ, UK. yyrt2@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (2)Stroke Research Group, Clinical
Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Box 83, R3 Neurosciences, Cambridge
Biomedical Campus, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.

Most stroke is multifactorial with multiple polygenic risk factors each
conferring small increases in risk interacting with environmental risk factors,
but it can also arise from mutations in a single gene. This review covers
single-gene disorders which lead to stroke as a major phenotype, with a focus on 
those which cause cerebral small vessel disease (SVD), an area where there has
been significant recent progress with findings that may inform us about the
pathogenesis of SVD more broadly. We also discuss the impact that next generation
sequencing technology (NGST) is likely to have on clinical practice in this area.
The most common form of monogenic SVD is cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy
with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy, due to the mutations in the
NOTCH3 gene. Several other inherited forms of SVD include cerebral autosomal
recessive arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy, retinal
vasculopathy with cerebral leukodystrophy, collagen type IV a1 and a2
gene-related arteriopathy and FOXC1 deletion related arteriopathy. These
monogenic forms of SVD, with overlapping clinical phenotypes, are beginning to
provide insights into how the small arteries in the brain can be damaged and some
of the mechanisms identified may also be relevant to more common sporadic SVD.
Despite the discovery of these disorders, it is often challenging to clinically
and radiologically distinguish between syndromes, while screening multiple genes 
for causative mutations that can be costly and time-consuming. The rapidly
falling cost of NGST may allow quicker diagnosis of these rare causes of SVD, and
can also identify previously unknown disease-causing variants.

PMID: 26037017  [PubMed - in process]


36. Izv Akad Nauk Ser Biol. 2015 Mar-Apr;(2):117-26.

[Molecular-genetic mechanisms of cornea morphogenesis].

[Article in Russian]

Panova IG, Markitantova YV, Smirnova YA, Zinovieva RD.

In this paper, we analyzed our own results and published data on the expression
of regulatory genes encoding transcription factors Pax6/PAX6, Pitx2/PITX2,
Fox1/FOXC1, Prox1/PROX1, Oct4/OCT4, Nanog/NANOG, and TGFß2 signaling protein
during morphogenesis of the cornea in vertebrates. We considered the results
obtained for the cornea of model animals, primarily mice, and human fetal cornea.
The main possibility of establishing common mechanisms of eye development in
vertebrates in health and disease is comparative studies of eye morphogenesis of 
humans and animal models.

PMID: 26021153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Kidney Int. 2015 Aug;88(2):321-31. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.140. Epub 2015 May 20.

Alternatively spliced isoforms of WT1 control podocyte-specific gene expression.

Lefebvre J(1), Clarkson M(1), Massa F(1), Bradford ST(2), Charlet A(1), Buske
F(3), Lacas-Gervais S(4), Schulz H(5), Gimpel C(6), Hata Y(7), Schaefer F(8),
Schedl A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Biology Valrose, Université de Nice-Sophia, Nice, France [2]
Inserm, UMR1091, Nice, France [3] CNRS, UMR7277, Nice, France. (2)1] Institute of
Biology Valrose, Université de Nice-Sophia, Nice, France [2] Inserm, UMR1091,
Nice, France [3] CNRS, UMR7277, Nice, France [4] CSIRO Food and Nutrition
Flagship, North Ryde, New South Wales, Australia [5] Epigenetics Group, Cancer
Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales,
Australia. (3)1] CSIRO Food and Nutrition Flagship, North Ryde, New South Wales, 
Australia [2] Epigenetics Group, Cancer Program, Garvan Institute of Medical
Research, Darlinghurst, New South Wales, Australia. (4)CCMA University of Nice,
Nice, France. (5)MDC for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany. (6)University
Children's Hospital, Freiburg, Germany. (7)Tokyo Medical and Dental University,
Tokyo, Japan. (8)University Children's Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.

The Wilms' tumor suppressor WT1 is a key regulator of podocyte function that is
mutated in Denys-Drash and Frasier syndromes. Here we have used an integrative
approach employing ChIP, exon array, and genetic analyses in mice to address
general and isoform-specific functions of WT1 in podocyte differentiation.
Analysis of ChIP-Seq data showed that almost half of the podocyte-specific genes 
are direct targets of WT1. Bioinformatic analysis further identified coactivator 
FOXC1-binding sites in proximity to WT1-bound regions, thus supporting
coordinated action of these transcription factors in regulating podocyte-specific
genes. Transcriptional profiling of mice lacking the WT1 alternative splice
isoform (+KTS) had a more restrictive set of genes whose expression depends on
these alternatively spliced isoforms. One of these genes encodes the
membrane-associated guanylate kinase MAGI2, a protein that localizes to the base 
of the slit diaphragm. Using functional analysis in mice, we further show that
MAGI2a is essential for proper localization of nephrin and the assembly of the
slit diaphragm complex. Finally, a dramatic reduction of MAGI2 was found in an
LPS mouse model of glomerular injury and in genetic cases of human disease. Thus,
our study highlights the central role of WT1 in podocyte differentiation,
identifies that WT1 has a central role in podocyte differentiation, and
identifies MAGI2a as the crucial isoform in slit diaphragm assembly, suggesting a
causative role of this gene in the etiology of glomerular disorders.

PMID: 25993318  [PubMed - in process]


38. Gene. 2015 Aug 15;568(1):76-80. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.05.015. Epub 2015 May 9.

Whole exome sequencing reveals a novel de novo FOXC1 mutation in a patient with
unrecognized Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and glaucoma.

Pasutto F(1), Mauri L(2), Popp B(3), Sticht H(4), Ekici A(3), Piozzi E(5),
Bonfante A(6), Penco S(2), Schlötzer-Schrehardt U(7), Reis A(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg
(FAU), Erlangen, Germany. Electronic address: francesca.pasutto@uk-erlangen.de.
(2)Medical Genetics, A.O. Niguarda Ca'Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy. (3)Institute
of Human Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU),
Erlangen, Germany. (4)Bioinformatics, Institute of Biochemistry, FAU
Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. (5)Pediatric Ophthalmology, A.O. Niguarda
Ca'Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy. (6)Medical Genetics, Ospedale S. Bassiano,
Bassano del Grappa, Italy. (7)Department of Ophthalmology, FAU Erlangen-Nürnberg,
Erlangen, Germany.

We report the identification of a novel mutation in the fork-head box C1 (FOXC1) 
gene which occurred de novo in an Italian patient with unrecognized
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. He was previously diagnosed as having late recognized
primary congenital glaucoma at the age of 14 years and was subsequently subjected
to multiple surgical interventions due to uncontrolled intraocular pressure and
progressive visual field loss. After exclusion of mutations in CYP1B1 and MYOC,
trio-whole-exome sequencing revealed de novo in frame deletion in the coding
region of the FOXC1 gene (c.407_409delGTC, p.V137del) leading to a deletion of
the evolutionary conserved amino acid Valine at position 137 of the protein.
Molecular modeling predicted that Val137 deletion impairs FOXC1 DNA-binding
capacity and transcriptional activation. Since loss-of-function mutations in
FOXC1 are associated with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome, the genetic findings in
combination with re-evaluation of the patient's clinical data resulted in a
corrected diagnosis of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome with developmental glaucoma. We
therefore suggest that in addition to CYP1B1 and MYOC, FOXC1 should be included
in the genetic analysis of cases with unclear glaucomatous phenotypes to ensure
proper diagnosis, adequate treatment and appropriate genetic counseling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25967385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2015 Jun;38(3):173-81. doi: 10.1007/s13402-014-0200-x. Epub
2015 Feb 10.

MicroRNA-138-5p regulates pancreatic cancer cell growth through targeting FOXC1.

Yu C(1), Wang M, Li Z, Xiao J, Peng F, Guo X, Deng Y, Jiang J, Sun C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Guiyang Medical
College, Guiyang, Guizhou Province, 550004, China.

PURPOSE: The prognosis of pancreatic cancer ranks among the worst of all cancer
types, which is primarily due to the fact that during the past decades little
progress has been made in its diagnosis and treatment. Here, we set out to
investigate the role of microRNA 138 (miR-138-5p) in the regulation of pancreatic
cancer cell growth and to assess its role as putative therapeutic target.
METHODS: qRT-PCR was used to examine the expression of miR-138-5p in 8 pancreatic
cancer cell lines and 18 primary human pancreatic cancer samples. A lentivirual
vector containing miR-138-5p mimics (lv-miR-138-5p) was used to exogenously
over-express miR-138-5p in the pancreatic cancer cells lines Capan-2 and PANC-1. 
The effect of this over-expression on cell proliferation was examined using an in
vitro propidium iodide fluorescence assay. Capan-2 cells exogenously
over-expressing miR-138-5p were transplanted into nude mice to examine its in
vivo effect on tumor growth. A predicted target of miR-138-5p (FOXC1) was first
validated using a luciferase assay and, subsequently, down-regulated by siRNA to 
assess its effect on pancreatic cancer cell growth.
RESULTS: We found that miR-138-5p was markedly down-regulated in both pancreatic 
cancer cell lines and primary human pancreatic cancer samples, compared to a
human pancreas ductal epithelial (HPDE) cell line and normal pancreatic tissues, 
respectively (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). In addition, we found that in the pancreatic cancer
cells lines Capan-2 and PANC-1 lentiviral transfection of miR-138-5p mimicked
up-regulation of the endogenous expression of miR-138-5p and, concomitantly,
inhibited cancer cell proliferation (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). The exogenous over-expression of 
miR-138-5p also led to a significant inhibition of tumor formation in vivo. Using
a luciferase assay, we found that miR-138-5p directly targets FOXC1. In
conformity with this notion, we found that FOXC1 was down-regulated upon
miR-138-5p over-expression in pancreatic cancer cells. Finally, we found that
silencing of FOXC1 by siRNA had an inhibitory effect on pancreatic cancer cell
growth.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that miR-138-5p may play an important role in
regulating pancreatic cancer cell growth, possibly through targeting FOXC1.
Over-expression of miR-138-5p may serve as a novel approach for the treatment of 
patients with pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC4445488
PMID: 25875420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Eur J Med Genet. 2015 May;58(5):310-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2015.02.011. Epub 2015
Mar 24.

Subtelomeric 6p25 deletion/duplication: Report of a patient with new clinical
findings and genotype-phenotype correlations.

Linhares ND(1), Svartman M(2), Rodrigues TC(3), Rosenberg C(3), Valadares ER(4).

Author information: 
(1)Setor de Citogenética/Laboratório Central do Hospital das Clínicas da
Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. Electronic address:
nataliaduarte@ufmg.br. (2)Departamento de Biologia Geral, Instituto de Ciências
Biológicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
(3)Departamento de Genética e Biologia Evolutiva, Instituto de Biociências,
Universidade de São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Departamento de Propedêutica
Complementar, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil.

The 6p terminal deletions are rare and present variability of clinical features, 
which increases the importance of reporting additional cases in order to better
characterize genotype-phenotype correlations. We report a 12-year-old girl with a
de novo deletion in 6p25.1-pter characterized by high-resolution karyotyping and 
FISH. Further analysis using oligonucleotide array-CGH revealed a 5.06 Mb
6p25.1-pter deletion associated with a contiguous 1 Mb 6p25.1 duplication. The
patient presented normal growth, developmental delay, frontal bossing, severe
hypertelorism, corectopia, wide and depressed nasal bridge, mild learning
disability, hearing loss and diffuse leukopathy. Additionaly, she presented
peculiar phenotypic features reported herein for the first time in 6p25 deletion 
syndrome: cerebrospinal fluid fistula and bones resembling those seen in 3-M
syndrome. The distinctive phenotype of the 6p25 deletion syndrome has been mainly
correlated with the FOXC1 and FOXF2 genes deletions, both related mainly to eye
development. We also consider the SERPINB6 as a candidate for sensorineural
hearing loss and TUBB2A as a candidate for our patient's skeletal features. In
addition, as our patient had a duplication including NRN1, a gene related with
neurodevelopment, synaptic plasticity and cognitive dysfunction in schizophrenia,
we suggest that this gene could be associated with her white matter abnormalities
and neurocognitive phenotype.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25817395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Microrna. 2015;4(1):50-6.

The Role of hsa-miR-548l Dysregulation as a Putative Modifier Factor for
Glaucoma-Associated FOXC1 Mutations.

Medina-Trillo C, Aroca-Aguilar JD, Ferre-Fernández JJ, Méndez-Hernández CD,
Morales L, García-Feijoo J, Escribano J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Castilla-La Mancha University,
Albacete, Spain. julio.escribano@uclm.es.

Mutations of the FOXC1 transcription factor are involved in a variety of
autosomal dominant ocular anterior segment defects, ranging from Axenfeld-Rieger 
malformations to isolated glaucoma in some patients. In this study we have
evaluated the possible role of the c.*734A>T FOXC1 variant as a modifier factor
of the activity of two FOXC1 mutations previously identified in families
primarily affected by dominant glaucoma (haplotypes p.G447_G448insDG-c.*734A>T
and p.I126S-c.*734A>T). Previous bioinformatic analyses indicated that the
c.*734A>T variant is located in a potential target sequence for hsa-miR-548l.
Co-expression of this miRNA with a reporter cDNA construct in which the wild-type
3'UTR sequence of FOXC1 was fused to the 3'-end of the firefly luciferase coding 
region, led to approximately 20% decreased luciferase activity compared to the
controls, confirming the presence of a target sequence for hsa-miR-548l. In
contrast, this miRNA did not show any effect on the luciferase activity
associated with the mutant 3'UTR FOXC1 sequence, showing that it resulted in a
loss-of-function of the has-miR-548l target sequence. In addition, functional
evaluation of the two glaucoma-associated haplotypes revealed increased protein
levels and transactivation, compared to the corresponding individual coding
mutations (approximately 1.2-fold on average). These data support the role of
hsa-miR-548l as a regulator of FOXC1 translation and provide evidence for the
c.*734A>T variant as a modifier factor for the activity of coding
glaucoma-associated FOXC1 mutations.

PMID: 25809640  [PubMed - in process]


42. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 26;6:6653. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7653.

The transcription factor Foxc1 is necessary for Ihh-Gli2-regulated endochondral
ossification.

Yoshida M(1), Hata K(2), Takashima R(2), Ono K(2), Nakamura E(2), Takahata Y(2), 
Murakami T(2), Iseki S(3), Takano-Yamamoto T(4), Nishimura R(2), Yoneda T(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan [2] Division
of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Dentistry, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. (2)Department of
Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University Graduate School of
Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan. (3)Section of Molecular
Craniofacial Embryology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8549, Japan. 
(4)Division of Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Dentistry, 4-1 Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. 
(5)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Osaka University
Graduate School of Dentistry, 1-8 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Japan [2] Division
of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Walther Hall,
R3-C321D, 980 West Walnut Street, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Indian hedgehog (Ihh) regulates endochondral ossification in both a parathyroid
hormone-related protein (PTHrP)-dependent and -independent manner by activating
transcriptional mediator Gli2. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying these
processes remain elusive. Here by using in vivo microarray analysis, we identify 
forkhead box C1 (Foxc1) as a transcriptional partner of Gli2. Foxc1 stimulates
expression of Ihh target genes, including PTHrP and Col10a1, through its physical
and functional interaction with Gli2. Conversely, a dominant negative Foxc1
inhibits the Ihh target gene expression. In a spontaneous loss of Foxc1 function 
mouse (Foxc1(ch/ch)), endochondral ossification is delayed and the expression of 
Ihh target genes inhibited. Moreover, the pathological Foxc1 missense mutation
observed in the Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome impairs Gli2-Foxc1 association as well
as Ihh function. Our findings suggest that Foxc1 is an important transcriptional 
partner of Ihh-Gli2 signalling during endochondral ossification, and that
disruption of the Foxc1-Gli2 interaction causes skeletal abnormalities observed
in the Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

PMID: 25808752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 18;10(3):e0119272. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119272.
eCollection 2015.

Hypo- and hypermorphic FOXC1 mutations in dominant glaucoma: transactivation and 
phenotypic variability.

Medina-Trillo C(1), Sánchez-Sánchez F(1), Aroca-Aguilar JD(1), Ferre-Fernández
JJ(2), Morales L(3), Méndez-Hernández CD(3), Blanco-Kelly F(4), Ayuso C(4),
García-Feijoo J(3), Escribano J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Área de Genética, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha,
Albacete, Spain; Instituto de Investigación en Discapacidades Neurológicas
(IDINE), Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete, Spain; Cooperative Research
Network on Age-Related Ocular Pathology, Visual and Life Quality, Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. (2)Área de Genética, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete, Spain; Instituto de Investigación en
Discapacidades Neurológicas (IDINE), Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete,
Spain. (3)Servicio de Oftalmología, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain;
Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria del Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid,
Spain. (4)Servicio de Genética, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria-Fundación
Jiménez Díaz (IIS-FJD), Madrid, Spain; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red
de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Madrid, Spain.

Dominant glaucoma, a heterogeneous, infrequent and irreversible optic neuropathy,
is often associated with elevated intraocular pressure and early-onset. The role 
of FOXC1 in this type of glaucoma was investigated in twelve Spanish probands via
nucleotide variation screening of its proximal promoter and unique exon.
Functional evaluations of the identified variants included analyses of the
transcriptional activity, protein stability, DNA binding ability and subcellular 
localization. Four different mutations that were identified in four probands
(33.3%) were associated with remarkable phenotypic variability and were
functionally classified as either hypermorphic (p.Y47X, p.Q106X and
p.G447_G448insDG) or hypomorphic (p.I126S) alleles. To the best of our knowledge,
three of the variants are novel (p.Y47X, p.I126S and p.G447_G448insDG) and, in
addition, hypermorphic FOXC1 mutations are reported herein for the first time.
The presence of an intact N-terminal activation domain in the truncated proteins 
p.Y47X and p.Q106X may underlie their associated transactivation hyperactivity by
a gain-of-function mechanism involving dysregulated protein-protein interactions.
Similarly, altered molecular interactions may also lead to increased
p.G447_G448insDG activity. In contrast, the partial loss-of-function associated
with p.I126S was due to impaired protein stability, DNA binding, protein
phosphorylation and subcellular distribution. These results support that moderate
and variable FOXC1 transactivation changes are associated with moderate
goniodysgenesis, dominant glaucoma and remarkable phenotypic variability.

PMCID: PMC4364892
PMID: 25786029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Dyn. 2015 May;244(5):703-11. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24269. Epub 2015 Apr 8.

Foxc1 is required for early stage telencephalic vascular development.

Prasitsak T(1), Nandar M, Okuhara S, Ichinose S, Ota MS, Iseki S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Craniofacial Embryology, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The brain vascular system arises from the perineural vascular plexus 
(PNVP) which sprouts radially into the neuroepithelium and subsequently branches 
off laterally to form a secondary plexus in the subventricular zone (SVZ), the
subventricular vascular plexus (SVP). The process of SVP formation remains to be 
fully elucidated. We investigated the role of Foxc1 in early stage vascular
formation in the ventral telencephalon.
RESULTS: The Foxc1 loss of function mutant mouse, Foxc1(ch/ch) , showed enlarged 
telencephalon and hemorrhaging in the ventral telencephalon by embryonic day
11.0. The mutant demonstrated blood vessel dilation and aggregation of
endothelial cells in the SVZ after the invasion of endothelial cells through the 
radial path, which lead to failure of SVP formation. During this early stage of
vascular development, Foxc1 was expressed in endothelial cells and pericytes, as 
well as in cranial mesenchyme surrounding the neural tube. Correspondingly,
abnormal deposition pattern of basement membrane proteins around the vessels and 
increased strong Vegfr2 staining dots were found in the aggregation sites.
CONCLUSIONS: These observations reveal an essential role for Foxc1 in the early
stage of vascular formation in the telencephalon.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25733312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Mar;167A(3):592-601. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36942.

Renal complications in 6p duplication syndrome: microarray-based investigation of
the candidate gene(s) for the development of congenital anomalies of the kidney
and urinary tract (CAKUT) and focal segmental glomerular sclerosis (FSGS).

Yoshimura-Furuhata M(1), Nishimura-Tadaki A, Amano Y, Ehara T, Hamasaki Y,
Muramatsu M, Shishido S, Aikawa A, Hamada R, Ishikura K, Hataya H, Hidaka Y, Noda
S, Koike K, Wakui K, Fukushima Y, Matsumoto N, Awazu M, Miyake N, Kosho T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nagano Red Cross Hospital, Nagano, Japan; Department
of Pediatrics, Shinshu University School of Medicine, Matsumoto, Japan.

6p duplication syndrome is a rare chromosomal disorder that frequently manifests 
renal complications, including proteinuria, hypoplastic kidney, and
hydronephrosis. We report a girl with the syndrome, manifesting left
hydronephrosis, proteinuria/hematuria, and focal segmental glomerular sclerosis
(FSGS) resulting in chronic end-stage renal failure, successfully treated with
renal transplantation. Microarray comparative genomic hybridization showed the
derivative chromosome 6 to have a 6.4-Mb duplication at 6p25.3-p25.1 with 32
protein-coding genes and a 220-Kb deletion at 6p25.3 with two genes of no
possible relation to the renal pathology. Review of the literature shows that
variation of renal complications in the syndrome is compatible with congenital
anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). FSGS, observed in another
patient with 6p duplication syndrome, could be a non-coincidental complication.
FOXC1, located within the 6.4-Mb duplicated region at 6p25.3-p25.2, could be a
candidate gene for CAKUT, but its single gene duplication effect would not be
sufficient. FSGS would be a primary defect associated with duplicated gene(s)
albeit no candidate could be proposed, or might occur in association with CAKUT.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25691411  [PubMed - in process]


46. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Mar;167A(3):524-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36890.

Anirdia-like phenotype caused by 6p25 dosage aberrations.

Sadagopan KA(1), Liu GT, Capasso JE, Wuthisiri W, Keep RB, Levin AV.

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Genetics, Wills Eye Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Department
of Pediatric Ophthalmology, Strabismus and Ocular Genetics, Ocular Genetics
Service, Aravind Eye Hospital, Madurai, India.

Axenfeld-Rieger spectrum (ARS) includes the anterior segment abnormalities
posterior embryotoxon, irido-corneal adhesions, corectopia, and other
abnormalities of pupil size and shape. Glaucoma occurs in approximately 50% of
affected children. It is often caused by mutations of FOXC1 or PITX2. Timing of
expression and dosage of these transcription factors appear to be very critical
in the development of the anterior segment. We report on one child with a
deletion and another with a duplication involving 6p25, causing an anirdia-like
phenotype. Classic anirdia is a pan-ophthalmic disorder caused by heterozygous
mutations involving the paired homeobox gene PAX6 at 11p13. It is often
associated with optic nerve hypoplasia, foveal hypoplasia, corneal pannus,
nystagmus, and cataract. Microdeletion of 11p13 may be associated with life
threatening Wilms tumor. Distinguishing these two syndromes has critical
implications for prognosis and treatment. We demonstrate how chromosomal
microarray can be instrumental in differentiating these phenotypes.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25691405  [PubMed - in process]


47. Ophthalmic Genet. 2015 Jun;36(2):165-7. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2015.1010735. Epub 
2015 Feb 12.

Ophthalmological Findings in 6p Deletion Syndrome.

Cornelis T(1), Rayyan M, Devriendt K, Casteels I.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology .

Patients with a deletion at the terminal end of chromosome 6p can present with a 
variety of ophthalmological and systemic malformations. In this paper we present 
two patients with this chromosomal anomaly and similar anterior eye-segment
abnormalities. We also give an overview of the literature on the ophthalmological
findings in 6p deletion syndrome and compare our patients to those previously
described in the literature. This syndrome should be considered in patients
presenting with anterior segment dysgenesis and systemic abnormalities.

PMID: 25675350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Stem Cells. 2015 May;33(5):1554-65. doi: 10.1002/stem.1941.

Prospectively Isolated Human Bone Marrow Cell-Derived MSCs Support Primitive
Human CD34-Negative Hematopoietic Stem Cells.

Matsuoka Y(1), Nakatsuka R, Sumide K, Kawamura H, Takahashi M, Fujioka T, Uemura 
Y, Asano H, Sasaki Y, Inoue M, Ogawa H, Takahashi T, Hino M, Sonoda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Graduate School of 
Medical Science, Hirakata, Osaka, Japan.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are maintained in a specialized bone marrow (BM) 
niche, which consists of osteoblasts, endothelial cells, and a variety of
mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs). However, precisely what types of MSCs
support human HSCs in the BM remain to be elucidated because of their
heterogeneity. In this study, we succeeded in prospectively
isolating/establishing three types of MSCs from human BM-derived lineage- and
CD45-negative cells, according to their cell surface expression of CD271 and
stage-specific embryonic antigen (SSEA)-4. Among them, the MSCs established from 
the Lineage(-) CD45(-) CD271(+) SSEA-4(+) fraction (DP MSC) could differentiate
into osteoblasts and chondrocytes, but they lacked adipogenic differentiation
potential. The DP MSCs expressed significantly higher levels of
well-characterized HSC-supportive genes, including IGF-2, Wnt3a, Jagged1, TGFß3, 
nestin, CXCL12, and Foxc1, compared with other MSCs. Interestingly, these
osteo-chondrogenic DP MSCs possessed the ability to support cord blood-derived
primitive human CD34-negative severe combined immunodeficiency-repopulating
cells. The HSC-supportive actions of DP MSCs were partially carried out by
soluble factors, including IGF-2, Wnt3a, and Jagged1. Moreover, contact between
DP MSCs and CD34-positive (CD34(+) ) as well as CD34-negative (CD34(-) ) HSCs was
important for the support/maintenance of the CD34(+/-) HSCs in vitro. These data 
suggest that DP MSCs might play an important role in the maintenance of human
primitive HSCs in the BM niche. Therefore, the establishment of DP MSCs provides 
a new tool for the elucidation of the human HSC/niche interaction in vitro as
well as in vivo.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25537923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Blood. 2015 Feb 5;125(6):981-91. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-568188. Epub 2014 Dec
22.

Jun-regulated genes promote interaction of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with the
microenvironment.

Blonska M(1), Zhu Y(2), Chuang HH(3), You MJ(4), Kunkalla K(5), Vega F(5), Lin
X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Center for Inflammation and
Cancer. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology. (3)Department of
Nuclear Medicine, and. (4)Center for Inflammation and Cancer, Department of
Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; 
(5)Department of Pathology, Sylvester Cancer Center, University of Miami, Miami, 
FL; and. (6)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Center for
Inflammation and Cancer, Cancer Biology Program, The University of Texas Graduate
School of Biomedical Sciences, Houston, TX.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive disease with a high
proliferation rate. However, the molecular and genetic features that drive the
aggressive clinical behavior of DLBCL are not fully defined. Here, we have
demonstrated that activated Jun signaling is a frequent event in DLBCL that
promotes dissemination of malignant cells. Downregulation of Jun dramatically
reduces lymphoma cell adhesion to extracellular matrix proteins, subcutaneous
tumor size in nude mice, and invasive behavior, including bone marrow
infiltration and interaction with bone marrow stromal cells. Furthermore, using a
combination of RNA interference and gene expression profiling, we identified Jun 
target genes that are associated with disseminated lymphoma. Among them, ITGAV,
FoxC1, and CX3CR1 are significantly enriched in patients with 2 or more
extranodal sites. Our results point to activated Jun signaling as a major driver 
of the aggressive phenotype of DLBCL.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4319238
PMID: 25533033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Apr;11(4):3155-9. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.3089. Epub 2014 Dec 15.

Forkhead box C1 promoter upstream transcript, a novel long non-coding RNA,
regulates proliferation and migration in basal-like breast cancer.

Liu J(1), Shen L(2), Yao J(3), Li Y(4), Wang Y(5), Chen H(6), Geng P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Thoracic Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Logistics
University of Chinese People's Armed Police Forces, Tianjin 300162, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853,
P.R. China. (3)Department of Oncology, PLA Center Hospital, Wuhan, Hubei 430000, 
P.R. China. (4)Oncology Department, Cancer Center, Division of Internal Medicine,
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China. (5)Orthopedics
Department, Institute of Orthopedics, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing
100853, P.R. China. (6)Department of Oncology, Kunming General Hospital of Chendu
Military Command, Kunming, Yunnan 650032, P.R. China.

Recent studies have shown that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have crucial
regulating roles in carcinogenesis. Forkhead box C1 (FOXC1) is an important
cancer-associated gene in basal-like breast cancer (BLBC). In the present study, 
a novel lncRNA, FOXC1 promoter upstream transcript (FOXCUT) was investigated in
BLBC patients using polymerase chain reaction analysis. The results showed that
the expression of FOXCUT and FOXC1 were positively correlated. When the
expression of FOXCUT was downregulated by small interfering RNA, the expression
of FOXC1 was similarly reduced. Furthermore, in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 breast 
cancer cells, knockdown of FOXCUT markedly inhibited cell proliferation and
migration in vitro. In conclusion, FOXCUT lncRNA may be functionally involved in 
the tumor progression of BLBCs through the regulation of its paired mRNA, FOXC1, 
demonstrating that FOXCUT may serve as a novel biomarker and therapeutic target
in BLBCs.

PMID: 25516208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Elife. 2014 Dec 16;3. doi: 10.7554/eLife.03962.

Foxc1 dependent mesenchymal signalling drives embryonic cerebellar growth.

Haldipur P(1), Gillies GS(1), Janson OK(1), Chizhikov VV(2), Mithal DS(3), Miller
RJ(3), Millen KJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, United States. (2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of 
Tennessee Health Sciences Center, Memphis, United States. (3)Department of
Molecular Pharmacology and Biological Chemistry, Northwestern University,
Chicago, United States.

Loss of Foxc1 is associated with Dandy-Walker malformation, the most common human
cerebellar malformation characterized by cerebellar hypoplasia and an enlarged
posterior fossa and fourth ventricle. Although expressed in the mouse posterior
fossa mesenchyme, loss of Foxc1 non-autonomously induces a rapid and devastating 
decrease in embryonic cerebellar ventricular zone radial glial proliferation and 
concurrent increase in cerebellar neuronal differentiation. Subsequent migration 
of cerebellar neurons is disrupted, associated with disordered radial glial
morphology. In vitro, SDF1a, a direct Foxc1 target also expressed in the head
mesenchyme, acts as a cerebellar radial glial mitogen and a chemoattractant for
nascent Purkinje cells. Its receptor, Cxcr4, is expressed in cerebellar radial
glial cells and conditional Cxcr4 ablation with Nes-Cre mimics the Foxc1-/-
cerebellar phenotype. SDF1a also rescues the Foxc1-/- phenotype. Our data
emphasizes that the head mesenchyme exerts a considerable influence on early
embryonic brain development and its disruption contributes to neurodevelopmental 
disorders in humans.

PMCID: PMC4281880
PMID: 25513817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Feb;167A(2):403-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36841. Epub 2014
Nov 25.

Expanding the clinical spectrum of ocular anomalies in Noonan syndrome:
Axenfeld-anomaly in a child with PTPN11 mutation.

Guerin A(1), So J, Mireskandari K, Jougeh-Doust S, Chisholm C, Klatt R, Richer J.

Author information: 
(1)The Hospital for Sick Children, Department of Pediatrics, Division of Clinical
and Metabolic Genetics, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Kingston General Hospital,
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Medical Genetics, Kingston, Ontario,
Canada.

Ocular anomalies have been frequently reported in Noonan syndrome. Anterior
segment anomalies have been described in 57% of PTPN11 positive patients, with
the most common findings being corneal changes and in particular, prominent
corneal nerves and cataracts. We report on a neonate with a confirmed PTPN11
mutation and ocular findings consistent with Axenfeld anomaly. The patient
initially presented with non-immune hydrops and subsequently developed
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and dysmorphic features typical of Noonan syndrome.
While a pathogenic mutation in PTPN11 was confirmed, prior testing for the two
common genes associated with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome, PITX2, and FOXC1 was
negative. This finding expands the spectrum of anterior chamber anomalies seen in
Noonan syndrome and perhaps suggests a common neural crest related mechanism that
plays a critical role in the development of the eye and other organs.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25425531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014 Dec 1;190(11):1263-72. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201408-1452OC.

Relationship of DNA methylation and gene expression in idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis.

Yang IV(1), Pedersen BS, Rabinovich E, Hennessy CE, Davidson EJ, Murphy E,
Guardela BJ, Tedrow JR, Zhang Y, Singh MK, Correll M, Schwarz MI, Geraci M,
Sciurba FC, Quackenbush J, Spira A, Kaminski N, Schwartz DA.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Medicine, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014 Dec 15;190(12):1328-30.

RATIONALE: Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is an untreatable and often fatal 
lung disease that is increasing in prevalence and is caused by complex
interactions between genetic and environmental factors. Epigenetic mechanisms
control gene expression and are likely to regulate the IPF transcriptome.
OBJECTIVES: To identify methylation marks that modify gene expression in IPF
lung.
METHODS: We assessed DNA methylation (comprehensive high-throughput arrays for
relative methylation arrays [CHARM]) and gene expression (Agilent gene expression
arrays) in 94 patients with IPF and 67 control subjects, and performed
integrative genomic analyses to define methylation-gene expression relationships 
in IPF lung. We validated methylation changes by a targeted analysis (Epityper), 
and performed functional validation of one of the genes identified by our
analysis.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: We identified 2,130 differentially methylated
regions (DMRs; <5% false discovery rate), of which 738 are associated with
significant changes in gene expression and enriched for expected inverse
relationship between methylation and expression (P < 2.2 × 10(-16)). We validated
13/15 DMRs by targeted analysis of methylation. Methylation-expression
quantitative trait loci (methyl-eQTL) identified methylation marks that control
cis and trans gene expression, with an enrichment for cis relationships (P < 2.2 
× 10(-16)). We found five trans methyl-eQTLs where a methylation change at a
single DMR is associated with transcriptional changes in a substantial number of 
genes; four of these DMRs are near transcription factors (castor zinc finger 1
[CASZ1], FOXC1, MXD4, and ZDHHC4). We studied the in vitro effects of change in
CASZ1 expression and validated its role in regulation of target genes in the
methyl-eQTL.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that DNA methylation may be involved in the
pathogenesis of IPF.

PMCID: PMC4315819
PMID: 25333685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;28(15):1109-12.

[Expression of FOXC1 and its relationship with E-cadherin in nasopharyngeal
carcinoma tissues].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu P, Tan S, Xiao S, Yi S, Ouyang L, Hou Q, Xiong W, Lei X.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the significance and relationship between the
expression of FOXC1 and clinicopathological features, and to explore its
correlation with E-cadherin.
METHOD: Immunohistochemical SP method was used to detected the expression of
FOXC1 in nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissues and nasopharyngitis tissues.
RESULT: (1) Immunoreaction to FOXC1 was mainly located in nucleus of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells. The positive expression rate of FOXC1 in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissues was 85.3% (81/95), which was significantly
higher than that in nasopharyngitis tissues (59.4%) (P < 0.05). (2) The
expression of FOXC1 was not related to patients' age and gender, clinical stage
of cancer and lymph node metastasis (P > 0.05). (3) There was a correlation
between the expression of FOXC1 and down-regulated expression of E-cadherin in
nasopharyngeal carcinoma tissues (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: FOXC1 may play an important role in generation and progression of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma, there may be a correlation between the expression of
FOXC1 and down-regulated expression of E-cadherin, also FOXC1 may play an
important role in the process of EMT in nasopharyngeal carcinoma by regulating
E-cadherin.

PMID: 25322595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;20(24):6357-66. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-0297. 
Epub 2014 Oct 7.

DNA methylation status of key cell-cycle regulators such as CDKNA2/p16 and CCNA1 
correlates with treatment response to doxorubicin and 5-fluorouracil in locally
advanced breast tumors.

Klajic J(1), Busato F(2), Edvardsen H(3), Touleimat N(2), Fleischer T(4), Bukholm
I(5), Børresen-Dale AL(4), Lønning PE(6), Tost J(2), Kristensen VN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicine, Department of Clinical Molecular Biology and Laboratory 
Science (EpiGen), Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway. K.G. Jebsen
Center for Breast Cancer Research, Institute for Clinical Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Department of Genetics, Institute for
Cancer Research, OUS Radiumhospitalet Montebello, Oslo, Norway. (2)Laboratory for
Epigenetics and Environment, Centre National de Génotypage, CEA-Institut de
Génomique, Evry, France. (3)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer
Research, OUS Radiumhospitalet Montebello, Oslo, Norway. (4)K.G. Jebsen Center
for Breast Cancer Research, Institute for Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine,
University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer
Research, OUS Radiumhospitalet Montebello, Oslo, Norway. (5)Department of
Surgery, Akerhus University Hospital, Oslo, Norway. Institute for Clinical
Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway. (6)Section of
Oncology, Institute of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.
Department of Oncology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
(7)Division of Medicine, Department of Clinical Molecular Biology and Laboratory 
Science (EpiGen), Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, Norway. K.G. Jebsen
Center for Breast Cancer Research, Institute for Clinical Medicine, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway. Department of Genetics, Institute for
Cancer Research, OUS Radiumhospitalet Montebello, Oslo, Norway.
v.n.kristensen@medisin.uio.no.

PURPOSE: To explore alterations in gene promoter methylation as a potential cause
of acquired drug resistance to doxorubicin or combined treatment with
5-fluorouracil and mitomycin C in human breast cancers.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Paired tumor samples from locally advanced breast cancer
patients treated with doxorubicin and 5-fluorouracil-mitomycin C were used in the
genome-wide DNA methylation analysis as discovery cohort. An enlarged cohort from
the same two prospective studies as those in the discovery cohort was used as a
validation set in pyrosequencing analysis.
RESULTS: A total of 469 genes were differentially methylated after treatment with
doxorubicin and revealed a significant association with canonical pathways
enriched for immune cell response and cell-cycle regulating genes including
CDKN2A, CCND2, CCNA1, which were also associated to treatment response. Treatment
with FUMI resulted in 343 differentially methylated genes representing canonical 
pathways such as retinoate biosynthesis, gai signaling, and LXR/RXR activation.
Despite the clearly different genes and pathways involved in the metabolism and
therapeutic effect of both drugs, 46 genes were differentially methylated before 
and after treatment with both doxorubicin and FUMI. DNA methylation profiles in
genes such as BRCA1, FOXC1, and IGFBP3, and most notably repetitive elements like
ALU and LINE1, were associated with TP53 mutations status.
CONCLUSION: We identified and validated key cell-cycle regulators differentially 
methylated before and after neoadjuvant chemotherapy such as CDKN2A and CCNA1 and
reported that methylation patterns of these genes may be potential predictive
markers to anthracycline/mitomycine sensitivity.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25294903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Clin Invest. 2014 Nov;124(11):4877-81. doi: 10.1172/JCI75109. Epub 2014 Sep 24.

Mutation of FOXC1 and PITX2 induces cerebral small-vessel disease.

French CR, Seshadri S, Destefano AL, Fornage M, Arnold CR, Gage PJ, Skarie JM,
Dobyns WB, Millen KJ, Liu T, Dietz W, Kume T, Hofker M, Emery DJ, Childs SJ,
Waskiewicz AJ, Lehmann OJ.

Patients with cerebral small-vessel disease (CSVD) exhibit perturbed end-artery
function and have an increased risk for stroke and age-related cognitive decline.
Here, we used targeted genome-wide association (GWA) analysis and defined a CSVD 
locus adjacent to the forkhead transcription factor FOXC1. Moreover, we
determined that the linked SNPs influence FOXC1 transcript levels and
demonstrated that patients as young as 1 year of age with altered FOXC1 function 
exhibit CSVD. MRI analysis of patients with missense and nonsense mutations as
well as FOXC1-encompassing segmental duplication and deletion revealed white
matter hyperintensities, dilated perivascular spaces, and lacunar infarction. In 
a zebrafish model, overexpression or morpholino-induced suppression of foxc1
induced cerebral hemorrhage. Inhibition of foxc1 perturbed platelet-derived
growth factor (Pdgf) signaling, impairing neural crest migration and the
recruitment of mural cells, which are essential for vascular stability. GWA
analysis also linked the FOXC1-interacting transcription factor PITX2 to CSVD,
and both patients with PITX2 mutations and murine Pitx2-/- mutants displayed
brain vascular phenotypes. Together, these results extend the genetic etiology of
stroke and demonstrate an increasing developmental basis for human
cerebrovascular disease.

PMCID: PMC4347243
PMID: 25250569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Oct;147(3):653-9. doi: 10.1007/s10549-014-3132-2.
Epub 2014 Sep 19.

Genome-wide DNA methylation profiling reveals parity-associated hypermethylation 
of FOXA1.

Ghosh S(1), Gu F, Wang CM, Lin CL, Liu J, Wang H, Ravdin P, Hu Y, Huang TH, Li R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Cancer Therapy and Research Center,
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, TX, 78229,
USA.

Early pregnancy in women by the age of 20 is known to have a profound effect on
reduction of lifelong breast cancer risk as compared to their nulliparous
counterparts. Additional pregnancies further enhance the protection against
breast cancer development. Nationwide trend of delayed pregnancy may contribute
to the recently reported increase in the incidence of advanced breast cancer
among young women in this country. The underlying mechanism for the
parity-associated reduction of breast cancer risk is not clearly understood. The 
purpose of the current study is to use whole-genome DNA methylation profiling to 
explore a potential association between parity and epigenetic changes in breast
tissue from women with early parity and nulliparity. Breast tissue was collected 
from age-matched cancer-free women with early parity (age < 20; n = 15) or
nulliparity (n = 13). The methyl-CpG binding domain-based capture-sequencing
technology was used for whole-genome DNA methylation profiling. Potential
parity-associated hypermethylated genes were further verified by locus-specific
pyrosequencing, using an expanded cohort of parous (n = 19) and nulliparous (n = 
16) women that included the initial samples used in the global analysis. Our
study identified six genes that are hypermethylated in the parous group (P <
0.05). Pyrosequencing confirmed parity-associated hypermethylation at multiple
CpG islands of the FOXA1 gene, which encodes a pioneer factor that facilitates
chromatin binding of estrogen receptor a. Our work identifies several potential
methylation biomarkers for parity-associated breast cancer risk assessment. In
addition, the results are consistent with the notion that parity-associated
epigenetic silencing of FOXA1 contributes to long-term attenuation of the
estrogenic impact on breast cancer development.

PMCID: PMC4181377
PMID: 25234841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Clin Invest. 2014 Oct;124(10):4320-4. doi: 10.1172/JCI77162. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

A lymphatic defect causes ocular hypertension and glaucoma in mice.

Thomson BR, Heinen S, Jeansson M, Ghosh AK, Fatima A, Sung HK, Onay T, Chen H,
Yamaguchi S, Economides AN, Flenniken A, Gale NW, Hong YK, Fawzi A, Liu X, Kume
T, Quaggin SE.

Glaucoma is a leading cause of blindness, afflicting more than 60 million people 
worldwide. Increased intraocular pressure (IOP) due to impaired aqueous humor
drainage is a major risk factor for the development of glaucoma. Here, we
demonstrated that genetic disruption of the angiopoietin/TIE2 (ANGPT/TIE2)
signaling pathway results in high IOP, buphthalmos, and classic features of
glaucoma, including retinal ganglion degeneration and vision loss. Eyes from mice
with induced deletion of Angpt1 and Angpt2 (A1A2Flox(WB) mice) lacked drainage
pathways in the corneal limbus, including Schlemm's canal and lymphatic
capillaries, which share expression of the PROX1, VEGFR3, and FOXC family of
transcription factors. VEGFR3 and FOXCs have been linked to lymphatic disorders
in patients, and FOXC1 has been linked to glaucoma. In contrast to blood
endothelium, in which ANGPT2 is an antagonist of ANGPT1, we have shown that both 
ligands cooperate to regulate TIE2 in the lymphatic network of the eye. While
A1A2Flox(WB) mice developed high IOP and glaucoma, expression of ANGPT1 or ANGPT2
alone was sufficient for ocular drainage. Furthermore, we demonstrated that loss 
of FOXC2 from lymphatics results in TIE2 downregulation, suggesting a mechanism
for ocular defects in patients with FOXC mutations. These data reveal a
pathogenetic and molecular basis for glaucoma and demonstrate the importance of
angiopoietin ligand cooperation in the lymphatic endothelium.

PMCID: PMC4191022
PMID: 25202984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2014 Jul;43(4):406-12.

[Expressions of FOXC1 and MMP-7 in molecular subtypes of breast cancer and their 
association with clinicopathological characteristics].

[Article in Chinese]

Cao PL(1), Wang K(1), Wang CB(1), Li XF(1), Yang Z(1), Yang Z(1), Wang HY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Xi'an 710061, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expressions of FOXC1 and matrix metalloproteinase 7
(MMP-7) in different molecular subtypes of breast cancer and their association
with clinicopathological characteristics of the disease.
METHODS: Based on immunohistochemical results of ER, PR, HER2, CK5/6, CK14 and
EGFR, 105 breast cancer patients were classified as 4 subtypes: luminal, HER2
positive, basal-like subtype (BLs) and normal breast-like subtype (NBLs). The
association of FOXC1 and MMP-7 expressions with clinicopathological parameters in
different molecular subtypes was analyzed.
RESULTS: Out of 105 patients with breast cancer, the subtypes of luminal, HER2
positive, BLs and NBLs accounted for 52.4% (55/105), 16.2% (17/105),
17.1%(18/105) and 14.3% (15/105), respectively. Patients with luminal and/or NBLs
subtypes had significantly higher 5-year survival rate than those with HER2
positive and/or BLs did (log-rank=22.161, P<0.01). The overall positive
expression rate of FOXC1 was 26.7% (28/105) and the expression was higher in BLs 
patients than that in other subgroups (<U+03C7>²=30.108, P<0.01). The expression of
FOXC1 was correlated with histological grade, tumor size, distant metastasis and 
5-year survival rate of breast cancer. The overall positive expression rate of
MMP-7 was 67.6% (71/105) and the expression of MMP-7 was also higher in BLs
patients than that in other molecular subtypes (<U+03C7>²=11.328, P<0.05). The positive 
expression of MMP-7 was correlated with metastasis in ipsilateral axillary lymph 
nodes, distant metastasis and 5-year survival rate of the patients. FOXC1 was
correlated with MMP-7 (r=0.325, P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: Patients with luminal and/or NBLs breast cancer have more favorable
prognosis than those with HER2 positive and/or BLs subtypes. The expressions of
FOXC1 and MMP-7 are closely correlated with the clinicopathological features of
breast cancer patients.

PMID: 25187454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Gene. 2014 Nov 10;551(2):127-37. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.08.045. Epub 2014 Aug
26.

Induced expression of Fndc5 significantly increased cardiomyocyte differentiation
rate of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Rabiee F(1), Forouzanfar M(2), Ghazvini Zadegan F(2), Tanhaei S(2), Ghaedi K(3), 
Motovali Bashi M(4), Baharvand H(5), Nasr-Esfahani MH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, School of Sciences, University of Isfahan, Isfahan,
Iran; Department of Cellular Biotechnology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan
Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran. (2)Department of Cellular
Biotechnology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology,
ACECR, Isfahan, Iran. (3)Department of Biology, School of Sciences, University of
Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran; Department of Cellular Biotechnology at Cell Science
Research Center, Royan Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran.
Electronic address: kamranghaedi@royaninstitute.org. (4)Department of Biology,
School of Sciences, University of Isfahan, Isfahan, Iran. (5)Department of Stem
Cells and Developmental Biology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan Institute 
for Stem Cell Biology and Technology, ACECR, Tehran, Iran; Department of
Developmental Biology, University of Science and Culture, ACECR, Tehran, Iran.
(6)Department of Cellular Biotechnology at Cell Science Research Center, Royan
Institute for Biotechnology, ACECR, Isfahan, Iran. Electronic address:
mh_nasr@royaninstitute.org.

Fibronectin type III domain-containing 5 protein (Fndc5) is an exercise hormone
and its transcript profile in mouse showed high degree of expression in heart,
skeletal muscle and brain. Our previous studies indicated a significant increase 
(approximately 10 fold) in mRNA level of Fndc5 when embryonic stem cells were
differentiated into beating bodies. As a step closer to identify the involvement 
of Fndc5 in the process of cardiomyocyte differentiation, we generated a stably
inducible transduced mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) line that overexpressed
Fndc5 following Doxycycline induction. Our results indicated that the
overexpression of Fndc5 during spontaneous cardiac differentiation significantly 
increased not only at RNA levels for mesodermal markers but also at the
transcriptional levels for cardiac progenitor and cardiac genes. These data
suggest that Fndc5 may be involved in cardiomyocyte differentiation. Therefore, a
new hope will be arisen for potential application of this myokine for
regeneration of damaged cardiac tissues especially in cardiac failure.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25168892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cancer Sci. 2014 Oct;105(10):1288-98. doi: 10.1111/cas.12499. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

miR-639 regulates transforming growth factor beta-induced epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition in human tongue cancer cells by targeting FOXC1.

Lin Z(1), Sun L, Chen W, Liu B, Wang Y, Fan S, Li Y, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Malignant Tumor Epigenetics and Gene
Regulation, Sun Yat-Sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou,
China; Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, China.

Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is implicated in embryonic development
and various pathological events. Transforming growth factor beta (TGFß) has been 
reported to induce EMT in tumor cells, which is a critical step in the process of
metastasis leading to cancer spreading and treatment failure. However, the
involvement of microRNA during the EMT process in tongue squamous cell carcinoma 
(TSCC) remains to be determined. To address this question, TSCC cell lines SCC9
and CAL27 were treated with human recombinant TGFß1 for 48 h. miRNA microarray
illustrated that miR-639 was significantly downregulated in TGFß-treated SCC9
cells. Ectopic expression of miR-639 with miRNA mimics effectively blocked
TGFß-induced EMT in SCC9 and CAL27 cells, but inhibition of miR-639 in SCC9 and
CAL27 cells with antisense oligonucleotides induced EMT. Computational microRNA
target predictions detected a conserved sequence matching to the seed region of
miR-639 in the 3'-UTR of FOXC1 mRNA. Luciferase reporter assays revealed that
miR-639 targets FOXC1. Ectopic expression of FOXC1 induces EMT in TSCC cells.
Silencing FOXC1 expression blocked TGFß-induced EMT in SCC9 cells. Clinically,
reduced miR-639 expression was associated with metastasis in TSCC and poor
patient survival. The data from the present study suggest that reduced expression
of miR-639 underscores the mechanism of TGFß-induced EMT in TSCC by targeting
FOXC1 and may serve as therapeutic targets in the process of metastasis.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4462345
PMID: 25130698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Dec;21 Suppl 4:S758-66. doi: 10.1245/s10434-014-3980-3. Epub
2014 Aug 15.

FOXC1 is a critical mediator of EGFR function in human basal-like breast cancer.

Jin Y(1), Han B, Chen J, Wiedemeyer R, Orsulic S, Bose S, Zhang X, Karlan BY,
Giuliano AE, Cui Y, Cui X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Human basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) has a poor prognosis and is
often identified by expression of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR).
BLBC remains a major clinical challenge because its pathogenesis is not well
understood, thus hindering efforts to develop targeted therapies. Recent data
implicate the forkhead box C1 (FOXC1) transcription factor as an important
prognostic biomarker and functional regulator of BLBC, but its regulatory
mechanism and impact on BLBC tumorigenesis remain unclear.
METHODS: The association between FOXC1 and EGFR expression in human breast cancer
was examined by immunohistochemistry in formalin-fixed tissues and analysis of
the TCGA database. The regulation of FOXC1 by EGFR activation was investigated in
MDA-MB-468 cells using immunoblotting, qRT-PCR, and luciferase activity assays.
This EGFR effect on FOXC1 expression was confirmed using the MDA-MB-468 xenograft
model.
RESULTS: Both FOXC1 mRNA and protein levels significantly correlated with EGFR
expression in human breast tumors. EGFR activation induced FOXC1 transcription
through the ERK and Akt pathways in BLBC. EGFR inhibition in vivo reduced FOXC1
expression in xenograft tumors. We also found that FOXC1 knockdown impaired the
effects of EGF on BLBC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings uncover a novel EGFR-FOXC1 signaling axis critical for 
BLBC cell functions, supporting the notion that intervention in the FOXC1 pathway
may provide potential modalities for BLBC treatment.

PMCID: PMC4237705
PMID: 25124473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 5;9(8):e95453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095453. eCollection 
2014.

Functionally significant, rare transcription factor variants in tetralogy of
Fallot.

Töpf A(1), Griffin HR(1), Glen E(1), Soemedi R(1), Brown DL(1), Hall D(1), Rahman
TJ(1), Eloranta JJ(2), Jüngst C(3), Stuart AG(4), O'Sullivan J(5), Keavney BD(6),
Goodship JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom. (2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Department of
Medicine II, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany. (4)Bristol
Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Kingdom. (5)Paediatric Cardiology,
Freeman Hospital Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle
upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (6)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; Institute of Cardiovascular
Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Rare variants in certain transcription factors involved in cardiac
development cause Mendelian forms of congenital heart disease. The purpose of
this study was to systematically assess the frequency of rare transcription
factor variants in sporadic patients with the cardiac outflow tract malformation 
tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We sequenced the coding, 5'UTR, and 3'UTR regions of twelve 
transcription factor genes implicated in cardiac outflow tract development
(NKX2.5, GATA4, ISL1, TBX20, MEF2C, BOP/SMYD1, HAND2, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXH, FOXA2
and TBX1) in 93 non-syndromic, non-Mendelian TOF cases. We also analysed Illumina
Human 660W-Quad SNP Array data for copy number variants in these genes; none were
detected. Four of the rare variants detected have previously been shown to affect
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays: FOXC1 p.P297S, FOXC2 p.Q444R, FOXH1 
p.S113T and TBX1 p.P43_G61del PPPPRYDPCAAAAPGAPGP. Two further rare variants,
HAND2 p.A25_A26insAA and FOXC1 p.G378_G380delGGG, A488_491delAAAA, affected
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays. Each of these six functionally
significant variants was present in a single patient in the heterozygous state;
each of the four for which parental samples were available were maternally
inherited. Thus in the 93 TOF cases we identified six functionally significant
mutations in the secondary heart field transcriptional network.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study indicates that rare genetic variants in the secondary
heart field transcriptional network with functional effects on protein function
occur in 3-13% of patients with TOF. This is the first report of a functionally
significant HAND2 mutation in a patient with congenital heart disease.

PMCID: PMC4122343
PMID: 25093829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Nov;53(11):917-33. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22204. Epub
2014 Jul 17.

Deregulated FOX genes in Hodgkin lymphoma.

Nagel S(1), Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

FOX genes encode transcription factors which regulate basic developmental
processes during embryogenesis and in the adult. Several FOX genes show
deregulated expression in particular malignancies, representing oncogenes or
tumor suppressors. Here, we screened six Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) cell lines for FOX
gene activity by comparative microarray profiling, revealing overexpression of
FOXC1 and FOXD1, and reduced transcription of FOXN3, FOXO1, and FOXP1. In silico 
expression analyses of these FOX gene candidates in HL patient samples supported 
the cell line data. Chromosomal analyses demonstrated an amplification of the
FOXC1 locus at 6p25 and a gain of the FOXR2 locus at Xp11, indicting genomic
aberrations for their upregulation. Comparative expression profiling and ensuing 
stimulation experiments revealed implementation of the TGFß- and WNT-signaling
pathways in deregulation of FOXD1 and FOXN3. Functional analysis of FOXP1
implicated miR9 and miR34a as upstream regulators and PAX5, TCF3, and RAG2 as
downstream targets. A similar exercise for FOXC1 revealed repression of MSX1 and 
activation of IPO7, both mediating inhibition of the B-cell specific homeobox
gene ZHX2. Taken together, our data show that aberrantly expressed FOX genes and 
their downstream targets are involved in the pathogenesis of HL via deregulation 
of B-cell differentiation and may represent useful diagnostic markers and/or
therapeutic targets.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25043849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 May 15;7(6):2838-49. eCollection 2014.

A novel long non-coding RNA FOXCUT and mRNA FOXC1 pair promote progression and
predict poor prognosis in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Pan F(1), Yao J(2), Chen Y(1), Zhou C(3), Geng P(1), Mao H(1), Fang X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Oncology, Cancer Center, Division of Internal Medicine,
Chinese PLA General Hospital & Chinese PLA Medical School Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Oncology, The 161th Hospital of PLA Wuhan, China. (3)Nanlou
Department of Respiratory Disease, Chinese PLA General Hospital Beijing, China.

Accumulating evidences demonstrated that many long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) can 
cooperate with the adjacent coding genes, forming into "lncRNA-mRNA gene pairs"
in multiple biological cellular processes. Here, we showed that a novel long
non-coding RNA FOXCUT (FOXC1 promoter upstream transcript) and its neighboring
gene FOXC1 played a similar important role in the oncogenesis and progression of 
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). In this study, the expression of
FOXCUT/FOXC1 was measured in 82 ESCC tissues and adjacent noncancerous tissues by
real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR). The prognostic significance of the lncRNA-mRNA
gene pair was evaluated using Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and log-rank test.
Cell biological experiments were performed in ESCC cell lines to explore their
functions in tumor progression. Notably elevated FOXCUT and FOXC1 expression
levels were observed in cancerous tissues compared to adjacent noncancerous
tissues (86.6% and 84.1%, respectively; P < 0.01), showing strong correlations
with poor differentiation, advanced lymph node classification and metastasis (P <
0.05). Moreover, patients with upregulated FOXCUT or FOXC1 experienced a
significantly worse prognosis than those with downregulated FOXCUT or FOXC1 (P < 
0.001 and P = 0.014, respectively). In addition, the expression of FOXCUT was
positively correlated with expression of FOXC1 in ESCC specimens. And the
expression of FOXC1 was also decreased as the FOXCUT expression was silenced by
siRNA. Assays in vitro demonstrated that knockdown of either FOXCUT or FOXC1
remarkably inhibited cell proliferation, colony formation, migration, invasion in
ESCC cells. In conclusion, FOXCUT may be functionally involved in the tumor
progression and survival of ESCC patients, at least in part, by modulating FOXC1.
FOXCUT and FOXC1 may function as a lncRNA-mRNA gene pair, which may represent a
potential prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target for ESCC patients.

PMCID: PMC4097289
PMID: 25031703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Ophthalmic Genet. 2016 Mar;37(1):111-5. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2014.924016. Epub
2014 Jun 10.

A Novel Mutation of FOXC1 (R127L) in an Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome Family with
Glaucoma and Multiple Congenital Heart Diseases.

Du RF(1), Huang H(2), Fan LL(2), Li XP(3), Xia K(2,)(4), Xiang R(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Information Management , Hunan University of Finance and
Economics , Changsha , China . (2)b Department of Cell Biology , School of Life
Sciences, Central South University , Changsha , China . (3)c Department of
Cardiology , the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University , Changsha ,
China , and. (4)d State Key Laboratory of Medical Genetics , Central South
University , Changsha , China.

PMID: 24914578  [PubMed - in process]


67. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2014 Aug;21(4):587-99. doi: 10.1530/ERC-13-0485. Epub 2014
Jun 2.

VGLL1 expression is associated with a triple-negative basal-like phenotype in
breast cancer.

Castilla MÁ(1), López-García MÁ(2), Atienza MR(3), Rosa-Rosa JM(3), Díaz-Martín
J(2), Pecero ML(3), Vieites B(2), Romero-Pérez L(2), Benítez J(3), Calcabrini
A(3), Palacios J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital
Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N,
41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer
(RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario
Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS),
Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of
Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, ItalyInstituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen
del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville,
SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid,
SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal and
Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman
Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of Technology and
HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy jose.palacios@salud.madrid.org
macastillamoro@gmail.com. (2)Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad
de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda.
Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa 
en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital
Universitario Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación
Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del
Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid,
SpainDepartment of Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome,
ItalyInstituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital
Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N,
41013 Seville, SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer
(RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid, SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario
Ramón y Cajal and Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS),
Madrid, SpainHuman Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of
Technology and HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy. (3)Instituto de
Biomedicina de Sevilla-CSIC-Universidad de SevillaHospital Universitario Virgen
del Rocío, Department of Pathology, Avda. Manuel Siurot S/N, 41013 Seville,
SpainRed Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Cáncer (RTICC)ISCIII, Madrid,
SpainServicio de Anatomía PatológicaHospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal and
Instituto Ramón y Cajal de Investigación Sanitaria (IRYCIS), Madrid, SpainHuman
Genetics GroupDepartamento de Biología del Cáncer, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO)-CIBERER, Madrid, SpainDepartment of Technology and
HealthIstituto Superiore di Sanità, Rome, Italy.

Vestigial-like 1 (VGLL1) is a poorly characterized gene encoding a
transcriptional co-activator structurally homologous to TAZ and YAP that
modulates the Hippo pathway in Drosophila. In this study, we examined the
expression of VGLL1 and its intronic miRNA, miR-934, in breast cancer. VGLL1 and 
miR-934 expression miRNA profiling was carried out on frozen samples of grade 3
invasive ductal carcinomas. VGLL1 protein was also examined in 433 sporadic and
BRCA1-associated breast carcinomas on tissue microarrays. RNA-seq data from The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) was used to confirm differences in VGLL1 and miR-934
expression in different breast cancer subtypes, and to correlate their expression
with that of other genes and miRNAs. Of 28 miRNAs differentially expressed in
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive and ER-negative grade 3 breast carcinomas,
miR-934 was most strongly upregulated in ER-negative carcinomas, and its
expression was correlated with that of VGLL1. Nuclear VGLL1 expression was
observed in 13% of sporadic breast carcinomas, and while VGLL1 was only
occasionally found in luminal A (0.70%) and B (5.60%) carcinomas, it was often
expressed in HER2-positive (17%), triple-negative (TN) breast carcinomas (>40%)
and BRCA1-associated TN carcinomas (>50%). These findings were confirmed in the
TCGA dataset, which revealed positive associations with luminal progenitor genes 
(GABRP, SLC6A14, FOXC1, PROM1, and BBOX1) and strong negative correlations with
ER-associated genes (ESR1, C6ORF211, GATA3, and FOXA1). Moreover, VGLL1
expression was associated with reduced overall survival. In conclusion, VGLL1 and
miR-934 are mainly expressed in sporadic and BRCA1-associated TN basal-like
breast carcinomas, and their coordinated expression, at least partially mediated 
by the direct modulation of ESR1, might be involved in the maintenance of a
luminal progenitor phenotype.

© 2014 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 24891455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 Sep;394(1-2):177-86. doi: 10.1007/s11010-014-2093-4. Epub 
2014 Jun 3.

The expression and functional role of a FOXC1 related mRNA-lncRNA pair in oral
squamous cell carcinoma.

Kong XP(1), Yao J, Luo W, Feng FK, Ma JT, Ren YP, Wang DL, Bu RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Chinese PLA Medical
School, Beijing, 10086, China, qq39471486@163.com.15313557577.

The Fork head box C1 (FOXC1) gene is overexpressed in multiple malignant tumors
and is functionally correlated with tumor progression. However, its' role in oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) is still unclear. Recent studies have revealed
that many long non-coding RNA (lncRNAs) cooperate with adjacent coding genes and 
form a functional "lncRNA-mRNA pair". In this study, we report a new lncRNA FOXC1
upstream transcript (FOXCUT) that was remarkably overexpressed in 23 OSCC
patients, as was the adjacent FOXC1 gene. The expressions of FOXC1 and FOXCUT
were positively correlated. When the expression of FOXCUT was down-regulated by
small interfering RNA (siRNA), the expression of FOXC1 was also decreased.
Moreover, in OSCC cells Tca8113 and SCC-9, down-regulation of either FOXC1 or
FOXCUT by siRNA could inhibit cell proliferation and cell migration in vitro and 
was accompanied with a reduction of MMP2, MMP7, MMP9, and VEGF-A. In conclusion, 
FOXC1 may be co-amplified with FOXCUT in OSCC, and both of them may be
functionally involved in the tumor progression of OSCC. This provides evidence
that both FOXC1 and FOXCUT may serve as novel biomarkers and therapeutic targets 
in OSCC patients who overexpress this "lncRNA-mRNA pair".

PMCID: PMC4118037
PMID: 24889262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Int Ophthalmol Clin. 2014 Summer;54(3):95-104. doi: 10.1097/IIO.0000000000000031.

Anterior segment dysgenesis.

Stahl ED.

PMID: 24879108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2014 Dec;25(12):2764-77. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012080823. Epub 2014
May 22.

Lmx1b and FoxC combinatorially regulate podocin expression in podocytes.

He B(1), Ebarasi L(2), Zhao Z(3), Guo J(4), Ojala JR(4), Hultenby K(5), De Val
S(3), Betsholtz C(2), Tryggvason K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of Matrix Biology,
and Bing.He@ki.se Karl.Tryggvason@ki.se. (2)Department of Medical Biochemistry
and Biophysics, Division of Vascular Biology, and Department of Immunology,
Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden; 
(3)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Oxford University, Oxford, United
Kingdom; and. (4)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of
Matrix Biology, and. (5)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical
Research Centre, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden; (6)Department of
Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Division of Matrix Biology, and
Cardiovascular & Metabolic Disorders Program, Duke-NUS, Singapore Bing.He@ki.se
Karl.Tryggvason@ki.se.

Podocin is a key protein of the kidney podocyte slit diaphragm protein complex,
an important part of the glomerular filtration barrier. Mutations in the human
podocin gene NPHS2 cause familial or sporadic forms of renal disease owing to the
disruption of filtration barrier integrity. The exclusive expression of NPHS2 in 
podocytes reflects its unique function and raises interesting questions about its
transcriptional regulation. Here, we further define a 2.5-kb zebrafish nphs2
promoter fragment previously described and identify a 49-bp podocyte-specific
transcriptional enhancer using Tol2-mediated G0 transgenesis in zebrafish. Within
this enhancer, we identified a cis-acting element composed of two adjacent
DNA-binding sites (FLAT-E and forkhead) bound by transcription factors Lmx1b and 
FoxC. In zebrafish, double knockdown of Lmx1b and FoxC orthologs using morpholino
doses that caused no or minimal phenotypic changes upon individual knockdown
completely disrupted podocyte development in 40% of injected embryos.
Co-overexpression of the two genes potently induced endogenous nphs2 expression
in zebrafish podocytes. We found that the NPHS2 promoter also contains a
cis-acting Lmx1b-FoxC motif that binds LMX1B and FoxC2. Furthermore, a
genome-wide search identified several genes that carry the Lmx1b-FoxC motif in
their promoter regions. Among these candidates, motif-driven podocyte enhancer
activity of CCNC and MEIS2 was functionally analyzed in vivo. Our results show
that podocyte expression of some genes is combinatorially regulated by two
transcription factors interacting synergistically with a common enhancer. This
finding provides insights into transcriptional mechanisms required for normal and
pathologic podocyte functions.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4243338
PMID: 24854274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Leuk Lymphoma. 2015 Feb;56(2):480-91. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2014.924119. Epub
2014 Jun 12.

Repressed BMP signaling reactivates NKL homeobox gene MSX1 in a T-ALL subset.

Nagel S(1), Ehrentraut S, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ - German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures , Braunschweig , Germany.

In T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL), several members of the NK-like
(NKL) homeobox genes are aberrantly expressed. Here, we have analyzed the
activity of NKL homeobox gene MSX1 using pediatric T-ALL in silico data,
detecting overexpression in 11% of patients. Quantification of MSX1 transcripts
in a panel of 24 T-ALL cell lines demonstrated overexpression in two examples.
Comparative expression profiling indicated inhibition of the bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP) signaling pathway, which was shown to inhibit MSX1 transcription.
In the LOUCY cell line we identified conspicuous expression of CHRDL1 encoding a 
BMP inhibitor which mediated activation of MSX1. Promoter analyses demonstrated
activation of CHRDL1 by oncogenic PITX1. Furthermore, knockdown and
overexpression studies of hematopoietic transcription factors demonstrated that
GATA2 and FOXC1 mediate activation and GATA3, LEF1, TAL1 and TOX repression of
MSX1 transcription. Collectively, our findings suggest that MSX1 is
physiologically restricted to lymphoid progenitors. The identification of
deregulated BMP signaling may provide novel therapeutic options for the treatment
of T-ALL.

PMID: 24844359  [PubMed - in process]


72. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Jul;164A(7):1695-701. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36540. Epub 2014
Apr 8.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: further clinical and array delineation of four
unrelated patients with a 4q25 microdeletion.

Titheradge H(1), Togneri F, McMullan D, Brueton L, Lim D, Williams D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Birmingham Women's NHS Foundation Trust,
Birmingham, United Kingdom.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is an autosomal dominant disorder with variable
expressivity. It is characterized by dysgenesis of the anterior segment of the
eye together with dental, cardiac, and umbilical anomalies. There is a high
incidence of secondary high tension glaucoma. It is a genetically heterogeneous
condition due to deletion or mutations of FOXC1 (6p25) or PITX2 (4q25). We report
on four unrelated patients with overlapping microdeletions encompassing PITX2 at 
4q25. We compare the genotypes and phenotypes of these newly described ARS
patients and discuss the involvement of contiguous genes. Patients 1, 2, and 3
had mild learning difficulties, not typically seen in patients with ARS. We
implicate the adjacent neuronally expressed genes; NEUROG2, UGT8, NDST3, and
PRSS12 as potentially causal. Our findings support the use of microarray analysis
in ARS patients for full prognostic information in infants presenting with
ARS-like phenotypes.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24715413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nature. 2014 Apr 24;508(7497):536-40. doi: 10.1038/nature13071. Epub 2014 Mar 2.

Foxc1 is a critical regulator of haematopoietic stem/progenitor cell niche
formation.

Omatsu Y(1), Seike M(1), Sugiyama T(1), Kume T(2), Nagasawa T(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Immunobiology and Hematology, Institute for Frontier Medical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, Japan [2] Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST), 
Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), 53 Kawahara-cho,
Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (2)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research
Institute, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

Haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells are maintained by special
microenvironments known as niches in bone marrow. Many studies have identified
diverse candidate cells that constitute niches for haematopoietic stem cells in
the marrow, including osteoblasts, endothelial cells, Schwann cells, a-smooth
muscle actin-expressing macrophages and mesenchymal progenitors such as CXC
chemokine ligand (CXCL)12-abundant reticular (CAR) cells, stem cell
factor-expressing cells, nestin-expressing cells and platelet-derived growth
factor receptor-a (PDGFR-a)(+)Sca-1(+)CD45(-)Ter119(-) (PaS) cells. However, the 
molecular basis of the formation of the niches remains unclear. Here we find that
the transcription factor Foxc1 is preferentially expressed in the
adipo-osteogenic progenitor CAR cells essential for haematopoietic stem and
progenitor cell maintenance in vivo in the developing and adult bone marrow. When
Foxc1 was deleted in all marrow mesenchymal cells or CAR cells, from
embryogenesis onwards, osteoblasts appeared normal, but haematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells were markedly reduced and marrow cavities were occupied by
adipocytes (yellow adipose marrow) with reduced CAR cells. Inducible deletion of 
Foxc1 in adult mice depleted haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells and reduced
CXCL12 and stem cell factor expression in CAR cells but did not induce a change
to yellow marrow. These data suggest a role for Foxc1 in inhibiting adipogenic
processes in CAR progenitors. Foxc1 might also promote CAR cell development,
upregulating CXCL12 and stem cell factor expression. This study identifies Foxc1 
as a specific transcriptional regulator essential for development and maintenance
of the mesenchymal niches for haematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.

PMID: 24590069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Feb 20;5:e1069. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.8.

Dysfunction of the stress-responsive FOXC1 transcription factor contributes to
the earlier-onset glaucoma observed in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome patients.

Ito YA(1), Goping IS(2), Berry F(3), Walter MA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Alberta T6G 2H7,
Canada. (2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Alberta T6G 2H7,
Canada. (3)1] Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Alberta T6G 
2H7, Canada [2] Department of Surgery, University of Alberta, Alberta T6G 2H7,
Canada. (4)1] Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Alberta T6G 
2H7, Canada [2] Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Alberta T6G
2H7, Canada.

Erratum in
    Cell Death Dis. 2014;5:e1430.

Mutations in the Forkhead Box C1 (FOXC1) transcription factor gene are associated
with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS), a developmental disorder affecting
structures in the anterior segment of the eye. Approximately 75% of ARS patients 
with FOXC1 mutations develop earlier-onset glaucoma. Constant exposure of the
trabecular meshwork (TM), located in the anterior segment of the eye, to
oxidative stress is predicted to be a risk factor for developing glaucoma.
Stress-induced death of TM cells results in dysfunction of the TM, leading to
elevated intraocular pressure, which is a major risk factor for developing
glaucoma. FOXC1 is predicted to maintain homeostasis in TM cells by regulating
genes that are important for stress response. In this study, we show that a
member of the heat-shock 70 family of proteins, HSPA6, is a target gene of FOXC1.
HSPA6 protein, which is only induced under severe oxidative stress conditions,
has a protective function in human trabecular meshwork (HTM) cells. We also show 
that FOXC1 is anti-apoptotic as knocking down FOXC1 significantly decreases HTM
cell viability. In addition, we show that FOXC1 itself responds to stress as
exposure of cells to H2O2-induced oxidative stress reduces FOXC1 levels and
activity. Conditions that decrease FOXC1 function, such as exposure of cells to
oxidative stress and FOXC1 ARS mutations, compromise the ability of TM cells to
effectively respond to environmental stresses. Dysfunction of FOXC1 contributes
to the death of TM cells, an important step in the development of glaucoma.

PMCID: PMC3944279
PMID: 24556684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Stem Cells Dev. 2014 Jun 15;23(12):1340-54. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0510. Epub 2014
Mar 10.

Isolation and transplantation of corneal endothelial cell-like cells derived from
in-vitro-differentiated human embryonic stem cells.

Zhang K(1), Pang K, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Ophthalmology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University , Jinan,
People's Republic of China .

The maintenance of corneal dehydration and transparency depends on barrier and
pump functions of corneal endothelial cells (CECs). The human CECs have no
proliferation capacity in vivo and the ability to divide in vitro under culture
conditions is dramatically limited. Thus, the acquisition of massive cells
analogous to normal human CECs is extremely necessary whether from the
perspective of cellular basic research or from clinical applications. Here we
report the derivation of CEC-like cells from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs)
through the periocular mesenchymal precursor (POMP) phase. Using the transwell
coculture system of hESCs with differentiated human corneal stromal cells, we
induced hESCs to differentiate into POMPs. Then, CEC-like cells were derived from
POMPs with lens epithelial cell-conditioned medium. Within 1 week, CEC-like cells
that expressed the corneal endothelium (CE) differentiation marker N-cadherin and
transcription factors FoxC1 and Pitx2 were detectable. Fluorescence-activated
cell sorting (FACS)-based isolation of the N-cadherin/vimentin dual-positive
population enriches for CEC-like cells. The isolated CEC-like cells were labeled 
with carboxyfluorescein diacetate, succinimidyl ester (CFDA SE) and seeded onto
posterior acellular porcine corneal matrix lamellae to construct the CEC-like
cell sheets. Pump function parameters of the CEC-like cell sheets approximated
those of human donor corneas. Importantly, when the CEC-like cell sheets were
transplanted into the eyes of rabbit CE dysfunction models, the corneal
transparency was restored gradually. In conclusion, CEC-like cells derived from
hESCs displayed characteristics of native human CECs. This renewable source of
human CECs offers massive cells for further studies of human CEC biological
characteristics and potential applications of replacement therapies as
substitution for donor CECs in the future.

PMCID: PMC4046205
PMID: 24499373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Exp Cell Res. 2014 Apr 1;322(2):381-8. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.01.016. Epub
2014 Jan 25.

Signals from the lens and Foxc1 regulate the expression of key genes during the
onset of corneal endothelial development.

Silla ZT(1), Naidoo J(1), Kidson SH(2), Sommer P(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal Westville Campus, Durban 
4001, South Africa. (2)Department of Human Biology, University of Cape Town
Medical School, Anzio Road, Observatory, South Africa. (3)School of Life
Sciences, University of KwaZulu-Natal Westville Campus, Durban 4001, South
Africa. Electronic address: sommerp@ukzn.ac.za.

Correct formation of the corneal endothelium is essential for continued
development of the anterior segment of the eye. Corneal endothelial development
is initiated at E12 when precursor peri-ocular mesenchyme cells migrate into the 
space between the lens and the presumptive corneal epithelium and begin to
respond to signals from the lens, undergoing a mesenchymal to epithelial
transition (MET) that is complete by E15.5. To study the initiation of MET,
peri-ocular mesenchyme cell lines were derived from E12.5 and E13.5 murine
embryos. These cells expressed key transcription factors, Foxc1 and Pitx2, as
well as Slug and Tsc22, genes involved in MET. We have shown that all these genes
must be down-regulated by E13.5 for differentiation to proceed. Lens-derived
signals play a role in this down-regulation with Tgfß2 specifically
down-regulating Foxc1 and Pitx2. Over-expression and knock-down of Foxc1
significantly and similarly affected the expression of Pitx2, Tsc22 and Slug
while Foxc1 was shown to play a role in mediating the lens effects on Slug. Thus,
for the progression of initial corneal endothelial development, the key
transcription factors, Foxc1 and Pitx2, as well as genes involved in MET, Slug
and Tsc-22, must be down-regulated, a process driven by the lens and Foxc1.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24472616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Clin Experiment Ophthalmol. 2014 Jan-Feb;42(1):13-24. doi: 10.1111/ceo.12152.
Epub 2013 Jul 29.

Genomics and anterior segment dysgenesis: a review.

Ito YA(1), Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Anterior segment dysgenesis refers to a spectrum of disorders affecting
structures in the anterior segment of the eye including the iris, cornea and
trabecular meshwork. Approximately 50% of patients with anterior segment
dysgenesis develop glaucoma. Traditional genetic methods using linkage analysis
and family-based studies have identified numerous disease-causing genes such as
PAX6, FOXC1 and PITX2. Despite these advances, phenotypic and genotypic
heterogeneity pose continuing challenges to understand the mechanisms underlying 
the complexity of anterior segment dysgenesis disorders. Genomic methods, such as
genome-wide association studies, are potentially an effective tool to understand 
anterior segment dysgenesis and the individual susceptibility to the development 
of glaucoma. In this review, we provide the rationale, as well as the challenges,
to utilizing genomic methods to examine anterior segment dysgenesis disorders.

© 2013 Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Ophthalmologists.

PMID: 24433355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2014 Aug;54(3):172-7. doi: 10.1111/cga.12053.

Difference in apical and basal growth of the frontal bone primordium in
Foxc1ch/ch mice.

Machida A(1), Okuhara S, Harada K, Iseki S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Craniofacial Embryology, Tokyo Medical and Dental
University, Tokyo, Japan; Section of Maxillofacial Surgery, Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

The frontal and parietal bones form the major part of the calvarium and their
primordia appear at the basolateral region of the head and grow apically. A
spontaneous loss of Foxc1 function mutant mouse, congenital hydrocephalus
(Foxc1(ch/ch)), results in congenital hydrocephalus accompanied by defects in the
apical part of the skull vault. We found that during the initiation stage of
apical growth of the frontal bone primordium in the Foxc1(ch/ch) mouse, the Runx2
expression domain extended only to the basal side and bone sialoprotein (Bsp) and
N-cadherin expression domains appeared only in the basal region. Fluorescent dye 
(DiI) labeling of the frontal primordium by ex-utero surgery confirmed that
apical extension of the frontal bone primordium of the mouse was severely
retarded, while extension to the basal side underneath the brain was largely
unaffected. Consistent with this observation, decreased cell proliferation
activity was seen at the apical tip but not the basal tip of the frontal bone
primordium as determined by double detection of Runx2 transcripts and BrdU
incorporation. Furthermore, expression of the osteogenic-related genes Bmp4 and-7
was observed only in the basal part of the meninges during the initiation period 
of primordium growth. These results suggest that a loss of Foxc1 function affects
skull bone formation of the apical region and that Bmp expression in the meninges
might influence the growth of the calvarial bone primordium.

© 2014 Japanese Teratology Society.

PMID: 24417671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2014 Jan;15(1):43-50. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1300053.

Identification of a novel frameshift mutation in PITX2 gene in a Chinese family
with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

Yin HF(1), Fang XY, Jin CF, Yin JF, Li JY, Zhao SJ, Miao Q, Song FW.

Author information: 
(1)Eye Center, the Second Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310009, China; Zhejiang Provincial Key Lab of Ophthalmology,
Hangzhou 310009, China.

OBJECTIVE: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is phenotypically and genetically
heterogeneous. In this study, we identified the underlying genetic defect in a
Chinese family with ARS.
METHODS: A detailed family history and clinical data were recorded. The ocular
phenotype was documented using slit-lamp photography and systemic anomalies were 
also documented where available. The genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral
blood leukocytes. All coding exons and intron-exon junctions of paired-like
homeodomain transcription factor 2 (PITX2) gene and the forkhead box C1 (FOXC1)
gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and screened for mutation 
by direct DNA sequencing. Variations detected in exon 5 of PITX2 were further
evaluated with cloning sequencing. The exon 5 of PITX2 was also sequenced in 100 
healthy controls, unrelated to the family, for comparison. Structural models of
the wild type and mutant homeodomain of PITX2 were investigated by SWISS-MODEL.
RESULTS: Affected individuals exhibited variable ocular phenotypes, whereas the
systemic anomalies were similar. After direct sequencing and cloning sequencing, 
a heterozygous deletion/insertion mutation c.198_201delinsTTTCT (p.M66Ifs*133)
was revealed in exon 5 of PITX2. This mutation co-segregated with all affected
individuals in the family and was not found either in unaffected family members
or in 100 unrelated controls.
CONCLUSIONS: We detected a novel frameshift mutation p.M66Ifs*133 in PITX2 in a
Chinese family with ARS. Although PITX2 mutations and polymorphisms have been
reported from various ethnic groups, we report for the first time the
identification of a novel deletion/insertion mutation that causes frameshift
mutation in the homeodomain of PITX2 protein.

PMCID: PMC3891117
PMID: 24390743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(12):e1003949. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003949. Epub 2013 Dec
19.

Interaction between Foxc1 and Fgf8 during mammalian jaw patterning and in the
pathogenesis of syngnathia.

Inman KE(1), Purcell P(2), Kume T(3), Trainor PA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, United States
of America. (2)Department of Plastic and Oral Surgery, Boston Children's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of
America. (3)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(4)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, Kansas City, Missouri, United States
of America ; Department of Anatomy & Cell Biology, University of Kansas School of
Medicine, Kansas City, Kansas, United States of America.

Syngnathia (bony fusion of the upper and lower jaw) is a rare human congenital
condition, with fewer than sixty cases reported in the literature. Syngnathia
typically presents as part of a complex syndrome comprising widespread oral and
maxillofacial anomalies, but it can also occur in isolation. Most cartilage,
bone, and connective tissue of the head and face is derived from neural crest
cells. Hence, congenital craniofacial anomalies are often attributed to defects
in neural crest cell formation, survival, migration, or differentiation. The
etiology and pathogenesis of syngnathia however remains unknown. Here, we report 
that Foxc1 null embryos display bony syngnathia together with defects in
maxillary and mandibular structures, and agenesis of the temporomandibular joint 
(TMJ). In the absence of Foxc1, neural crest cell derived osteogenic patterning
is affected, as osteoblasts develop ectopically in the maxillary prominence and
fuse with the dentary bone. Furthermore, we observed that the craniofacial
musculature is also perturbed in Foxc1 null mice, which highlights the complex
tissue interactions required for proper jaw development. We present evidence that
Foxc1 and Fgf8 genetically interact and that Fgf8 dosage is associated with
variation in the syngnathic phenotype. Together our data demonstrates that Foxc1 
- Fgf8 signaling regulates mammalian jaw patterning and provides a mechanistic
basis for the pathogenesis of syngnathia. Furthermore, our work provides a
framework for understanding jaw patterning and the etiology of other congenital
craniofacial anomalies, including temporomandibular joint agenesis.

PMCID: PMC3868537
PMID: 24385915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Dev Biol. 2014 Feb 1;386(1):216-26. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.12.026. Epub 2013
Dec 24.

Midline-derived Shh regulates mesonephric tubule formation through the paraxial
mesoderm.

Murashima A(1), Akita H(2), Okazawa M(3), Kishigami S(4), Nakagata N(5),
Nishinakamura R(6), Yamada G(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama
Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Wakayama, Japan.
(2)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced Medicine, Wakayama
Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Wakayama, Japan; Faculty 
of Biology-Oriented Science and Technology, Kinki University, Kinokawa 649-6493, 
Wakayama, Japan. (3)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Advanced
Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509,
Wakayama, Japan; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Osaka University
Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita 565-0871, Osaka, Japan.
(4)Faculty of Biology-Oriented Science and Technology, Kinki University, Kinokawa
649-6493, Wakayama, Japan. (5)Division of Reproductive Engineering, Center for
Animal Resources and Development, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto
860-0811, Kumamoto, Japan. (6)Department of Kidney Development, Institute of
Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto
860-0811, Kumamoto, Japan. (7)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of 
Advanced Medicine, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1 Kimiidera, Wakayama
641-8509, Wakayama, Japan. Electronic address: transg8@wakayama-med.ac.jp.

During organogenesis, Sonic hedgehog (Shh) possesses dual functions: Shh
emanating from midline structures regulates the positioning of bilateral
structures at early stages, whereas organ-specific Shh locally regulates organ
morphogenesis at later stages. The mesonephros is a transient embryonic kidney in
amniote, whereas it becomes definitive adult kidney in some anamniotes. Thus,
elucidating the regulation of mesonephros formation has important implications
for our understanding of kidney development and evolution. In Shh knockout (KO)
mutant mice, the mesonephros was displaced towards the midline and ectopic
mesonephric tubules (MTs) were present in the caudal mesonephros.
Mesonephros-specific ablation of Shh in Hoxb7-Cre;Shh(flox/-) and
Sall1(CreERT2/+);Shh(flox/-) mice embryos indicated that Shh expressed in the
mesonephros was not required for either the development of the mesonephros or the
differentiation of the male reproductive tract. Moreover, stage-specific ablation
of Shh in Shh(CreERT2/flox) mice showed that notochord- and/or floor
plate-derived Shh were essential for the regulation of the number and position of
MTs. Lineage analysis of hedgehog (Hh)-responsive cells, and analysis of gene
expression in Shh KO embryos suggested that Shh regulated nephrogenic gene
expression indirectly, possibly through effects on the paraxial mesoderm. These
data demonstrate the essential role of midline-derived Shh in local tissue
morphogenesis and differentiation.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3985168
PMID: 24370450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Histopathology. 2014 Jun;64(7):963-70. doi: 10.1111/his.12347. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Overexpression of FOXC1 correlates with poor prognosis in gastric cancer
patients.

Xu Y(1), Shao QS, Yao HB, Jin Y, Ma YY, Jia LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Zhejiang Provincial People's Hospital,
Hangzhou, China.

AIMS: The aim of this study was to determine FOXC1 expression in gastric tissues,
and the clinical significance of FOXC1 in the development, progression and
metastasis of gastric cancer (GC).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We screened GCs for the expression of FOXC1 using the
Affymetrix U133 plus 2.0 Gene Chip Array, and found that expression was
significantly higher in GC tissues than in controls. Furthermore, we validated
the expression levels of FOXC1 using real-time quantitative RT-PCR (qRT-PCR), and
of FOXC1 using immunohistochemistry (IHC). Our study showed that expression
levels of FOXC1 mRNA and FOXC1 in GC tissues were significantly higher than those
in corresponding non-tumour tissues. High FOXC1 expression correlated with the
degree of histological differentiation (P < 0.01), TNM stage (P < 0.001),
invasive depth (P < 0.05), lymph node metastasis (P < 0.05), and distant
metastasis (P < 0.01). Survival analysis revealed that patients with high FOXC1
expression had shorter overall survival than those with low expression
(P < 0.001). Multivariate analysis showed that high FOXC1 expression was an
independent prognostic factor for GC patients (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of FOXC1 may play a key role in the progression of
GC, and FOXC1 expression may serve as a useful marker for predicting the outcome 
of patients with GC.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24329718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Leuk Lymphoma. 2014 Aug;55(8):1893-903. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2013.864762. Epub
2014 Feb 17.

Oncogenic deregulation of NKL homeobox gene MSX1 in mantle cell lymphoma.

Nagel S(1), Ehrentraut S, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ - German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures , Braunschweig , Germany.

NKL homeobox gene MSX1 is physiologically expressed during embryonic
hematopoiesis. Here, we detected MSX1 overexpression in three examples of mantle 
cell lymphoma (MCL) and one of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) by screening 96
leukemia/lymphoma cell lines via microarray profiling. Moreover, in silico
analysis identified significant overexpression of MSX1 in 3% each of patients
with MCL and AML, confirming aberrant activity in subsets of both types of
malignancies. Comparative expression profiling analysis and subsequent functional
studies demonstrated overexpression of histone acetyltransferase PHF16 together
with transcription factors FOXC1 and HLXB9 as activators of MSX1 transcription.
Additionally, we identified regulation of cyclin D1/CCND1 by MSX1 and its
repressive cofactor histone H1C. Fluorescence in situ hybridization in MCL cells 
showed that t(11;14)(q13;q32) results in detachment of CCND1 from its
corresponding repressive MSX1 binding site. Taken together, we uncovered
regulators and targets of homeobox gene MSX1 in leukemia/lymphoma cells,
supporting the view of a recurrent genetic network that is reactivated in
malignant transformation.

PMID: 24237447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Comput Biol Chem. 2013 Dec;47:192-7. doi: 10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2013.08.010.
Epub 2013 Sep 19.

Gene expression patterns combined with bioinformatics analysis identify genes
associated with cholangiocarcinoma.

Li C(1), Shen W, Shen S, Ai Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Zhongshan Hospital Affiliated in Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

To explore the molecular mechanisms of cholangiocarcinoma (CC), microarray
technology was used to find biomarkers for early detection and diagnosis. The
gene expression profiles from 6 patients with CC and 5 normal controls were
downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus and compared. As a result, 204
differentially co-expressed genes (DCGs) in CC patients compared to normal
controls were identified using a computational bioinformatics analysis. These
genes were mainly involved in coenzyme metabolic process, peptidase activity and 
oxidation reduction. A regulatory network was constructed by mapping the DCGs to 
known regulation data. Four transcription factors, FOXC1, ZIC2, NKX2-2 and GCGR, 
were hub nodes in the network. In conclusion, this study provides a set of
targets useful for future investigations into molecular biomarker studies.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24140882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Semin Ophthalmol. 2013 Sep-Nov;28(5-6):301-5. doi: 10.3109/08820538.2013.825291.

The genetics of intraocular pressure.

Ojha P(1), Wiggs JL, Pasquale LR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts Eye and Ear
Infirmary, Boston , Massachusetts , USA and.

Glaucoma is a leading cause of irreversible blindness. Intraocular pressure (IOP)
is the only modifiable risk factor for glaucoma, yet there is little known about 
the molecular events that regulate IOP. Genetic and genomic studies have helped
identify genes that influence IOP and could lead to the identification of
biological pathways that serve as targets for novel pressure-modifying therapies.
Genetic linkage studies resulted in the identification of several genes that
cause Mendelian (autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive) forms of
high-pressure glaucoma, including MYOC. PITX2, FOXC1, and CYP1B1. Classical twin 
studies suggest that IOP is a heritable trait. More recently, genome-wide
association studies (GWAS) have shown that common genetic variants in the GAS7
and TMCO1 genomic regions are associated with elevated IOP. TMCO1 has also been
associated with primary open-angle glaucoma in patients with advanced disease. A 
further study identifying additional genes contributing to IOP will be necessary 
to fully define the underlying genetic architecture of IOP.

PMID: 24138038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. BMC Cancer. 2013 Oct 5;13:456. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-456.

Quantitative DNA methylation analyses reveal stage dependent DNA methylation and 
association to clinico-pathological factors in breast tumors.

Klajic J(1), Fleischer T, Dejeux E, Edvardsen H, Warnberg F, Bukholm I, Lønning
PE, Solvang H, Børresen-Dale AL, Tost J, Kristensen VN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Molecular Biology and Laboratory Science (EpiGen),
Akershus University hospital, Division of Medicine, 1476 Lørenskog, Norway.
v.n.kristensen@medisin.uio.no.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation of regulatory genes has frequently been
found in human breast cancers and correlated to clinical outcome. In the present 
study we investigate stage specific changes in the DNA methylation patterns in
order to identify valuable markers to understand how these changes affect breast 
cancer progression.
METHODS: Quantitative DNA methylation analyses of 12 candidate genes ABCB1,
BRCCA1, CDKN2A, ESR1, GSTP1, IGF2, MGMT, HMLH1, PPP2R2B, PTEN, RASSF1A and FOXC1 
was performed by pyrosequencing a series of 238 breast cancer tissue samples from
DCIS to invasive tumors stage I to IV.
RESULTS: Significant differences in methylation levels between the DCIS and
invasive stage II tumors were observed for six genes RASSF1A, CDKN2A, MGMT,
ABCB1, GSTP1 and FOXC1. RASSF1A, ABCB1 and GSTP1 showed significantly higher
methylation levels in late stage compared to the early stage breast carcinoma.
Z-score analysis revealed significantly lower methylation levels in DCIS and
stage I tumors compared with stage II, III and IV tumors. Methylation levels of
PTEN, PPP2R2B, FOXC1, ABCB1 and BRCA1 were lower in tumors harboring TP53
mutations then in tumors with wild type TP53. Z-score analysis showed that TP53
mutated tumors had significantly lower overall methylation levels compared to
tumors with wild type TP53. Methylation levels of RASSF1A, PPP2R2B, GSTP1 and
FOXC1 were higher in ER positive vs. ER negative tumors and methylation levels of
PTEN and CDKN2A were higher in HER2 positive vs. HER2 negative tumors. Z-score
analysis also showed that HER2 positive tumors had significantly higher z-scores 
of methylation compared to the HER2 negative tumors. Univariate survival analysis
identifies methylation status of PPP2R2B as significant predictor of overall
survival and breast cancer specific survival.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study we report that the level of aberrant DNA
methylation is higher in late stage compared with early stage of invasive breast 
cancers and DCIS for genes mentioned above.

PMCID: PMC3819713
PMID: 24093668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Chin Med Sci J. 2013 Sep;28(3):129-34.

Low trichorhinophalangeal syndrome 1 gene transcript levels in basal-like breast 
cancer associate with mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition.

Bao Y(1), Ruan LJ, Mo JF.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory, Jiaxing Second Hospital, Jiaxing University, Jiaxing, Zhejiang
314000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate trichorhinophalangeal syndrome 1 gene (TRPS-1)
expression patterns in different subtypes of breast cancer and its correlations
with other genes and survival using microarray data sets.
METHODS: The transcripts of TRPS-1 and its role in survival in breast cancer were
analyzed using published microarray data sets#x02014;Netherlands Cancer Institute
(NKI) cohort and Wang cohort.
RESULTS: TRPS-1 expression was lower in basal-like breast cancer. The mRNA levels
of TRPS-1 negatively correlated with Slug (Pearson correlation
coefficient=-0.1366, P=0.0189 in NKI data set and Pearson correlation
coefficient=-0.1571, P=0.0078 in Wang data set), FOXC1 (Pearson correlation
coefficient=-0.1211, P=0.0376 in NKI data set and Pearson correlation
coefficient=-0.1709, P=0.0037 in Wang data set), and CXCL1 (Pearson correlation
coefficient=-0.1197, P=0.0399 in NKI data set and Pearson correlation
coefficient=-0.3436, P<0.0001 in Wang data set), but positively correlated with
BRCA1 (Pearson correlation coefficient=0.1728, P=0.0029 in NKI data set and
Pearson correlation coefficient=0.1805, P=0.0022 in Wang data set). Low TRPS-1
expression associated with poor overall survival (hazard ratio 1.79, 95% CI of
ratio 0.9894 to 3.238, P=0.054) and relapse-free survival (hazard ratio 1.913,
95% CI of ratio 1.159 to 3.156, P<0.05). The low TRPS-1 mRNA levels predicted
poor outcome in breast cancer patients by the 70-gene signature.
CONCLUSION: The strong expression of TRPS-1 may serve as a good prognostic marker
in breast cancer.

PMID: 24074613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Dev Biol. 2013 Nov 15;383(2):227-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.09.014. Epub 2013 
Sep 17.

Spry1 and Spry2 are necessary for eyelid closure.

Kuracha MR(1), Siefker E, Licht JD, Govindarajan V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, 253 Criss III, Cancer Center, 2500 California Plaza,
Creighton University, Omaha, NE 68178, USA.

Sproutys (Sprys) are downstream targets and negative feedback regulators of the
FGF-Ras-ERK signaling pathway. Our previous studies have shown that Spry1 and
Spry2, through negative modulation of FGF-ERK signaling, allow lens vesicle
separation from the overlying ectoderm and regulate corneal epithelial
proliferation. Here we show that Spry1 and Spry2 are necessary for eyelid
closure. Murine palpebral conjunctival epithelial cells that differentiate as
inner eyelids and adjacent mesenchymal cells express Spry1 and Spry2 prior to
eyelid closure. Conditional deletion of both Spry1 and Spry2, but not either one 
alone, in the ocular surface epithelial cells result in the "EOB" (eyes open at
birth) phenotype suggesting redundant roles for these proteins during eyelid
closure. Spry mutant eyelids show increased proliferation of conjunctival
epithelial cells with concomitant induction of FGF targets, Erm, Pea3 and Dusp6
and elevated ERK phosphorylation. Peridermal cells at the leading edge of
Spry-mutant eyelids showed reduced c-Jun, but not ERK, phosphorylation, reduced
F-actin polymerization and reduced motility in vitro. Spry mutant eyelids also
showed disruptions in epithelial mesenchymal interactions reflected in the
enhanced mesenchymal Spry1 and Spry4 expression, disaggregation of BMP4-positive 
mesenchymal cells and loss of Shh in the eyelid epithelium. Spry mutant eyelids
also showed increased Wnt signaling and reduced expression of Foxc1 and Foxc2,
two transcription factors previously shown to be necessary for eyelid closure.
Collectively, our results show that conjunctival epithelial Spry1 and Spry2
redundantly promote eyelid closure by (a) stimulating ERK-independent,
c-Jun-mediated peridermal migration, (b) suppressing conjunctival epithelial
proliferation through FGF-ERK signaling, (c) mediating conjunctival
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions and (d) maintaining expression of Foxc1 and
Foxc2.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3857020
PMID: 24055172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Ann Lab Med. 2013 Sep;33(5):360-3. doi: 10.3343/alm.2013.33.5.360. Epub 2013 Aug 
8.

Novel c.300_301delinsT mutation in PITX2 in a Korean family with Axenfeld-Rieger 
syndrome.

Yun JW(1), Cho HK, Oh SY, Ki CS, Kee C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Genetics, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is characterized by anomalies of the anterior
segment of the eye and systemic abnormalities. Mutations in the FOXC1 and PITX2
genes are underlying causes of ARS, but there has been few reports on genetically
confirmed ARS in Korea. We identified a novel PITX2 mutation (c.300_301delinsT)
in 2 Korean patients from a family with ARS. We expand the spectrum of PITX2
mutations and, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first confirmed family
of PITX2-related ARS in Korea.

PMCID: PMC3756242
PMID: 24003428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Acta Ophthalmol. 2014 Aug;92(5):412-6. doi: 10.1111/aos.12250. Epub 2013 Jul 29.

'Congenital' nystagmus may hide various ophthalmic diagnoses.

Holmström G(1), Bondeson ML, Eriksson U, Åkerblom H, Larsson E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience/Ophthalmology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

PURPOSE: To investigate whether patients registered at a low-vision centre with
'nystagmus' had any underlying, but so far unknown, ophthalmic diagnosis.
METHODS: All patients registered at the low-vision centre of Uppsala county with 
nystagmus as their major diagnosis were identified. Their medical records were
studied to exclude those with other general diagnoses that could explain the
nystagmus. The remaining group of patients underwent an ophthalmic examination,
refraction and optical coherence tomography (OCT). Electroretinogram and genetic 
analyses were performed when indicated.
RESULTS: Sixty-two patients with nystagmus as their main diagnosis were
registered at the low-vision centre, Uppsala, and 43 of them had a major
diagnosis other than nystagmus. Nystagmus was the major diagnosis in 19 patients,
15 of whom, aged 6-76 years, participated in the study. Two of the patients had
foveal hypoplasia and albinism, four a seemingly isolated foveal hypoplasia,
three achromatopsia, one rod-cone dystrophy, one degenerative high myopia, and
two could not be evaluated. Only two patients appeared to have 'congenital'
nystagmus. Eleven of the patients underwent a comprehensive genetic investigation
of the PAX 6 gene. In addition, four of the patients were analysed for mutations 
in FOXC1 and PITX2 and one in FRMD7. No mutations were found in any of the
patients analysed.
CONCLUSION: The study illustrates that many patients in our study group with
nystagmus had underlying ophthalmic diagnoses. Early diagnosis is important to
facilitate habilitation and to provide genetic counselling and, in the future,
possibly also gene therapy.

© 2013 Acta Ophthalmologica Scandinavica Foundation. Published by John Wiley &
Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23889849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biol Open. 2013 May 20;2(7):647-59. doi: 10.1242/bio.20135009. Print 2013 Jul 15.

Foxc1 is required by pericytes during fetal brain angiogenesis.

Siegenthaler JA(1), Choe Y, Patterson KP, Hsieh I, Li D, Jaminet SC, Daneman R,
Kume T, Huang EJ, Pleasure SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Programs in Neuroscience and Developmental Biology,
Institute for Regenerative Medicine, UC San Francisco , San Francisco, CA 94158 ,
USA ; Present address: Department of Pediatrics, Denver-Anschutz Medical Campus, 
University of Colorado, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

Brain pericytes play a critical role in blood vessel stability and blood-brain
barrier maturation. Despite this, how brain pericytes function in these different
capacities is only beginning to be understood. Here we show that the forkhead
transcription factor Foxc1 is expressed by brain pericytes during development and
is critical for pericyte regulation of vascular development in the fetal brain.
Conditional deletion of Foxc1 from pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells
leads to late-gestation cerebral micro-hemorrhages as well as pericyte and
endothelial cell hyperplasia due to increased proliferation of both cell types.
Conditional Foxc1 mutants do not have widespread defects in BBB maturation,
though focal breakdown of BBB integrity is observed in large, dysplastic vessels.
qPCR profiling of brain microvessels isolated from conditional mutants showed
alterations in pericyte-expressed proteoglycans while other genes previously
implicated in pericyte-endothelial cell interactions were unchanged. Collectively
these data point towards an important role for Foxc1 in certain brain pericyte
functions (e.g. vessel morphogenesis) but not others (e.g. barriergenesis).

PMCID: PMC3711032
PMID: 23862012  [PubMed]


92. Cells Tissues Organs. 2013;198(1):22-7. doi: 10.1159/000351291. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Foxc1 gene null mutation causes ectopic budding and kidney hypoplasia but not
dysplasia.

Komaki F(1), Miyazaki Y, Niimura F, Matsusaka T, Ichikawa I, Motojima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mice carrying the null-mutated Foxc1 gene frequently develop an
anomalous double collecting system. These mice provide an ideal opportunity to
specify the role of ectopic budding in the development of congenital anomalies of
the kidney and urinary tract.
METHODS: Tissue specimens were collected from Foxc1(ch/ch) mutants at several
embryonic stages and at birth. The upper and lower pole kidneys were
qualitatively and quantitatively examined by histology, in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Upper pole kidneys of newborn Foxc1(ch/ch) mice were significantly more 
hypoplastic and contained significantly fewer glomeruli than their lower pole
counterparts. On embryonic day 14.5, the stage immediately before the formation
of the first urine, the upper pole kidney was already smaller than the lower pole
kidney. Neither histology nor immunostaining for kidney markers showed dysplastic
regions in either kidney of newborn Foxc1(ch/ch) mice. Of note, expression of
Foxc1 was restricted to maturing podocytes and was not detectable in any
intermediate structure of nephron development in the nephrogenic zone.
CONCLUSION: Ectopic budding alone results only in kidney hypoplasia but not
dysplasia. The development of dysplasticity in the maturing kidney involves
gene(s) that function beyond the initial budding stage within the metanephros.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23838094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Pediatr Int. 2013 Jun;55(3):376-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-200X.2012.03729.x.

6p subtelomere deletion with congenital glaucoma, severe mental retardation, and 
growth impairment.

Nakane T(1), Kousuke N, Sonoko H, Yuko K, Sato H, Kubota T, Sugita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Yamanashi, Chuo, Japan.
tnakane99@gmail.com

Submicroscopic deletion of the 6p subtelomere has recently been recognized as a
clinically identifiable syndrome. A distinct phenotype has emerged consisting of 
developmental delay/mental retardation, language impairment, hearing loss, and
ophthalmologic, cardiac, and craniofacial abnormalities, including hypertelorism,
midface hypoplasia, small nose, and high arched palate. We describe here a
patient with 6p subtelomere deletion associated with congenital glaucoma, severe 
mental retardation, and growth impairment. Fluorescent in situ hybridization
analysis revealed only one 6p25.3 signal. Array comparative genomic hybridization
assay showed 2.1 Mb deletion and 4.14 Mb duplication in the 6p25 region.
Generally, developmental delay and language impairment are common findings in
patients with 6p subtelomere deletion syndrome, but growth impairment is not.
Compared to that, the present patient showed atypically severe developmental
delay and growth impairment.

© 2013 The Authors. Pediatrics International © 2013 Japan Pediatric Society.

PMID: 23782370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Vis. 2013 Apr 30;19:935-43. Print 2013.

A novel forkhead box C1 gene mutation in a Korean family with Axenfeld-Rieger
syndrome.

Kim GN(1), Ki CS, Seo SW, Yoo JM, Han YS, Chung IY, Park JM, Kim SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Gyeongsang National University, College of
Medicine, Jinju, Korea.

PURPOSE: To report a case series of patients with novel forkhead box CI (FOXC1)
mutations in a Korean family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS).
METHODS: Four members of the same family underwent complete ophthalmologic and
systemic examinations and genetic analysis. Genomic DNA was isolated from
peripheral blood leukocytes, and all coding exons with flanking intronic regions 
of the FOXC1 and pituitary homeobox 2 genes were amplified using PCR, and
sequenced.
RESULTS: The patients were 40, 12, 11, and 10 years old (father, son, and two
sisters, respectively). All four had uncontrolled intraocular pressure,
glaucomatous visual field defect, retinal nerve fiber layer defect, iridocorneal 
adhesion on gonioscopy, hypoplasia and marked atrophy of the iris, flattening of 
the midface, and broad flat noses. A diagnosis of ARS was made based on
characteristic ocular and systemic traits. A novel FOXC mutation, c.317delA, was 
identified in all affected members of the family with ARS.
CONCLUSIONS: We found a novel c.317delA mutation in FOXC1 in a Korean family with
ARS. We suggest that this FOXC1 mutation causes typical ARS, and that our results
may be useful for better understanding of the spectrum of FOXC1 mutations and the
role of FOXC1 in the development and progression of ARS.

PMCID: PMC3654851
PMID: 23687430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jul;161A(7):1686-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35937. Epub 2013
May 17.

6p25 microdeletion: white matter abnormalities in an adult patient.

Vernon HJ(1), Bytyci Telegrafi A, Batista D, Owegi M, Leigh R.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. hvernon1@jhmi.edu

We report on a 41-year-old woman of normal intelligence with a complicated past
medical history including unilateral profound hearing loss, unilateral
Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly, and leukoencephalopathy. She was referred to an adult
neurology clinic because of a previous diagnosis of multiple sclerosis, which was
non-responsive to multiple medications. Due to her complicated past medical
history, the medical genetics service was consulted. She was found to have a
chromosome 6p25.3-6p25.2 deletion on SNP array. This report highlights chromosome
6p subtelomeric deletions as a possible underlying cause for periventricular
white matter abnormalities in an adult. It emphasizes the importance of genetic
testing in an adult with leukoencephalopathy and congenital anomalies.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23686687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biol Reprod. 2013 Jul 11;89(1):10. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.108001. Print 2013
Jul.

FOXC1 is enriched in the mammary luminal progenitor population, but is not
necessary for mouse mammary ductal morphogenesis.

Sizemore GM(1), Sizemore ST, Pal B, Booth CN, Seachrist DD, Abdul-Karim FW, Kume 
T, Keri RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Expression of FOXC1, a forkhead box transcription factor, correlates with the
human basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) subtype, and functional analyses have
revealed its importance for in vitro invasiveness of BLBC cells. Women diagnosed 
with this breast tumor subtype have a poorer outcome because of the lack of
targeted therapies; thus, continued investigation of factors driving these tumors
is critical to uncover novel therapeutic targets. Several processes that dictate 
normal mammary morphogenesis parallel cancer progression, and enforced expression
of FOXC1 can induce a progenitor state in more-differentiated mammary epithelial 
cells. Consequently, evaluating how FOXC1 functions in the normal gland is
critical to further understand BLBC biology. Although FOXC1 is well known to
control normal development of a number of tissues, its role in the mammary gland 
has not yet been investigated. Herein, we describe FOXC1 expression patterning in
the normal breast, where it is localized to the basal/myoepithelium, suggesting
that FOXC1 would be required for normal development. However, mammary glands
lacking Foxc1 have no overt defect in ductal outgrowth, alveologenesis, or
lineage specification. Of significant interest, we found that expression of FOXC1
is enriched in the normal luminal progenitor population, which is the postulated 
cell of origin of BLBC. These results indicate that FOXC1 is unnecessary for
mammary morphogenesis and that its role in BLBC likely involves processes that
are unrelated to cell lineage specification.

PMID: 23677979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Curr Glaucoma Pract. 2013 May-Aug;7(2):66-84. doi:
10.5005/jp-journals-10008-1140. Epub 2013 May 9.

Genetic, Biochemical and Clinical Insights into Primary Congenital Glaucoma.

Faiq M(1), Sharma R(2), Dada R(3), Mohanty K(1), Saluja D(4), Dada T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Pursuing Doctorate, Dr Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All
India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India. (2)Resident, Dr Rajendra
Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences,
New Delhi, India. (3)Additional Professor, Department of Anatomy, Laboratory for 
Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India. (4)Professor, Medical Biotechnology Laboratory, Dr BR Ambedkar
Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Delhi, New Delhi, India.
(5)Additional Professor, Dr Rajendra Prasad Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All
India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

Glaucoma is an irreversible form of optic neuropathy in which the optic nerve
suffers damage in a characteristic manner with optic nerve cupping and retinal
ganglion cell death. Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is an idiopathic
irreversible childhood blinding disorder which manifests at birth or within the
first year of life. PCG presents with a classical triad of symptoms (viz
epiphora, photophobia and blepharospasm) though there are many additional
symptoms, including large eye ball and hazy cornea. The only anatomical anomaly
found in PCG is trabecular meshwork (TM) dysgenesis. PCG is an inheritable
disease with established genetic etiology. It transmits through autosomal
recessive mode. A number of cases are sporadic also. Mutations in many genes have
been found to be causative in PCG and many are yet to be found. Mutations in
cytochrome P4501B1 (CYP1B1) gene have been found to be the predominant cause of
PCG. Other genes that have been implicated in PCG etiology are myocilin,
Forkhead-related transcription factor C1 (FOXC1) and latent transforming growth
factor beta-binding protein 2 (LTBP2). Mutations in these genes have been
reported from many parts of the world. In addition to this, mitochondrial genome 
mutations are also thought to be involved in its pathogenesis. There appears to
be some mechanism involving more than one genetic factor. In this review, we will
discuss the various clinical, biochemical and genetic aspects of PCG. We
emphasize that etiology of PCG does not lie in a single gene or genetic factor.
Research needs to be oriented into a direction where gene-gene interactions,
ocular embryology, ophthalmic metabolism and systemic oxidative status need to be
studied in order to understand this disorder. We also accentuate the need for
ophthalmic genetic facilities in all ophthalmology setups. How to cite this
article: Faiq M, Sharma R, Dada R, Mohanty K, Saluja D, Dada T. Genetic,
Biochemical and Clinical Insights into Primary Congenital Glaucoma. J Current
Glau Prac 2013;7(2):66-84.

PMCID: PMC4741182
PMID: 26997785  [PubMed]


98. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2013 Jun;51(6):475-81. doi: 10.5414/CP201851.

Genetic polymorphisms associated with oxaliplatin-induced peripheral
neurotoxicity in Japanese patients with colorectal cancer.

Oguri T(1), Mitsuma A, Inada-Inoue M, Morita S, Shibata T, Shimokata T, Sugishita
M, Nakayama G, Uehara K, Hasegawa Y, Ando Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Nagoya University Graduate School of
Medicine, Nagoya, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Pharmacogenomic associations between severe oxaliplatininduced chronic
peripheral neurotoxicity (OXCPN) (Grade 2 lasting for > 7 days or Grade 3) and 9 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 8 genes (TAC1, FOXC1, ITGA1, ACYP2,
DLEU7, BTG4, CAMK2N1, and FARS2) were reported by the genomewide association
study (GWAS) in Korean patients. The present study was designed to explore
reliable predictors of OXCPN and thereby improve the management of metastatic
colorectal cancer (CRC).
METHODS: We retrospectively investigated pharmacogenomic characteristics of OXCPN
in 70 Japanese patients with CRC who received oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy and 
updated the results of our previous analysis of ERCC1 (C118T, rs11615 and C8092A,
rs3212986) and GSTP1 (Ile105Val, rs1695) polymorphisms.
RESULTS: Univariate analysis suggested potential associations of severe OXCPN
with rs843748 in ACYP2 and rs17140129 in FARS2, as well as with the absence of
diabetes mellitus (DM) (p = 0.056, 0.072, and 0.029, respectively). There was no 
association between severe OXCPN and any of the 7 other SNPs. Multiple logistic
regression analysis showed that an increased risk of severe OXCPN was related to 
rs17140129 and the absence of DM (p = 0.034 and 0.030, respectively). On updated 
analysis, polymorphisms of ERCC1 (C118T, rs11615) and rs10486003 in TAC1 were
associated with time to the onset of Grade 1 OXCPN (p = 0.024 and 0.049,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Severe OXCPN is significantly related to rs17140129, found in the
GWAS of Korean patients, in Japanese patients. Patients without DM are more
likely to have OXCPN. The association between ERCC1 polymorphism and time to the 
onset of OXCPN was significant on updated analysis.

PMID: 23547850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Exp Eye Res. 2013 Jun;111:112-21. doi: 10.1016/j.exer.2013.03.009. Epub 2013 Mar 
27.

FOXC1 in human trabecular meshwork cells is involved in regulatory pathway that
includes miR-204, MEIS2, and ITGß1.

Paylakhi SH(1), Moazzeni H, Yazdani S, Rassouli P, Arefian E, Jaberi E, Arash EH,
Gilani AS, Fan JB, April C, Amin S, Suri F, Elahi E.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, Damghan University, Damghan, Iran.

Forkhead box C1 (FOXC1) is a transcription factor that affects eye development.
FOXC1 is implicated in the etiology of glaucoma because mutations in the gene are
among the causes of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome which is often accompanied by
glaucoma. Glaucoma is the second leading cause of blindness. It is a complex
disorder whose genetic basis in most patients remains unknown. Microarrays
expression analysis was performed to identify genes in human trabecular meshwork 
(TM) primary cultures that are affected by FOXC1 and genes that may have roles in
glaucoma. This represents the first genome wide analysis of FOXC1 target genes in
any tissue. FOXC1 knock down by siRNAs affected the expression of 849 genes.
Results on selected genes were confirmed by real time PCR, immunoblotting, and
dual luciferase reporter assays. Observation of MEIS2 as a FOXC1 target and
consideration of FOXC1 as a potential target of miR-204 prompted testing the
effect of this micro RNA on expression of FOXC1 and several genes identified by
array analysis as FOXC1 target genes. It was observed that miR-204 caused
decreased expression of FOXC1 and the FOXC1 target genes CLOCK, PLEKHG5, ITGß1,
and MEIS2 in the TM cultures. Expression of CLOCK, PLEKHG5, ITGß1 has not
previously been reported to be affected by miR-204. The data suggest existence of
a complex regulatory pathway in the TM part of which includes interactions
between FOXC1, miR-204, MEIS2, and ITGß1. All these molecules are known to have
TM relevant functions, and the TM is strongly implicated in the etiology of
glaucoma.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23541832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58219. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058219. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

CoupTFI interacts with retinoic acid signaling during cortical development.

Harrison-Uy SJ(1), Siegenthaler JA, Faedo A, Rubenstein JL, Pleasure SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California, USA.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(8). doi:10.1371/annotation/f9bd989c-250a-49e9-b8e3-40aa929127d6.

We examined the role of the orphan nuclear hormone receptor CoupTFI in mediating 
cortical development downstream of meningeal retinoic acid signaling. CoupTFI is 
a regulator of cortical development known to collaborate with retinoic acid (RA) 
signaling in other systems. To examine the interaction of CoupTFI and cortical RA
signaling we utilized Foxc1-mutant mice in which defects in meningeal development
lead to alterations in cortical development due to a reduction of RA signaling.
By analyzing CoupTFI(-/-);Foxc1(H/L) double mutant mice we provide evidence that 
CoupTFI is required for RA rescue of the ventricular zone and the neurogenic
phenotypes in Foxc1-mutants. We also found that overexpression of CoupTFI in
Foxc1-mutants is sufficient to rescue the Foxc1-mutant cortical phenotype in
part. These results suggest that CoupTFI collaborates with RA signaling to
regulate both cortical ventricular zone progenitor cell behavior and cortical
neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3589372
PMID: 23472160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57501. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057501. Epub 2013 Feb 27.

ß-catenin is essential for efficient in vitro premyogenic mesoderm formation but 
can be partially compensated by retinoic acid signalling.

Wong J(1), Mehta V, Voronova A, Coutu J, Ryan T, Shelton M, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada.

Previous studies have shown that P19 cells expressing a dominant negative
ß-catenin mutant (ß-cat/EnR) cannot undergo myogenic differentiation in the
presence or absence of muscle-inducing levels of retinoic acid (RA). While RA
could upregulate premyogenic mesoderm expression, including Pax3/7 and Meox1,
only Pax3/7 and Gli2 could be upregulated by RA in the presence of ß-cat/EnR.
However, the use of a dominant negative construct that cannot be compensated by
other factors is limiting due to the possibility of negative chromatin
remodelling overriding compensatory mechanisms. In this study, we set out to
determine if ß-catenin function is essential for myogenesis with and without RA, 
by creating P19 cells with reduced ß-catenin transcriptional activity using an
shRNA approach, termed P19[shß-cat] cells. The loss of ß-catenin resulted in a
reduction of skeletal myogenesis in the absence of RA as early as premyogenic
mesoderm, with the loss of Pax3/7, Eya2, Six1, Meox1, Gli2, Foxc1/2, and Sox7
transcript levels. Chromatin immunoprecipitation identified an association of
ß-catenin with the promoter region of the Sox7 gene. Differentiation of
P19[shß-cat] cells in the presence of RA resulted in the upregulation or lack of 
repression of all of the precursor genes, on day 5 and/or 9, with the exception
of Foxc2. However, expression of Sox7, Gli2, the myogenic regulatory factors and 
terminal differentiation markers remained inhibited on day 9 and overall skeletal
myogenesis was reduced. Thus, ß-catenin is essential for in vitro formation of
premyogenic mesoderm, leading to skeletal myogenesis. RA can at least partially
compensate for the loss of ß-catenin in the expression of many myogenic precursor
genes, but not for myoblast gene expression or overall myogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3583846
PMID: 23460868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Apr 15;19(8):1960-71. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3260.
Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Copy number aberrations of genes regulating normal thymus development in thymic
epithelial tumors.

Petrini I(1), Wang Y, Zucali PA, Lee HS, Pham T, Voeller D, Meltzer PS, Giaccone 
G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Branch; Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

PURPOSES: To determine whether the deregulation of genes relevant for normal
thymus development can contribute to the biology of thymic epithelial tumors
(TET).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using array comparative genomic hybridization, we evaluated 
the copy number aberrations of genes regulating thymus development. The
expression of genes most commonly involved in copy number aberrations was
evaluated by immunohistochemistry and correlated with patients' outcome.
Correlation between FOXC1 copy number loss and gene expression was determined in 
a confirmation cohort. Cell lines were used to test the role of FOXC1 in tumors.
RESULTS: Among 31 thymus development-related genes, PBX1 copy number gain and
FOXC1 copy number loss were presented in 43.0% and 39.5% of the tumors,
respectively. Immunohistochemistry on a series of 132 TETs, including those
evaluated by comparative genomic hybridization, revealed a correlation between
protein expression and copy number status only for FOXC1 but not for PBX1.
Patients with FOXC1-negative tumors had a shorter time to progression and a trend
for a shorter disease-related survival. The correlation between FOXC1 copy number
loss and mRNA expression was confirmed in a separate cohort of 27 TETs. Ectopic
FOXC1 expression attenuated anchorage-independent cell growth and cell migration 
in vitro.
CONCLUSION: Our data support a tumor suppressor role of FOXC1 in TETs.

PMCID: PMC3630263
PMID: 23444221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Mar 11;54(3):1829-37. doi: 10.1167/iovs.12-11477.

Targeted overexpression of TGF-a in the corneal epithelium of adult transgenic
mice induces changes in anterior segment morphology and activates noncanonical
Wnt signaling.

Yuan Y(1), Yeh LK, Liu H, Yamanaka O, Hardie WD, Kao WW, Liu CY.

Author information: 
(1)Crawley Vision Research Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, College of
Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

PURPOSE: Transforming growth factor-alpha (TGF-a) transduces its signal through
the epidermal growth factor receptor and is essential for corneal epithelial
homeostasis. Previous studies have demonstrated that overexpression of TGF-a in
the developing eye leads to anterior segment dysgenesis. However, the underlying 
mechanisms remain unclear. Here we examined the effects of TGF-a overexpression
on adult ocular surface homeostasis.
METHODS: Binary Tet-On transgenic Krt12(rtTA)/tet-O-TGF-a mice were subjected to 
doxycycline (Dox) induction to overexpress TGF-a in the corneal epithelium.
Intraocular pressure (IOP) was measured by noninvasive tonometry. The enucleated 
eyes of the experimental mice were subjected to histopathology,
immunohistochemistry, and biochemistry examination.
RESULTS: Histologic and immunofluorescent examination showed that
double-transgenic mice overexpressing TGF-a manifested peripheral anterior
synechiae. Elevation of IOP, activation of glial cells, and loss of retinal
ganglion cells were also observed. Quantitative real-time PCR revealed that the
expressions of genes (RXRa, PITX2, and FOXC1) related to anterior segment
dysgenesis were downregulated. Canonical Wnt signaling was suppressed, whereas
noncanonical Wnt ligands (Wnt4 and Wnt5a) were upregulated. Increased myosin
light chain phosphorylation suggested that noncanonical Wnt signaling is
activated in affected eyes.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of TGF-a in the corneal epithelium induces changes in
anterior segment morphology. Corneal endothelial abnormalities are associated
with the activation of the noncanonical Wnt and RhoA/ROCK signaling axis,
indicating a potential application of RhoA/ROCK inhibitors as a therapeutic
strategy for certain types of secondary angle-closure glaucoma.

PMCID: PMC3626521
PMID: 23412089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Vis. 2013;19:78-84. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Screening of the LTBP2 gene in a north Indian population with primary congenital 
glaucoma.

Mohanty K(1), Tanwar M, Dada R, Dada T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, Department of Anatomy, All
India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.

PURPOSE: Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG), a severe form of glaucoma that
presents early in life, is an autosomal recessive eye disorder that results from 
defects in anterior eye segment. Null mutations in LTBP2 were reported in
patients with PCG in Pakistani and Iranian families. This study was aimed to
identify the mutation profile of the LTBP2 gene in north Indian patients with
PCG.
METHODS: After ethical clearance, 54 unrelated patients with PCG who were either 
negative or heterozygous for MYOC, CYP1B1, and FOXC1 mutations and 50 ethnically 
matched non-glaucomatous controls were recruited for the study. PCG diagnosis was
established by the presence of buphthalmos in at least one affected eye and
associated high intraocular pressure before the age of 3 years. LTBP2 was
screened in genomic blood DNA for mutations, with PCR and direct sequencing of
PCR amplified fragments.
RESULTS: We observed one intronic single nucleotide polymorphism (rs3742793)
between exons 6 and 7 in the LTBP2 gene in 18 patients with PCG. This nucleotide 
change resulted in cytosine (C) being replaced by guanosine (G) at position
g.75070493. No pathogenic variants were identified in the LTBP2 gene in our
cohort of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: LTBP2 gene mutations are not involved in the pathogenesis of primary
congenital glaucoma in our patients. Thus, it is important to screen other
glaucoma-associated loci and genes for involvement in congenital glaucoma in
cases that are either negative or heterozygous for MYOC, CYP1B1, and FOXC1
mutations to have better insight into the disease pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3559091
PMID: 23378721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Science. 2013 Feb 1;339(6119):580-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1228522.

Circulating breast tumor cells exhibit dynamic changes in epithelial and
mesenchymal composition.

Yu M(1), Bardia A, Wittner BS, Stott SL, Smas ME, Ting DT, Isakoff SJ, Ciciliano 
JC, Wells MN, Shah AM, Concannon KF, Donaldson MC, Sequist LV, Brachtel E, Sgroi 
D, Baselga J, Ramaswamy S, Toner M, Haber DA, Maheswaran S.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Harvard Medical School,
Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2013 Apr;10(4):184.
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Mar 18;23(3):272-3.
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2013 Mar;13(3):148.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of adherent epithelial cells to a
migratory mesenchymal state has been implicated in tumor metastasis in
preclinical models. To investigate its role in human cancer, we characterized EMT
in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) from breast cancer patients. Rare primary tumor
cells simultaneously expressed mesenchymal and epithelial markers, but
mesenchymal cells were highly enriched in CTCs. Serial CTC monitoring in 11
patients suggested an association of mesenchymal CTCs with disease progression.
In an index patient, reversible shifts between these cell fates accompanied each 
cycle of response to therapy and disease progression. Mesenchymal CTCs occurred
as both single cells and multicellular clusters, expressing known EMT regulators,
including transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß pathway components and the FOXC1
transcription factor. These data support a role for EMT in the blood-borne
dissemination of human breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3760262
PMID: 23372014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J AAPOS. 2013 Feb;17(1):105-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2012.09.011. Epub 2013 Jan
28.

Congenital glaucoma with acquired peripheral circumferential iris degeneration.

Khan AO(1), Aldahmesh MA, Mohamed JY, Alkuraya FS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. arif.khan@mssm.edu

Iris anomalies associated with congenital or early-childhood glaucoma include
stable primary developmental abnormalities such as those associated with the
Axenfeld-Rieger spectrum and aniridia. Secondary generalized iris atrophy from
uncontrolled intraocular pressure is another potential iris finding in pediatric 
glaucoma. We document an unusual pattern of acquired peripheral circumferential
iris degeneration in 2 unrelated children with otherwise-controlled congenital
glaucoma. Genetic testing revealed a common homozygous CYP1B1 mutation in one
(p.Gly61Glu) and a novel heterozygous FOXC1 deletion in the other
(p.Tyr81_Pro95del).

Copyright © 2013 American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus.
Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23363883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53496. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053496. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

Co-culture of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells with human osteblasts favours
mono/macrophage differentiation at the expense of the erythroid lineage.

Salati S(1), Lisignoli G, Manferdini C, Pennucci V, Zini R, Bianchi E, Norfo R,
Facchini A, Ferrari S, Manfredini R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine Stefano Ferrari, University of Modena and
Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are located in the bone marrow in a specific
microenvironment referred as the hematopoietic stem cell niche, where HSCs
interact with a variety of stromal cells. Though several components of the stem
cell niche have been identified, the regulatory mechanisms through which such
components regulate the stem cell fate are still unknown. In order to address
this issue, we investigated how osteoblasts (OBs) can affect the molecular and
functional phenotype of Hematopoietic Stem/Progenitor Cells (HSPCs) and vice
versa. For this purpose, human CD34+ cells were cultured in direct contact with
primary human OBs. Our data showed that CD34+ cells cultured with OBs give rise
to higher total cell numbers, produce more CFUs and maintain a higher percentage 
of CD34+CD38- cells compared to control culture. Moreover, clonogenic assay and
long-term culture results showed that co-culture with OBs induces a strong
increase in mono/macrophage precursors coupled to a decrease in the erythroid
ones. Finally, gene expression profiling (GEP) allowed us to study which
signalling pathways were activated in the hematopoietic cell fraction and in the 
stromal cell compartment after coculture. Such analysis allowed us to identify
several cytokine-receptor networks, such as WNT pathway, and transcription
factors, as TWIST1 and FOXC1, that could be activated by co-culture with OBs and 
could be responsible for the biological effects reported above. Altogether our
results indicate that OBs are able to affect HPSCs on 2 different levels: on one 
side, they increase the immature progenitor pool in vitro, on the other side,
they favor the expansion of the mono/macrophage precursors at the expense of the 
erythroid lineage.

PMCID: PMC3551919
PMID: 23349713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Development. 2013 Mar;140(5):1034-44. doi: 10.1242/dev.085225. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Foxc1 controls the growth of the murine frontal bone rudiment by direct
regulation of a Bmp response threshold of Msx2.

Sun J(1), Ishii M, Ting MC, Maxson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Cancer Hospital,
University of Southern California Keck School of Medicine, 1441 Eastlake Avenue, 
Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA.

The mammalian skull vault consists of several intricately patterned bones that
grow in close coordination. The growth of these bones depends on the precise
regulation of the migration and differentiation of osteogenic cells from
undifferentiated precursor cells located above the eye. Here, we demonstrate a
role for Foxc1 in modulating the influence of Bmp signaling on the expression of 
Msx2 and the specification of these cells. Inactivation of Foxc1 results in a
dramatic reduction in skull vault growth and causes an expansion of Msx2
expression and Bmp signaling into the area occupied by undifferentiated precursor
cells. Foxc1 interacts directly with a Bmp responsive element in an enhancer
upstream of Msx2, and acts to reduce the occupancy of P-Smad1/5/8. We propose
that Foxc1 sets a threshold for the Bmp-dependent activation of Msx2, thus
controlling the differentiation of osteogenic precursor cells and the rate and
pattern of calvarial bone development.

PMCID: PMC3583041
PMID: 23344708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. J Curr Glaucoma Pract. 2013 Jan-Apr;7(1):25-35. doi:
10.5005/jp-journals-10008-1133. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Molecular Diagnostics and Genetic Counseling in Primary Congenital Glaucoma.

Faiq M(1), Mohanty K(1), Dada R(1), Dada T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, Department of Anatomy, All
India Institute of Medical Sciences New Delhi, India. (2)Glaucoma Services, Dr RP
Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New
Delhi, India.

Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is a childhood irreversible blinding disorder
with onset at birth or in the first year of life. It is characterized by the
classical traid of symptoms viz. epiphora (excessive tearing), photophobia
(hypersensitivity to light) and blepharospasm (inflammation of eyelids). The only
anatomical defect seen in PCG is trabecular meshwork dysgenesis. PCG shows
autosomal recessive mode of inheritance with considerable number of sporadic
cases. The etiology of this disease has not been fully understood but some genes 
like CYP1B1, MYOC, FOXC1, LTBP2 have been implicated. Various chromosomal
aberrations and mutations in mitochondrial genome have also been reported.
Molecular biology has developed novel techniques in order to do genetic and
biochemical characterization of many genetic disorders including PCG. Techniques 
like polymerase chain reaction, single strand conformational polymorphism and
sequencing are already in use for diagnosis of PCG and other techniques like
protein truncation testing and functional genomics are beginning to find their
way into molecular workout of this disorder. In the light of its genetic
etiology, it is important to develop methods for genetic counseling for the
patients and their families so as to bring down its incidence. In this review, we
ought to develop a genetic insight into PCG with possible use of molecular
biology and functional genomics in understanding the disease etiology,
pathogenesis, pathology and mechanism of inheritance. We will also discuss the
possibilities and use of genetic counseling in this disease. How to cite this
article: Faiq M, Mohanty K, Dada R, Dada T. Molecular Diagnostics and Genetic
Counseling in Primary Congenital Glaucoma. J Current Glau Prac 2013;7(1):25-35.

PMCID: PMC4741126
PMID: 26997777  [PubMed]


110. Bull Acad Natl Med. 2013 Jan;197(1):133-9; discussion 140-1.

[From congenital glaucoma to chronic open angle glaucoma in adulthood: a clinical
and genetic continuum].

[Article in French]

Dufier JL, Rozet JM, Kaplan J, Roche O.

Congenital glaucoma, a true hydrocephalus of the eye, is defined by ocular
hypertension resulting in buphthalmos in children up to three years old, the
elasticity of the eye wall allowing its expansion. Juvenile glaucoma in teenagers
and chronic glaucoma in adults do not alter the external aspect of the eye, as
the eyeball has lost its elasticity. However, chronic ocular hypertension always 
causes ischemic excavation of the optic nerve head, leading to insidious
amputation of the visual field and, potentially, blindness. Like most
ophthalmological disorders, the different types of glaucoma have been shown to be
genetically determined, and alterations in several genes have been identified.
These altered genes can be expressed more or less early in life, suggesting a
role of modifier genes. The role of CYP1B1 alterations in classic primary
congenital glaucoma is well known, as is the role of PITX2, FOXC1, PAX6 and LOXC1
alterations in secondary congenital glaucoma due to iridogoniodysgenesis, and of 
MYOC alterations in the genesis of chronic glaucoma in adulthood. An outbred
family carrying CYP1B1 mutations in the compound heterozygous state includes two 
sibs with primary congenital glaucoma and two others who developed chronic
glaucoma in adulthood.

PMID: 24672985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Tumour Biol. 2013 Apr;34(2):941-6. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0629-3. Epub 2012 Dec 
22.

High expression of FOXC1 is associated with poor clinical outcome in non-small
cell lung cancer patients.

Wei LX(1), Zhou RS, Xu HF, Wang JY, Yuan MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Tangdu Hospital, Fourth Military Medical
University, No. 1, Xinsi Rd, Xi'an, 710038, China.

The aim of this study was to detect FOXC1 expression in human non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) and to analyze its association with prognosis of NSCLC patients.
Expressional levels of FOXC1 mRNA and protein in 30 cases of NSCLC and
corresponding non-tumor tissue samples were examined by quantitative real-time
PCR and Western blotting. Immunohistochemistry was performed to detect the
expression of FOXC1 in 125 NSCLC tissues. We found that the expression levels of 
FOXC1 mRNA and protein in NSCLC tissues were significantly higher than those in
corresponding non-tumor tissues. High-level FOXC1 expression was correlated with 
poor tumor differentiation, tumor-node-metastasis stage, and lymph node
metastasis. Patients with high expression levels of FOXC1 showed lower overall
survival rate than those with low expression levels. Multivariate analysis showed
that high FOXC1 protein expression was an independent prognostic factor for NSCLC
patients. Our study suggests that over-expression of FOXC1 may play an important 
role in the progression of NSCLC, and FOXC1 expression may offer a valuable
marker for predicting the outcome of patients with NSCLC.

PMID: 23264086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Tumour Biol. 2013 Apr;34(2):853-8. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0617-7. Epub 2012 Dec 
16.

High level of FOXC1 expression is associated with poor prognosis in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma.

Wang L(1), Gu F, Liu CY, Wang RJ, Li J, Xu JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First People's Hospital of Changshu City,
Changshu Hospital Affiliated to Soochow University, Changshu, 215500, Jiangsu
Province, China.

Accumulating evidence for overexpression of FOXC1 in various types of human
cancer suggests that it plays a key role in tumor biology. However, little is
known about the function of FOXC1 in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA). This
study was to investigate the expression profile of FOXC1 in PDA and its clinical 
significance. We detected the expression profile of FOXC1 mRNA and protein in PDA
tissue and in corresponding normal tissue by quantitative reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction and western blotting. Immunohistochemistry was also
used in the detection of FOXC1 protein expression. The clinicopathological
implications of these proteins were analyzed statistically. Survival analysis was
performed to assess prognostic significance. FOXC1 mRNA was overexpressed in PDA 
tissue when compared with corresponding normal tissue, so was FOXC1 protein. The 
overexpression of FOXC1 was significantly associated with the degree of clinical 
stage (p < 0.001), histological differentiation (p = 0.002), and lymph node
metastases (p < 0.001). Survival analysis revealed that overexpression of FOXC1
is associated with a poorer prognosis. These observations suggest that FOXC1
plays a key role in PDA and therefore may provide an opportunity for developing a
novel therapeutic target as well as a prognostic marker in PDA.

PMID: 23242609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jan;161A(1):114-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35697. Epub 2012
Dec 14.

Cardiac anomalies in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome due to a novel FOXC1 mutation.

Gripp KW(1), Hopkins E, Jenny K, Thacker D, Salvin J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, A. I. DuPont Hospital for Children, Wilmington, 
Delaware. kgripp@nemours.org.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is an autosomal dominant condition characterized
by ophthalmologic anterior segment abnormalities and extraocular findings
including dental anomalies and redundant periumbilical skin. Intragenic mutations
in the homeobox gene PITX2 or the transcription factor encoding FOXC1 were
identified, and genomic rearrangements encompassing either gene also cause ARS. A
molecular etiology is identified in 40-60%. Extraocular anomalies occur more
often with intragenic PITX2 than FOXC1 mutations. We report on a patient with
infantile glaucoma presenting at age 21 months with congestive heart failure due 
to a dysplastic arcade mitral valve necessitating valve replacement, and mildly
hypoplastic left ventricular outflow tract and aortic arch. Family history
included early onset glaucoma in four relatives; congenital hip dysplasia
requiring surgery in three; and an atrial septal defect in the affected maternal 
grandmother. Despite the absence of dental or umbilical abnormalities, anterior
chamber abnormalities consistent with ARS were present in affected individuals.
Molecular testing revealed a novel FOXC1 mutation (c.508C>T; p.Arg170Trp) in the 
proband and his affected mother; other family members were unavailable. A
literature review revealed four reports of congenital heart disease associated
with intragenic FOXC1 mutations, and none with intragenic PITX2 mutations.
Previously, mouse studies showed Foxc1 (Mf1) expression in the developing valves 
and atrial septum, supporting a causal relationship of FOXC1 mutations for valvar
anomalies and ASD. Hip dysplasia in three family members suggests a role for
FOXC1 in the femoral head dysplasia of de Hauwere syndrome with 6p25 deletions.
Further reports of clinical and molecular diagnoses will clarify
genotype-phenotype correlation.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23239455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Vis. 2012;18:2770-82. Epub 2012 Nov 22.

Absence of NR2E1 mutations in patients with aniridia.

Corso-Díaz X(1), Borrie AE, Bonaguro R, Schuetz JM, Rosenberg T, Jensen H, Brooks
BP, Macdonald IM, Pasutto F, Walter MA, Grønskov K, Brooks-Wilson A, Simpson EM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics at the Child & Family Research 
Institute, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

PURPOSE: Nuclear receptor 2E1 (NR2E1) is a transcription factor with many roles
during eye development and thus may be responsible for the occurrence of certain 
congenital eye disorders in humans. To test this hypothesis, we screened NR2E1
for candidate mutations in patients with aniridia and other congenital ocular
malformations (anterior segment dysgenesis, congenital optic nerve malformation, 
and microphthalmia).
METHODS: The NR2E1 coding region, 5' and 3' untranslated regions (UTRs), exon
flanking regions including consensus splice sites, and six evolutionarily
conserved non-coding candidate regulatory regions were analyzed by sequencing 58 
probands with aniridia of whom 42 were negative for PAX6 mutations. Nineteen
probands with anterior segment dysgenesis, one proband with optic nerve
malformation, and two probands with microphthalmia were also sequenced. The
control population comprised 376 healthy individuals. All sequences were analyzed
against the GenBank sequence AL078596.8 for NR2E1. In addition, the coding region
and flanking intronic sequences of FOXE3, FOXC1, PITX2, CYP1B1, PAX6, and B3GALTL
were sequenced in one patient and his relatives.
RESULTS: Sequencing analysis showed 17 NR2E1 variants including two novel rare
non-coding variants (g.-1507G>A, g.14258C>T), and one novel rare coding variant
(p.Arg274Gly). The latter was present in a male diagnosed with Peters' anomaly
who subsequently was found to have a known causative mutation for Peters' plus
syndrome in B3GALTL (c.660+1G>A). In addition, the NR2E1 novel rare variant
Arg274Gly was present in the unaffected mother of the patient but absent in 746
control chromosomes.
CONCLUSIONS: We eliminated a major role for NR2E1 regulatory and coding mutations
in aniridia and found a novel rare coding variant in NR2E1. In addition, we found
no coding region variation in the control population for NR2E1, which further
supports its previously reported high level of conservation and low genetic
diversity. Future NR2E1 studies in ocular disease groups such as those involving 
retinal and optic nerve abnormalities should be undertaken to determine whether
NR2E1 plays a role in these conditions.

PMCID: PMC3513187
PMID: 23213277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49095. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049095. Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Initiation of early osteoblast differentiation events through the direct
transcriptional regulation of Msx2 by FOXC1.

Mirzayans F(1), Lavy R, Penner-Chea J, Berry FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

Hierarchal transcriptional regulatory networks function to control the correct
spatiotemporal patterning of the mammalian skeletal system. One such factor, the 
forkhead box transcription factor FOXC1 is necessary for the correct formation of
the axial and craniofacial skeleton. Previous studies have demonstrated that the 
frontal and parietal bones of the skull fail to develop in mice deficient for
Foxc1. Furthermore expression of the Msx2 homeobox gene, an essential regulator
of calvarial bone development is absent in the skull mesenchymal progenitors of
Foxc1 mutant mice. Thus we sought to determine whether Msx2 was a direct target
of FOXC1 transcriptional regulation. Here, we demonstrate that elevated
expression of FOXC1 can increase endogenous Msx2 mRNA levels. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments reveal that FOXC1 occupies a conserved element in
the MSX2 promoter. Using a luciferase reporter assay, we demonstrate that FOXC1
can stimulate the activity of the both human and mouse MSX2 promoters. We also
report that reducing FOXC1 levels by RNA interference leads to a decrease in MSX2
expression. Finally, we demonstrate that heterologous expression of Foxc1 in
C2C12 cells results in elevated alkaline phosphatase activity and increased
expression of Runx2 and Msx2. These data indicate that Foxc1 expression leads to 
a similar enhanced osteogenic differentiation phenotype as observed with Msx2
overexpression. Together these findings suggest that a Foxc1->Msx2 regulatory
network functions in the initial stages of osteoblast differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3492307
PMID: 23145080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Med Genet. 2012 Oct;49(10):650-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101135.

De novo copy number variants are associated with congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Yu L(1), Wynn J, Ma L, Guha S, Mychaliska GB, Crombleholme TM, Azarow KS, Lim FY,
Chung DH, Potoka D, Warner BW, Bucher B, LeDuc CA, Costa K, Stolar C, Aspelund G,
Arkovitz MS, Chung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New
York 10032, USA.

BACKGROUND: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a common birth defect with
significant morbidity and mortality. Although the aetiology of CDH remains poorly
understood, studies from animal models and patients with CDH suggest that genetic
factors play an important role in the development of CDH. Chromosomal anomalies
have been reported in CDH.
METHODS: In this study, the authors investigated the frequency of chromosomal
anomalies and copy number variants (CNVs) in 256 parent-child trios of CDH using 
clinical conventional cytogenetic and microarray analysis. The authors also
selected a set of CDH related training genes to prioritise the genes in those
segmental aneuploidies and identified the genes and gene sets that may contribute
to the aetiology of CDH.
RESULTS: The authors identified chromosomal anomalies in 16 patients (6.3%) of
the series including three aneuploidies, two unbalanced translocation, and 11
patients with de novo CNVs ranging in size from 95 kb to 104.6 Mb. The authors
prioritised the genes in the CNV segments and identified KCNA2, LMNA, CACNA1S,
MYOG, HLX, LBR, AGT, GATA4, SOX7, HYLS1, FOXC1, FOXF2, PDGFA, FGF6, COL4A1,
COL4A2, HOMER2, BNC1, BID, and TBX1 as genes that may be involved in diaphragm
development. Gene enrichment analysis identified the most relevant gene ontology 
categories as those involved in tissue development (p=4.4×10(-11)) or regulation 
of multicellular organismal processes (p=2.8×10(-10)) and 'receptor binding'
(p=8.7×10(-14)) and 'DNA binding transcription factor activity' (p=4.4×10(-10)).
CONCLUSIONS: The present findings support the role of chromosomal anomalies in
CDH and provide a set of candidate genes including FOXC1, FOXF2, PDGFA, FGF6,
COL4A1, COL4A2, SOX7, BNC1, BID, and TBX1 for further analysis in CDH.

PMCID: PMC3696999
PMID: 23054247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Int J Biol Sci. 2012;8(8):1130-41. Epub 2012 Sep 8.

FOXC1 contributes to microvascular invasion in primary hepatocellular carcinoma
via regulating epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Xu ZY(1), Ding SM, Zhou L, Xie HY, Chen KJ, Zhang W, Xing CY, Guo HJ, Zheng SS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Combined Multi-organ Transplantation, Ministry of Public
Health, Zhejiang Province; Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China.

The existence of microvascular invasion (MVI) formation is one of the most
important risk factors predicting poor outcome in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
and its mechanism remains largely unknown. Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition
(EMT) has been suggested to be involved in many steps of the invasion-metastasis 
cascade. To elucidate the possible contribution of EMT to MVI, we initially
evaluated the expression of 8 EMT-related transcription factors (TFs) in HCC
patients with or without MVI and found that FOXC1 expression was significantly
higher in patients with MVI than those without MVI (P < 0.05). Knockdown of FOXC1
expression in HCC cells resulted in a partial conversion of their EMT progresses,
mainly regulating the mesenchymal component. Ectopic expression of snail, twist
or TGF-ß1 could induce expression of FOXC1, but none of the expression of snail, 
twist, slug or TGF-ß was consistently down-regulated in response to FOXC1
silencing, suggesting FOXC1 might operate the downstream of other EMT regulators.
In addition, knockdown of FOXC1 expression led to cytoskeleton modification
accompanied by decreased ability of cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. 
Meanwhile, some matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) and VEGF-A were also
simultaneously down-regulated. Together, our findings demonstrate that FOXC1 is
one of candidate predictive markers of MVI, and that inhibition of FOXC1
expression can partially reverse EMT program, offering a potential molecular
therapeutic target for reducing tumor metastasis in HCC patients.

PMCID: PMC3445051
PMID: 22991501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Dev Biol. 2012 Nov 15;371(2):256-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.08.027. Epub 2012 
Aug 31.

Early transcriptional targets of MyoD link myogenesis and somitogenesis.

Maguire RJ(1), Isaacs HV, Pownall ME.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, University of York, Heslington, York, North Yorkshire YO10
5YW, UK.

In order to identify early transcriptional targets of MyoD prior to skeletal
muscle differentiation, we have undertaken a transcriptomic analysis on gastrula 
stage Xenopus embryos in which MyoD has been knocked-down. Our validated list of 
genes transcriptionally regulated by MyoD includes Esr1 and Esr2, which are known
targets of Notch signalling, and Tbx6, mesogenin, and FoxC1; these genes are all 
are known to be essential for normal somitogenesis but are expressed surprisingly
early in the mesoderm. In addition we found that MyoD is required for the
expression of myf5 in the early mesoderm, in contrast to the reverse relationship
of these two regulators in amniote somites. These data highlight a role for MyoD 
in the early mesoderm in regulating a set of genes that are essential for both
myogenesis and somitogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22954963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2013 Jan;23(1):1-4. doi: 10.1016/j.tcm.2012.08.002. Epub
2012 Aug 29.

FoxC1-dependent regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor signaling in
corneal avascularity.

Koo HY(1), Kume T.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Angiogenesis is a crucial process whereby new blood vessels are formed from
pre-existing vessels, and it occurs under both normal and pathophysiological
conditions. The process is precisely regulated through the balance between
proangiogenic and anti-angiogenic mechanisms, and many of these mechanisms have
been well-characterized through extensive research. However, little is known
about how angiogenesis is regulated at the transcriptional level. We have
recently shown that deletion of the Forkhead box (Fox) transcription factor Foxc1
in cells of neural crest (NC) lineage leads to aberrant vessel growth in the
normally avascular corneas of mice, and that the effect is cell type-specific
because the corneas of mice lacking Foxc1 expression in vascular endothelial
cells remained avascular. The NC-specific Foxc1 deletion was also associated with
elevated levels of both proangiogenic factors, such as the matrix
metalloproteases (MMPs) MMP-3, MMP-9, and MMP-19 and the angiogenic inhibitor
soluble vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 1 (sVEGFR-1). Thus, FoxC1
appears to control angiogenesis by regulating two distinct and opposing
mechanisms; if so, vascular development could be determined, at least in part, by
a competitive balance between proangiogenic and anti-angiogenic FoxC1-regulated
pathways. In this review, we describe the mechanisms by which FoxC1 regulates
vessel growth and discuss how these observations could contribute to a more
complete understanding of the role of FoxC1 in pathological angiogenesis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3525780
PMID: 22939989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Hepatology. 2013 Feb;57(2):610-24. doi: 10.1002/hep.26029.

Overexpression of forkhead box C1 promotes tumor metastasis and indicates poor
prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xia L(1), Huang W, Tian D, Zhu H, Qi X, Chen Z, Zhang Y, Hu H, Fan D, Nie Y, Wu
K.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive
Diseases, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.

Recurrence and metastasis remain the most common causes of lethal outcomes in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) after curative resection. Thus, it is critical to 
discover the mechanisms underlying HCC metastasis. Forkhead box C1 (FoxC1), a
member of the Fox family of transcription factors, induces epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and promotes epithelial cell migration. However, the role of
FoxC1 in the progression of HCC remains unknown. Here, we report that FoxC1 plays
a critical role in HCC metastasis. FoxC1 expression was markedly higher in HCC
tissues than in adjacent noncancerous tissues. HCC patients with positive FoxC1
expression had shorter overall survival times and higher recurrence rates than
those with negative FoxC1 expression. FoxC1 expression was an independent,
significant risk factor for recurrence and survival after curative resection.
FoxC1 overexpression induced changes characteristic of EMT and an increase in HCC
cell invasion and lung metastasis. However, FoxC1 knockdown inhibited these
processes. FoxC1 transactivated Snai1 expression by directly binding to the Snai1
promoter, thereby leading to the inhibition of E-cadherin transcription.
Knockdown of Snai1 expression significantly attenuated FoxC1-enhanced invasion
and lung metastasis. FoxC1 expression was positively correlated with Snai1
expression, but inversely correlated with E-cadherin expression in human HCC
tissues. Additionally, a complementary DNA microarray, serial deletion,
site-directed mutagenesis, and a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed
that neural precursor cell expressed, developmentally down-regulated 9 (NEDD9),
which promotes the metastasis of HCC cells, is a direct transcriptional target of
FoxC1 and is involved in FoxC1-mediated HCC invasion and metastasis.CONCLUSIONS: 
FoxC1 may promote HCC metastasis through the induction of EMT and the
up-regulation of NEDD9 expression. Thus, FoxC1 may be a candidate prognostic
biomarker and a target for new therapies.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 22911555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Gynecol Obstet Fertil. 2012 Sep;40(9):500-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gyobfe.2012.07.018.
Epub 2012 Aug 17.

[Molecular characterization of corona radiata cells from patients with diminished
ovarian reserve].

[Article in French]

May-Panloup P(1), Ferré-L'Hôtellier V, Morinière C, Marcaillou C, Lemerle S,
Coutolleau A, Reynier P, Descamps P, Guardiola P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de biologie de la reproduction, centre hospitalier universitaire, 
49933 Angers, France. PaMayPanloup@chu-angers.fr

OBJECTIVES: Diminished ovarian reserve (DOR) is one of the causes of infertility.
In this prospective study, gene expression profiling (GEP) of corona radiata
cells (CRC) was performed to identify genes deregulated in DOR patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Microarray-based GEP of CRC isolated from eight women
undergoing IVF was performed to identify genes differentially expressed between
patients with normal ovarian reserve and DOR patients. Microfluidic-based
quantitative RT-PCR assay were used to validate selected transcripts on 40
independent patients.
RESULTS: Forty-eight transcripts were differentially expressed, including CXXC5
and FOXC1 down regulated in DOR, as well as CTGF, FSTL3, PTGS2 and SOCS2 up
regulated in DOR. According to these transcripts, two DOR patients'subgroups (DOR
Gr1 and Gr2) were identified. In DOR Gr2 patients, CITED2, CTGF, GAS-1, IRS2,
PTGS2, SOCS2, VCAN were expressed at significantly higher levels, and CXXC5,
FOXC1, GBP2 and ZMIZ1 at significantly lower level. Eleven of those genes are
transcriptional targets of Estrogens and higher baseline oestradiol levels were
observed in DOR Gr2 patients (P<0.006).
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION: Twelve genes deregulated in CRC of DOR patients were
identified, which could be involved in DOR pathogenesis. The distinction of a
particular subgroup of DOR patients suggests the possibility of deregulation of
estrogen response genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22906700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Oct;158A(10):2430-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35548. Epub 2012 
Aug 17.

Pre- and postnatal phenotype of 6p25 deletions involving the FOXC1 gene.

Delahaye A(1), Khung-Savatovsky S, Aboura A, Guimiot F, Drunat S, Alessandri JL, 
Gérard M, Bitoun P, Boumendil J, Robin S, Huel C, Guilherme R, Serero S, Gressens
P, Elion J, Verloes A, Benzacken B, Delezoide AL, Pipiras E.

Author information: 
(1)AP-HP, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Service d'Histologie, Embryologie, et
Cytogénétique, Bondy, France. andree.delahaye@jvr.aphp.fr

FOXC1 deletion, duplication, and mutations are associated with Axenfeld-Rieger
anomaly, and Dandy-Walker malformation spectrum. We describe the clinical
history, physical findings, and available brain imaging studies in three fetuses,
two children, and one adult with 6p25 deletions encompassing FOXC1. Various
combinations of ocular and cerebellar malformations were found. In all three
fetuses, necropsy including detailed microscopic assessments of the eyes and
brains showed ocular anterior segment dysgenesis suggestive of Axenfeld-Rieger
anomaly. Five 6p25 deletions were terminal, including two derived from inherited 
reciprocal translocations; the remaining 6p25 deletion was interstitial. The size
and breakpoints of these deletions were characterized using comparative genomic
hybridization arrays. All six deletions included FOXC1. Our data confirm that
FOXC1 haploinsufficiency plays a major role in the phenotype of patients with
6p25 deletions. Histopathological features of Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly were
clearly identifiable before the beginning of the third-trimester of gestation.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22903608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e42378. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042378. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

Derivation of corneal endothelial cell-like cells from rat neural crest cells in 
vitro.

Ju C(1), Zhang K, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2012;7(10).
doi:10.1371/annotation/931e92e2-ee2d-4f4f-b0b6-89a7a3f8fbad.

The aim of this study was to investigate the feasibility of inducing rat neural
crest cells (NCC) to differentiate to functional corneal endothelial cell
(CEC)-like cells in vitro. Rat NCC were induced with adult CEC-derived
conditioned medium. Immunofluorescence, flow cytometry and real time RT-PCR assay
were used to detect expression of the corneal endothelium differentiation marker 
N-cadherin and transcription factors FoxC1 and Pitx2. CFDA SE-labeled CEC-like
cells were transplanted to the corneal endothelium of a rat corneal endothelium
deficiency model, and an eye-down position was maintained for 24 hours to allow
cell attachment. The animals were observed for as long as 2 months after surgery 
and underwent clinical and histological examination. Spindle-like NCC turned to
polygonal CEC-like after induction and expressed N-cadherin, FoxC1, Pitx2, zonula
occludens-1 and sodium-potassium pump Na(+)/K(+) ATPase. The corneas of the
experimental group were much clearer than those of the control group and the mean
corneal thickness in the experimental group was significantly less than in the
control group7, 14, 21 and 28 days after surgery. Confocal microscopy through
focusing and histological analysis confirmed that green fluorescence-positive
CEC-like cells formed a monolayer covering the Descemet's membrane in the
experimental group. In conclusion, CEC-like cells derived from NCCs displayed
characters of native CEC, and the induction protocol provides guidance for future
human CEC induction from NCC.

PMCID: PMC3409168
PMID: 22860120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Vis. 2012;18:1526-39. Epub 2012 Jun 13.

Common TGFß2, BMP4, and FOXC1 variants are not associated with primary open-angle
glaucoma.

Park S(1), Jamshidi Y, Vaideanu D, Fraser S, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)Tennent Institute of Ophthalmology, Gartnavel General Hospital, Glasgow, UK.

PURPOSE: Primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is a common but complex disease with 
a strong genetic component. Notably, few genes have been robustly associated with
POAG. An obvious group of genes to test as susceptibility factors for POAG are
the developmental genes forkhead box C1 (FOXC1), transforming growth factor-beta 
2 (TGFß2), and bone morphogenic protein 4 (BMP4). These genes are known to play
important roles in the normal morphogenesis of the anterior segment and/or have
been implicated in intra-ocular pressure (IOP) regulation and trabecular meshwork
function. This study investigates the role of FOXC1, TGFß2, and BMP4 in POAG.
METHODS: The contribution of common genetic variation at the FOXC1, TGFß2, and
BMP4 loci to risk of POAG was investigated in a case-control association study in
330 British Caucasian individuals comprised of 272 high-tension glaucoma (HTG)
and 58 ocular hypertension (OHT), and 276 matched controls.
RESULTS: All the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were in Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium and genotyping success rate was >92% for all SNPs. With the exception
of a weak association between the BMP4 tagging SNP rs2761884 and the combined
patient group HTG+OHT that did not withstand permutation testing (uncorrected
p=0.0400, corrected p=0.1320), no associations (p<0.05) were identified between
the patient groups (HTG and OHT) and FOXC1, TGFß2, and BMP4 alleles and
haplotypes compared to the control group.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first association analysis of FOXC1, TGFß2, and BMP4 and
POAG. These genes were selected as candidate genes for POAG because of their
biologic roles. No significant associations were identified between FOXC1, TGFß2,
and BMP4 alleles and haplotypes and POAG. The lack of association suggests that
common variation in these genes do not have a significant role in the
pathogenesis of POAG among British Caucasian subjects.

PMCID: PMC3380945
PMID: 22736943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Aug;26(8):1268-77. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1305. Epub 2012 Jun 
25.

COUP-TFII is a major regulator of cell cycle and Notch signaling pathways.

Chen X(1), Qin J, Cheng CM, Tsai MJ, Tsai SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor (COUP-TF)II has been
shown to play a major role in endothelial cell growth and regulation of the Notch
signaling pathway to confer vein identity. However, the underlying mechanisms for
COUP-TFII regulation in these pathways remain to be defined. Here we employed a
genomic approach by using microarray analysis to identify downstream targets in
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) cells and found the expression of 
many genes in the cell cycle pathway and Notch signaling pathway are
significantly altered in the COUP-TFII-depleted cells. The expression of E2F
transcription factor 1 (E2F1), a key transcription factor that regulates the
expression of cell cycle regulators, is reduced in the absence of COUP-TFII.
Using chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments, we showed that COUP-TFII
directly regulates the expression of E2F1 through tethering to the Sp1 binding
sites in the promoter of E2F1 to modulate cell proliferation. In addition, we
also demonstrate that Foxc1 and Np-1, two upstream genes of Notch signaling and
Hey2, a downstream effector of Notch signaling, are direct targets of COUP-TFII. 
Furthermore, COUP-TFII suppresses the expression of EphrinB2, an arterial marker,
while enhancing the expression of ephrin receptor B4, a venous marker, supporting
our in vivo findings that COUP-TFII regulates vein identity by suppressing the
Notch signal pathway.

PMCID: PMC3404301
PMID: 22734039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jul;158A(7):1793-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35416. Epub 2012
Jun 7.

Periventricular heterotopia with white matter abnormalities associated with 6p25 
deletion.

Cellini E(1), Disciglio V, Novara F, Barkovich JA, Mencarelli MA, Hayek J,
Renieri A, Zuffardi O, Guerrini R.

Author information: 
(1)Child Neurology Unit, Children's Hospital A. Meyer-University of Florence,
Florence, Italy.

PMID: 22678982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jul 13;287(29):24631-40. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.375865. Epub
2012 May 29.

The forkhead box transcription factor FOXC1 promotes breast cancer invasion by
inducing matrix metalloprotease 7 (MMP7) expression.

Sizemore ST(1), Keri RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Case Western Reserve University School of
Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA.

Therapeutic options for treatment of basal-like breast cancers are limited and
identification of molecular targets for novel therapies to treat this aggressive 
cancer is urgently needed. Recently, FOXC1, a forkhead box transcription factor, 
was identified as a functionally important biomarker of breast cancer
aggressiveness and the basal-like breast cancer subtype. However, the mechanism
through which FOXC1 controls aggressiveness of basal-like breast cancer remains
to be elucidated. Here, we identify matrix metalloprotease 7 (MMP7) as a key
downstream effector of FOXC1-mediated invasiveness. Expression of FOXC1 and MMP7 
is significantly correlated in breast cancer samples and cell lines at both the
mRNA and protein levels. Transient expression of FOXC1 in nontransformed mammary 
epithelial cell lines resulted in significantly increased expression of MMP7 and 
an MMP7-dependent increase in invasiveness. In reciprocal experiments, silencing 
endogenous FOXC1 in basal-like breast cancer cell lines resulted in decreased
expression of MMP7 without decreased expression of other matrix
metalloproteinases. We also demonstrate that elevated co-expression of FOXC1 and 
MMP7 is an independent predictor of patient outcome in multivariate analyses of
two breast cancer patient cohorts. Together, our findings identify MMP7 as a
novel mechanism through which FOXC1 may regulate the basal-like breast cancer
invasive phenotype and the propensity of these cancers to metastasize.
Furthermore, our findings demonstrate for the first time a correlation between
MMP7 expression and basal-like breast cancers, suggesting that MMP7 may be a
useful therapeutic target for treatment of this disease.

PMCID: PMC3397891
PMID: 22645147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e33788. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033788. Epub 2012 May 7.

Single cell profiling of circulating tumor cells: transcriptional heterogeneity
and diversity from breast cancer cell lines.

Powell AA(1), Talasaz AH, Zhang H, Coram MA, Reddy A, Deng G, Telli ML, Advani
RH, Carlson RW, Mollick JA, Sheth S, Kurian AW, Ford JM, Stockdale FE, Quake SR, 
Pease RF, Mindrinos MN, Bhanot G, Dairkee SH, Davis RW, Jeffrey SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA.

Comment in
    Future Oncol. 2012 Oct;8(10):1253-6.

BACKGROUND: To improve cancer therapy, it is critical to target metastasizing
cells. Circulating tumor cells (CTCs) are rare cells found in the blood of
patients with solid tumors and may play a key role in cancer dissemination.
Uncovering CTC phenotypes offers a potential avenue to inform treatment. However,
CTC transcriptional profiling is limited by leukocyte contamination; an approach 
to surmount this problem is single cell analysis. Here we demonstrate feasibility
of performing high dimensional single CTC profiling, providing early insight into
CTC heterogeneity and allowing comparisons to breast cancer cell lines widely
used for drug discovery.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We purified CTCs using the MagSweeper, an
immunomagnetic enrichment device that isolates live tumor cells from
unfractionated blood. CTCs that met stringent criteria for further analysis were 
obtained from 70% (14/20) of primary and 70% (21/30) of metastatic breast cancer 
patients; none were captured from patients with non-epithelial cancer (n = 20) or
healthy subjects (n = 25). Microfluidic-based single cell transcriptional
profiling of 87 cancer-associated and reference genes showed heterogeneity among 
individual CTCs, separating them into two major subgroups, based on 31 highly
expressed genes. In contrast, single cells from seven breast cancer cell lines
were tightly clustered together by sample ID and ER status. CTC profiles were
distinct from those of cancer cell lines, questioning the suitability of such
lines for drug discovery efforts for late stage cancer therapy.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: For the first time, we directly measured high
dimensional gene expression in individual CTCs without the common practice of
pooling such cells. Elevated transcript levels of genes associated with
metastasis NPTN, S100A4, S100A9, and with epithelial mesenchymal transition: VIM,
TGFß1, ZEB2, FOXC1, CXCR4, were striking compared to cell lines. Our findings
demonstrate that profiling CTCs on a cell-by-cell basis is possible and may
facilitate the application of 'liquid biopsies' to better model drug discovery.

PMCID: PMC3346739
PMID: 22586443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 12;109(24):E1509; author reply E1510. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1204423109. Epub 2012 May 11.

FOXC1-associated phenotypes in humans may not always exhibit corneal
neovascularization.

Chakrabarti S, Ramappa M, Chaurasia S, Kaur I, Mandal AK.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 7;109(6):2015-20.

PMCID: PMC3386115
PMID: 22582167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Dec;20(12):1224-33. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.80. Epub 2012
May 9.

PITX2 and FOXC1 spectrum of mutations in ocular syndromes.

Reis LM(1), Tyler RC, Volkmann Kloss BA, Schilter KF, Levin AV, Lowry RB,
Zwijnenburg PJ, Stroh E, Broeckel U, Murray JC, Semina EV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Children's Research Institute, Milwaukee, WI,
USA.

Anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD) encompasses a broad spectrum of developmental
conditions affecting anterior ocular structures and associated with an increased 
risk for glaucoma. Various systemic anomalies are often observed in ASD
conditions such as Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) and De Hauwere syndrome. We
report DNA sequencing and copy number analysis of PITX2 and FOXC1 in 76 patients 
with syndromic or isolated ASD and related conditions. PITX2 mutations and
deletions were found in 24 patients with dental and/or umbilical anomalies seen
in all. Seven PITX2-mutant alleles were novel including c.708_730del, the most
C-terminal mutation reported to date. A second case of deletion of the distant
upstream but not coding region of PITX2 was identified, highlighting the
importance of this recently discovered mechanism for ARS. FOXC1 deletions were
observed in four cases, three of which demonstrated hearing and/or heart defects,
including a patient with De Hauwere syndrome; no nucleotide mutations in FOXC1
were identified. Review of the literature identified several other patients with 
6p25 deletions and features of De Hauwere syndrome. The 1.3-Mb deletion of 6p25
presented here defines the critical region for this phenotype and includes the
FOXC1, FOXF2, and FOXQ1 genes. In summary, PITX2 or FOXC1 disruptions explained
63% of ARS and 6% of other ASD in our cohort; all affected patients demonstrated 
additional systemic defects with PITX2 mutations showing a strong association
with dental and/or umbilical anomalies and FOXC1 with heart and hearing defects. 
FOXC1 deletion was also found to be associated with De Hauwere syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3499749
PMID: 22569110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biochem. 2012 Jun;151(6):559-62. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvs042. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Implication of TGF-ß as a survival factor during tumour development.

Itoh S(1), Itoh F.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Showa Pharmaceutical University, Machida, Tokyo,
Japan. sitoh@ac.shoyaku.ac.jp

Transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß is a pleiotropic secretory protein which
inhibits and potentiates tumour progression during early and late stage of
tumourigenicity, respectively. However, it still remains veiled how TGF-ß
signalling reveals its two faces. Hoshino et al. (Autocrine TGF-ß protects breast
cancer cells from apoptosis through reduction of BH3-only protein, Bim, J.
Biochem. 2011;149:55-65) demonstrated a new aspect of TGF-ß as a survival factor 
in highly metastatic breast cancer cells from which TGF-ß1 and TGF-ß3 are
abundantly expressed. They found that TGF-ß suppressed the expression of BH3-only
protein Bim which promotes programmed death signalling via release of cytochrome 
c from mitochondria. Further interestingly, forkhead box C1 (Foxc1) whose
expression is suppressed upon TGF-ß stimulation is involved in the expression of 
Bim. Based on their results, autocrine TGF-ß signalling in certain breast cancers
promotes cell survival via inhibition of apoptotic signalling. Thus, the
inhibitors for activin receptor-like kinase (ALK)5 kinase might exert a curative 
influence on certain types of metastatic breast cancers.

PMID: 22528667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Genesis. 2012 Oct;50(10):766-74. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22036. Epub 2012 May 14.

Generation of conditional alleles for Foxc1 and Foxc2 in mice.

Sasman A(1), Nassano-Miller C, Shim KS, Koo HY, Liu T, Schultz KM, Millay M,
Nanano A, Kang M, Suzuki T, Kume T.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The Forkhead box transcription factors, Foxc1 and Foxc2, are crucial for
development of the eye, cardiovascular network, and other physiological systems, 
but their cell-type specific and postdevelopmental functions are unknown, in part
because conventional (i.e., whole-organism) homozygous-null mutations of either
factor result in perinatal death. Here, we describe the generation of mice with
conditional-null Foxc1(flox) and Foxc2(flox) mutations that are induced via
Cre-mediated recombination. Mice homozygous for the unrecombined alleles are
viable and fertile, indicating that the conditional alleles retain their
wild-type function. The embryos of Foxc1(flox) or Foxc2(flox) mice crossed with
Cre-deleter mice that are homozygous for the recombined allele (i.e., Foxc1(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) 
or Foxc2(<U+0394>/<U+0394>) embryos) lack expression of the corresponding gene and show the
same developmental defects observed in conventional homozygous mutant embryos. We
expect these conditional mutations to enable characterization of the cell-type
specific functions of Foxc1 and Foxc2 in development, disease, and adult animals.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3435482
PMID: 22522965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Ophthalmic Genet. 2012 Dec;33(4):240-8. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2012.675396. Epub
2012 Apr 12.

Chromosome 6p25 deletion syndrome: report of a case with optic disc coloboma and 
review of published ophthalmic findings.

Beby F(1), Des Portes V, Till M, Mottolese C, Denis P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Ophthalmology, Femme Mère-Enfant Hospital, Bron,
France. beby.francis@neuf.fr

PURPOSE: The 6p25 deletion syndrome is a rare disorder characterized by
Dandy-Walker malformation, congenital heart defects, developmental delay,
dysmorphic facial features, and malformations of the anterior segment of the eye 
with a risk for glaucoma. Here we report a child harboring a cryptic de novo 6p25
deletion, bilateral optic disc coloboma and characteristic anterior segment
anomalies. We review reported ophthalmic findings in patients with this syndrome.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Retrospective case review of a 4-day-old male with
Dandy-Walker malformation and cardiac defects who was referred with a suspected
diagnosis of iris coloboma.
RESULTS: The ophthalmic examination showed bilateral corectopia associated with
posterior embryotoxon. Fundus examination revealed bilateral optic disc
excavation, which was diagnosed as colobomatous because of its configuration and 
stability over time. Because of the association of posterior embryotoxon with
Dandy-Walker malformation, a terminal 6p deletion syndrome was clinically
suspected. Array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) and fluorescence in situ
hybridization (FISH) studies revealed a 3.2 Mb deletion at 6p25.2p25.3 including 
the FOXC1 gene. Neither unaffected parent carried this deletion.
CONCLUSIONS: Optic disc colobomas may be found in patients carrying a 6p25
deletion. This has the potential to confound assessment of affected children for 
glaucoma and intracranial hypertension.

PMID: 22497499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 25;287(22):18318-29. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.339424. Epub
2012 Apr 5.

Small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) modification mediates function of the
inhibitory domains of developmental regulators FOXC1 and FOXC2.

Danciu TE(1), Chupreta S, Cruz O, Fox JE, Whitman M, Iñiguez-Lluhí JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Periodontics and Oral Medicine, University of Michigan School of
Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. tdanciu@umich.edu

FOXC1 and FOXC2 are forkhead transcription factors that play essential roles
during development and physiology. Despite their critical role, the mechanisms
that regulate the function of these factors remain poorly understood. We have
identified conserved motifs within a previously defined N-terminal negative
regulatory region of FOXC1/C2 that conforms to the definition of synergy control 
or SC motifs. Because such motifs inhibit the activity of transcription factors
by serving as sites of post-translational modification by small ubiquitin-like
modifier (SUMO), we have examined whether FOXC1/C2 are targets of SUMOylation and
probed the functional significance of this modification. We find that endogenous 
FOXC1 forms modified by SUMO2/3 can be detected. Moreover, in cell culture, all
three SUMO isoforms are readily conjugated to FOXC1 and FOXC2. The modification
can be reconstituted in vitro with purified components and can be reversed in
vitro by treatment with the SUMO protease SENP2. SUMOylation of FOXC1 and FOXC2
occurs primarily on one consensus synergy control motif with minor contributions 
of a second, more degenerate site. Notably, although FOXC1 is also phosphorylated
at multiple sites, disruption of sites immediately downstream of the SC motifs
does not influence SUMOylation. Consistent with a negative functional role,
SUMOylation-deficient mutants displayed higher transcriptional activity when
compared with wild type forms despite comparable protein levels and subcellular
localization. Thus, the findings demonstrate that SC motifs mediate the
inhibitory function of this region by serving as sites for SUMOylation and reveal
a novel mechanism for acute and reversible regulation of FOXC1/C2 function.

PMCID: PMC3365760
PMID: 22493429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Neoplasma. 2012;59(4):424-32. doi: 10.4149/neo_2012_055.

Apoptosis-, proliferation, immune function-, and drug resistance- related genes
in ER positive, HER2 positive and triple negative breast cancer.

Kolacinska A(1), Chalubinska J, Zawlik I, Szymanska B, Borowska-Garganisz E,
Nowik M, Fendler W, Kubiak R, Pawlowska Z, Morawiec Z, Szemraj J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Cancer Center, Copernicus Memorial Hospital, 
Lodz, Poland. agnkol@gazeta.pl

The aim of our study was to examine an association between gene expression
assessed using a 23-gene microarray and receptor status of breast cancer samples 
categorized as ER positive, HER2 positive and triple negative subtypes. The ER
positive cohort was subsequently divided into Luminal A, Luminal B HER2 negative 
and Luminal B HER2 positive subtypes. Core- needle biopsies were collected from
78 female patients with inoperable locally advanced breast cancer or resectable
tumors suitable for downstaging, before any treatment. Expressions of 23 genes
were determined by means of TagMan Low Density Arrays. Analysis of variance was
used to select genes with discriminatory potential between receptor subtypes. We 
introduced a correction for false discovery rates (presented as q values) due to 
testing multiple hypothesis. Pairwise post-hoc comparisons of receptor subtypes
were performed using Tukey 's HSD test. Five genes out of a 23-gene microarray
differed significantly in relation to breast cancer receptor-based subtypes.
Among these five genes, we identified: BCL2 (p=0.0002, q=0.0009), MKI67
(p=0.0037, q=0.0064), IGF1R (p=0.0040, q=0.0064), FOXC1 (p=0.0113, q=0.0135) and 
IRF1 (p=0.0435, q=0.0416) as ones showing ER positive, HER2 positive and triple
negative -subtype specific expression profiles. When incorporating Luminal A,
Luminal B HER2 negative, Luminal B HER2 positive subtypes into analysis, four
genes: BCL2 (p=0.0006, q=0.0034), MKI67 (p=0.0078, q=0.0198), FOXC1 (p=0.0102,
q=0.0198) and IGF1R (p=0.0174, q=0.0254) were selected. Elevated levels of IGF1R 
and BCL2 were significantly linked with Luminal A subtype. Triple negative breast
cancer subtype was associated with higher expression of IRF1, FOXC1 and MKI67. In
HER2 positive cohort lower expression of all five analyzed genes was noted.

PMID: 22489698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Int J Oncol. 2012 Jun;40(6):1858-64. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1407. Epub 2012 Mar
19.

Raf-1 oncogenic signaling is linked to activation of mesenchymal to epithelial
transition pathway in metastatic breast cancer cells.

Leontovich AA(1), Zhang S, Quatraro C, Iankov I, Veroux PF, Gambino MW, Degnim A,
McCubrey J, Ingle J, Galanis E, D'Assoro AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic College of
Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA.

Aberrant activation of the Raf/MEK/MAPK pathway plays a key role in breast cancer
development and progression. Dysregulation of Raf/MEK/MAPK oncogenic signaling
often results from overexpression of the HER-2/Neu tyrosine kinase receptor
leading to chemoendocrine resistance, development of distant metastases and
ultimately poor prognosis in breast cancer patients. HER-2/Neu overexpression is 
also linked to activation of the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT)
pathway, loss of adhesion molecules and metastasis. Recently, it has been
demonstrated that cancer cells that undergo EMT acquire a CD44+/CD24-/low basal
cancer stem cell-like phenotype and are characterized by activation of HER-2/Neu 
and TGFß oncogenic signaling pathways with increased capacity of self-renewal,
drug resistance, invasion and distant metastases. Following metastatic
dissemination, cancer cells re-activate certain epithelial properties through
mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) to establish neoplastic lesions at
secondary sites, although the molecular mechanisms regulating MET remain elusive.
In this study we demonstrate that constitutive activation of Raf-1 oncogenic
signaling induces HER-2/Neu overexpression leading to the development of distant 
metastases in ERa+ MCF-7 breast cancer xenografts. Importantly, development of
distant metastases in xenograft models was linked to activation of the MET
pathway characterized by reduced expression of EMT inducer genes (TGFB2, TWIST1
and FOXC1) and overexpression of BMB7, CXCR7 and EGR family of transcription
factors. In summary, our results demonstrate for the first time that
amplification of Raf/MEK/MAPK oncogenic signaling during tumor growth promotes
the genesis of metastatic lesions from primary tumors by activating the
mesenchymal epithelial transition.

PMCID: PMC4058770
PMID: 22447278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Apr;158A(4):707-12. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33943. Epub 2012
Mar 9.

Nine genes that may contribute to partial trisomy (6)(p22<U+2192>pter) and unique
presentation of persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous with retinal detachment.

Su PH(1), Lee IC, Yang SF, Ng YY, Liu CS, Chen JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.

We report on a newborn girl with facial anomalies, a congenital heart defect,
severe pre- and postnatal growth retardation, feeding problems, and persistent
hyperplastic primary vitreous. Cytogenetic analysis by high resolution GTG
banding showed extra chromosomal material on the short arm of one chromosome 1 of
the patient, but neither parent. SKY and CGH analysis demonstrated that the
patient had a de novo 46,XX, der(1)t(1;6)(p36.3; p22). Compared with previously
reported cases of partial trisomy 6p22 syndrome, this patient exhibited a unique 
condition for this syndrome: persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV) with
retinal detachment. The human genome database was searched for candidate genes
and we propose the following nine genes located in the 6p22<U+2192>6pter region for
their potential contribution to the phenotype of partial trisomy 6p22<U+2192>pter and
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV) with retinal detachment: Forkhead
box Q1 (FOXQ1), FOXF2, FOXC1, NRN1, EDN1, ATXN1, DEK oncogene, E2F3, and NRNS1.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22407547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mol Biol Rep. 2012 Jul;39(7):7435-41. doi: 10.1007/s11033-012-1576-1. Epub 2012
Feb 9.

Gene expression and pathologic response to neoadjuvant chemotherapy in breast
cancer.

Kolacinska A(1), Fendler W, Szemraj J, Szymanska B, Borowska-Garganisz E, Nowik
M, Chalubinska J, Kubiak R, Pawlowska Z, Blasinska-Morawiec M, Potemski P,
Jeziorski A, Morawiec Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Cancer Center, Copernicus Memorial Hospital, 
Paderewskiego 4, 93-509 Lodz, Poland. info@drkolacinska.pl

Pathologic complete response after neoadjuvant systemic treatment appears to be a
valid surrogate for better overall survival in breast cancer patients. Currently,
together with standard clinicopathologic assessment, novel molecular biomarkers
are being exhaustively tested in order to look into the heterogeneity of breast
cancer. The aim of our study was to examine an association between 23-gene
real-time-PCR expression assay including ABCB1, ABCC1, BAX, BBC3, BCL2, CASP3,
CYP2D6, ERCC1, FOXC1, GAPDH, IGF1R, IRF1, MAP2, MAPK 8, MAPK9, MKI67, MMP9,
NCOA3, PARP1, PIK3CA, TGFB3, TOP2A, and YWHAZ receptor status of breast cancer
core biopsies sampled before neoadjuvant chemotherapy (anthracycline and taxanes)
and pathologic response. Core-needle biopsies were collected from 42 female
patients with inoperable locally advanced breast cancer or resectable tumors
suitable for downstaging, before any treatment. Expressions of 23 genes were
determined by means of TagMan low density arrays. Analysis of variance was used
to select genes with discriminatory potential between receptor subtypes. We
introduced a correction for false discovery rates (presented as q values) due to 
multiple hypothesis testing. Statistical analysis showed that seven genes out of 
a 23-gene real-time-PCR expression assay differed significantly in relation to
pathologic response regardless of breast cancer subtypes. Among these genes, we
identified: BAX (p = 0.0146), CYP2D6 (p = 0.0063), ERCC1 (p = 0.0231), FOXC1 (p =
0.0048), IRF1 (p = 0.0022), MAP2 (p = 0.0011), and MKI67 (p = 0.0332). The
assessment of core biopsy gene profiles and receptor-based subtypes, before
neoadjuvant therapy seems to predict response or resistance and to define new
signaling pathways to provide more powerful classifiers in breast cancer, hence
the need for further research.

PMID: 22318550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 7;109(6):1818-9. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1119291109.
Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Studies on Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome patients and mice reveal Foxc1's role in
corneal neovascularization.

François M(1), Ramchandran R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 7;109(6):2015-20.

PMCID: PMC3277551
PMID: 22308435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Oncogene. 2012 Nov 8;31(45):4798-802. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.635. Epub 2012 Jan
16.

FOXC1 regulates the functions of human basal-like breast cancer cells by
activating NF-<U+03BA>B signaling.

Wang J(1), Ray PS, Sim MS, Zhou XZ, Lu KP, Lee AV, Lin X, Bagaria SP, Giuliano
AE, Cui X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, John Wayne Cancer Institute, Saint John's
Health Center, Santa Monica, CA, USA.

Human basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) is an enigmatic and aggressive malignancy
with a poor prognosis. There is an urgent need to identify therapeutic targets
for BLBC, because current treatment modalities are limited and not effective. The
forkhead box transcription factor FOXC1 has recently been identified as a
critical functional biomarker for BLBC. However, how it orchestrates BLBC cells
was not clear. Here we show that FOXC1 activates the transcription factor nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) in BLBC cells by increasing p65/RelA protein stability. High
NF-<U+03BA>B activity has been associated with estrogen receptor-negative breast cancer,
particularly BLBC. The effect of FOXC1 on p65/RelA protein stability is mediated 
by increased expression of Pin1, a peptidyl-prolyl isomerase. FOXC1 requires
NF-<U+03BA>B for its regulation of cell proliferation, migration and invasion. Notably, 
FOXC1 overexpression renders breast cancer cells more susceptible to
pharmacological inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B. These results suggest that BLBC cells may
rely on FOXC1-driven NF-<U+03BA>B signaling. Interventions of this pathway may provide
modalities for the treatment of BLBC.

PMCID: PMC3961006
PMID: 22249250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Neural Dev. 2012 Jan 17;7:2. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-7-2.

Meningeal defects alter the tangential migration of cortical interneurons in
Foxc1hith/hith mice.

Zarbalis K(1), Choe Y, Siegenthaler JA, Orosco LA, Pleasure SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pediatric Regenerative Medicine Shriners Hospitals for Children, 
Northern California, 2425 Stockton Blvd., CA 95817, USA. kzarbalis@ucdavis.edu

BACKGROUND: Tangential migration presents the primary mode of migration of
cortical interneurons translocating into the cerebral cortex from subpallial
domains. This migration takes place in multiple streams with the most superficial
one located in the cortical marginal zone. While a number of forebrain-expressed 
molecules regulating this process have emerged, it remains unclear to what extent
structures outside the brain, like the forebrain meninges, are involved.
RESULTS: We studied a unique Foxc1 hypomorph mouse model (Foxc1hith/hith) with
meningeal defects and impaired tangential migration of cortical interneurons. We 
identified a territorial correlation between meningeal defects and disruption of 
interneuron migration along the adjacent marginal zone in these animals,
suggesting that impaired meningeal integrity might be the primary cause for the
observed migration defects. Moreover, we postulate that the meningeal factor
regulating tangential migration that is affected in homozygote mutants is the
chemokine Cxcl12. In addition, by using chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis,
we provide evidence that the Cxcl12 gene is a direct transcriptional target of
Foxc1 in the meninges. Further, we observe migration defects of a lesser degree
in Cajal-Retzius cells migrating within the cortical marginal zone, indicating a 
less important role for Cxcl12 in their migration. Finally, the developmental
migration defects observed in Foxc1hith/hith mutants do not lead to obvious
differences in interneuron distribution in the adult if compared to control
animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest a critical role for the forebrain meninges to
promote during development the tangential migration of cortical interneurons
along the cortical marginal zone and Cxcl12 as the factor responsible for this
property.

PMCID: PMC3287125
PMID: 22248045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Hum Reprod. 2012 Mar;27(3):829-43. doi: 10.1093/humrep/der431. Epub 2012 Jan 13.

Molecular characterization of corona radiata cells from patients with diminished 
ovarian reserve using microarray and microfluidic-based gene expression
profiling.

May-Panloup P(1), Ferré-L'Hôtellier V, Morinière C, Marcaillou C, Lemerle S,
Malinge MC, Coutolleau A, Lucas N, Reynier P, Descamps P, Guardiola P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie de Reproduction, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire,
Angers cedex 9 49933, France. pamaypanloup@chu-angers.fr

BACKGROUND: Diminished ovarian reserve (DOR) is one of the causes of infertility 
in young women. In this prospective study, gene expression profiling (GEP) of
corona radiata cells (CRC) was performed to identify genes deregulated in DOR
patients.
METHODS: Microarray-based GEP of CRC isolated from eight women undergoing IVF was
performed to identify genes differentially expressed between patients with normal
ovarian reserve and DOR patients. Microfluidic-based quantitative RT-PCR assays
were used to validate selected transcripts on 40 independent patients. A
principal component analysis was used to identify more homogeneous subgroups of
DOR patients. In silico analyses focusing on cis-regulation were performed to
refine the interactions between patient's biological characteristics and their
GEP.
RESULTS: Forty-eight transcripts were differentially expressed, including CXXC
finger protein 5 (CXXC5), forkhead box C1 (FOXC1) (down-regulated in DOR) as well
as connective tissue growth factor (CTGF), follistatin-like 3 (FSTL3),
prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2 (PTGS2) and suppressor of cytokine
signaling 2 (SOCS2) (up-regulated in DOR). According to these transcripts, two
DOR patients' subgroups (DOR Gr1 and Gr2) were identified. In DOR Gr2 patients,
C-terminal domain 2 (CITED2), CTGF, growth arrest-specific 1 (GAS1), insulin
receptor substrate 2 (IRS2), PTGS2, SOCS2 and Versican (VCAN) were expressed at
significantly higher levels and CXXC5, FOXC1, guanylate-binding protein 2 (GBP2) 
and zinc finger MIZ-domain containing 1 (ZMIZ1) at significantly lower levels.
Higher baseline estradiol (E(2)) levels were observed in DOR Gr2 patients (P <
0.006). The in silico analyses suggested that all 11 genes differentially
expressed between DOR Gr1 and DOR Gr2 subgroups could be transcriptional targets 
of estrogen.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite small sample size limitations, 12 genes deregulated in the
CRC of DOR patients were identified, which could be involved in DOR pathogenesis.
A DOR patient's subgroup with high baseline E(2) levels and deregulated
estrogen-responsive genes was also identified.

PMID: 22246450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 May;20(5):527-33. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.233. Epub 2012 Jan
11.

Genomic imbalances detected by array-CGH in patients with syndromal ocular
developmental anomalies.

Delahaye A(1), Bitoun P, Drunat S, Gérard-Blanluet M, Chassaing N, Toutain A,
Verloes A, Gatelais F, Legendre M, Faivre L, Passemard S, Aboura A, Kaltenbach S,
Quentin S, Dupont C, Tabet AC, Amselem S, Elion J, Gressens P, Pipiras E,
Benzacken B.

Author information: 
(1)AP-HP, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Service d'Histologie, Embryologie, et
Cytogénétique, Bondy, France. andree.delahaye@jvr.aphp.fr

In 65 patients, who had unexplained ocular developmental anomalies (ODAs) with at
least one other birth defect and/or intellectual disability, we performed
oligonucleotide comparative genome hybridisation-based microarray analysis
(array-CGH; 105A or 180K, Agilent Technologies). In four patients, array-CGH
identified clinically relevant deletions encompassing a gene known to be involved
in ocular development (FOXC1 or OTX2). In four other patients, we found three
pathogenic deletions not classically associated with abnormal ocular
morphogenesis, namely, del(17)(p13.3p13.3), del(10)(p14p15.3), and
del(16)(p11.2p11.2). We also detected copy number variations of uncertain
pathogenicity in two other patients. Rearranged segments ranged in size from 0.04
to 5.68<U+2009>Mb. These results show that array-CGH provides a high diagnostic yield
(15%) in patients with syndromal ODAs and can identify previously unknown
chromosomal regions associated with these conditions. In addition to their
importance for diagnosis and genetic counselling, these data may help identify
genes involved in ocular development.

PMCID: PMC3330214
PMID: 22234157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Br J Ophthalmol. 2012 Mar;96(3):318-22. doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2011-300801.
Epub 2011 Dec 23.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: new perspectives.

Chang TC(1), Summers CG, Schimmenti LA, Grajewski AL.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Eye Institute, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee, 37203, USA. tachenchang@hotmail.com

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is a genetic disease affecting multiple organ systems.
In the eye, this condition manifests with varying degrees of anterior segment
dysgenesis and carries a high risk of glaucoma. Other associated systemic issues 
include cardiovascular outflow tract malformations, craniofacial abnormalities
and pituitary abnormalities, which can result in severe endocrinological
sequelae. Recent advances in molecular genetics have identified two major genes, 
PITX2 and FOXC1, demonstrating a wide spectrum of mutations, which aids in the
molecular diagnosis of the disease, although evidence exists to implicate other
loci in this condition. The management of individuals affected by Axenfeld-Rieger
syndrome requires a multidisciplinary approach and would include dedicated
surveillance and management of glaucoma, sensorineural hearing loss, and cardiac,
endocrinological, craniofacial and orthopaedic abnormalities.

PMID: 22199394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 7;109(6):2015-20. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1109540109. Epub 2011 Dec 14.

Forkhead box transcription factor FoxC1 preserves corneal transparency by
regulating vascular growth.

Seo S(1), Singh HP, Lacal PM, Sasman A, Fatima A, Liu T, Schultz KM, Losordo DW, 
Lehmann OJ, Kume T.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 12;109(24):E1509; author reply E1510.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 7;109(6):1818-9.

Normal vision requires the precise control of vascular growth to maintain corneal
transparency. Here we provide evidence for a unique mechanism by which the
Forkhead box transcription factor FoxC1 regulates corneal vascular development.
Murine Foxc1 is essential for development of the ocular anterior segment, and in 
humans, mutations have been identified in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome, a disorder
characterized by anterior segment dysgenesis. We show that FOXC1 mutations also
lead to corneal angiogenesis, and that mice homozygous for either a global
(Foxc1(-/-)) or neural crest (NC)-specific (NC-Foxc1(-/-)) null mutation display 
excessive growth of corneal blood and lymphatic vessels. This is associated with 
disorganization of the extracellular matrix and increased expression of multiple 
matrix metalloproteinases. Heterozygous mutants (Foxc1(+/-) and NC-Foxc1(+/-))
exhibit milder phenotypes, such as disrupted limbal vasculature. Moreover,
environmental exposure to corneal injury significantly increases growth of both
blood and lymphatic vessels in both Foxc1(+/-) and NC-Foxc1(+/-) mice compared
with controls. Notably, this amplification of the angiogenic response is
abolished by inhibition of VEGF receptor 2. Collectively, these findings identify
a role for FoxC1 in inhibiting corneal angiogenesis, thereby maintaining corneal 
transparency by regulating VEGF signaling.

PMCID: PMC3277512
PMID: 22171010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Oncogene. 2012 Aug 9;31(32):3667-78. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.531. Epub 2011 Nov 28.

BRCA1 and GATA3 corepress FOXC1 to inhibit the pathogenesis of basal-like breast 
cancers.

Tkocz D(1), Crawford NT, Buckley NE, Berry FB, Kennedy RD, Gorski JJ, Harkin DP, 
Mullan PB.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Belfast, UK.

In this study we describe a novel interaction between the breast/ovarian tumor
suppressor gene BRCA1 and the transcription factor GATA3, an interaction, which
is important for normal breast differentiation. We show that the BRCA1-GATA3
interaction is important for the repression of genes associated with
triple-negative and basal-like breast cancer (BLBCs) including FOXC1, and that
GATA3 interacts with a C-terminal region of BRCA1. We demonstrate that FOXC1 is
an essential survival factor maintaining the proliferation of BLBCs cell lines.
We define the mechanistic basis of this corepression and identify the
GATA3-binding site within the FOXC1 distal promoter region. We show that BRCA1
and GATA3 interact on the FOXC1 promoter and that BRCA1 requires GATA3 for
recruitment to this region. This interaction requires fully functional BRCA1 as a
mutant BRCA1 protein is unable to localize to the FOXC1 promoter or repress FOXC1
expression. We demonstrate that this BRCA1-GATA3 repression complex is not a
FOXC1-specific phenomenon as a number of other genes associated with BLBCs such
as FOXC2, CXCL1 and p-cadherin were also repressed in a similar manner. Finally, 
we demonstrate the importance of our findings by showing that loss of GATA3
expression or aberrant FOXC1 expression contributes to the drug resistance and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition-like phenotypes associated with aggressive
BLBCs.

PMID: 22120723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jan;158A(1):150-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34308. Epub 2011
Nov 21.

Array-CGH and clinical characterization in a patient with subtelomeric 6p
deletion without ocular dysgenesis.

Piccione M(1), Antona R, Salzano E, Cavani S, Malacarne M, Morreale Bubella R,
Pierluigi M, Viaggi CD, Corsello G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento Materno Infantile, Università di Palermo, Palermo, Italy.
piccionemaria@libero.it

Subtelomeric terminal 6p deletion has been recognized as a clinically
identifiable syndrome including facial dysmorphism, malformation of the anterior 
eye chamber, hearing loss, heart defects, and developmental delay.
Genotype-phenotype correlations of previously published patients have strongly
suggested anterior eye segment anomalies as one of the major malformations of the
syndrome if the critical 6p25 region contains the FOXC 1 gene. In addition, the
presence in this region of one or more genes involved in hearing loss has been
hypothesized. We report a patient with a 47,XYY karyotype and submicroscopic
terminal 6p deletion. Further characterization of the deletion with array
comparative genome hybridization also revealed a cryptic microduplication on
chromosome 19. The patient showed dysmorphic features, neuromotor retardation,
and profound language impairment, in absence of hearing loss and structural eye
anomalies. As far as we know this is the first reported terminal 6p25.1 deletion 
case without eye dysgenesis precisely characterized by array-CGH. Our result
suggests that the genes in this region may not be obvious candidates for hearing 
loss and demonstrate the need for further elucidation of the function of the
genes involved in eye developmental processes.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22105932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jun;133(2):617-34. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1811-9. 
Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Life stage differences in mammary gland gene expression profile in non-human
primates.

Stute P(1), Sielker S, Wood CE, Register TC, Lees CJ, Dewi FN, Williams JK,
Wagner JD, Stefenelli U, Cline JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine, University 
Women's Hospital, Berne, Switzerland. petra.stute@insel.ch

Breast cancer (BC) is the most common malignancy of women in the developed world.
To better understand its pathogenesis, knowledge of normal breast development is 
crucial, as BC is the result of disregulation of physiologic processes. The aim
of this study was to investigate the impact of reproductive life stages on the
transcriptional profile of the mammary gland in a primate model. Comparative
transcriptomic analyses were carried out using breast tissues from 28 female
cynomolgus macaques (Macaca fascicularis) at the following life stages:
prepubertal (n = 5), adolescent (n = 4), adult luteal (n = 5), pregnant (n = 6), 
lactating (n = 3), and postmenopausal (n = 5). Mammary gland RNA was hybridized
to Affymetrix GeneChip(®) Rhesus Macaque Genome Arrays. Differential gene
expression was analyzed using ANOVA and cluster analysis. Hierarchical cluster
analysis revealed distinct separation of life stage groups. More than 2,225
differentially expressed mRNAs were identified. Gene families or pathways that
changed across life stages included those related to estrogen and androgen (ESR1,
PGR, TFF1, GREB1, AR, 17HSDB2, 17HSDB7, STS, HSD11B1, AKR1C4), prolactin (PRLR,
ELF5, STAT5, CSN1S1), insulin-like growth factor signaling (IGF1, IGFBP1,
IGFBP5), extracellular matrix (POSTN, TGFB1, COL5A2, COL12A1, FOXC1, LAMC1,
PDGFRA, TGFB2), and differentiation (CD24, CD29, CD44, CD61, ALDH1, BRCA1, FOXA1,
POSTN, DICER1, LIG4, KLF4, NOTCH2, RIF1, BMPR1A, TGFB2). Pregnancy and lactation 
displayed distinct patterns of gene expression. ESR1 and IGF1 were significantly 
higher in the adolescent compared to the adult animals, whereas differentiation
pathways were overrepresented in adult animals and pregnancy-associated life
stages. Few individual genes were distinctly different in postmenopausal animals.
Our data demonstrate characteristic patterns of gene expression during breast
development. Several of the pathways activated during pubertal development have
been implicated in cancer development and metastasis, supporting the idea that
other developmental markers may have application as biomarkers for BC.

PMCID: PMC3822905
PMID: 22037779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25489. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025489. Epub 2011 Oct 13.

Foxf2: a novel locus for anterior segment dysgenesis adjacent to the Foxc1 gene.

McKeone R(1), Vieira H, Gregory-Evans K, Gregory-Evans CY, Denny P.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Mammalian Genetics Unit, Harwell, Oxford, United Kingdom.

Anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD) is characterised by an abnormal migration of
neural crest cells or an aberrant differentiation of the mesenchymal cells during
the formation of the eye's anterior segment. These abnormalities result in
multiple tissue defects affecting the iris, cornea and drainage structures of the
iridocorneal angle including the ciliary body, trabecular meshwork and Schlemm's 
canal. In some cases, abnormal ASD development leads to glaucoma, which is
usually associated with increased intraocular pressure. Haploinsufficiency
through mutation or chromosomal deletion of the human FOXC1 transcription factor 
gene or duplications of the 6p25 region is associated with a spectrum of ocular
abnormalities including ASD. However, mapping data and phenotype analysis of
human deletions suggests that an additional locus for this condition may be
present in the same chromosomal region as FOXC1. DHPLC screening of ENU
mutagenised mouse archival tissue revealed five novel mouse Foxf2 mutations.
Re-derivation of one of these (the Foxf2(W174R) mouse lineage) resulted in
heterozygote mice that exhibited thinning of the iris stroma, hyperplasia of the 
trabecular meshwork, small or absent Schlemm's canal and a reduction in the
iridocorneal angle. Homozygous E18.5 mice showed absence of ciliary body
projections, demonstrating a critical role for Foxf2 in the developing eye. These
data provide evidence that the Foxf2 gene, separated from Foxc1 by less than 70
kb of genomic sequence (250 kb in human DNA), may explain human abnormalities in 
some cases of ASD where FOXC1 has been excluded genetically.

PMCID: PMC3192754
PMID: 22022403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Cancer. 2012 Jun 1;118(11):2828-36. doi: 10.1002/cncr.26614. Epub 2011 Oct 21.

Polymorphic markers associated with severe oxaliplatin-induced, chronic
peripheral neuropathy in colon cancer patients.

Won HH(1), Lee J, Park JO, Park YS, Lim HY, Kang WK, Kim JW, Lee SY, Park SH.

Author information: 
(1)Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, South
Korea.

BACKGROUND: To identify potential genetic markers for severe oxaliplatin-induced 
chronic peripheral neuropathy (OXCPN), the authors performed a genome-wide
association analysis of patients with colon cancer who received oxaliplatin-based
chemotherapy.
METHODS: This was a prospective study in which DNA was purified in peripheral
blood from patients with colon cancer who received oxaliplatin. The primary
endpoint was the development of severe (grade 2 lasting for >7 days or grade 3)
OXCPN. For the discovery set, genotyping was done for 96 patients who received
adjuvant fluorouracil and oxaliplatin using the a genome-wide human
single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array. An association between polymorphisms 
and severe OXCPN was investigated. At the same time, 247 patients who received
oxaliplatin-based, first-line chemotherapy for advanced disease were enrolled as 
a validation set.
RESULTS: Among the 32 genotyped candidate SNPs selected from the discovery set, 9
SNPs in 8 genes (tachykinin, precursor 1[TAC1]; forkhead box C1 [FOXC1];
integrin, alpha 1 [ITGA1]; acylphosphatase 2, muscle type [ACYP2]; deleted in
lymphocytic leukemia, 7 [DLEU7]; B-cell translocation gene 4 [BTG4];
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II inhibitor 1 [CAMK2N1]; and
phenylalanyl-tRNA synthase 2 [FARS2]) had nominal replication (P < .05). The most
significant association was observed at reference SNP number (rs)10486003 in TAC1
(P = 4.84 × 10(-7)) in combined data from 2 sets. Five SNPs (rs10486003, rs2338, 
rs830884, rs843748, and rs797519) were significant in a multiple regression
analysis (P < .05). Overall prediction accuracy calculated by the regression
model was 72.8% (95% confidence interval, 65.8%-79.9%) in the model development
and 75.9% (95% confidence interval, 66.9%-84.9%) in the model evaluation.
CONCLUSIONS: The current results indicated that a genome-wide pharmacogenomic
approach is useful for identifying novel polymorphism predictors of severe OXCPN 
that may be used in personalized chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2011 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 22020760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Dec;155A(12):2925-32. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33858. Epub 2011
Oct 18.

Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly and Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome: clinical,
molecular-cytogenetic, and DNA array analyses of three patients with chromosomal 
defects at 6p25.

Tonoki H(1), Harada N, Shimokawa O, Yosozumi A, Monzaki K, Satoh K, Kosaki R,
Sato A, Matsumoto N, Iizuka S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Clinical Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Tenshi Hospital,
Sapporo, Japan. hidefumi.tonoki@tenshi.or.jp

Clinical phenotypes of and genetic aberrations in three unrelated Japanese
patients with Axenfeld-Rieger anomalies and various accompanying malformations of
systemic organs are described. GTG-banded chromosome analysis showed terminal
deletions of the short arm of chromosome 6 in two patients and an inversion,
inv(6)(p25q14), in the other. FISH and DNA array analyses revealed that the two
patients with deletions had 5.0-5.7<U+2009>Mb and 6.6<U+2009>Mb 6p terminal deletions,
respectively, and FOXC1 was apparently deleted in both patients. In the other
patient, the inversion breakpoint at 6p25 was estimated to be in or very close to
the FOXC1 locus, but DNA array analysis did not reveal a deletion around the
breakpoint. Common extraocular findings in these patients included broad
forehead, brachycephaly, hypertelorism, downslanting palpebral fissures, small
anteverted nose, and cardiac defects. Two patients also exhibited autistic
characteristics. The two patients with deletions exhibited poor muscle tone and
developmental delays. Most of these extraocular findings were similar to those
found in previous patients with FOXC1 mutations and distinct from those found in 
patients with PITX2 mutations, who frequently develop umbilical and dental
anomalies. We suggest that the psychomotor retardation is a clinical
manifestation associated with a deletion of multiple contiguous genes in the 6p
terminus and that this phenomenon is similar to the 6p25 deletion syndrome.
Understanding the relationship between genetic lesions and the spectrum of
extraocular findings in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger anomalies may lead to
better clinical management.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22009788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Indian Pediatr. 2011 Sep;48(9):727-9.

Dysmyelination of the cerebral white matter with microdeletion at 6p25.

Kapoor S(1), Mukherjee SB, Shroff D, Arora R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi.
drseemakapoor@gmail.com

A 6 year old boy presented with mental retardation, hypotonia, abnormal facies,
impaired hearing, protuberant eyes, visual impairment, short stature,
Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly, a bicuspid aortic valve, and bilateral sensorineural
deafness. CT scan of head suggested dysmyelination of the subcortical and
periventricular white matter. FISH revealed a subtelomeric microdeletion
encompassing both FOXC1 and FOXF2 loci within 6p25. Dysmyelination of the central
nervous system has been infrequently described earlier in patients with 6p25
deletion.

PMID: 21992905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Dec;124(2):370-7. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr245. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Development of a neural teratogenicity test based on human embryonic stem cells: 
response to retinoic acid exposure.

Colleoni S(1), Galli C, Gaspar JA, Meganathan K, Jagtap S, Hescheler J,
Sachinidis A, Lazzari G.

Author information: 
(1)Avantea, Laboratory of Reproductive Technologies, 26100 Cremona, Italy.
silviacolleoni@avantea.it

The aim of this study was the development of an alternative testing method based 
on human embryonic stem cells for prenatal developmental toxicity with particular
emphasis on early neural development. To this purpose, we designed an in vitro
protocol based on the generation of neural rosettes, representing the in vitro
counterpart of the developing neural plate and neural tube, and we challenged
this complex cell model with retinoic acid (RA), a well-known teratogenic agent. 
The cells were exposed to different concentrations of RA during the process of
rosettes formation. Morphological and molecular parameters were evaluated in
treated as compared with untreated cells to detect both cytotoxicity and specific
neural toxicity. Transcriptomic analysis was performed with microarray Affymetrix
platform and validated by quantitative real-time PCR for genes relevant to early 
neural development such as HoxA1, HoxA3, HoxB1, HoxB4, FoxA2, FoxC1, Otx2, and
Pax7. The results obtained demonstrated that neural rosette forming cells respond
to RA with clear concentration-dependent morphological, and gene expression
changes remarkably similar to those induced in vivo, in the developing neural
tube, by RA exposure. This strict correspondence indicates that the neural
rosette protocol described is capable of detecting specific teratogenic
mechanisms causing perturbations of early neural development and therefore
represents a promising alternative test for human prenatal developmental
toxicity.

PMID: 21934132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Gene. 2011 Dec 1;489(1):30-40. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2011.08.007. Epub 2011 Aug 31.

Analysis of lamprey clustered Fox genes: insight into Fox gene evolution and
expression in vertebrates.

Wotton KR(1), Shimeld SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, The Tinbergen Building, South
Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PS, UK. kwotton@talk21.com

In the human genome, members of the FoxC, FoxF, FoxL1, and FoxQ1 gene families
are found in two paralagous clusters. One cluster contains the genes FOXQ1,
FOXF2, FOXC1 and the second consists of FOXF1, FOXC2, and FOXL1. In jawed
vertebrates these genes are known to be expressed in different pharyngeal tissues
and all, except FoxQ1, are involved in patterning the early embryonic mesoderm.
We have previously traced the evolution of this cluster in the bony vertebrates, 
and the gene content is identical in the dogfish, a member of the most basally
branching lineage of the jawed vertebrates. Here we extend these analyses to
jawless vertebrates. Using genomic searches and molecular approaches we have
identified homologues of these genes from lampreys. We identify two FoxC genes,
two FoxF genes, two FoxQ1 genes and single FoxL1 gene. We examine the embryonic
expression of one predominantly mesodermally expressed gene family, FoxC, and the
endodermally expressed member of the cluster, FoxQ1. We identified FoxQ1
transcripts in the pharyngeal endoderm, while the two FoxC genes are
differentially expressed in the pharyngeal mesenchyme and ectoderm. Furthermore
we identify conserved expression of lamprey FoxC genes in the paraxial and
intermediate mesoderms. We interpret our results through a chordate-wide
comparison of expression patterns and discuss gene content in the context of
theories on the evolution of the vertebrate genome.

2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21907770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 15;358(2):318-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.08.005. Epub 2011 
Aug 16.

Wt1a, Foxc1a, and the Notch mediator Rbpj physically interact and regulate the
formation of podocytes in zebrafish.

O'Brien LL(1), Grimaldi M, Kostun Z, Wingert RA, Selleck R, Davidson AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Regenerative Medicine and Department of Medicine, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School and Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston,
MA 02114, USA.

Podocytes help form the glomerular blood filtration barrier in the kidney and
their injury or loss leads to renal disease. The Wilms' tumor suppressor-1 (Wt1) 
and the FoxC1/2 transcription factors, as well as Notch signaling, have been
implicated as important regulators of podocyte fate. It is not known whether
these factors work in parallel or sequentially on different gene targets, or as
higher-order transcriptional complexes on common genes. Here, we use the
zebrafish to demonstrate that embryos treated with morpholinos against wt1a,
foxc1a, or the Notch transcriptional mediator rbpj develop fewer podocytes, as
determined by wt1b, hey1 and nephrin expression, while embryos deficient in any
two of these factors completely lack podocytes. From GST-pull-downs and
co-immunoprecipitation experiments we show that Wt1a, Foxc1a, and Rbpj can
physically interact with each other, whereas only Rbpj binds to the Notch
intracellular domain (NICD). In transactivation assays, combinations of Wt1,
FoxC1/2, and NICD synergistically induce the Hey1 promoter, and have additive or 
repressive effects on the Podocalyxin promoter, depending on dosage. Taken
together, these data suggest that Wt1, FoxC1/2, and Notch signaling converge on
common target genes where they physically interact to regulate a
podocyte-specific gene program. These findings further our understanding of the
transcriptional circuitry responsible for podocyte formation and differentiation 
during kidney development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3183404
PMID: 21871448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Hum Mutat. 2011 Oct;32(10):1144-52. doi: 10.1002/humu.21550. Epub 2011 Sep 8.

Digenic inheritance of mutations in FOXC1 and PITX2<U+2009>: correlating transcription
factor function and Axenfeld-Rieger disease severity.

Kelberman D(1), Islam L, Holder SE, Jacques TS, Calvas P, Hennekam RC, Nischal
KK, Sowden JC.

Author information: 
(1)Ulverscroft Vision Research Group, UCL Institute of Child Health, London,
United Kingdom.

Disease-causing mutations affecting either one of the transcription factor genes,
PITX2 or FOXC1, have been previously identified in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger 
syndrome (AR). We identified a family who segregate novel mutations in both PITX2
(p.Ser233Leu) and FOXC1 (c.609delC). The most severely affected individual, who
presented with an atypical phenotype of corneal opacification, lens extrusion,
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV), and subsequent bilateral retinal
detachment, inherited mutations in both genes, whereas the single heterozygous
mutations caused mild AR phenotypes. This is the first report of such digenic
inheritance. By analyzing cognate targets of each gene, we showed that FOXC1 and 
PITX2 can independently regulate their own and each other's target gene promoters
and do not show synergistic action in vitro. Mutation in either gene caused
reduced transcriptional activation to different extents on the FOXO1 and PLOD1
promoters, whereas both mutations in combination showed the lowest level of
activation. These data show how the compensatory activity of one factor, when the
other is impaired, may lessen the phenotypic impact of developmental anomalies,
yet reduced activity of both transcription factors increased disease severity.
This suggests an under-reported mechanism for phenotypic variability whereby
single mutations cause mild AR phenotypes, whereas digenic inheritance increases 
phenotypic severity.

© 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21837767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Reproduction. 2011 Oct;142(4):489-95. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0092. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Forkhead transcription factors in ovarian function.

Uhlenhaut NH(1), Treier M.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert Rössle Strasse 10, 13125
Berlin-Buch, Germany. henriette.uhlenhaut@mdc-berlin.de

Since the discovery of the conserved forkhead (Fkh) DNA binding domain more than 
20 years ago, members of the Fkh or forkhead box (FOX) family of transcription
factors have been shown to act as important regulators of numerous developmental 
and homeostatic processes. The human genome contains 44 Fkh genes, several of
which have recently been reported to be essential for female fertility. In this
review, we highlight the roles of specific FOX proteins in ovarian
folliculogenesis and present our current understanding of their molecular
function. In particular, we describe what we have learned from loss-of-function
studies using mouse models as well as human genetics and illustrate how different
stages of folliculogenesis, both in oocytes and in somatic granulosa and theca
cells, are regulated by FOXC1, FOXL2, and FOXO subfamily members.

PMID: 21810859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Ophthalmologe. 2011 Jul;108(7):610-4, 616-7. doi: 10.1007/s00347-010-2294-5.

[Development of the iridocorneal angle and congenital glaucoma].

[Article in German]

Tamm ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Anatomie, Universität Regensburg, Universitätsstr. 31, 93053,
Regensburg, Deutschland. ernst.tamm@vkl.uni-regensburg.de

The trabecular meshwork originates from cells of the neural crest which migrate
to the iridocorneal angle during embryonic and fetal development of the eye.
Correct morphogenesis of trabecular outflow pathways requires the differentiation
of the cells to a porous and lamellate meshwork as well as the ingrowth of
Schlemm's canal and posterior movement of the iris root. A failure in these
processes is responsible for primary congenital or infantile glaucoma which
presents with increased resistance to aqueous humor outflow resulting in
increased intraocular pressure. Most cases appear to be of a sporadic nature but 
hereditary cases are often caused by mutations in the CYP1B1 gene which encodes
for the enzyme cytochrome P450 1B1. Mutations cause a reduction in enzymatic
activity which probably leads to diminished turnover of an as yet unidentified
metabolite taking part in the signaling processes essential for formation of the 
trabecular meshwork and Schlemm's canal. More rarely, mutations in latent
transforming growth factor beta binding protein 2 (LTBP2) or in the transcription
factor FOXC1 have been described as causative for primary congenital glaucoma.

PMID: 21796509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Radiother Oncol. 2011 Oct;101(1):116-21. doi: 10.1016/j.radonc.2011.05.048. Epub 
2011 Jun 23.

DNA methylation changes in cells regrowing after fractioned ionizing radiation.

Kuhmann C(1), Weichenhan D, Rehli M, Plass C, Schmezer P, Popanda O.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics and Cancer Risk Factors, German Cancer Research
Center, Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Repeated exposure to ionizing radiation (IR) can result
in adaptive reactions. While DNA methylation changes in adaption to repeated
stress exposure are established for a variety of drugs, their role in fractioned 
ionizing radiation is largely unknown.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: MCF7 breast cancer cells were treated 5 times a week with
IR in fractions of 2 Gy, resulting in total doses of 10 and 20 Gy. Cells were
harvested 48 and 72 h after the last irradiation, as well as after a recovery
period of at least 14 d. To identify genes differentially methylated in
irradiated versus non-irradiated cells, we used methyl-CpG immunoprecipitation
(MCIp) followed by global methylation profiling on CpG island microarrays.
RESULTS: MCIp profiling revealed methylation changes in several CpG islands 48 h 
after FIR with 10 and 20 Gy. Cells receiving a total dose of 10 Gy started
regrowing after 14 d and exhibited similar radioresistance as mock-treated cells.
Differential methylation of the CpG units associated with FOXC1 (p<0.001) and
TRAPPC9 (p<0.001) could be confirmed by time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(Sequenom).
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, these data indicate that regrowth of MCF7 cells after 10
Gy FIR is associated with locus-specific alterations in DNA methylation.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21704414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2012 Jan;131(1):65-73. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1396-3.
Epub 2011 Apr 5.

FOXC1, a target of polycomb, inhibits metastasis of breast cancer cells.

Du J(1), Li L, Ou Z, Kong C, Zhang Y, Dong Z, Zhu S, Jiang H, Shao Z, Huang B, Lu
J.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Genetics and Cytology, Northeast Normal University, 5268
Renmin Street, Changchun 130024, China.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins have recently been shown related to cancer
development. The PcG protein EZH2 is involved in progression of prostate and
breast cancers, and has been identified as a molecular marker in breast cancer.
Nevertheless, the molecular mechanism by which PcG proteins regulate cancer
progression and malignant metastasis is still unclear. PcG proteins methylate
H3K27 in undifferentiated epithelial cells, resulting in the repression of
differentiation genes such as HOX. FOXC1 is a member of the Forkhead box
transcription factor family, which plays an important role in differentiation,
and is involved in eye development. We discovered in this study that the
expression of FOXC1 gene was negatively correlated to that of PcG genes, i.e.,
Bmi1, EZH2, and SUZ12, in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. To investigate the
regulatory effects of PcG proteins on FOXC1 gene, the two cell lines were
transfected with either expression plasmids or siRNA plasmids of Bmi1, EZH2, and 
SUZ12, and we found that PcGs, especially EZH2, could repress the transcription
of FOXC1 gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed that histone
methylation and acetylation modifications played critical roles in this
regulatory process. When FOXC1 was stably transfected into MDA-MB-231 cells, the 
migration and invasion of the cells were repressed. Moreover, the tumorigenicity 
and the spontaneous metastatic capability regulated by FOXC1 were determined by
using an orthotropic xenograft tumor model of athymic mice with the
FOXC1-MDA-MB-231HM and the GFP-MDA-MB-231HM cells, and the results showed that
FOXC1 in MDA-MB-231HM cells inhibited migration and invasion in vitro and reduced
the pulmonary metastasis in vivo. Data presented in this report contribute to the
understanding of the mechanisms by which EZH2 participates in tumor development.

PMID: 21465172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Ann Surg Oncol. 2011 Dec;18(13):3839-47. doi: 10.1245/s10434-011-1657-8. Epub
2011 Mar 18.

Basal-like breast cancer defined by FOXC1 expression offers superior prognostic
value: a retrospective immunohistochemical study.

Ray PS(1), Bagaria SP, Wang J, Shamonki JM, Ye X, Sim MS, Steen S, Qu Y, Cui X,
Giuliano AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, John Wayne Cancer Institute, Santa Monica,
CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) has a poor prognosis and is often
identified by the triple-negative phenotype (TNP) and/or basal cytokeratins
(CKs). Overexpression of mRNA for forkhead box C1 (FOXC1) transcription factor
was recently identified as a pivotal prognostic biomarker of BLBC. We
investigated the prognostic value of FOXC1 protein expression in invasive breast 
cancer and compared its prognostic significance to that of TNP and basal CKs.
METHODS: Archived TNP specimens of primary invasive ductal breast cancer from 759
patients were examined by immunohistochemical staining for FOXC1, CK5/6, and
CK14; prognostic significance was assessed using multivariate analyses. In
addition, the impact of adding FOXC1 versus basal CKs to TNP-based BLBC
assessment was assessed.
RESULTS: FOXC1 protein expression was a significant predictor of overall survival
on univariate (hazard ratio [HR] 3.364 95% confidence interval [CI] 1.758-6.438, 
P = 0.0002) and multivariate (HR 3.389 95% CI 1.928-7.645, P = 0.0001) analyses, 
despite its correlation with younger age (P = 0.0003). Interestingly, nodal
status was not significant on multivariate analysis when FOXC1 expression status 
was included in the analysis. BLBC defined by TNP plus FOXC1 demonstrated
superior prognostic relevance compared to BLBC defined by TNP or TNP plus basal
CKs.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunohistochemical detection of FOXC1 expression in TNP invasive
breast cancer is an independent prognostic indicator that is superior to
conventional immunohistochemical surrogates of BLBC. Prospective validation is
warranted to further define the diagnostic, prognostic, and predictive utility of
FOXC1 in breast cancer management and clinical trial design.

PMID: 21424368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mol Vis. 2011 Mar 11;17:708-14.

Genetic and genomic analysis of classic aniridia in Saudi Arabia.

Khan AO(1), Aldahmesh MA, Alkuraya FS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

PURPOSE: To determine the genetic and genomic alterations underlying classic
aniridia in Saudi Arabia, a region with social preference for consanguineous
marriage.
METHODS: Prospective study of consecutive patients referred to a pediatric
ophthalmologist in Saudi Arabia (2005-2009). All patients had paired box gene 6
(PAX6) analysis (sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification 
analysis if sequencing was normal). If PAX6 analysis was negative, the following 
were performed: candidate gene sequencing (forkhead box C1 [FOXC1], paired-like
homeodomain transcription factor 2 [PITX2], cytochrome P450, family 1, subfamily 
B [CYP1B1], paired-like homeodomain transcription factor 3 [PITX3], and v-maf
avian musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog [MAF]) and molecular
karyotyping by array competitive genomic hybridization (250K single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) arrays).
RESULTS: All 12 probands (4 months-25 years of age; four boys and eight girls)
had lens opacity and foveal hypoplasia in addition to no grossly visible iris.
Four cases were familial. All cases were products of consanguineous unions except
for three, one of which was endogamous. Heterozygous PAX6 mutations (including
two novel mutations) were detectable in all but two cases, both of which were
sporadic. In one of these two cases, the phenotype segregated with homozygosity
for a previously-reported pathogenic missense FOXC1 variant (p.P297S) when
homozygosity for chromosome 11q24.2 deletion (chr11:125,001,547-125,215,177
[rs114259885; rs112291840]) was also present. In the other, no genetic or genomic
abnormalities were found.
CONCLUSIONS: The classic aniridia phenotype in Saudi Arabia is typically caused
by heterozygous PAX6 mutations, even in the setting of enhanced homozygosity from
recent shared parental ancestry. For PAX6-negative cases, interaction between
missense variation in an anterior segment developmental gene and copy number
variation elsewhere in the genome may be a potential mechanism for the phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3060157
PMID: 21423868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Int J Cancer. 2012 Mar 1;130(5):1036-45. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26060. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Dysregulation of microRNA-204 mediates migration and invasion of endometrial
cancer by regulating FOXC1.

Chung TK(1), Lau TS, Cheung TH, Yim SF, Lo KW, Siu NS, Chan LK, Yu MY, Kwong J,
Doran G, Barroilhet LM, Ng AS, Wong RR, Wang VW, Mok SC, Smith DI, Berkowitz RS, 
Wong YF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) regulate mRNA stability and protein expression, and certain
miRNAs have been demonstrated to act either as oncogenes or tumor suppressors.
Differential miRNA expression signatures have been documented in many human
cancers but the role of miRNAs in endometrioid endometrial cancer (EEC) remains
poorly understood. This study identifies significantly dysregulated miRNAs of EEC
cells, and characterizes their impact on the malignant phenotype. We studied the 
expression of 365 human miRNAs using Taqman low density arrays in EECs and normal
endometriums. Candidate differentially expressed miRNAs were validated by
quantitative real-time PCR. Expression of highly dysregulated miRNAs was examined
in vitro through the effect of anti-/pre-miRNA transfection on the malignant
phenotype. We identified 16 significantly dysregulated miRNAs in EEC and 7 of
these are novel findings with respect to EEC. Antagonizing the function of miR-7,
miR-194 and miR-449b, or overexpressing miR-204, repressed migration, invasion
and extracellular matrix-adhesion in HEC1A endometrial cancer cells. FOXC1 was
determined as a target gene of miR-204, and two binding sites in the
3'-untranslated region were validated by dual luciferase reporter assay. FOXC1
expression was inversely related to miR-204 expression in EEC. Functional
analysis revealed the involvement of FOXC1 in migration and invasion of HEC1A
cells. Our results present dysfunctional miRNAs in endometrial cancer and
identify a crucial role for miR-204-FOXC1 interaction in endometrial cancer
progression. This miRNA signature offers a potential biomarker for predicting EEC
outcomes, and targeting of these cancer progression- and metastasis-related
miRNAs offers a novel potential therapeutic strategy for the disease.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21400511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Am J Ophthalmol. 2011 Jun;151(6):1087-1094.e45. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2010.11.025.
Epub 2011 Feb 25.

High frequency of submicroscopic chromosomal deletions in patients with
idiopathic congenital eye malformations.

Balikova I(1), de Ravel T, Ayuso C, Thienpont B, Casteels I, Villaverde C,
Devriendt K, Fryns JP, Vermeesch JR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Human Genetics, University Hospitals Leuven, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to evaluate the clinical usefulness of the
array comparative genomic hybridization technique for the genetic analysis of
patients with congenital ocular malformations.
DESIGN: Laboratory investigation.
METHODS: This was a multicenter study. Samples were collected from 37 patients
with negative results for the routine diagnostic work-up, including normal
karyotype and mutation analysis of appropriate genes. Samples from both parents
also were tested. High-resolution genome-wide Agilent 244K oligoarray (Agilent
Technologies) was applied. Confirmation of the results was obtained with
independent techniques.
RESULTS: Causal deletions were identified in 5 (13%) patients, affecting OTX2,
FOXC1 and VPS13B (COH1), the downstream regulatory region of PAX6, and a 1,5
Megabases de novo deletion on chromosome 16.
CONCLUSIONS: This high frequency of causal submicroscopic chromosomal aberrations
in patients with congenital ocular malformation warrants implementation of array 
comparative genomic hybridization in the diagnostic work-up of these patients.
Moreover, this screening technique broadens the phenotypic and mutational
spectrum associated with genes known to cause congenital ocular malformation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21353197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Ophthalmic Genet. 2011 Sep;32(3):138-42. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2010.544365. Epub 
2011 Feb 9.

Molecular characterization of newborn glaucoma including a distinct aniridic
phenotype.

Khan AO(1), Aldahmesh MA, Al-Abdi L, Mohamed JY, Hashem M, Al-Ghamdi I, Alkuraya 
FS.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Ophthalmology, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. arif.khan@mssm.edu

Comment in
    Surv Ophthalmol. 2013 Sep-Oct;58(5):502.
    Surv Ophthalmol. 2013 Sep-Oct;58(5):502.

PURPOSE: To characterize the underlying genetic defect in otherwise healthy Saudi
newborns with buphthalmos, including those with iris abnormalities.
METHODS: Prospective case series of affected Saudi Arabian probands who were
referred for genetic counseling over a 4 year period. All had CYP1B1 sequencing. 
Selected patients with visible iris abnormalities had PAX6, FOXC1, and PITX2
sequencing. CYP1B1-negative patients had LTBP2 sequencing.
RESULTS: All 67 probands had corneal enlargement with variable haze/scarring
evident to caregivers at birth; 46 had a family history of infantile or early
childhood glaucoma. All families were consanguineous except for 6, 2 of which
were endogamous. Eight probands had mild ectropion uveae with partial aniridia; 2
probands had thick scarred corneas that precluded careful iris examination.
Homozygous or compound heterozygous CYP1B1 mutations were identified in 91%
(61/67), including all 8 probands with ectopion uveae and partial aniridia. The
common Saudi mutation p.G61E occurred in most cases (38 homozygous, 8 compound
heterozygous). Four novel mutations were identified (p.N252K, p.V460E, p.S485F,
p.N519D). No mutations were identified in the other screened genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Newborn glaucoma on the Arabian Peninsula is typically
CYP1B1-related even in the setting of developmental iris abnormality. Mild iris
ectropion with partial aniridia in a newborn with glaucoma suggests mutations in 
CYP1B1 rather than in other genes associated with anterior segment dysgenesis. On
the Arabian Peninsula p.G61E mutations are the major cause of newborn glaucoma
but novel CYP1B1 mutations continue to be documented. The fact that the 9% of
cases that were CYP1B1-negative did not have mutations in LTBP2 suggests that
there exists at least 1 additional locus for this condition.

PMID: 21306220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Apr 15;20(8):1610-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr038. Epub 2011 Jan 
31.

A complex regulatory network of transcription factors critical for ocular
development and disease.

Acharya M(1), Huang L, Fleisch VC, Allison WT, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada
T6G 2H7. moulinat@ulaberta.ca

The PITX2 'homeobox' and FOXC1 and FOXC2 'forkhead box' transcription factors are
critical for eye development and cause human ocular diseases when mutated. We
have identified biochemical and genetic links between these transcription factors
and a transcriptional regulator protein PRKC apoptosis Wilms' tumor 1 regulator
(PAWR) that we propose to functionally connect all these proteins in a common
pathway critically involved in eye development. We discovered all binary physical
interactions between FOXC1, PITX2, FOXC2 and PAWR. Importantly, PAWR modulates
the abilities of PITX2, FOXC1 and FOXC2 to activate their genetic targets.
Together with either FOXC1 or FOXC2, PAWR increases PITX2 activity. PAWR reduces 
PITX2 activity in the absence of FOXC1 or FOXC2. At the same time, PAWR also
exerts different regulatory effects on different FOXC target sites. Furthermore, 
morpholino knockdown of pitx2, foxc1 and pawr in zebrafish indicate that PAWR,
FOXC1 and PITX2 genetically interact, and are in the same developmental pathway. 
These data for the first time tie PITX2, FOXC1, FOXC2 and PAWR into a common
regulatory pathway. We have therefore identified a functional link between three 
transcription factors, modulated by PAWR, which we propose underlies the similar 
ocular phenotypes and glaucoma pathology caused by mutations of these genes.

PMID: 21282189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Glaucoma. 2011 Dec;20(9):584-6. doi: 10.1097/IJG.0b013e3181f7b258.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome in monozygotic twins.

Ma J(1), Zhong Y, Zhao C, Zhang X, Sui R, Chu P, Zhao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, PR China.

Two teenaged monozygotic twin sisters with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) were
referred to our center for uncontrolled glaucoma from the local hospital in
December 2006. At presentation, typical components of ARS could be found in both 
patients, including iris anomaly, maxillary hypoplasia, hypodontia, and umbilical
skin fold. Both sisters received trabeculectomy in both the eyes later in our
center. Intraocular pressure was well controlled in both the eyes in both
patients 1 year after the surgeries. No mutations were found by direct sequencing
of PITX2 and FOXC1 genes, in the twin sisters. As far as we know, no earlier
report has described monozygotic twins with ARS in the international literature.

PMID: 21278591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. BMC Cancer. 2011 Jan 25;11:31. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-31.

Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) mutation analysis, gene expression
profiling and EGFR protein expression in primary prostate cancer.

Peraldo-Neia C(1), Migliardi G, Mello-Grand M, Montemurro F, Segir R, Pignochino 
Y, Cavalloni G, Torchio B, Mosso L, Chiorino G, Aglietta M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, University of Torino Medical School,
Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment, Candiolo, Turin, Italy.
caterina.peraldoneia@ircc.it

BACKGROUND: Activating mutations of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
confer sensitivity to the tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKi), gefitinib and
erlotinib. We analysed EGFR expression, EGFR mutation status and gene expression 
profiles of prostate cancer (PC) to supply a rationale for EGFR targeted
therapies in this disease.
METHODS: Mutational analysis of EGFR TK domain (exons from 18 to 21) and
immunohistochemistry for EGFR were performed on tumour tissues derived from
radical prostatectomy from 100 PC patients. Gene expression profiling using
oligo-microarrays was also carried out in 51 of the PC samples.
RESULTS: EGFR protein overexpression (EGFRhigh) was found in 36% of the tumour
samples, and mutations were found in 13% of samples. Patients with EGFRhigh
tumours experienced a significantly increased risk of biochemical relapse (hazard
ratio-HR 2.52, p=0.02) compared with patients with tumours expressing low levels 
of EGFR (EGFRlow). Microarray analysis did not reveal any differences in gene
expression between EGFRhigh and EGFRlow tumours. Conversely, in EGFRhigh tumours,
we were able to identify a 79 gene signature distinguishing mutated from
non-mutated tumours. Additionally, 29 genes were found to be differentially
expressed between mutated/EGFRhigh (n=3) and mutated/EGFRlow tumours (n=5). Four 
of the down-regulated genes, U19/EAF2, ABCC4, KLK3 and ANXA3 and one of the
up-regulated genes, FOXC1, are involved in PC progression.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on our findings, we hypothesize that accurate definition of
the EGFR status could improve prognostic stratification and we suggest a possible
role for EGFR-directed therapies in PC patients. Having been generated in a
relatively small sample of patients, our results warrant confirmation in larger
series.

PMCID: PMC3040720
PMID: 21266046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jan;155A(1):154-63. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33751. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

A complex 6p25 rearrangement in a child with multiple epiphyseal dysplasia.

Bedoyan JK(1), Lesperance MM, Ackley T, Iyer RK, Innis JW, Misra VK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Michigan Medical School, Ann
Arbor, USA. sarahbed@med.umich.edu

Genomic rearrangements are increasingly recognized as important contributors to
human disease. Here we report on an 11½-year-old child with myopia, Duane
retraction syndrome, bilateral mixed hearing loss, skeletal anomalies including
multiple epiphyseal dysplasia, and global developmental delay, and a complex 6p25
genomic rearrangement. We have employed oligonucleotide-based comparative genomic
hybridization arrays (aCGH) of different resolutions (44 and 244K) as well as a
1<U+2009>M single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array to analyze this complex
rearrangement. Our analyses reveal a complex rearrangement involving a ~2.21<U+2009>Mb
interstitial deletion, a ~240<U+2009>kb terminal deletion, and a 70-80<U+2009>kb region in
between these two deletions that shows maintenance of genomic copy number. The
interstitial deletion contains eight known genes, including three Forkhead box
containing (FOX) transcription factors (FOXQ1, FOXF2, and FOXC1). The region
maintaining genomic copy number partly overlaps the dual specificity protein
phosphatase 22 (DUSP22) gene. Array analyses suggest a homozygous loss of genomic
material at the 5' end of DUSP22, which was corroborated using TaqMan® copy
number analysis. It is possible that this homozygous genomic loss may render both
copies of DUSP22 or its products non-functional. Our analysis suggests a
rearrangement mechanism distinct from a previously reported replication-based
error-prone mechanism without template switching for a specific 6p25
rearrangement with a 1.22<U+2009>Mb interstitial deletion. Our study demonstrates the
utility and limitations of using oligonucleotide-based aCGH and SNP array
technologies of increasing resolutions in order to identify complex DNA
rearrangements and gene disruptions.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4533830
PMID: 21204225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 28;286(4):2517-25. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.163709. Epub 2010 
Nov 15.

MyoD directly up-regulates premyogenic mesoderm factors during induction of
skeletal myogenesis in stem cells.

Gianakopoulos PJ(1), Mehta V, Voronova A, Cao Y, Yao Z, Coutu J, Wang X,
Waddington MS, Tapscott SJ, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1H 8M5, Canada.

Gain- and loss-of-function experiments have illustrated that the family of
myogenic regulatory factors is necessary and sufficient for the formation of
skeletal muscle. Furthermore, MyoD required cellular aggregation to induce
myogenesis in P19 embryonal carcinoma stem cells. To determine the mechanism by
which stem cells can be directed into skeletal muscle, a time course of P19 cell 
differentiation was examined in the presence and absence of exogenous MyoD. By
quantitative PCR, the first MyoD up-regulated transcripts were the premyogenic
mesoderm factors Meox1, Pax7, Six1, and Eya2 on day 4 of differentiation.
Subsequently, the myoblast markers myogenin, MEF2C, and Myf5 were up-regulated,
leading to skeletal myogenesis. These results were corroborated by Western blot
analysis, showing up-regulation of Pax3, Six1, and MEF2C proteins, prior to
myogenin protein expression. To determine at what stage a dominant-negative
MyoD/EnR mutant could inhibit myogenesis, stable cell lines were created and
examined. Interestingly, the premyogenic mesoderm factors, Meox1, Pax3/7, Six1,
Eya2, and Foxc1, were down-regulated, and as expected, skeletal myogenesis was
abolished. Finally, to identify direct targets of MyoD in this system, chromatin 
immunoprecipitation experiments were performed. MyoD was observed associated with
regulatory regions of Meox1, Pax3/7, Six1, Eya2, and myogenin genes. Taken
together, MyoD directs stem cells into the skeletal muscle lineage by binding and
activating the expression of premyogenic mesoderm genes, prior to activating
myoblast genes.

PMCID: PMC3024746
PMID: 21078671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Mol Vis. 2010 Oct 8;16:1996-2006.

MYOC and FOXC1 gene analysis in primary congenital glaucoma.

Tanwar M(1), Kumar M, Dada T, Sihota R, Dada R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory For Molecular Reproduction and Genetics, Department of Anatomy, All
India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari Nagar, New Delhi, India.

PURPOSE: To screen the myocilin (MYOC) and forkhead box protein C1 (FOXC1) genes 
for sequence variations in primary congenital glaucoma (PCG).
METHODS: Seventy five PCG patients were screened for MYOC variations and 54 cases
(negative or heterozygous for cytochrome P4501B1 mutations) for FOXC1 mutations
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Five single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs; -126T>C, -83G>A, p.R76K,
IVS2+35G>A, and p.Y347Y) were identified in MYOC and two sequence variations
(GGC375ins and GGC447ins) in FOXC1. No pathogenic variations were identified in
MYOC and FOXC1 in our patients.
CONCLUSIONS: MYOC and FOXC1 mutations are not involved in pathogenesis of primary
congenital glaucoma in our patients. Thus, it is important to screen other loci
for involvement in congenital glaucoma in cases which are negative or
heterozygous for CYP1B1 mutations to have a better insight in to disease
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2956699
PMID: 21031026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Nov;152A(11):2743-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33688.

Familial hydrocephalus with normal cognition and distinctive radiological
features.

Basel-Vanagaite L(1), Raas-Rotchild A, Kornreich L, Har-Zahav A, Yeshaya J,
Latarowski V, Lerer I, Dobyns WB, Shohat M.

Author information: 
(1)Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, Raphael Recanati Genetics
Institute, Rabin Medical Center, Beilinson Campus, Petah Tikva, Israel.
basel@post.tau.ac.il

Hydrocephalus is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous condition.
Individuals with posterior fossa abnormalities have an increased risk of
developing hydrocephalus. The Dandy-Walker malformation, Dandy-Walker variant,
and mega-cisterna magna (MCM) seem to represent a continuum of developmental
anomalies of the posterior fossa. Here we describe the natural clinical history
and the radiological features of a family with autosomal or X-linked dominant
inheritance of MCM and hydrocephalus of variable severity. The affected family
members demonstrate similar structural brain abnormalities including midline
cyst, colpocephaly, MCM with a large posterior fossa and minimal vermian
hypoplasia. The cognitive development of the affected individuals is normal.
L1CAM and FOXC1 gene involvement in the pathogenesis of the disease in this
family was excluded. The rare possibility of autosomal dominant or X-linked
dominant inheritance and variable penetrance and expressivity must always be
considered in genetic counseling of families with hereditary hydrocephalus.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20979187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Ann Neurol. 2010 Oct;68(4):454-64. doi: 10.1002/ana.22103.

Primary cellular meningeal defects cause neocortical dysplasia and dyslamination.

Hecht JH(1), Siegenthaler JA, Patterson KP, Pleasure SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Program in Neuroscience, Institute for Regenerative
Medicine, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2010 Oct;68(4):421-3.

OBJECTIVE: Cortical malformations are important causes of neurological morbidity,
but in many cases their etiology is poorly understood. Mice with Foxc1 mutations 
have cellular defects in meningeal development. We use hypomorphic and null
alleles of Foxc1 to study the effect of meningeal defects on neocortical
organization.
METHODS: Embryos with loss of Foxc1 activity were generated using the hypomorphic
Foxc1(hith) allele and the null Foxc1(lacZ) allele. Immunohistologic analysis was
used to assess cerebral basement membrane integrity, marginal zone heterotopia
formation, neuronal overmigration, meningeal defects, and changes in basement
membrane composition. Dysplasia severity was quantified using 2 measures.
RESULTS: Cortical dysplasia resembling cobblestone cortex, with basement membrane
breakdown and lamination defects, is seen in Foxc1 mutants. As Foxc1 activity was
reduced, abnormalities in basement membrane integrity, heterotopia formation,
neuronal overmigration, and meningeal development appeared earlier in gestation
and were more severe. Surprisingly, the basement membrane appeared intact at
early stages of development in the face of severe deficits in meningeal
development. Prominent defects in basement membrane integrity appeared as
development proceeded. Molecular analysis of basement membrane laminin subunits
demonstrated that loss of the meninges led to changes in basement membrane
composition.
INTERPRETATION: Cortical dysplasia can be caused by cellular defects in the
meninges. The meninges are not required for basement membrane establishment but
are needed for remodeling as the brain expands. Specific changes in basement
membrane composition may contribute to subsequent breakdown. Our study raises the
possibility that primary meningeal defects may cortical dysplasia in some cases.

PMCID: PMC2966036
PMID: 20976766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dev Dyn. 2010 Dec;239(12):3215-25. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22459. Epub 2010 Oct 19.

Canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is required for maintenance but not activation 
of Pitx2 expression in neural crest during eye development.

Zacharias AL(1), Gage PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, and Cell and Developmental
Biology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48105, USA.

Pitx2 is a paired-like homeodomain gene that acts as a key regulator of eye
development. Despite its significance, upstream regulation of Pitx2 expression
during eye development remains incompletely understood. We use neural
crest-specific ablation of Ctnnb1 to demonstrate that canonical Wnt signaling is 
not required for initial activation of Pitx2 in neural crest. However, canonical 
Wnt signaling is subsequently required to maintain Pitx2 expression in the neural
crest. Eye development in Ctnnb1-null mice appears grossly normal early but
significant phenotypes emerge following loss of Pitx2 expression. LEF-1 and
ß-catenin bind Pitx2 promoter sequences in ocular neural crest, indicating a
likely direct effect of canonical Wnt signaling on Pitx2 expression. Combining
our data with previous reports, we propose a model wherein a sequential code of
retinoic acid followed by canonical Wnt signaling are required for activation and
maintenance of Pitx2 expression, respectively. Other key transcription factors in
the neural crest, including Foxc1, do not require intact canonical Wnt signaling.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3073314
PMID: 20960542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Mar;19(3). doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.163. Epub 2010 Oct 13.

Clinical utility gene card for: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

Weisschuh N(1), De Baere E, Wissinger B, Tümer Z.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Centre for Ophthalmology, Institute for
Ophthalmic Research, Tuebingen, Germany. nicole.weisschuh@uni-tuebingen.de

PMCID: PMC3061995
PMID: 20940740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Jan 21;52(1):324-33. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-5309.

Expanding the spectrum of FOXC1 and PITX2 mutations and copy number changes in
patients with anterior segment malformations.

D'haene B(1), Meire F, Claerhout I, Kroes HY, Plomp A, Arens YH, de Ravel T,
Casteels I, De Jaegere S, Hooghe S, Wuyts W, van den Ende J, Roulez F,
Veenstra-Knol HE, Oldenburg RA, Giltay J, Verheij JB, de Faber JT, Menten B, De
Paepe A, Kestelyn P, Leroy BP, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Department of Ophthalmology, Ghen University
Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

PURPOSE: Anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD) comprises a heterogeneous group of
developmental abnormalities that affect several structures of the anterior
segment of the eye. The main purpose of this study was to assess the proportion
of FOXC1 and PITX2 mutations and copy number changes in 80 probands with ASD.
METHODS: The patients were examined for FOXC1 and PITX2 copy number changes and
mutations using MLPA (multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification) and
direct sequencing. Subsequently, the identified copy number changes were
fine-mapped using high-resolution microarrays. In the remaining mutation-negative
patients, sequencing of the FOXC1 andPITX2 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) and
three other candidate genes (P32, PDP2, and FOXC2) was performed.
RESULTS: Thirteen FOXC1 and eight PITX2 mutations were identified, accounting for
26% (21/80) of the cases. In addition, six FOXC1 and five PITX2 deletions were
found, explaining 14% (11/80) of the cases. The smallest FOXC1 and PITX2
deletions were 5.4 and 1.6 kb in size, respectively. Six patients carrying FOXC1 
deletions presented with variable extraocular phenotypic features such as hearing
defects (in 4/6) and mental retardation (in 2/6). No further genetic defects were
found in the remaining mutation-negative patients.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXC1 and PITX2 genetic defects explain 40% of our large ASD cohort.
The current spectrum of intragenic FOXC1 and PITX2 mutations was extended
considerably, the identified copy number changes were fine mapped, the smallest
FOXC1 and PITX2 deletions reported so far were identified, and the need for
dedicated copy number screening of the FOXC1 and PITX2 genomic landscape was
emphasized. This study is unique in that sequence and copy number changes were
screened simultaneously in both genes.

PMID: 20881294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biochem. 2011 Jan;149(1):55-65. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvq114. Epub 2010 Sep 29.

Autocrine TGF-ß protects breast cancer cells from apoptosis through reduction of 
BH3-only protein, Bim.

Hoshino Y(1), Katsuno Y, Ehata S, Miyazono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Cancer cells undergo multi-step processes in obtaining the ability to
metastasize, and are constantly exposed to signals that induce apoptosis.
Acquisition of anti-apoptotic properties by cancer cells is important for
metastasis, and recent studies suggest that transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß
promotes the survival of certain types of cancer cells. Here, we found that in
highly metastatic breast cancer cells, JygMC(A), JygMC(B) and 4T1, TGF-ß ligands 
were produced in autocrine fashion. Pharmacological inhibition of endogenous
TGF-ß signalling by a TGF-ß type I receptor kinase inhibitor in serum-free
conditions increased the expression of BH3-only protein, Bim (also known as
Bcl2-like 11) in JygMC(A) and JygMC(B) cells, and caused apoptotic cell death. We
also found that induction of Bim by TGF-ß was not observed in Foxc1 knocked-down 
cancer cells. These findings suggest that TGF-ß plays a crucial role in the
regulation of survival of certain types of cancer cells through the
TGF-ß-Foxc1-Bim pathway, and that specific inhibitors of TGF-ß signalling might
be useful as apoptosis inducers in breast cancer cells.

PMID: 20880961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Aug 31;107(35):15449-54. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1004900107. Epub 2010 Aug 16.

Core epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition interactome gene-expression signature
is associated with claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancer subtypes.

Taube JH(1), Herschkowitz JI, Komurov K, Zhou AY, Gupta S, Yang J, Hartwell K,
Onder TT, Gupta PB, Evans KW, Hollier BG, Ram PT, Lander ES, Rosen JM, Weinberg
RA, Mani SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Nov 2;107(44):19132.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) produces cancer cells that are
invasive, migratory, and exhibit stem cell characteristics, hallmarks of cells
that have the potential to generate metastases. Inducers of the EMT include
several transcription factors (TFs), such as Goosecoid, Snail, and Twist, as well
as the secreted TGF-beta1. Each of these factors is capable, on its own, of
inducing an EMT in the human mammary epithelial (HMLE) cell line. However, the
interactions between these regulators are poorly understood. Overexpression of
each of the above EMT inducers up-regulates a subset of other EMT-inducing TFs,
with Twist, Zeb1, Zeb2, TGF-beta1, and FOXC2 being commonly induced.
Up-regulation of Slug and FOXC2 by either Snail or Twist does not depend on
TGF-beta1 signaling. Gene expression signatures (GESs) derived by overexpressing 
EMT-inducing TFs reveal that the Twist GES and Snail GES are the most similar,
although the Goosecoid GES is the least similar to the others. An EMT core
signature was derived from the changes in gene expression shared by up-regulation
of Gsc, Snail, Twist, and TGF-beta1 and by down-regulation of E-cadherin, loss of
which can also trigger an EMT in certain cell types. The EMT core signature
associates closely with the claudin-low and metaplastic breast cancer subtypes
and correlates negatively with pathological complete response. Additionally, the 
expression level of FOXC1, another EMT inducer, correlates strongly with poor
survival of breast cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC2932589
PMID: 20713713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Tissue Eng Part A. 2010 Nov;16(11):3427-40. doi: 10.1089/ten.tea.2010.0112. Epub 
2010 Jul 23.

Superior osteogenic capacity of human embryonic stem cells adapted to matrix-free
growth compared to human mesenchymal stem cells.

Bigdeli N(1), de Peppo GM, Lennerås M, Sjövall P, Lindahl A, Hyllner J, Karlsson 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Transfusion Medicine, Institute of
Biomedicine, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Gothenburg University, Gothenburg, 
Sweden. narmin.bigdeli@gu.se

Human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) represent a promising source of cells for
bone tissue engineering. However, their low frequencies and limited proliferation
restrict their clinical utility. An alternative is the use of human embryonic
stem cells (hESCs), but labor-intensive expansion with the need for coating
support limits their clinical use. We have previously derived a cell line from
hESCs denoted matrix-free growth (MFG)-hESC that are independent of coating
support for expansion, and we here compare its osteogenic capacity to that of
hMSCs. Microarray analysis of hMSCs and MFG-hESCs revealed differential
expression of genes involved in ossification. MFG-hESCs have significantly higher
expression of secreted phosphoprotein 1 (SPP1) during osteogenic differentiation,
whereas the opposite was true for alkaline phosphatase (ALPL), transforming
growth factor, beta 1 (TGFB2), runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2), and
forkhead box C1 (FOXC1), as well as the activity of the ALPL enzyme,
demonstrating that these two cell types differentiate into the osteogenic lineage
using different signaling pathways. von Kossa staining, time-of-flight secondary 
ion mass spectrometry, and measurement of calcium and phosphate in the
extracellular matrix demonstrated a superior ability of the MFG-hESCs to produce 
a mineralized matrix compared to hMSCs. The superior ability of the MFG-hESCs to 
form mineralized matrix compared to hMSCs demonstrates that MFG-hESCs are a
promising alternative to the use of adult stem cells in future bone regenerative 
applications.

PMID: 20653416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cancer Res. 2010 May 15;70(10):3870-6. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-4120. Epub
2010 Apr 20.

FOXC1 is a potential prognostic biomarker with functional significance in
basal-like breast cancer.

Ray PS(1), Wang J, Qu Y, Sim MS, Shamonki J, Bagaria SP, Ye X, Liu B, Elashoff D,
Hoon DS, Walter MA, Martens JW, Richardson AL, Giuliano AE, Cui X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, John Wayne Cancer Institute, Santa Monica,
California 90404, USA.

Gene expression signatures for a basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) subtype have
been associated with poor clinical outcomes, but a molecular basis for this
disease remains unclear. Here, we report overexpression of the transcription
factor FOXC1 as a consistent feature of BLBC compared with other molecular
subtypes of breast cancer. Elevated FOXC1 expression predicted poor overall
survival in BLBC (P = 0.0001), independently of other clinicopathologic
prognostic factors including lymph node status, along with a higher incidence of 
brain metastasis (P = 0.02) and a shorter brain metastasis-free survival in lymph
node-negative patients (P < 0.0001). Ectopic overexpression of FOXC1 in breast
cancer cells increased cell proliferation, migration, and invasion, whereas
shRNA-mediated FOXC1 knockdown yielded opposite effects. Our findings identify
FOXC1 as a theranostic biomarker that is specific for BLBC, offering not only a
potential prognostic candidate but also a potential molecular therapeutic target 
in this breast cancer subtype.

(c)2010 AACR.

PMID: 20406990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Case Rep Med. 2010;2010:621984. doi: 10.1155/2010/621984. Epub 2010 Mar 21.

Dental and Craniofacial Anomalies Associated with Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome with
PITX2 Mutation.

Dressler S(1), Meyer-Marcotty P, Weisschuh N, Jablonski-Momeni A, Pieper K,
Gramer G, Gramer E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, Dental School, University of Marburg,
Georg-Voigt-Str. 3, 35033 Marburg, Germany.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) (OMIM Nr.: 180500) is a rare autosomal dominant
disorder (1 : 200000) with genetic and morphologic variability. Glaucoma is
associated in 50% of the patients. Craniofacial and dental anomalies are
frequently reported with ARS. The present study was designed as a
multidisciplinary analysis of orthodontic, ophthalmologic, and genotypical
features. A three-generation pedigree was ascertained through a family with ARS. 
Clinically, radiographic and genetic analyses were performed. Despite an
identical genotype in all patients, the phenotype varies in expressivity of
craniofacial and dental morphology. Screening for PITX2 and FOXC1 mutations by
direct DNA-sequencing revealed a P64L missense mutation in PITX2 in all family
members, supporting earlier reports that PITX2 is an essential factor in
morphogenesis of teeth and craniofacial skeleton. Despite the fact that the
family members had identical mutations, morphologic differences were evident. The
concomitant occurrence of rare dental and craniofacial anomalies may be early
diagnostic indications of ARS. Early detection of ARS and elevated intraocular
pressure (IOP) helps to prevent visual field loss.

PMCID: PMC2842968
PMID: 20339518  [PubMed]


182. Mol Cancer. 2010 Mar 25;9:68. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-68.

DNA methylation profiling in doxorubicin treated primary locally advanced breast 
tumours identifies novel genes associated with survival and treatment response.

Dejeux E(1), Rønneberg JA, Solvang H, Bukholm I, Geisler S, Aas T, Gut IG,
Børresen-Dale AL, Lønning PE, Kristensen VN, Tost J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Epigenetics, Centre National de Génotypage, CEA - Institut de
Génomique, Evry, France. dejeux@cng.fr

BACKGROUND: Breast cancer is the most frequent cancer in women and consists of a 
heterogeneous collection of diseases with distinct histopathological, genetic and
epigenetic characteristics. In this study, we aimed to identify DNA methylation
based biomarkers to distinguish patients with locally advanced breast cancer who 
may benefit from neoadjuvant doxorubicin treatment.
RESULTS: We investigated quantitatively the methylation patterns in the promoter 
regions of 14 genes (ABCB1, ATM, BRCA1, CDH3, CDKN2A, CXCR4, ESR1, FBXW7, FOXC1, 
GSTP1, IGF2, HMLH1, PPP2R2B, and PTEN) in 75 well-described pre-treatment samples
from locally advanced breast cancer and correlated the results to the available
clinical and molecular parameters. Six normal breast tissues were used as
controls and 163 unselected breast cancer cases were used to validate
associations with histopathological and clinical parameters.Aberrant methylation 
was detected in 9 out of the 14 genes including the discovery of methylation at
the FOXC1 promoter. Absence of methylation at the ABCB1 promoter correlated with 
progressive disease during doxorubicin treatment. Most importantly, the DNA
methylation status at the promoters of GSTP1, FOXC1 and ABCB1 correlated with
survival, whereby the combination of methylated genes improved the subdivision
with respect to the survival of the patients. In multivariate analysis GSTP1 and 
FOXC1 methylation status proved to be independent prognostic markers associated
with survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative DNA methylation profiling is a powerful tool to
identify molecular changes associated with specific phenotypes. Methylation at
the ABCB1 or GSTP1 promoter improved overall survival probably due to prolonged
availability and activity of the drug in the cell while FOXC1 methylation might
be a protective factor against tumour invasiveness. FOXC1 proved to be general
prognostic factor, while ABCB1 and GSTP1 might be predictive factors for the
response to and efficacy of doxorubicin treatment. Pharmacoepigenetic effects
such as the reported associations in this study provide molecular explanations
for differential responses to chemotherapy and it might prove valuable to take
the methylation status of selected genes into account for patient management and 
treatment decisions.

PMCID: PMC2861056
PMID: 20338046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Histol Histopathol. 2010 May;25(5):637-46.

Specification of arterial, venous, and lymphatic endothelial cells during
embryonic development.

Kume T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg Cardiovascular Research Institute, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. t-kume@northwestern.edu

The groundbreaking discovery about arterial and venous expression of ephrinB2 and
EphB4, respectively, in early embryonic development has led to a new paradigm for
vascular research, providing compelling evidence that arterial and venous
endothelial cells are established by genetic mechanisms before circulation
begins. For arterial specification, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
induces expression of Notch signaling genes, including Notch1 and its ligand,
Delta-like 4 (Dll4), and Foxc1 and Foxc2 transcription factors directly regulate 
Dll4 expression. Upon activation of Notch signaling, the Notch downstream genes, 
Hey1/2 in mice or gridlock in zebrafish, further promote arterial
differentiation. On the other hand, the orphan nuclear receptor COUP-TFII is a
determinant factor for venous specification by inhibiting expression of arterial 
specific genes, including Nrp1 and Notch. After arterial and venous endothelial
cells differentiate, a subpopulation of venous endothelial cells is thought to
become competent to acquire lymphatic endothelial cell fate by progressively
expressing the transcription factors Sox18 and Prox1 to differentiate into
lymphatic endothelial cells. Therefore, it has now evident that arterial-venous
cell fate determination and subsequent lymphatic development are regulated by the
multi-step regulatory system associated with the key signaling pathways and
transcription factors. Furthermore, new signaling molecules as additional
regulators in these processes have recently been identified. As the mechanistic
basis for a link between signaling pathways and transcriptional networks in
arterial, venous and lymphatic endothelial cells begins to be uncovered, it is
now time to summarize the literature on this exciting topic and provide
perspectives for future research in the field.

PMCID: PMC2899674
PMID: 20238301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2010 Sep;51(9):4380-6. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-4111. Epub
2010 Feb 17.

Identification of the IRXB gene cluster as candidate genes in severe dysgenesis
of the ocular anterior segment.

Chaabouni M(1), Etchevers H, De Blois MC, Calvas P, Waill-Perrier MC, Vekemans M,
Romana SP.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Cytogénétique, INSERM, Paris, France. chaabouni_myriam@yahoo.fr

PURPOSE: Anterior segment ocular dysgenesis (ASOD) is a broad heterogeneous group
of diseases detectable at the clinical and molecular level. In a patient with
bilateral congenital ASOD including aniridia and aphakia, a complex chromosomal
rearrangement, inv(2)(p22.3q12.1)t(2;16)(q12.1;q12.2), was characterized at the
molecular level, to identify candidate genes implicated in ASOD.
METHODS: After negative sequencing of the PAX6, FOXC1, and PITX2 genes, we used
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and Southern blot analysis to
characterize the chromosomal breakpoints. Candidate genes were selected, and in
situ tissue expression analysis was performed on human fetuses and embryos.
RESULTS: Molecular analyses showed that the 16q12.2 breakpoint in this
rearrangement occurs in a 625-bp region centromeric to the IRX3 gene, which
belongs to the IRXB cluster. In situ hybridization expression studies showed that
during early human embryonic development, the IRX3 gene is expressed in the
anterior segment of the eye. Of interest, it has been shown previously that a
highly conserved noncoding region (HCNCR) is located 300 kb centromeric to the
IRX3 gene and induces, in a murine transgenic assay, an expression pattern
fitting that of the IRX3 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors propose that the 16q12.2 breakpoint of this complex
translocation is causally related to the ocular anterior segment dysgenesis
observed in this patient. This translocation is assumed to separate the HCNCR
from the IRXB cluster genes, thus deregulating the IRXB cluster and leading to
the ASOD observed by a positional effect.

PMID: 20164457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(1):R3. doi: 10.1186/bcr2466. Epub 2010 Jan 7.

Frequent aberrant DNA methylation of ABCB1, FOXC1, PPP2R2B and PTEN in ductal
carcinoma in situ and early invasive breast cancer.

Muggerud AA(1), Rønneberg JA, Wärnberg F, Botling J, Busato F, Jovanovic J,
Solvang H, Bukholm I, Børresen-Dale AL, Kristensen VN, Sørlie T, Tost J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University
Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Montebello, Oslo, N-0310, Norway.

INTRODUCTION: Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a non-invasive lesion of the
breast that is frequently detected by mammography and subsequently removed by
surgery. However, it is estimated that about half of the detected lesions would
never have progressed into invasive cancer. Identifying DCIS and invasive cancer 
specific epigenetic lesions and understanding how these epigenetic changes are
involved in triggering tumour progression is important for a better understanding
of which lesions are at risk of becoming invasive.
METHODS: Quantitative DNA methylation analysis of ABCB1, CDKN2A/p16INK4a, ESR1,
FOXC1, GSTP1, IGF2, MGMT, MLH1, PPP2R2B, PTEN and RASSF1A was performed by
pyrosequencing in a series of 27 pure DCIS, 28 small invasive ductal carcinomas
(IDCs), 34 IDCs with a DCIS component and 5 normal breast tissue samples. FOXC1, 
ABCB1, PPP2R2B and PTEN were analyzed in 23 additional normal breast tissue
samples. Real-Time PCR expression analysis was performed for FOXC1.
RESULTS: Aberrant DNA methylation was observed in all three diagnosis groups for 
the following genes: ABCB1, FOXC1, GSTP1, MGMT, MLH1, PPP2R2B, PTEN and RASSF1A. 
For most of these genes, methylation was already present at the DCIS level with
the same frequency as within IDCs. For FOXC1 significant differences in
methylation levels were observed between normal breast tissue and invasive
tumours (P < 0.001). The average DNA methylation levels were significantly higher
in the pure IDCs and IDCs with DCIS compared to pure DCIS (P = 0.007 and P =
0.001, respectively). Real-time PCR analysis of FOXC1 expression from 25 DCIS, 23
IDCs and 28 normal tissue samples showed lower gene expression levels of FOXC1 in
both methylated and unmethylated tumours compared to normal tissue (P < 0.001).
DNA methylation levels of FOXC1, GSTP1, ABCB1 and RASSF1A were higher in
oestrogen receptor (ER) positive vs. ER negative tumours; whereas methylation
levels of FOXC1, ABCB1, PPP2R2B and PTEN were lower in tumours with a TP53
mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Quantitative methylation analysis identified ABCB1, FOXC1, PPP2R2B
and PTEN as novel genes to be methylated in DCIS. In particular, FOXC1 showed a
significant increase in the methylation frequency in invasive tumours. Low FOXC1 
gene expression in both methylated and unmethylated DCIS and IDCs indicates that 
the loss of its expression is an early event during breast cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC2880421
PMID: 20056007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cell. 2009 Oct 30;139(3):597-609. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.10.004.

Retinoic acid from the meninges regulates cortical neuron generation.

Siegenthaler JA(1), Ashique AM, Zarbalis K, Patterson KP, Hecht JH, Kane MA,
Folias AE, Choe Y, May SR, Kume T, Napoli JL, Peterson AS, Pleasure SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute for Regenerative Medicine, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2011 Aug 5;146(3):486.

Extrinsic signals controlling generation of neocortical neurons during embryonic 
life have been difficult to identify. In this study we demonstrate that the
dorsal forebrain meninges communicate with the adjacent radial glial endfeet and 
influence cortical development. We took advantage of Foxc1 mutant mice with
defects in forebrain meningeal formation. Foxc1 dosage and loss of meninges
correlated with a dramatic reduction in both neuron and intermediate progenitor
production and elongation of the neuroepithelium. Several types of experiments
demonstrate that retinoic acid (RA) is the key component of this secreted
activity. In addition, Rdh10- and Raldh2-expressing cells in the dorsal meninges 
were either reduced or absent in the Foxc1 mutants, and Rdh10 mutants had a
cortical phenotype similar to the Foxc1 null mutants. Lastly, in utero RA
treatment rescued the cortical phenotype in Foxc1 mutants. These results
establish RA as a potent, meningeal-derived cue required for successful
corticogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2772834
PMID: 19879845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Clin Genet. 2009 Sep;76(3):296-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2009.01210.x.

Characterization of a novel FOXC1 mutation, P297S, identified in two individuals 
with anterior segment dysgenesis.

Fetterman CD, Mirzayans F, Walter MA.

PMID: 19793056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Differentiation. 2010 Jan;79(1):31-40. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2009.08.008. Epub 2009
Sep 25.

Canonical Wnt signaling regulates Foxc1/2 expression in P19 cells.

Savage J(1), Voronova A, Mehta V, Sendi-Mukasa F, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5.

FOXC1 and FOXC2 are forkhead/winged-helix transcription factors expressed in
paraxial mesoderm and somites. Emphasizing the importance of FOXC1/2 during
embryonic development, double-knockout mice lacking the alleles for both Foxc1
and Foxc2 failed to form segmented somites and undergo myogenesis. The present
study aims to determine upstream factors that regulate Foxc1/2 expression during 
the differentiation of P19 cells into skeletal muscle. Previous work had shown
that dominant-negative forms of beta-catenin, Gli2, and Meox1 could inhibit
distinct stages of skeletal myogenesis in P19 cells. In the presence of a
dominant-negative beta-catenin fusion protein, Foxc1/2 transcripts were not
upregulated and neither were markers of somitogenesis/myogenesis, including
Meox1, Pax3 and MyoD. Conversely, inhibition of GSK3 by LiCl or overexpression of
activated beta-catenin in aggregated P19 cells resulted in enhancement of Foxc1/2
expression, indicating that FOX transcription may be under the control of Wnt
signaling. Supporting this hypothesis, beta-catenin bound to conserved regions
upstream of Foxc1 during P19 cell differentiation and drove transcription from
this region in a promoter assay. In addition, ectopic expression of a
dominant-negative Meox1 or Gli2 resulted in decreased Foxc1/2 transcript levels, 
correlating with inhibition of skeletal myogenesis. Overexpression of Gli2 was
also sufficient to upregulate Foxc1/2 transcript levels and induce skeletal
myogenesis. In summary, Foxc1/2 expression is dependent on a complex interplay
from various signaling inputs from the Wnt and Shh pathways during early stages
of in vitro skeletal myogenesis.

PMID: 19782461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Hum Mutat. 2009 Dec;30(12):E1002-9. doi: 10.1002/humu.21127.

Novel missense mutations in the FOXC2 gene alter transcriptional activity.

van Steensel MA(1), Damstra RJ, Heitink MV, Bladergroen RS, Veraart J, Steijlen
PM, van Geel M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of dermatology, Maastricht University Medical Center, Maastricht, 
the Netherlands. m.van.steensel@mumc.nl

Mutations in the FOXC2 gene that codes for a forkhead transcription factor are
associated with primary lymphedema that usually develops around puberty.
Associated abnormalities include distichiasis and, very frequently, superficial
and deep venous insufficiency. Most mutations reported so far either truncate the
protein or are missense mutations in the forkhead domain causing a loss of
function. The haplo-insufficient state is associated with lymphatic hyperplasia
in mice as well as in humans. We analyzed the FOXC2 gene in 288 patients with
primary lymphedema and found 11 pathogenic mutations, of which 9 are novel. Of
those, 5 were novel missense mutations of which 4 were located outside of the
forkhead domain. To examine their pathogenic potential we performed a
transactivation assay using a luciferase reporter construct driven by FOXC1
response elements. We found that the mutations outside the forkhead domain cause 
a gain of function as measured by luciferase activity. Patient characteristics
conform to previous reports with the exception of distichiasis, which was found
in only 2 patients out of 11. FOXC2 mutations causing lymphedema-distichiasis
syndrome reported thus far result in haplo-insufficiency and lead to lymphatic
hyperplasia. Our results suggest that gain-of-function mutations may also cause
lymphedema. One would expect that in this case, lymphatic hypoplasia would be the
underlying abnormality. Patients with activating mutations might present with
Meige disease.

PMID: 19760751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Nat Genet. 2009 Sep;41(9):1037-42. doi: 10.1038/ng.422. Epub 2009 Aug 9.

FOXC1 is required for normal cerebellar development and is a major contributor to
chromosome 6p25.3 Dandy-Walker malformation.

Aldinger KA(1), Lehmann OJ, Hudgins L, Chizhikov VV, Bassuk AG, Ades LC, Krantz
ID, Dobyns WB, Millen KJ.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Dandy-Walker malformation (DWM), the most common human cerebellar malformation,
has only one characterized associated locus. Here we characterize a second
DWM-linked locus on 6p25.3, showing that deletions or duplications encompassing
FOXC1 are associated with cerebellar and posterior fossa malformations including 
cerebellar vermis hypoplasia (CVH), mega-cisterna magna (MCM) and DWM. Foxc1-null
mice have embryonic abnormalities of the rhombic lip due to loss of
mesenchyme-secreted signaling molecules with subsequent loss of Atoh1 expression 
in vermis. Foxc1 homozygous hypomorphs have CVH with medial fusion and foliation 
defects. Human FOXC1 heterozygous mutations are known to affect eye development, 
causing a spectrum of glaucoma-associated anomalies (Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome,
ARS; MIM no. 601631). We report the first brain imaging data from humans with
FOXC1 mutations and show that these individuals also have CVH. We conclude that
alteration of FOXC1 function alone causes CVH and contributes to MCM and DWM. Our
results highlight a previously unrecognized role for mesenchyme-neuroepithelium
interactions in the mid-hindbrain during early embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2843139
PMID: 19668217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mol Vis. 2009 Jul 13;15:1366-73.

Molecular analysis of FOXC1 in subjects presenting with severe developmental eye 
anomalies.

Kaur K(1), Ragge NK, Ragoussis J.

Author information: 
(1)University of Oxford, Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford, UK.

PURPOSE: Haploinsufficiency through mutation or deletion of the forkhead
transcription factor, FOXC1, causes Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly, which manifests as a
range of anterior segment eye defects and glaucoma. The aim of this study is to
establish whether mutation of FOXC1 contributes toward other developmental eye
anomalies, namely anophthalmia, microphthalmia, and coloboma.
METHODS: The coding sequence and 3;-UTR of FOXC1 was analyzed in 114 subjects
with severe developmental eye anomalies by bidirectional direct sequencing.
RESULTS: Four coding FOXC1 variations (two novel missense variations, one
insertion, and one novel deletion) were identified in the cohort. Two noncoding
variations were also identified in the 3'-UTR. The missense mutations were
c.889C_T and c.1103C_A, resulting in p.Pro297Ser and p.Thr368Asn, respectively.
The c.889C_T transition was identified in 19 of the 100 unaffected control
samples. The c.1103C_A transversion resulted in a conservative substitution in an
unconserved amino acid and was deemed unlikely to be pathogenic. A
c.1142_1144insGCG change resulting in p.Gly380ins, which was previously
associated with kidney anomalies, was identified in 44 of the 114 affected
individuals. This variation was also present in 29 of the 87 unaffected controls 
and is therefore likely to be a polymorphism. A c.91_100delCGGCGGCCG deletion
resulting in p.Ala31_33del was identified in one individual. This deletion
segregated with the moderately affected mother and unaffected maternal
grandfather of the proband. This deletion was identified in one of the 307
unaffected controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggests a potential susceptibility role for FOXC1 in
generating severe eye pathologies. However, on the basis of these results, it is 
unlikely that FOXC1 mutation is a major causative factor of anophthalmia,
microphthalmia, and coloboma.

PMCID: PMC2713731
PMID: 19626132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Oct;23(10):1587-602. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0421. Epub 2009
Jul 16.

Insulin acts through FOXO3a to activate transcription of plasminogen activator
inhibitor type 1.

Jag UR(1), Zavadil J, Stanley FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York 10016, USA.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is an important regulator of
fibrinolysis. PAI-1 levels are elevated in type 2 diabetes, and this elevation
correlates with macro- and microvascular complications of diabetes. However, the 
mechanistic link between insulin and up-regulation of PAI-1 is unclear. Here we
demonstrate that overexpression of Forkhead-related transcription factor (Fox)O1,
FoxO3a, and FoxC1 augment insulin's ability to activate the PAI-1 promoter. In
addition, insulin treatment promotes the phosphorylation of nuclear and
cytoplasmic Fox03a and an increase of cytoplasmic Fox03a. In contrast, insulin
treatment led to the accumulation of phospho-Fox01 only in the cytoplasm.
Furthermore, insulin also increased the ability of chimeric LexA-FoxO1,
LexA-FoxO3a, and LexA-FoxC1 proteins to increase the activity of a LexA reporter,
suggesting that the effect of insulin on FoxO3a was direct. Using small
interfering RNA to specifically deplete each of the Fox transcription factors
tested, we demonstrate that only reduction of FoxO3a inhibits insulin-increased
PAI-1-Luc expression and PAI-1 mRNA accumulation. Finally, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirm the presence of FoxO3a on the PAI-1 promoter. 
These results suggest that FoxO3a mediates insulin-increased PAI-1 gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC2754891
PMID: 19608644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Dec;17(12):1527-39. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.93. Epub 2009
Jun 10.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and spectrum of PITX2 and FOXC1 mutations.

Tümer Z(1), Bach-Holm D.

Author information: 
(1)The Kennedy Center, Medical Genetics Laboratory, Glostrup, Denmark.
zet@kennedy.dk

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder, which
encompasses a range of congential malformations affecting the anterior segment of
the eye. ARS shows genetic heterogeneity and mutations of the two genes, PITX2
and FOXC1, are known to be associated with the pathogenesis. There are several
excellent reviews dealing with the complexity of the phenotype and genotype of
ARS. In this study, we will attempt to give a brief review of the clinical
features and the relevant diagnostic approaches, together with a detailed review 
of published PITX2 and FOXC1 mutations.

PMCID: PMC2987033
PMID: 19513095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jul;119(7):1997-2008. doi: 10.1172/JCI38519. Epub 2009 Jun 8.

Heparan sulfate deficiency leads to Peters anomaly in mice by disturbing neural
crest TGF-beta2 signaling.

Iwao K(1), Inatani M, Matsumoto Y, Ogata-Iwao M, Takihara Y, Irie F, Yamaguchi Y,
Okinami S, Tanihara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Kumamoto University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto, Japan.

During human embryogenesis, neural crest cells migrate to the anterior chamber of
the eye and then differentiate into the inner layers of the cornea, the
iridocorneal angle, and the anterior portion of the iris. When proper development
does not occur, this causes iridocorneal angle dysgenesis and intraocular
pressure (IOP) elevation, which ultimately results in developmental glaucoma.
Here, we show that heparan sulfate (HS) deficiency in mouse neural crest cells
causes anterior chamber dysgenesis, including corneal endothelium defects,
corneal stroma hypoplasia, and iridocorneal angle dysgenesis. These dysfunctions 
are phenotypes of the human developmental glaucoma, Peters anomaly. In the neural
crest cells of mice embryos, disruption of the gene encoding exostosin 1 (Ext1), 
which is an indispensable enzyme for HS synthesis, resulted in disturbed
TGF-beta2 signaling. This led to reduced phosphorylation of Smad2 and
downregulated expression of forkhead box C1 (Foxc1) and paired-like homeodomain
transcription factor 2 (Pitx2), transcription factors that have been identified
as the causative genes for developmental glaucoma. Furthermore, impaired
interactions between HS and TGF-beta2 induced developmental glaucoma, which was
manifested as an IOP elevation caused by iridocorneal angle dysgenesis. These
findings suggest that HS is necessary for neural crest cells to form the anterior
chamber via TGF-beta2 signaling. Disturbances of HS synthesis might therefore
contribute to the pathology of developmental glaucoma.

PMCID: PMC2701878
PMID: 19509472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Stem Cells. 2009 Jun;27(6):1231-43. doi: 10.1002/stem.57.

SOX15 and SOX7 differentially regulate the myogenic program in P19 cells.

Savage J(1), Conley AJ, Blais A, Skerjanc IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

In this study, we have identified novel roles for Sox15 and Sox7 as regulators of
muscle precursor cell fate in P19 cells. To examine the role of Sox15 and Sox7
during skeletal myogenesis, we isolated populations of P19 cells with either gene
stably integrated into the genome, termed P19[Sox15] and P19[Sox7]. Both SOX
proteins were sufficient to upregulate the expression of the muscle precursor
markers Pax3/7, Meox1, and Foxc1 in aggregated cells. In contrast to the
P19[Sox7] cell lines, which subsequently differentiated into skeletal muscle,
myogenesis failed to progress past the precursor stage in P19[Sox15] cell lines, 
shown by the lack of MyoD and myosin heavy chain (MHC) expression. P19[Sox15]
clones showed elevated and sustained levels of the inhibitory factors Msx1 and
Id1, which may account for the lack of myogenic progression in these cells.
Stable expression of a Sox15 dominant-negative protein resulted in the loss of
Pax3/7 and Meox1 transcripts, as well as myogenic regulatory factor (MRF) and MHC
expression. These results suggest that Sox15, or genes that are bound by Sox15,
are necessary and sufficient for the acquisition of the muscle precursor cell
fate. On the other hand, knockdown of endogenous Sox15 caused a decrease in Pax3 
and Meox1, but not MRF expression, suggesting that other factors can compensate
in the absence of Sox15. Taken together, these results show that both Sox7 and
Sox15 are able to induce the early stages of myogenesis, but only Sox7 is
sufficient to initiate the formation of fully differentiated skeletal myocytes.

PMID: 19489079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Nov;50(11):5026-34. doi: 10.1167/iovs.09-3447.
Epub 2009 May 20.

FoxC1 is essential for vascular basement membrane integrity and hyaloid vessel
morphogenesis.

Skarie JM(1), Link BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

PURPOSE: Alterations in FOXC1 dosage lead to a spectrum of highly penetrant,
ocular anterior segment dysgenesis phenotypes. The most serious outcome is the
development of glaucoma, which occurs in 50% to 75% of patients. Therefore, the
need to identify specific pathways and genes that interact with FOXC1 to promote 
glaucoma is great. In this study, the authors investigated the loss of foxC1 in
the zebrafish to characterize phenotypes and gene interactions that may impact
glaucoma pathogenesis.
METHODS: Morpholino knockdown in zebrafish, RNA and protein marker analyses,
transgenic reporter lines, and angiography, along with histology and transmission
electron microscopy, were used to study foxC1 function and gene interactions.
RESULTS: Zebrafish foxC1 genes were expressed dynamically in the developing
vasculature and periocular mesenchyme during development. Multiple ocular and
vascular defects were found after the knockdown of foxC1. Defects in the hyaloid 
vasculature, arteriovenous malformations, and coarctation of the aorta were
observed with maximal depletion of foxC1. Partial loss of foxC1 resulted in CNS
and ocular hemorrhages, defects in intersegmental vessel patterning, and
increased vascular permeability. To investigate the basis for these disruptions, 
the ultrastructure of foxC1-depleted hyaloid vascular cells was studied. These
experiments, along with laminin-111 immunoreactivity, revealed disruptions in
basement membrane integrity. Finally, codepletion of laminin alpha-1 and foxC1
uncovered a genetic interaction between these genes during development.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic interactions between FOXC1 and basement membrane components 
influence vascular stability and may impact glaucoma development and increase
stroke risk in FOXC1 patients.

PMCID: PMC3651675
PMID: 19458328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Development. 2009 May;136(10):1741-50. doi: 10.1242/dev.034082. Epub 2009 Apr 15.

FGF-regulated BMP signaling is required for eyelid closure and to specify
conjunctival epithelial cell fate.

Huang J(1), Dattilo LK, Rajagopal R, Liu Y, Kaartinen V, Mishina Y, Deng CX,
Umans L, Zwijsen A, Roberts AB, Beebe DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Washington University, St
Louis, MO 63130, USA.

There are conflicting reports about whether BMP signaling is required for eyelid 
closure during fetal development. This question was addressed using mice
deficient in BMP or TGFbeta signaling in prospective eyelid and conjunctival
epithelial cells. Genes encoding two type I BMP receptors, the type II TGFbeta
receptor, two BMP- or two TGFbeta-activated R-Smads or the co-Smad Smad4 were
deleted from the ocular surface ectoderm using Cre recombinase. Only mice with
deletion of components of the BMP pathway had an 'eyelid open at birth'
phenotype. Mice lacking Fgf10 or Fgfr2 also have open eyelids at birth. To better
understand the pathways that regulate BMP expression and function during eyelid
development, we localized BMPs and BMP signaling intermediates in Fgfr2 and Smad4
conditional knockout (CKO) mice. We found that Fgfr2 was required for the
expression of Bmp4, the normal distribution of Shh signaling and for preserving
the differentiation of the conjunctival epithelium. FGF signaling also promoted
the expression of the Wnt antagonist Sfrp1 and suppressed Wnt signaling in the
prospective eyelid epithelial cells, independently of BMP function. Transcripts
encoding Foxc1 and Foxc2, which were previously shown to be necessary for eyelid 
closure, were not detectable in Smad4(CKO) animals. c-Jun, another key regulator 
of eyelid closure, was present and phosphorylated in eyelid periderm cells at the
time of fusion, but failed to translocate to the nucleus in the absence of BMP
function. Smad4(CKO) mice also showed premature differentiation of the
conjunctival epithelium, conjunctival hyperplasia and the acquisition of
epidermal characteristics, including formation of an ectopic row of hair
follicles in place of the Meibomian glands. A second row of eyelashes is a
feature of human lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome, which is associated with
mutations in FOXC2.

PMCID: PMC2673764
PMID: 19369394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Aug;50(8):3573-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-3032. Epub
2009 Mar 11.

Severe molecular defects of a novel FOXC1 W152G mutation result in aniridia.

Ito YA(1), Footz TK, Berry FB, Mirzayans F, Yu M, Khan AO, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

PURPOSE: FOXC1 mutations result in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome, a disorder
characterized by a broad spectrum of malformations of the anterior segment of the
eye and an elevated risk for glaucoma. A novel FOXC1 W152G mutation was
identified in a patient with aniridia. Molecular analysis was conducted to
determine the functional consequences of the FOXC1 W152G mutation.
METHODS: Site-directed mutagenesis was used to introduce the W152G mutation into 
the FOXC1 complementary DNA. The levels of W152G protein expression and the
functional abilities of the mutant protein were determined.
RESULTS: After screening for mutations in PAX6, CYP1B1, and FOXC1, a novel FOXC1 
W152G mutation was identified in a newborn boy with aniridia and congenital
glaucoma. Molecular analysis of the W152G mutation revealed that the mutant
protein has severe molecular consequences in FOXC1, including defects in
phosphorylation, protein folding, DNA-binding ability, inability to transactivate
a reporter gene, and nuclear localization. Although W152G has molecular defects
similar to those of the previously studied FOXC1 L130F mutation, W152G causes a
more severe phenotype than L130F. Both the W152G and the L130F mutations result
in the formation of protein aggregates in the cytoplasm. However, unlike the
L130F aggregates, the W152G aggregates do not form microtubule-dependent
inclusion bodies, known as aggresomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Severe molecular consequences, including the inability of the W152G 
protein aggregates to form protective aggresomes, may underlie the aniridia
phenotype that results from the FOXC1 W152G mutation.

PMID: 19279310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. BJU Int. 2009 Jun;103(11):1574-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2009.08351.x. Epub
2009 Feb 11.

Gene expression of forkhead transcription factors in the normal and diseased
human prostate.

van der Heul-Nieuwenhuijsen L(1), Dits NF, Jenster G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE To assess the expression of forkhead transcription factors (FOX) in
normal prostate and prostate diseases, as since the first FOX was identified, its
family members have been implicated in a variety of cellular processes, including
embryonic development and disease. MATERIAL AND METHODS We analysed a set of 12
different FOX genes by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction in prostate zones, prostate cancer, lymph node metastases, benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), xenografts and several prostate cell lines. RESULTS 
There were striking differences among the expression of various FOX family
members; most prominent were the high expression of FOXF1 and FOXF2 in the normal
prostate transition zone and BPH, and their decreased expression in prostate
cancer. Interestingly, although the FOXF genes are stroma-specific, some of the
androgen-independent prostate cancer xenografts uniquely express these two genes.
FOXD1 and FOXD2 were more highly expressed in prostate cancer and lymph node
metastases. FOXA1 and FOXC1 have an opposite expression pattern for
androgen-dependent growth of prostate cancer cell lines and xenografts.
CONCLUSIONS Various members of the FOX family are differentially expressed in the
zones of the normal prostate and in benign and malignant outgrowths. The
expression profiles of FOXF1 and FOXF2 suggest a role in epithelial to
mesenchymal transition, while FOXA1 and FOXC1 expression is linked to
androgen-associated growth status of cancer.

PMID: 19220249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. BMJ Case Rep. 2009;2009. pii: bcr06.2008.0297. doi: 10.1136/bcr.06.2008.0297.
Epub 2009 Feb 16.

Rieger syndrome with multiple chromosomal breaks and chromosome 4 deletion.

Tanwar M(1), Kumar R, Goyal A, Kumar M, Dada T, Singh G, Sihota R, Dada R.

Author information: 
(1)All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Laboratory for Molecular Reproduction
and Genetics, Department of Anatomy, New Delhi, 110029, India.

Rieger syndrome (RS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder with variable
expressivity and complete penetrance. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) shows
genetic heterogeneity with mutations in several chromosomal loci being implicated
including PITX2, FOXC1 and PAX6. Cytogenetic analysis was done in this case.
Patient had de novo 46,XY,del(4q25-q27) karyotype with a high percentage (>35%)
of chromosomal breaks. The breaks were on different chromosomes and not related
to disease phenotype of RS. Such chromosomal breaks are diagnostic of chromosomal
instability syndromes. Available literature does not report chromosomal breaks in
RS or due to culture condition. Such a high percentage of chromosomal breaks are 
associated with development of certain cancers. In the present case we did not
find any features consistent with any of the chromosomal instability syndromes
like Fanconi's anaemia and Blooms syndrome, but such cases need to be under
regular follow-up. Thus RS cases with multiple chromosomal breaks need regular
follow-up and genetic counselling.

PMCID: PMC3029512
PMID: 21686867  [PubMed]


201. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2009;665:63-77.

The cooperative roles of Foxc1 and Foxc2 in cardiovascular development.

Kume T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, 2220 Pierce Ave, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-6300, USA.
tsutomu.kume@vanderbilt.edu

Fox1 and Foxc2 are closely related members of the Forkhead/Fox transcription
factor family. The two Foxc genes have overlapping expression patterns in
mesodermal and neural crest derivatives during development, as well as similar
functions of gene regulation. Consistently, mouse mutants for each gene have
similar abnormalities in multiple embryonic tissues, including the eye, kidney
and cardiovascular system. Analysis of compound Foxc1; Foxc2 mutant embryos
reveals that the two Foxc genes have dose-dependent, cooperative roles in
development. In particular, recent studies demonstrate that Foxc1 and Foxc2 are
essential for arterial cell specification, lymphatic vessel formation,
angiogenesis and cardiac outflow tract development. This chapter will summarize
and discuss current knowledge about the function of Foxc1 and Foxc2 in
cardiovascular development.

PMID: 20429416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 16;105(37):14076-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805206105. Epub 2008 Sep 9.

Cell type-specific DNA methylation patterns in the human breast.

Bloushtain-Qimron N(1), Yao J, Snyder EL, Shipitsin M, Campbell LL, Mani SA, Hu
M, Chen H, Ustyansky V, Antosiewicz JE, Argani P, Halushka MK, Thomson JA,
Pharoah P, Porgador A, Sukumar S, Parsons R, Richardson AL, Stampfer MR, Gelman
RS, Nikolskaya T, Nikolsky Y, Polyak K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Cellular identity and differentiation are determined by epigenetic programs. The 
characteristics of these programs in normal human mammary epithelium and their
similarity to those in stem cells are unknown. To begin investigating these
issues, we analyzed the DNA methylation and gene expression profiles of distinct 
subpopulations of mammary epithelial cells by using MSDK (methylation-specific
digital karyotyping) and SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression). We identified
discrete cell-type and differentiation state-specific DNA methylation and gene
expression patterns that were maintained in a subset of breast carcinomas and
correlated with clinically relevant tumor subtypes. CD44+ cells were the most
hypomethylated and highly expressed several transcription factors with known stem
cell function including HOXA10 and TCF3. Many of these genes were also
hypomethylated in BMP4-treated compared with undifferentiated human embryonic
stem (ES) cells that we analyzed by MSDK for comparison. Further highlighting the
similarity of epigenetic programs of embryonic and mammary epithelial cells,
genes highly expressed in CD44+ relative to more differentiated CD24+ cells were 
significantly enriched for Suz12 targets in ES cells. The expression of FOXC1,
one of the transcription factors hypomethylated and highly expressed in CD44+
cells, induced a progenitor-like phenotype in differentiated mammary epithelial
cells. These data suggest that epigenetically controlled transcription factors
play a key role in regulating mammary epithelial cell phenotypes and imply
similarities among epigenetic programs that define progenitor cell
characteristics.

PMCID: PMC2532972
PMID: 18780791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Dev Dyn. 2008 Oct;237(10):2748-54. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21652.

A bioinformatics approach for identifying candidate transcriptional regulators of
mesenchyme-to-epithelium transitions in mouse embryos.

Bard JB(1), Lam MS, Aitken S.

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology, Research Group, Weatherall Institute of Molecular
Medicine, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. j.bard@ed.ac.uk

This article reports a method for identifying groups of genes associated with
tissues undergoing a particular process during mouse development. Given the
Theiler stage at which each tissue starts the process, Boolean intersection
analysis identifies genes expressed in some or all of these tissues both before
the process starts and once it has started. This analysis is implemented in
GXD-search; this tool downloads appropriate gene sets from GXD, the mouse gene
expression database, and performs the calculations. Applied to
mesenchyme-to-epithelium transitions (MET), GXD-search has identified Crabp1 and 
six transcriptional regulators (Cited1, Cited2, Meox1, Lhx1, Foxc1, and Foxc2)
that are usually expressed in tissues about to undergo this process. Expression
pattern analysis of these transcriptional regulators, mutations in each of which 
affect epithelial development, shows that this gene set is expressed in no other 
tissues and they are, thus, candidates for regulating MET. GXD-search is
downloadable from http://www.aiai.ed.ac.uk/project/biosphere/GXD-search.html.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18773494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Jan;50(1):75-83. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-2253. Epub 
2008 Aug 15.

The transcription factor gene FOXC1 exhibits a limited role in primary congenital
glaucoma.

Chakrabarti S(1), Kaur K, Rao KN, Mandal AK, Kaur I, Parikh RS, Thomas R.

Author information: 
(1)Hyderabad Eye Research Foundation, Hyderabad, India. subho@lvpei.org

PURPOSE: Primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) is an autosomal recessive disorder
that has been linked to CYP1B1 mutations. This study was conducted to explore the
role of FOXC1, which is involved in anterior segment dysgenesis, in PCG.
METHODS: An earlier screening for CYP1B1 in a clinically well-characterized PCG
cohort (n = 301) revealed cases that were either homozygous (n = 73), compound
heterozygous (n = 18), or heterozygous (n = 41) for the mutant allele, whereas
the remaining (n = 169) did not harbor any mutation. Hence, FOXC1 was screened in
210 PCG cases who were either heterozygous (n = 41) or did not harbor any CYP1B1 
mutation (n = 169), along with ethnically matched normal control subjects (n =
157) by resequencing the entire coding region.
RESULTS: Two heterozygous missense (H128R and C135Y) and three frame shift
mutations (g.1086delC, g.1155del9bp, and g.1947dup25bp) were observed in FOXC1 in
5 (2.38%) of 210 cases. The missense mutations had a de novo origin in two
sporadic cases, whereas the FOXC1 deletions were seen in two cases that were also
heterozygous for the CYP1B1 allele (R368H). The parents of the proband with
g.1086delC were heterozygous for either the FOXC1 or CYP1B1 alleles. The
unaffected mother of the proband with the g.1155del9bp was heterozygous for both 
the FOXC1 and CYP1B1 alleles; the father harbored only the FOXC1 allele. Familial
segregation of the g.1947dup25bp could not be performed because of the
unavailability of DNA from one parent. Except for the g.1155del9bp (0.95% normal 
chromosomes), all the other variations were absent in the control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study indicates a limited role of FOXC1 in PCG
pathogenesis.

PMID: 18708620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Nov 15;17(22):3446-58. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn238. Epub 2008 Aug
11.

A novel mechanistic spectrum underlies glaucoma-associated chromosome 6p25 copy
number variation.

Chanda B(1), Asai-Coakwell M, Ye M, Mungall AJ, Barrow M, Dobyns WB, Behesti H,
Sowden JC, Carter NP, Walter MA, Lehmann OJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

The factors that mediate chromosomal rearrangement remain incompletely defined.
Among regions prone to structural variant formation, chromosome 6p25 is one of
the few in which disease-associated segmental duplications and segmental
deletions have been identified, primarily through gene dosage attributable ocular
phenotypes. Using array comparative genome hybridization, we studied ten 6p25
duplication and deletion pedigrees and amplified junction fragments from each.
Analysis of the breakpoint architecture revealed that all the rearrangements were
non-recurrent, and in contrast to most previous examples the majority of the
segmental duplications and deletions utilized coupled homologous and
non-homologous recombination mechanisms. One junction fragment exhibited an
unprecedented 367 bp insert derived from tandemly arranged breakpoint elements.
While this accorded with a recently described replication-based mechanism, it
differed from the previous example in being unassociated with template switching,
and occurring in a segmental deletion. These results extend the mechanisms
involved in structural variant formation, provide strong evidence that a spectrum
of recombination, DNA repair and replication underlie 6p25 rearrangements, and
have implications for genesis of copy number variations in other genomic regions.
These findings highlight the benefits of undertaking the extensive studies
necessary to characterize structural variants at the base pair level.

PMCID: PMC2572693
PMID: 18694899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2008 Dec;49(12):5243-9. doi: 10.1167/iovs.07-1625.
Epub 2008 Aug 1.

Human p32 is a novel FOXC1-interacting protein that regulates FOXC1
transcriptional activity in ocular cells.

Huang L(1), Chi J, Berry FB, Footz TK, Sharp MW, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

PURPOSE: Mutations in the human forkhead box C1 gene (FOXC1) cause
Axenfeld-Rieger (AR) malformations, often leading to glaucoma. Understanding the 
function of FOXC1 necessitates characterizing the proteins that interact with
FOXC1. This study was undertaken to isolate FOXC1-interacting proteins and
determine their effects on FOXC1.
METHODS: To identify FOXC1-interacting proteins, a human trabecular meshwork
(HTM) yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) cDNA library was screened. The interaction and
colocalization between FOXC1 and its putative protein partner were confirmed by
Ni(2+) pull-down assays, immunoprecipitation, and immunofluorescence,
respectively. The electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) was used to study
the effect of the interacting protein on FOXC1 DNA-binding ability. Dual
luciferase assays using FOXC1 reporter plasmids in HTM cells were performed to
determine the effect of the interaction on FOXC1 transcription activity.
RESULTS: The human p32 protein was isolated as a putative FOXC1-interacting
protein from a Y2H screen. The interaction of FOXC1 with p32 was confirmed by
Ni-pull-down assays and immunoprecipitation. Although p32 is predominantly
cytoplasmic, the portion of p32 that is within the nucleus colocalizes with
FOXC1. The FOXC1 forkhead domain (FHD) was identified as the p32 interaction
domain. p32 significantly inhibited FOXC1-mediated transcription activation in a 
dose-dependent manner but did not affect FOXC1 DNA-binding ability. Of interest, 
a FOXC1 mutation F112S displayed an impaired interaction with p32.
CONCLUSIONS: In the study, the human p32 protein as a novel regulator of
FOXC1-mediated transcription activation. Failure of p32 to interact with FOXC1
containing the disease-causing F112S mutation indicates that impaired protein
interaction may be a disease mechanism for AR malformations.

PMID: 18676636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2008 Aug;11(4):412-21. doi: 10.1375/twin.11.4.412.

Chromosomal rearrangements and novel genes in disorders of eye development,
cataract and glaucoma.

Mihelec M(1), St Heaps L, Flaherty M, Billson F, Rudduck C, Tam PP, Grigg JR,
Peters GB, Jamieson RV.

Author information: 
(1)Eye Genetics Research Group, Children's Medical Research Institute, The
Children's Hospital at Westmead and Save Sight Institute, Sydney, Australia.

Disorders of eye development such as microphthalmia and anophthalmia (small and
absent eyes respectively), anterior segment dysgenesis where there may be
pupillary and iris anomalies, and associated cataract and glaucoma, often lead to
visual impairment or blindness. Currently treatment options are limited, as much 
is unknown about the molecular pathways that control normal eye development and
induce the aberrant processes that lead to ocular defects. Mutation detection
rates in most of the known genes are generally low, emphasizing the genetic
heterogeneity of developmental ocular defects. Identification of the disease
genes in these conditions improves the clinical information available for
affected individuals and families, and provides new insights into the underlying 
biological processes for facilitation of better treatment options. Investigation 
of chromosomal rearrangements associated with an ocular phenotype has been
especially powerful for disease gene identification. Molecular characterization
of such rearrangements, which pinpoints the region by physically disrupting the
causative gene or its regulatory sequences, allows for rapid elucidation of
underlying genetic factors that contribute to the phenotype. Genes including
PAX6, PITX2, FOXC1, MAF, TMEM114, SOX2, OTX2 and BMP4 have been identified in
this way to be associated with developmental eye disorders. More recently, new
methods in chromosomal analysis such as comparative genomic hybridization (CGH)
microarray, have also enhanced our ability in disease gene identification.

PMID: 18637741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Acta Ophthalmol. 2009 Feb;87(1):52-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0420.2007.01082.x. Epub
2008 Jun 19.

A new autosomal dominant Peters' anomaly phenotype expanding the anterior segment
dysgenesis spectrum.

Berker N(1), Alanay Y, Elgin U, Volkan-Salanci B, Simsek T, Akarsu N,
Alikasifoglu M.

Author information: 
(1)Ulucanlar Eye Research Hospital, Ankara, Turkey. niluferberker@gmail.com

PURPOSE: To test the association of genes involved in anterior segment
development in a family with autosomal dominantly inherited Peters' anomaly (PA) 
with a unique ocular phenotype.
METHODS: Six members of a five-generation family with PA were extensively
phenotyped and linkage analysis of candidate genes, namely, PAX6, PITX2, FOXC1,
CYP1B1 and MAF, was performed.
RESULTS: The complete pedigree consisted of 38 members, 19 of whom were affected.
The six probands examined had bilateral microcornea, corneal opacity,
iridocorneal adhesions, nystagmus and strabismus, but cataract, keratolenticular 
adhesions, glaucoma and posterior embryotoxon were absent. PAX6 gene mutations
had been previously excluded in one of the affected members. DNA markers for
candidate genes CYP1B1 on 2p22, PITX2 on 4q25, PAX6 on 11p13, MAF on 16q23 and
FOXC1 on 6p25 were genotyped. Highly negative lod scores were obtained for all
markers.
CONCLUSIONS: The exclusion of these genes as likely candidates supports the
hypothesis that the ocular phenotype associated with PA segregating in this
family is a distinct, new, autosomal dominant entity in the anterior segment
dysgenesis spectrum.

PMID: 18616618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS One. 2008 Jun 11;3(6):e2401. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002401.

Foxc transcription factors directly regulate Dll4 and Hey2 expression by
interacting with the VEGF-Notch signaling pathways in endothelial cells.

Hayashi H(1), Kume T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown that in the developing embryo, arterial and
venous identity is established by genetic mechanisms before circulation begins.
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) signaling and its downstream Notch
pathway play critical roles in arterial cell fate determination. We have recently
shown that Foxc1 and Foxc2, two closely related Fox transcription factors, are
essential for arterial cell specification during development by directly inducing
the transcription of Delta-like 4 (Dll4), a ligand for Notch receptors. However, 
the basic mechanisms whereby the VEGF and Notch signaling pathways control
transcriptional regulation of arterial-specific genes have yet to be elucidated.
METHODOLOGIES/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In the current study, we examined whether and
how Foxc transcription factors are involved in VEGF and Notch signaling in
induction of Dll4 as well as the Notch target gene Hey2 in endothelial cells. We 
found that Foxc1 and Foxc2 directly activate the Hey2 promoter via Foxc binding
elements. Significantly, Foxc2 physically and functionally interacts with a Notch
transcriptional activation complex containing Su(H) and Notch intracellular
domain to induce Hey2 promoter activity. Moreover, activation of the Dll4 and
Hey2 promoters is induced by VEGF in conjunction with either Foxc1 or Foxc2 more 
than by either component alone. VEGF-activated PI3K and ERK intracellular
pathways modulate the transcriptional activity of Foxc proteins in Dll4 and Hey2 
induction.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our new findings demonstrate that Foxc transcriptional 
factors interact with VEGF and Notch signaling to regulate arterial gene
expression in multiple steps of the VEGF-Dll4-Notch-Hey2 signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC2398774
PMID: 18545664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Clin Genet. 2008 Nov;74(5):476-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2008.01025.x. Epub
2008 May 21.

A novel mutation in the FOXC1 gene in a family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and 
Peters' anomaly.

Weisschuh N(1), Wolf C, Wissinger B, Gramer E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Institute for Ophthalmic Research, University
Clinics Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. nicole.weisschuh@uni-tuebingen.de

Peters anomaly and Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) belong to the overlapping
spectrum of disorders summarized as anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD). Five
patients from a family with Peters' anomaly and ARS were screened for mutations
in the PITX2, CYP1B1 and FOXC1 genes by direct sequencing. All affected family
members examined were heterozygous for a single nucleotide substitution,
resulting in a nonsense mutation (Q120X) at a highly conserved residue of the
FOXC1 gene that is essential for DNA binding. In this pedigree, all affected
family members were diagnosed with ARS except for one who shows bilateral Peters'
anomaly. Our findings support the role of FOXC1 mutations in the spectrum of ASD.

PMID: 18498376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Dev Dyn. 2008 Jun;237(6):1590-603. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21553.

Expression of FoxC, FoxF, FoxL1, and FoxQ1 genes in the dogfish Scyliorhinus
canicula defines ancient and derived roles for Fox genes in vertebrate
development.

Wotton KR(1), Mazet F, Shimeld SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, The Tinbergen Building, South
Parks Road, Oxford, United Kingdom.

In the human genome, members of the FoxC, FoxF, FoxL1, and FoxQ1 gene families
are found in two paralagous clusters. Here we characterize all four gene families
in the dogfish Scyliorhinus canicula, a member of the cartilaginous fish lineage 
that diverged before the radiation of osteichthyan vertebrates. We identify two
FoxC genes, two FoxF genes, and single FoxQ1 and FoxL1 genes, demonstrating
cluster duplication preceded the radiation of gnathostomes. The expression of all
six genes was analyzed by in situ hybridization. The results show conserved
expression of FoxL1, FoxF, and FoxC genes in different compartments of the
mesoderm and of FoxQ1 in pharyngeal endoderm and its derivatives, confirming
these as ancient sites of Fox gene expression, and also illustrate multiple cases
of lineage-specific expression domains. Comparison to invertebrate chordates
shows that the majority of conserved vertebrate expression domains mark tissues
that are part of the primitive chordate body plan.

PMID: 18498098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Ophthalmic Genet. 2008 Jun;29(2):67-71. doi: 10.1080/13816810801908152.

Heterozygous FOXC1 mutation (M161K) associated with congenital glaucoma and
aniridia in an infant and a milder phenotype in her mother.

Khan AO(1), Aldahmesh MA, Al-Amri A.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Ophthalmology Division, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. arif.khan@mssm.edu <arif.khan@mssm.edu>

Erratum in
    Ophthalmic Genet. 2008 Dec;29(4):190.

PURPOSE: To report the genetic basis for congenital glaucoma with clinical
aniridia in an infant and a milder phenotype in her mother.
METHODS: Prospective case series.
RESULTS: An infant girl with almost complete lack of iris tissue was referred and
treated for congenital glaucoma. Although the presumed clinical diagnosis was
aniridia (On-line Mendelian Inheritance in Man [OMIM] AN2, # 106210), PAX6
sequencing was normal. Examination of the infant's mother was significant for
Axenfeld-Rieger malformation (ARM): prominent Schwabe line, subtle iris
hypoplasia, iris stands bridging the angle, increased intraocular pressure, and
glaucomatous optic nerve cupping. Both parents and the infant underwent
diagnostic FOXC1 DNA sequencing. A heterozygous M161K FOXC1 mutation was found in
the infant and her mother but not in the father, who had a normal ocular
examination.
DISCUSSION: The spectrum of intrafamilial phenotypic variation associated with
heterozygous FOXC1 mutation can be wide. FOXC1 mutation can be a cause of
congenital glaucoma with clinical aniridia. Although such infants resemble the
AN2 phenotype, the glaucoma of AN2 due to PAX6 mutation is typically secondary
with onset several years after birth.

PMID: 18484311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Anat. 2008 May;212(5):603-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2008.00893.x. Epub 2008 
Apr 14.

Impaired meningeal development in association with apical expansion of calvarial 
bone osteogenesis in the Foxc1 mutant.

Vivatbutsiri P(1), Ichinose S, Hytönen M, Sainio K, Eto K, Iseki S.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Craniofacial Embryology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, Japan.

Loss of function of the mouse forkhead/winged helix transcription factor Foxc1
induces congenital hydrocephalus and impaired skull bone development due to
failure of apical expansion of the bone. In this study we investigated meningeal 
development in the congenital hydrocephalus (ch) mouse with spontaneous loss of
function mutant of Foxc1, around the period of initiation of skull bone apical
expansion. In situ hybridization of Runx2 revealed active apical expansion of the
frontal bone begins between embryonic day 13.5 and embryonic day 14.5 in the wild
type, whereas expansion was inhibited in the mutant. Ultrastructural analysis
revealed that three layers of the meninges begin to develop at E13.5 in the
basolateral site of the head and subsequently progress to the apex in wild type. 
In ch homozygotes, although three layers were recognized at first at the
basolateral site, cell morphology and structure of the layers became abnormal
except for the pia mater, and arachnoidal and dural cells never differentiated in
the apex. We identified meningeal markers for each layer and found that their
expression was down-regulated in the mutant arachnoid and dura maters. These
results suggest that there is a close association between meningeal development
and the apical growth of the skull bones.

PMCID: PMC2409093
PMID: 18422524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Dev Biol. 2008 May 1;317(1):310-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.030. Epub 2008
Mar 4.

The canonical Wnt signaling antagonist DKK2 is an essential effector of PITX2
function during normal eye development.

Gage PJ(1), Qian M, Wu D, Rosenberg KI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Michigan
Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA. philgage@umich.edu

Local control of cell signaling activity and integration of inputs from multiple 
signaling pathways are central for normal development but the underlying
mechanisms remain poorly understood. Here we show that Dkk2, encoding an
antagonist of canonical Wnt signaling, is an essential downstream target of the
PITX2 homeodomain transcription factor in neural crest during eye development.
Canonical Wnt signaling is ectopically activated in central ocular surface
ectoderm and underlying mesenchyme in Pitx2- and Dkk2-deficient mice. General
ocular surface ectoderm identity is maintained during development in
Dkk2-deficient mice but peripheral fates, including conjunctival goblet cells and
eyelash follicles, are ectopically permitted within more central structures and
eyelids are hypomorphic. Loss of DKK2 results in ectopic blood vessels within the
periocular mesenchyme and PITX2 expression remains persistently high, providing
evidence for a negative feedback loop. Collectively, these data suggest that
activation of Dkk2 by PITX2 provides a mechanism to locally suppress canonical
Wnt signaling activity during eye development, a paradigm that may be a model for
achieving local or transient inhibition of pathway activity elsewhere during
embryogenesis. We further propose a model placing PITX2 as an essential
integration node between retinoic acid and canonical Wnt signaling during eye
development.

PMCID: PMC2387126
PMID: 18367164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Oral Pathol Med. 2008 Sep;37(8):504-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0714.2008.00650.x. 
Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Morphology of the sella turcica in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome with PITX2 mutation.

Meyer-Marcotty P(1), Weisschuh N, Dressler P, Hartmann J, Stellzig-Eisenhauer A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthodontics, Dental Clinic of the Medical Faculty, University
of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany. Meyer_P1@klinik.uni-wuerzburg.de

BACKGROUND: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder 
with an incidence of 1:200 000. Genotype and phenotype are heterogeneous and
clinical morphology impresses with variable expressivity. Additionally to the
typical craniofacial and dental aberrations anomalies in the morphology of sella 
turcica are discussed.
METHOD: In a multidisciplinary genetic and clinical study four patients of a
family with ARS were screened by direct DNA sequencing. Radiographic analysis of 
the patients was performed for evaluating cranial and dental structures.
Additionally, a specific analysis of the morphology of the sella turcica was made
on the radiographs.
RESULTS: Screening for PITX2 and FOXC1 mutations revealed a P64L missense
mutation in PITX2 in all four patients. The cephalometric analysis showed a
midface hypoplasia associated with a skeletal Class III. All patients showed a
sella turcica bridge combined with a prominent posterior clinoid process followed
by a steep clivus and an elongated sella turcica.
CONCLUSION: The incidence of a sella turcica bridge in combination with a PITX2
mutation would suspect that sella turcica anomalies are typical symptoms of the
syndrome. Sella turcica anomalies in association with craniofacial and dental
aberrations, such as maxillary retrognathia, skeletal Class III relationship and 
hypoplasia of teeth, might be important indicators for ARS caused by PITX2
mutation.

PMID: 18331556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Feb 15;146A(4):500-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32169.

Exclusion of a PAX6, FOXC1, PITX2, and MYCN mutation in another patient with
apple peel intestinal atresia, ocular anomalies and microcephaly and review of
the literature.

van Bever Y(1), van Hest L, Wolfs R, Tibboel D, van den Hoonaard TL, Gischler SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre-Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. y.vanbever@erasmusmc.nl

We describe another patient with the combination of apple peel intestinal
atresia, microcephaly, microphthalmia, and anterior eye chamber anomalies.
Development so far seems to be normal, although there is major visual impairment 
due to the corneal clouding. Mutation analysis of the PAX6, FOX1, PITX2, and MYNC
genes was normal as was MLPA for these genes. Autosomal recessive inheritance is 
possible as recurrence in sibs was described, although germ line mosaicism or a
microdeletion due to a very small parental translocation cannot be ruled out.

PMID: 18203155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Mar 14;367(3):584-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2007.12.183. Epub 2008 Jan 8.

Forkhead transcription factors regulate expression of the chemokine receptor
CXCR4 in endothelial cells and CXCL12-induced cell migration.

Hayashi H(1), Kume T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232-6300, USA.

Foxc1 and Foxc2 transcription factors are required for vascular development.
However, the molecular mechanisms by which Foxc1 and Foxc2 control angiogenesis, 
the growth of new blood vessels from pre-existing vessels and capillaries, remain
unknown. CXC chemokine ligand 12 (CXCL12) and its receptor, CXCR4, are critical
for the process of angiogenesis, including the migration and tube formation of
endothelial cells. Here we show that Foxc1 and Foxc2 directly induce CXCR4
expression by activating its promoter in endothelial cells. Furthermore,
Foxc1-deficient endothelial cells show a significant reduction in CXCR4
expression as well as CXCL12-stimulated migration. Taken together, these results 
provide novel evidence that Foxc transcription factors are important regulators
of the chemotactic motility of endothelial cells through the induction of CXCR4
expression.

PMCID: PMC2265419
PMID: 18187037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Feb 15;17(4):490-505. Epub 2007 Nov 9.

FOXC1 is required for cell viability and resistance to oxidative stress in the
eye through the transcriptional regulation of FOXO1A.

Berry FB(1), Skarie JM, Mirzayans F, Fortin Y, Hudson TJ, Raymond V, Link BA,
Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
fberry@ualberta.ca

Mutations in the human FOXC1 transcription factor gene underlie Axenfeld-Rieger
(AR) syndrome, a disorder characterized by anterior segment malformations in the 
eye and glaucoma. Through the use of an inducible FOXC1 protein, along with an
intermediate protein synthesis blocker, we have determined direct targets of
FOXC1 transcriptional regulation. FOXC1 regulates the expression of FOXO1A and
binds to a conserved element in the FOXO1A promoter in vivo. The zebrafish foxO1a
orthologs exhibit a robust expression pattern in the periocular mesenchyme.
Furthermore, FOXO1A expression is reduced in cultured human trabecular meshwork
(TM) cells and in the zebrafish developing eye when FOXC1 expression is knocked
down by siRNAs and morpholino antisense oliognucleotides, respectively. We also
demonstrate that reduced FOXC1 expression increases cell death in cultured TM
cells in response to oxidative stress, and increases cell death in the developing
zebrafish eye. These studies have uncovered a novel role for FOXC1 as an
essential mediator of cellular homeostasis in the eye and indicate that a
decreased resistance to oxidative stress may underlie AR-glaucoma pathogenesis.
Given that FOXO1A influences cellular homeostasis when positively or negatively
regulated; the dysregulation of FOXO1A activities in the eye through FOXC1 loss
of function mutations and FOXC1 gene duplications provides an explanation into
how seemingly similar human disorders can arise from both increases and decreases
in FOXC1 gene dose.

PMID: 17993506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Eye (Lond). 2007 Oct;21(10):1310-8.

Molecular and developmental mechanisms of anterior segment dysgenesis.

Sowden JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, University College London Institute of Child
Health and Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS Trust, London, UK.
j.sowden@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD) is a failure of the normal development of the
tissues of the anterior segment of the eye. It leads to anomalies in the
structure of the mature anterior segment, associated with an increased risk of
glaucoma and corneal opacity. Several different gene mutations have been
identified underlying these anomalies with the majority of ASD genes encoding
transcriptional regulators. In this review, the role of the ASD genes, PITX2 and 
FOXC1, is considered in relation to the embryology of the anterior segment, the
biochemical function of these proteins, and their role in development and disease
aetiology. The emerging view is that these genes act in concert to specify a
population of mesenchymal progenitor cells, mainly of neural crest origin, as
they migrate anteriorly around the embryonic optic cup. These same genes then
regulate mesenchymal cell differentiation to give rise to distinct anterior
segment tissues. Development appears critically sensitive to gene dosage, and
variation in the normal level of transcription factor activity causes a range of 
anterior segment anomalies. Interplay between PITX2 and FOXC1 in the development 
of different anterior segment tissues may partly explain the phenotypic
variability and the genetic heterogeneity characteristic of ASD.

PMID: 17914434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Aug 28;104(35):14002-7. Epub 2007 Aug 21.

Cortical dysplasia and skull defects in mice with a Foxc1 allele reveal the role 
of meningeal differentiation in regulating cortical development.

Zarbalis K(1), Siegenthaler JA, Choe Y, May SR, Peterson AS, Pleasure SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, 1550 Fourth Street, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

We report the identification of a hypomorphic mouse allele for Foxc1
(Foxc1(hith)) that survives into adulthood revealing previously unknown roles for
Foxc1 in development of the skull and cerebral cortex. This line of mice was
recovered in a forward genetic screen using ENU mutagenesis to identify mutants
with cortical defects. In the hith allele a missense mutation substitutes a Leu
for a conserved Phe at amino acid 107, leading to destabilization of the protein 
without substantially altering transcriptional activity. Embryonic and postnatal 
histological analyses indicate that diminished Foxc1 protein expression in all
three layers of meningeal cells in Foxc1(hith/hith) mice contributes to the
cortical and skull defects in mutant mice and that the prominent phenotypes
appear as the meninges differentiate into pia, arachnoid, and dura. Careful
analysis of the cortical phenotypes shows that Foxc1(hith/hith) mice display
detachment of radial glial endfeet, marginal zone heterotopias, and cortical
dyslamination. These abnormalities have some features resembling defects in type 
2 (cobblestone) lissencephaly or congenital muscular dystrophies but appear later
in corticogenesis because of the delay in breakdown of the basement membrane. Our
data reveal that the meninges regulate the development of the skull and cerebral 
cortex by controlling aspects of the formation of these neighboring structures.
Furthermore, we provide evidence that defects in meningeal differentiation can
lead to severe cortical dysplasia.

PMCID: PMC1955817
PMID: 17715063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Dev Dyn. 2007 Oct;236(10):2731-41.

The role of FoxC1 in early Xenopus development.

Cha JY(1), Birsoy B, Kofron M, Mahoney E, Lang S, Wylie C, Heasman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati,
Ohio, USA.

FoxC1 is an important transcription factor in vertebrate development since its
mutation in humans results in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. In the mouse, disturbance
of its function causes congenital hydrocephalus and abnormalities in the
development of various mesodermal derivatives. In this report, we provide one
mechanistic basis for the requirement for FoxC1 in vertebrate development. We
find that, in Xenopus laevis embryos, FoxC1 expression is regulated by the
maternal T-box transcription factor VegT, via the nodal sub-family of TGFbeta
signaling transducers. We show that at the late neurula to early tailbud stage,
FoxC1 depletion causes the down-regulation of adhesion molecules, EP and E
cadherin, as well as members of the Ephrin/EphR signaling families in the
mesoderm germ layer resulting in the loss of adhesion and apoptosis of mesodermal
cells.

2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17705306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Mol Vis. 2007 Jun 27;13:1005-9.

Novel mutations in the FOXC1 gene in Japanese patients with Axenfeld-Rieger
syndrome.

Fuse N(1), Takahashi K, Yokokura S, Nishida K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, Sendai, Miyagi, Japan. fusen@oph.med.tohoku.ac.jp

PURPOSE: Mutations in the forkhead transcription factor (FOXC1) gene have been
shown to cause juvenile glaucoma associated with a variety of anterior-segment
anomalies. The purpose of this study was to determine the ocular and genetic
characteristics of two Japanese families with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS).
METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from the leukocytes of six members of two
families with ARS. The DNA from one exon of the FOXC1 gene were amplified by
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and directly sequenced. The patients received
standard systemic and ophthalmological examinations.
RESULTS: Sequence analysis of the FOXC1 gene revealed a novel Ala85Pro missense
mutation in Helix1 in family 1 and a deletion of 17 nucleotides (437-453) in
Wing1 and Beta2 within the forkhead domain of the FOXC1 gene in family 2. This
deletion predicted a loss of the forkhead domain by a premature termination of
translation. These mutations segregated with the ARS phenotype in an autosomal
dominant pattern. The affected individuals in family 1 had posterior embryotoxon,
iris hypoplasia, corectopia with early-onset severe glaucoma, atrial septal
defect, aortic stenosis, and pulmonary stenosis. The affected members in family 2
had posterior embryotoxon and iris hypoplasia with early-onset glaucoma, and
systemically they had hearing loss, hypertelorism, and telecanthus.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel mutation in Helix1 and a novel deletion in Wing1 and Beta2
of the forkhead domain of the FOXC1 gene have been identified in two families
with ARS. FOXC1 mutations cause a variety of developmental abnormalities in the
anterior segment of the eye, and they also induce an elevation in intraocular
pressures and early-onset glaucoma.

PMCID: PMC2776537
PMID: 17653043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Mamm Genome. 2007 Jul;18(6-7):402-11. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Systems developmental biology: the use of ontologies in annotating models and in 
identifying gene function within and across species.

Bard J(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences, Edinburgh University, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK.
j.bard@ed.ac.uk

Systems developmental biology is an approach to the study of embryogenesis that
attempts to analyze complex developmental processes through integrating the roles
of their molecular, cellular, and tissue participants within a computational
framework. This article discusses ways of annotating these participants using
standard terms and IDs now available in public ontologies (these are areas of
hierarchical knowledge formalized to be computationally accessible) for tissues, 
cells, and processes. Such annotations bring two types of benefit. The first
comes from using standard terms: This allows linkage to other resources that use 
them (e.g., GXD, the gene-expression [G-E] database for mouse development). The
second comes from the annotation procedure itself: This can lead to the
identification of common processes that are used in very different and apparently
unrelated events, even in other organisms. One implication of this is the
potential for identifying the genes underpinning common developmental processes
in different tissues through Boolean analysis of their G-E profiles. While it is 
easiest to do this for single organisms, the approach is extendable to analyzing 
similar processes in different organisms. Although the full computational
infrastructure for such an analysis has yet to be put in place, two examples are 
briefly considered as illustration. First, the early development of the mouse
urogenital system shows how a line of development can be graphically formalized
using ontologies. Second, Boolean analysis of the G-E profiles of the
mesenchyme-to-epithelium transitions that take place during mouse development
suggest Lhx1, Foxc1, and Meox1 as candidate transcription factors for mediating
this process.

PMCID: PMC1998887
PMID: 17566825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Ophthalmic Genet. 2007 Jun;28(2):57-67.

Autosomal dominant cornea plana is not associated with pathogenic mutations in
DCN, DSPG3, FOXC1, KERA, LUM, or PITX2.

Aldave AJ(1), Sonmez B, Bourla N, Schultz G, Papp JC, Salem AK, Rayner SA,
Yellore VS.

Author information: 
(1)The Jules Stein Eye Institute, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA. aldave@jsei.ucla.edu

PURPOSE: To determine the genetic basis of autosomal dominant cornea plana (CNA1)
through the performance of a genome-wide linkage analysis and screening of the
decorin (DCN), dermatan sulfate proteoglycan 3 (DSPG3), forkhead box C1 (FOXC1), 
keratocan (KERA), lumican (LUM,) and paired-like homeodomain transcription factor
2 (PITX2) genes in members of an affected multigenerational family.
METHODS: Cycloplegic refraction, slit lamp biomicroscopy, corneal pachymetry, and
corneal topography were performed to determine each patient's affected status.
DNA was obtained from affected and unaffected subjects for the performance of a
genome-wide linkage analysis as well as PCR amplification and sequencing of DCN, 
DSPG3, FOXC1, KERA, LUM, and PITX2.
RESULTS: Five affected and three unaffected individuals were examined and
provided a peripheral blood sample for DNA isolation. All affected individuals
demonstrated an average corneal dioptric power less than 39 D, as well as one or 
more of the following anomalies: high hyperopia, strabismus, microcornea,
posterior embryotoxon, iridocorneal adhesions, iris atrophy, and pupillary
irregularities. A genome-wide linkage analysis did not indicate or exclude
linkage to the region on chromosome 12 to which CNA1 has been previously mapped, 
and did not provide a single or multipoint LOD score greater than 2.0 for any of 
the 400 microsatellite markers. Screening of DCN, DSPG3, FOXC1, KERA, LUM, and
PITX2 revealed 12 previously described single nucleotide polymorphisms, 2
previously described duplications, and 1 previously described insertion. None of 
the mutations previously associated with autosomal recessive cornea plana (CNA2) 
were identified. Seven novel sequence variants were described, including 5 single
nucleotide substitutions, 1 insertion and 1 deletion. None of the identified
sequence variants demonstrated complete segregation with the affected phenotype
in the pedigree.
CONCLUSION: Although missense and nonsense mutations in KERA are associated with 
CNA2, we did not identify any of the previously described mutations or novel
mutations that segregated with the disease phenotype in a family with CNA1. In
addition, no pathogenic sequence variations were found in DCN, DSPG3, LUM, PITX2 
and FOXC1, which have also been implicated in corneal and anterior segment
dysgenesis.

PMID: 17558846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Epilepsy Res. 2007 Jun;75(1):70-3. Epub 2007 May 18.

Chromosomal abnormality at 6p25.1-25.3 identifies a susceptibility locus for
hypothalamic hamartoma associated with epilepsy.

Kerrigan JF(1), Kruer MC, Corneveaux J, Panganiban CB, Itty A, Reiman D, Ng YT,
Stephan DA, Craig DW.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Center and Division of Pediatric Neurology, Barrow Neurological
Institute and Children's Health Center, St. Joseph's Hospital and Medical Center,
Phoenix, AZ 85013, USA. jkerrigan@chw.edu

The pathogenesis of hypothalamic hamartoma (HH) associated with epilepsy is
unknown. We have identified an individual with HH and refractory epilepsy
exhibiting subtle dysmorphic features. High-resolution karyotype identified a
duplication of the terminal end of 6p (6p25.1-25.3), confirmed by fluorescent in 
situ-hybridization (FISH). Copy number analysis with high-density (250K) single
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping microarrays characterized the
abnormality as a series of amplified regions between 1.4 Mb and 10.2 Mb, with a
small tandem deletion from 8.8 Mb to 9.7 Mb. There are 38 RefSeq genes within the
duplicated regions, and no known coding sequences within the deletion. This
unique patient helps identify 6p25.1-25.3 as a possible susceptibility locus for 
sporadic HH.

PMID: 17512701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Jun 1;143A(11):1227-30.

Absence of PITX2, BARX1, and FOXC1 mutations in De Hauwere syndrome
(Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly, hydrocephaly, hearing loss): a 25-year follow up.

Lowry RB(1), Gould DB, Walter MA, Savage PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Alberta Children's Hospital & University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. brian.lowry@calgaryhealthregion.ca

This study reports a 25-year follow-up of a patient with De Hauwere syndrome
(Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly, hydrocephalus, and hearing loss) whose intelligence is 
normal. Short stature and hyperlaxity of joints later leading to severe joint
pain were noted. Mutation analysis of candidate genes known or suspected to be
associated with Axenfeld-Rieger eye malformations was performed. This included
complete sequencing for PITX2, BARX1 and the forkhead domain of FOXC1. The
results of these analyses were negative and suggest that De Hauwere syndrome is
caused by a different gene.

Copyright (c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17486624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Fr Ophtalmol. 2007 Jan;30(1):44-8.

[Glaucoma with aniridia and isolated congenital glaucoma in siblings:
contribution and limits of genetics].

[Article in French]

Lise-Schneider B(1), Calvas P, Roche O, Lambert JC, Dufier JL, Costet-Fighiera C.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Ophtalmologie, CHU de Nice, Hôpital Saint Roch, Nice, France.

INTRODUCTION: Congenital glaucoma associated with aniridia and primary congenital
glaucoma are regarded as different entities. Indeed, the abnormalities of the
angle's structures as well as the genes involved are different. We report the
observation of two sisters presenting these two types of glaucoma with particular
attention paid to the importance and the difficulty of genetic counseling.
OBSERVATIONS: Child L, with no particular family history, had presented bilateral
aniridia complicated by bilateral glaucoma since birth. In addition to medical
and surgical treatment, general and genetic investigations were undertaken that
revealed no abnormalities. No microdeletion of the gene PAX6 responsible for the 
aniridia was found. Consequently, the genetic advice was in favor of a second
pregnancy for this couple. At birth, L's sister also presented bilateral
congenital glaucoma, which was isolated, without aniridia. New genetic
investigations were carried out but no abnormalities in PAX6, nor in FOXC1 or
PITX2 involved in the development of the anterior chamber, were found. Moreover, 
the haplotypes for aniridia locus AN2 inherited by the two sisters were
different, proof that this gene could not be responsible for the glaucoma.
DISCUSSION: At L's birth, the hypothesis retained was that she was a sporadic
case whose gene mutation could not be identified (which happens in 50% of
sporadic cases). The risk for the second pregnancy was negligible, although not
null. The primary congenital glaucoma presented by L's sister remains unexplained
in the context of aniridia and the role of the PAX6 gene was eliminated. The
study of PITX2 and FOXC1 genes involved in anterior segment dysgenesis proved
that they were also not involved. Thus, this observation evokes the
responsibility of a gene other than PAX6 in aniridia, which could also have a
role in isolated congenital glaucoma.
CONCLUSION: Analysis of congenital pathologies from a more genetic than clinical 
point of view seems to progressively break down the barriers established between 
the various phenotypes of hereditary congenital anomalies. Even if the
association of aniridia and primary congenital glaucoma in siblings is reported
here for the first time, it does not appear so extraordinary if one considers the
complexity of the anterior chamber's development, which involves many genes, most
of them still unidentified to date.

PMID: 17287671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Arch Ophthalmol. 2007 Jan;125(1):128-35.

Analyses of a novel L130F missense mutation in FOXC1.

Ito YA(1), Footz TK, Murphy TC, Courtens W, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Medical Genetics, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To understand how the novel L130F mutation, found in 2 patients with
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome, disrupts function of the forkhead box C1 protein
(FOXC1).
METHODS: Sequencing DNA from patients with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome identified a 
novel missense mutation that results in an L130F substitution in the FOXC1 gene. 
Site-directed mutagenesis was used to introduce the L130F mutation into the FOXC1
complementary DNA. The level of L130F protein expression was determined by means 
of immunoblotting. We determined the mutant protein's ability to localize to the 
nucleus, bind DNA, and transactivate a reporter construct.
RESULTS: The FOXC1 L130F mutant protein is expressed at levels similar to those
of wild-type FOXC1. The L130F protein, however, migrated at an apparent reduced
molecular weight compared with the wild-type protein, suggesting that the mutant 
and wild-type proteins may be differentially phosphorylated. The L130F protein
also had a significantly impaired capacity to localize to the nucleus, bind DNA, 
and transactivate reporter genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The disease-causing L130F mutation further demonstrates that helix 3
of the forkhead domain is important for the FOXC1 protein to properly localize to
the nucleus, bind DNA, and activate gene expression.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The inability of FOXC1 to function owing to the L130F
mutation provides further insight into how disruptions in the FOXC1 gene lead to 
human Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

PMID: 17210863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Jan;48(1):228-37.

Genotype-phenotype correlations in Axenfeld-Rieger malformation and glaucoma
patients with FOXC1 and PITX2 mutations.

Strungaru MH(1), Dinu I, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.

PURPOSE: To improve the understanding of Axenfeld-Rieger Malformation
(ARM)-associated glaucoma and to determine the best glaucoma treatment for
patients with ARM who have known genetic defects in FOXC1 or PITX2.
METHODS: Clinical data were collected from patients with diagnosed ARM, in whom
we had previously identified disease-causing mutations in either the FOXC1 or
PITX2 genes, by examination of patient records and use of clinical
questionnaires. One hundred twenty-six patients with ARM, representing 20
different probands, with FOXC1 and PITX2 alterations were included in the study.
RESULTS: ARM-associated glaucoma is a bilateral anterior segment dysgenesis
disease that affects males and females equally. Seventy-five percent of the
patients with ARM who participated in this study had glaucoma that had developed 
in adolescence or early adulthood. Of note, the patients with nonocular findings 
were more likely to have PITX2 defects than FOXC1 defects. Glaucoma in only 18%
of patients with either PITX2 or FOXC1 genetic defects responded to medical or
surgical treatment (used solely or in combination).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with FOXC1 mutations have the mildest prognosis for
glaucoma development, whereas patients with PITX2 defects and patients with FOXC1
duplication have a more severe prognosis for glaucoma development than do
patients with FOXC1 mutations. In the present study, current medical therapies do
not successfully lower intraocular pressure or prevent progression of glaucoma in
patients with ARM who have FOXC1 or PITX2 alterations. This clinical study also
provides useful diagnostic criteria to identify the gene responsible for ARM.

PMID: 17197537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Eur J Med Genet. 2007 Mar-Apr;50(2):120-7. Epub 2006 Oct 28.

Clinical presentation of a variant of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome associated with
subtelomeric 6p deletion.

Martinez-Glez V(1), Lorda-Sanchez I, Ramirez JM, Ruiz-Barnes P, Rodriguez de Alba
M, Diego-Alvarez D, Ramos C, Searby CC, Nishimura DY, Ayuso C.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Service, Fundacion Jimenez Diaz, Madrid, Spain.

We report a 22-year-old female with a variant of the Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome
(ARS) and discuss its relation with the subtelomeric 6p deletion. An ARS variant 
has been described in two familial cases of Axenfeld-Rieger Anomaly (ARA)
featuring specific extra ocular manifestations-hypertelorism, midface hypoplasia,
mild sensorial deafness, hydrocephaly, psychomotor delay and flattened femoral
epiphyses. We proposed that this set of characteristics represents a separate
syndrome within the ARS. On the other hand, there have been reported four cases
with cryptic de novo pure 6pter microdeletions detected by specific subtelomeric 
probes in patients with ARS characteristics. We describe a 6pter deletion
detected by SNP genotyping and confirmed by FISH and MLPA involving the FOXC1
gene in a patient with ocular and systemic findings that fit perfectly with the
variant mentioned above. We conclude that the ARS variant belongs to the ARS
phenotypic spectrum, which includes flattened femoral epiphyses as a feature.

PMID: 17157569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. BMC Med Genet. 2006 Nov 29;7:82.

Identification of the first intragenic deletion of the PITX2 gene causing an
Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome: case report.

de la Houssaye G(1), Bieche I, Roche O, Vieira V, Laurendeau I, Arbogast L,
Zeghidi H, Rapp P, Halimi P, Vidaud M, Dufier JL, Menasche M, Abitbol M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche Thérapeutique en Ophtalmologie, EA no 2502, Faculté de
Médecine René Descartes, site Necker, 156 rue de Vaugirard 75730 Paris cedex 15, 
Université Paris V, Paris, France. delaho@necker.fr

BACKGROUND: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is characterized by bilateral
congenital abnormalities of the anterior segment of the eye associated with
abnormalities of the teeth, midface, and umbilicus. Most cases of ARS are caused 
by mutations in the genes encoding PITX2 or FOXC1. Here we describe a family
affected by a severe form of ARS.
CASE PRESENTATION: Two members of this family (father and daughter) presented
with typical ARS and developed severe glaucoma. The ocular phenotype was much
more severe in the daughter than in the father. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
detected an aggressive form of meningioma in the father. There was no mutation in
the PITX2 gene, determined by exon screening. We identified an intragenic
deletion by quantitative genomic PCR analysis and characterized this deletion in 
detail.
CONCLUSION: Our findings implicate the first intragenic deletion of the PITX2
gene in the pathogenesis of a severe form of ARS in an affected family. This
study stresses the importance of a systematic search for intragenic deletions in 
families affected by ARS and in sporadic cases for which no mutations in the
exons or introns of PITX2 have been found. The molecular genetics of some ARS
pedigrees should be re-examined with enzymes that can amplify medium and large
genomic fragments.

PMCID: PMC1684248
PMID: 17134502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Glaucoma. 2006 Dec;15(6):499-504.

Novel CYP1B1 and known PAX6 mutations in anterior segment dysgenesis (ASD).

Chavarria-Soley G(1), Michels-Rautenstrauss K, Caliebe A, Kautza M, Mardin C,
Rautenstrauss B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Schwabachanlage 10, 91054 Erlangen, Germany.

PURPOSE: The study intended to define the underlying genetic defects for 21 index
patients affected with different forms of anterior segment dysgenesis. Sequence
analysis for the PAX6, PITX2, FOXC1, and CYP1B1 genes has been implemented for
this purpose.
METHODS: Ten patients affected with Peters anomaly, 8 with Rieger anomaly, and 3 
with aniridia were included in this study. All patients underwent a complete eye 
examination, including anterior segment evaluation, with slit-lamp microsocopy,
fundoscopy, tonography, and gonioscopy. Twenty-one intronic primer pairs were
used to amplify the coding exons of the FOXC1, CYP1B1, PITX2, and PAX6 genes for 
sequence analysis on an automated sequencer (ABI 3730).
RESULTS: We were able to detect mutations in 5 of 21 patients with anterior
segment malformations. We found mutations in individuals suffering from Rieger
anomaly and aniridia, in CYP1B1 and PAX6, respectively. None of the 10 Peters
anomaly patients had causative mutations in any of the 4 genes we screened.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest primary congenital glaucoma and the anterior
segment dysgenesis disorders may share a common molecular pathophysiology in the 
CYP1B1 pathway.

PMID: 17106362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Nov;47(11):4905-9.

Reduced human and murine corneal thickness in an Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome
subtype.

Asai-Coakwell M(1), Backhouse C, Casey RJ, Gage PJ, Lehmann OJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, 829 Medical Sciences
Building, Edmonton T6G 2H7, Alberta, Canada.

PURPOSE: Axenfeld-Rieger malformations of the anterior segment are clinically
heterogeneous, and up to 50% of cases are attributable to PITX2 or FOXC1
mutation. In view of PITX2's contribution to corneal development and the altered 
CCT in some FOXC1-related cases, this study was undertaken to investigate whether
a related phenotype is associated with the PITX2/Pitx2 mutation.
METHODS: Central corneal thickness (CCT) was measured in patients and mice with
PITX2/Pitx2 mutations. CCT in affected individuals and unaffected first-degree
relatives from a large PITX2 mutation pedigree was measured with ultrasonic
pachymetry. For murine measurements, the optical coherence tomogram (OCT) was
calibrated against plastic films whose thickness had been determined with
scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Subsequently, CCT was measured in ex vivo
eyes from Pitx2(+/-) and wild-type murine littermates by using OCT.
RESULTS: CCT in individuals with the PITX2 mutation (mean 484 microm; range,
425-519; n = 8) was significantly lower than in their unaffected first-degree
relatives (mean 582 microm; range, 550-590; n = 5; P = 0.0002, t-test). Scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) and OCT measurements of reference films correlated
closely (r = 0.9995) and subsequent OCT analysis of murine eyes revealed a
significant reduction in CCT in Pitx2(+/-) compared with wild-type littermates
(Pitx2(+/-): mean, 72 microm; range, 57-87, n = 6; wt: mean, 88 microm; range,
63-100; n = 6, P = 0.035, t-test).
CONCLUSIONS: The results show that PITX2/Pitx2 mutation results in reduced
corneal thickness and provides the first example of reduced CCT in a genetic
subtype of glaucoma. These data will facilitate management of developmental
glaucoma and offer potential for guiding molecular genetic testing in patients
with Axenfeld-Rieger. The similar CCT reduction observed in patients and mice
with comparable mutations emphasizes the utility of this murine model. The
technical advance of optical murine CCT measurement also provides scope for
serial in vivo imaging of the developing anterior segment and determining the
effects of altered CCT on measured IOP.

PMID: 17065505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Sci STKE. 2006 Oct 3;2006(355):pe39.

MAPping out arteries and veins.

Lamont RE(1), Childs S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary AB, Canada T2N 4N1, Canada. relamont@ucalgary.ca

Growing evidence suggests that a genetic program specifies the identity of
arteries and veins before the onset of circulation. A signaling cascade involving
sonic hedgehog (Shh), vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), the VEGF
receptor 2 (VEGFR2), homeobox proteins Foxc1 and Foxc2, the Notch receptor, and
the downstream transcription factor gridlock is required for expression of
arterial markers, whereas only a single transcription factor, COUP-TFII (chicken 
ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor II), has previously been
implicated in maintaining venous fate. Recent work has now implicated two
competing pathways downstream of VEGFR2 in arterial versus venous specification: 
Activation of the phospholipase C-gamma (PLC-gamma)-mitogen-activated protein
kinase (MAPK) pathway acts in arterial specification, whereas the
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt pathway acts to allow a venous fate by
inhibition of the PLC-gamma-MAPK pathway. Here, we review this work and discuss
how activation of the MAPK signaling cascade could stimulate an arterial fate.

PMID: 17018851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Nov 1;15(21):3229-40. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

FGF19 is a target for FOXC1 regulation in ciliary body-derived cells.

Tamimi Y(1), Skarie JM, Footz T, Berry FB, Link BA, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

The forkhead C1 (FOXC1) transcription factor is involved in the development and
regulation of several organs, including the eye, where FOXC1 alterations cause
iris, trabecular meshwork and corneal anomalies. Using nickel agarose chromatin
enrichment with human anterior segment cells, we previously identified the
fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19) locus as a gene potentially regulated by
FOXC1. Here, we demonstrate that FGF19 is a direct target of FOXC1 in the eye.
FOXC1 positively regulates FGF19 expression in corneal and periocular mesenchymal
cells in cell culture and in zebrafish embryos. Through the FGFR4 tyrosine
kinase, FGF19 promotes MAPK phosphorylation in the developing and mature cornea. 
During development, loss of either FOXC1 or FGF19 results in complementary, but
distinct, anterior segment dysgeneses. This study reveals an important role for
FOXC1 in the direct regulation of the FGF19-FGFR4-MAPK pathway to promote both
the development and maintenance of anterior segment structures within the eye.

PMID: 17000708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Circulation. 2006 Sep 19;114(12):1269-76. Epub 2006 Sep 4.

Transcriptional genomics associates FOX transcription factors with human heart
failure.

Hannenhalli S(1), Putt ME, Gilmore JM, Wang J, Parmacek MS, Epstein JA, Morrisey 
EE, Margulies KB, Cappola TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Penn Center for Bioinformatics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Specific transcription factors (TFs) modulate cardiac gene expression
in murine models of heart failure, but their relevance in human subjects remains 
untested. We developed and applied a computational approach called
transcriptional genomics to test the hypothesis that a discrete set of cardiac
TFs is associated with human heart failure.
METHODS AND RESULTS: RNA isolates from failing (n=196) and nonfailing (n=16)
human hearts were hybridized with Affymetrix HU133A arrays, and differentially
expressed heart failure genes were determined. TF binding sites overrepresented
in the -5-kb promoter sequences of these heart failure genes were then determined
with the use of public genome sequence databases. Binding sites for TFs
identified in murine heart failure models (MEF2, NKX, NF-AT, and GATA) were
significantly overrepresented in promoters of human heart failure genes (P<0.002;
false discovery rate 2% to 4%). In addition, binding sites for FOX TFs showed
substantial overrepresentation in both advanced human and early murine heart
failure (P<0.002 and false discovery rate <4% for each). A role for FOX TFs was
supported further by expression of FOXC1, C2, P1, P4, and O1A in failing human
cardiac myocytes at levels similar to established hypertrophic TFs and by
abundant FOXP1 protein in failing human cardiac myocyte nuclei.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide the first evidence that specific TFs identified 
in murine models (MEF2, NKX, NFAT, and GATA) are associated with human heart
failure. Moreover, these data implicate specific members of the FOX family of TFs
(FOXC1, C2, P1, P4, and O1A) not previously suggested in heart failure
pathogenesis. These findings provide a crucial link between animal models and
human disease and suggest a specific role for FOX signaling in modulating the
hypertrophic response of the heart to stress in humans.

PMID: 16952980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Sep;47(9):3846-52.

Novel mutations of FOXC1 and PITX2 in patients with Axenfeld-Rieger
malformations.

Weisschuh N(1), Dressler P, Schuettauf F, Wolf C, Wissinger B, Gramer E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory, University Eye Hospital, Tübingen, Germany.
nicole.weisschuh@uni-tuebingen.de

Erratum in
    Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 Dec;47(12):5162.

PURPOSE: To determine the prevalence of FOXC1 and PITX2 mutations and to assess
clinical phenotypes in a cohort of German patients with Axenfeld-Rieger
malformations.
METHODS: All coding exons of the FOXC1 and PITX2 genes were amplified by PCR from
genomic DNA and subjected to direct DNA sequencing. Analysis of mutations in
control subjects was performed by restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)
analysis.
RESULTS: Sequence variants were identified by DNA sequencing in 15 of 19 cases.
Mutation screening identified four potentially pathogenic FOXC1 mutations causing
amino acid substitutions (P79R, Y115S, G149D, and M161V) that were not present in
100 control subjects. In addition, two different 1-bp deletions causing a
frameshift and subsequent premature stop codon were identified in two subjects.
One patient harbored a FOXC1 nonsense mutation (S48X). Mutation screening also
identified two potentially pathogenic PITX2 mutations (P64L and P64R) in two
index patients that were excluded in 100 healthy control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings in the present study clearly demonstrate that FOXC1 and
PITX2 mutations are responsible for a significant proportion of Axenfeld-Rieger
malformations in Germany.

PMID: 16936096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Dev Biol. 2006 Aug 15;296(2):421-36. Epub 2006 Jun 8.

Forkhead transcription factors, Foxc1 and Foxc2, are required for the
morphogenesis of the cardiac outflow tract.

Seo S(1), Kume T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, 332 PRB, 2220 Pierce Ave, Nashville, TN 37232-6300,
USA.

Previous studies have shown that Foxc1 and Foxc2, closely related Fox
transcription factors, have interactive roles in cardiovascular development.
However, little is known about their functional overlap during early heart
morphogenesis. Here, we show that Foxc genes are coexpressed in a novel heart
field, the second heart field, as well as the cardiac neural crest cells (NCCs), 
endocardium, and proepicardium. Notably, compound Foxc1; Foxc2 mutants have a
wide spectrum of cardiac abnormalities, including hypoplasia or lack of the
outflow tract (OFT) and right ventricle as well as the inflow tract, dysplasia of
the OFT and atrioventricular cushions, and abnormal formation of the epicardium, 
in a dose-dependent manner. Most importantly, in the second heart field, compound
mutants exhibit significant downregulation of Tbx1 and Fgf8/10 and a reduction in
cell proliferation. Moreover, NCCs in compound mutants show extensive apoptosis
during migration, leading to a failure of the OFT septation. Taken together, our 
results demonstrate that Foxc1 and Foxc2 play pivotal roles in the early
processes of heart development, especially acting upstream of the Tbx1-FGF
cascade during the morphogenesis of the OFT.

PMID: 16839542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Dev Growth Differ. 2006 Jun;48(5):297-308.

Identification of Tgf beta1i4 as a downstream target of Foxc1.

Sommer P(1), Napier HR, Hogan BL, Kidson SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Cape
Town, Observatory, South Africa.

Craniofacial development is severely affected by null mutations in Foxc1,
indicating a multifunctional role for Foxc1 in ocular, maxilla and mandible,
skull and facial gland development. To delineate signaling pathways in which
Foxc1 is involved we compared the transcriptomes of whole heads of Foxc1+/+ and
Foxc1-/- embryos using a candidate cDNA array comprising genes expressed in the
head mesenchyme and ocular region, and a 7K oligo array. Absence of Foxc1 led to 
downregulation of Stat1 and Galnt4, and upregulation of Tgf beta1i4 at embryonic 
day 13.5 in the developing head mesenchyme. Comparative analyses revealed
differences in the expression pattern of Tgf beta1i4 in the head mesenchyme of
Foxc1-/- and Foxc1+/+ embryos. In the ocular regions of Foxc1-/- embryos, Tgf
beta1i4 was expressed in higher levels in the conjunctival epithelium and in the 
condensing mesenchyme on the nasal aspect of the developing eye while in
wild-type embryos more intense expression was seen in the mesenchyme on the
temporal aspect of the eye. Such data indicate that Foxc1 regulation of Tgf
beta1i4 is complex and may be cell-type dependent. Analysis of the regulation of 
Tgf beta1i4 by Foxc1 in a more homogenous cell population, mesenchymal cells
isolated from the periocular region revealed that, in these cells, Foxc1
negatively regulated Tgf beta1i4 expression, presumably via secreted factors such
as TGF-beta1. Since Foxc1 expression is essential for normal craniofacial
development, it is possible that its downstream targets play a role in the
development of the phenotypes associated with null mutations in Foxc1.

PMID: 16759280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Ophthalmologe. 2006 May;103(5):393-400.

[Morphology, family history, and age at diagnosis of 26 patients with
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and glaucoma or ocular hypertension].

[Article in German]

Dressler P(1), Gramer E.

Author information: 
(1)Poliklinik für Zahnärztliche Prothetik, Universität Würzburg.

PURPOSE: The Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) shows genetic and morphologic
heterogeneity and is associated with glaucoma in 50% of the patients.
METHODS: Ocular, dental, and systemic anomalies, maximum intraocular pressure
(IOPmax), frequency of ARS or glaucoma in the family history (FH), and age at
diagnosis (AAD) of 26 consecutively examined patients with ARS and glaucoma or
elevated IOP were evaluated retrospectively.
RESULTS: In 65.4% of the patients hypoplasia of the iris was found. Almost 50% of
the patients had systemic anomalies, dental anomalies being the most frequent. Of
26 patients, 12 (46.2%) had an ARS in the FH; 57.7% of the patients had a FH of
glaucoma with or without ARS. No significant differences in IOPmax and frequency 
of iris hypoplasia and glaucoma surgery were found when patients with and without
ARS in their FH and patients with and without iris hypoplasia were compared.
CONCLUSION: Patients with iris hypoplasia and patients with ARS and/or glaucoma
in the FH do not show a worse glaucoma prognosis than patients without iris
hypoplasia or without a FH of glaucoma or ARS. ARS was diagnosed within the 1st
year of life in approximately half of the patients. Therefore, children of ARS
patients should be screened as soon as possible to improve early diagnosis of ARS
and glaucoma and to improve glaucoma prognosis. As the dental and facial
anomalies may require treatment in the first dentition, patients with ARS should 
be referred to a dentist or orthodontist.

PMID: 16683168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Dev Biol. 2006 Jun 15;294(2):458-70. Epub 2006 Apr 3.

The forkhead transcription factors, Foxc1 and Foxc2, are required for arterial
specification and lymphatic sprouting during vascular development.

Seo S(1), Fujita H, Nakano A, Kang M, Duarte A, Kume T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232-6300, USA.

Accumulating evidence suggests that in the vertebrate embryo, acquisition of
arterial and venous identity is established early by genetic mechanisms,
including those regulated by vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and Notch 
signaling. However, although the COUP-TFII nuclear receptor has recently been
shown to regulate vein identity, very little is known about the molecular
mechanisms of transcriptional regulation in arterial specification. Here, we show
that mouse embryos compound mutant for Foxc1 and Foxc2, two closely related Fox
transcription factors, exhibit arteriovenous malformations and lack of induction 
of arterial markers whereas venous markers such as COUP-TFII are normally
expressed, suggesting that mutant endothelial cells fail to acquire an arterial
fate. Notably, consistent with this observation, overexpression of Foxc genes in 
vitro induces expression of arterial markers such as Notch1 and its ligand
Delta-like 4 (Dll4), and Foxc1 and Foxc2 directly activate the Dll4 promoter via 
a Foxc-binding site. Moreover, compound Foxc mutants show a defect in sprouting
of lymphatic endothelial cells from veins in early lymphatic development, due to 
reduced expression of VEGF-C. Taken together, our results demonstrate that Foxc
transcription factors are novel regulators of arterial cell specification
upstream of Notch signaling and lymphatic sprouting during embryonic development.

PMID: 16678147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2006 May;47(5):1803-9.

Structural assessment of PITX2, FOXC1, CYP1B1, and GJA1 genes in patients with
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome with developmental glaucoma.

Cella W(1), de Vasconcellos JP, de Melo MB, Kneipp B, Costa FF, Longui CA, Costa 
VP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Faculty of Medical Sciences, State University of 
Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil. wenercella@ig.com.br

PURPOSE: Axenfeld-Rieger (AR) is an autosomal dominant disorder with phenotypic
heterogeneity characterized by anterior segment dysgenesis, facial bone defects, 
and redundant periumbilical skin. The PITX2 gene, on chromosome 4q25, and the
FOXC1 gene, on chromosome 6p25, have been implicated in the different phenotypes 
of the syndrome through mutational events. Recently, the CYP1B1 gene was found to
be associated with Peters' anomaly, and the gene associated with
oculodentodigital dysplasia syndrome, which presents some similarities with AR,
was identified (connexin 43--GJA1 gene). The purpose of this study was to
evaluate PITX2, FOXC1, CYP1B1, and GJA1 gene mutations in Brazilian families with
AR.
METHODS: Eight unrelated patients affected by AR (all eight with glaucoma and
three with systemic manifestations) and their families were ophthalmologically
evaluated and their blood was collected for DNA extraction purposes. The coding
regions of PITX2, FOXC1, CYP1B1, and GJA1 genes were completely evaluated through
direct sequencing.
RESULTS: The frequency of mutations in the FOXC1, GJA1, PITX2, and CYP1B1 genes
in this study were 25%, 12.5%, 0% and 0%, respectively. In the FOXC1 gene, two
GGC triplet insertions (GGC375ins and GGC447ins) defined as a polymorphism, and
two new mutations--a deletion (718 to 719delCT) and a nonsense mutation
(Trp152STOP)--were identified. One polymorphism (Ala253Val) was identified in the
GJA1 gene in the same family presenting the Trp152STOP mutation in the FOXC1
gene. In this family harboring both structural alterations, two patients who
carried the GJA1 (Ala253Val) and FOXC1 (Trp152STOP) mutations developed less
severe glaucoma compared with family members presenting the FOXC1 (Trp152STOP)
mutation alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Two new structural alterations in the FOXC1 gene and a polymorphism 
in the GJA1 gene were first described in Brazilian patients with AR and
developmental glaucoma. A polymorphism in the GJA1 gene (Ala253Val), for the
first time identified in association with AR, raises the possibility of its
participation as a modifier gene.

PMID: 16638984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 14;281(15):10098-104. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Regulation of FOXC1 stability and transcriptional activity by an epidermal growth
factor-activated mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling cascade.

Berry FB(1), Mirzayans F, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2H7,
Canada. fberry@ualberta.ca

Mutations in the FOXC1 transcription factor gene result in Axenfeld Rieger
malformations, a disorder that affects the anterior segment of the eye, the
teeth, and craniofacial structures. Individuals with this disorder possess an
elevated risk for developing glaucoma. Previous work in our laboratory has
indicated that FOXC1 transcriptional activity may be regulated by
phosphorylation. We report here that FOXC1 is a short-lived protein (t 1/2< 30
min), and serine 272 is a critical residue in maintaining proper stability of
FOXC1. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that activation of the ERK1/2
mitogen-activated protein kinase through epidermal growth factor stimulation is
required for maximal FOXC1 transcriptional activation and stability. Finally, we 
have demonstrated that FOXC1 is targeted to the ubiquitin 26 S proteasomal
degradation pathway and that amino acid residues 367-553, which include the
C-terminal transactivation domain of FOXC1, are essential for ubiquitin
incorporation and proteolysis. These results indicate that FOXC1 protein levels
and activity are tightly regulated by post-translational modifications.

PMID: 16492674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Mar 1;140(5):503-8.

Case of chromosome 6p25 terminal deletion associated with Axenfeld-Rieger
syndrome and persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous.

Suzuki K(1), Nakamura M, Amano E, Mokuno K, Shirai S, Terasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya, Japan.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern and is
characterized by anomalies of the anterior segment of the eye and systemic signs 
including craniofacial dysmorphic features and cardiac defects. The disorder is
genetically heterogeneous and one causative gene, FOXC1, is located on chromosome
6p25. Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV) is a congenital ocular
disorder in which there is a failure of the normal regression of the primary
vitreous and a proliferation of fibrous tissue from the remnants of the primary
vitreous. Deletions of chromosome 6p25 have been reported in a small number of
patients with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome; however, no case of chromosome 6p25
deletion has been reported with PHPV. We report a newborn girl who had both
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and the combined type of PHPV, in whom the G-banding and
spectral karyotyping revealed a 6p monosomy of terminal deletion with a
breakpoint at chromosome 6p25.1. The karyotype was 46,XX,del(6)(p25.1). We
conclude that PHPV in the context of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome can be caused by
6p25 terminal deletion.

PMID: 16470791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Dev Dyn. 2006 Apr;235(4):1074-80.

The role of the forkhead transcription factor, Foxc1, in the development of the
mouse lacrimal gland.

Mattiske D(1), Sommer P, Kidson SH, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

The lacrimal gland produces secretions that lubricate and protect the cornea of
the eye. Foxc1 encodes a forkhead/winged helix transcription factor required for 
the development of many embryonic organs. Autosomal dominant mutations in human
FOXC1 cause eye disorders such as Axenfeld-Rieger Syndrome and glaucoma iris
hypoplasia, resulting from malformation of the anterior segment of the eye. We
show here that lacrimal gland development is severely impaired in homozygous null
Foxc1 mouse mutants, with reduced outgrowth and branching. Foxc1 is expressed in 
both the epithelium of the lacrimal gland and the surrounding mesenchyme. FGF10
stimulates the growth and branching morphogenesis in cultures of wild type and
Foxc1 mutant gland epithelial buds. However, using micromass culture of lacrimal 
gland mesenchyme, we show that Bmp7 induces wild type mesenchyme cells to
aggregate, but Foxc1 mutant cells do not respond. This study demonstrates that
Foxc1 mediates the BMP signaling required for lacrimal gland development.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2567112
PMID: 16470615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Jun;6(5):519-38. Epub 2006 Feb 3.

Differential gene expression in the developing mouse ureter.

Mitchell EK(1), Taylor DF, Woods K, Davis MJ, Nelson AL, Teasdale RD, Grimmond
SM, Little MH, Bertram JF, Caruana G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, School of Biomedical Sciences, Monash 
University, Clayton, Victoria 3800, Australia.

In many instances, kidney dysgenesis results as a secondary consequence to
defects in the development of the ureter. Through the use of mouse genetics a
number of genes associated with such malformations have been identified, however,
the cause of many other abnormalities remain unknown. In order to identify novel 
genes involved in ureter development we compared gene expression in embryonic day
(E) 12.5, E15.5 and postnatal day (P) 75 ureters using the Compugen mouse long
oligo microarrays. A total of 248 genes were dynamically upregulated and 208
downregulated between E12.5 and P75. At E12.5, when the mouse ureter is comprised
of a simple cuboidal epithelium surrounded by ureteric mesenchyme, genes
previously reported to be expressed in the ureteric mesenchyme, foxC1 and foxC2
were upregulated. By E15.5 the epithelial layer develops into urothelium,
impermeable to urine, and smooth muscle develops for the peristaltic movement of 
urine towards the bladder. The development of these two cell types coincided with
the upregulation of UPIIIa, RAB27b and PPARgamma reported to be expressed in the 
urothelium, and several muscle genes, Acta1, Tnnt2, Myocd, and Tpm2. In situ
hybridization identified several novel genes with spatial expression within the
smooth muscle, Acta1; ureteric mesenchyme and smooth muscle, Thbs2 and Col5a2;
and urothelium, Kcnj8 and Adh1. This study marks the first known report defining 
global gene expression of the developing mouse ureter and will provide insight
into the molecular mechanisms underlying kidney and lower urinary tract
malformations.

PMID: 16459152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Mar 15;15(6):905-19. Epub 2006 Jan 31.

Functional interactions between FOXC1 and PITX2 underlie the sensitivity to FOXC1
gene dose in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and anterior segment dysgenesis.

Berry FB(1), Lines MA, Oas JM, Footz T, Underhill DA, Gage PJ, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada,
T6G 2H7. fberry@ualberta.ca

Axenfeld-Rieger ocular dysgenesis is associated with mutations of the human PITX2
and FOXC1 genes, which encode transcription factors of the homeodomain and
forkhead types, respectively. We have identified a functional link between FOXC1 
and PITX2 which we propose underpins the similar Axenfeld-Rieger phenotype caused
by mutations of these genes. FOXC1 and PITX2A physically interact, and this
interaction requires crucial functional domains on both proteins: the C-terminal 
activation domain of FOXC1 and the homeodomain of PITX2. Immunofluorescence
further shows PITX2A and FOXC1 to be colocalized within a common nuclear
subcompartment. Furthermore, PITX2A can function as a negative regulator of FOXC1
transactivity. This work ties both proteins into a common pathway and offers an
explanation of why increased FOXC1 gene dosage produces a phenotype resembling
that of PITX2 deletions and mutations. Ocular phenotypes arise despite the
deregulated expression of FOXC1-target genes through mutations in FOXC1 or PITX2.
Ultimately, PITX2 loss of function mutations have a compound effect: the reduced 
expression of PITX2-target genes coupled with the extensive activation of
FOXC1-regulated targets. Our findings indicate that the functional interaction
between FOXC1 and PITX2A underlies the sensitivity to FOXC1 gene dosage in
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and related anterior segment dysgeneses.

PMID: 16449236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Dev Biol. 2006 Feb 15;290(2):447-58. Epub 2006 Jan 17.

The mouse forkhead gene Foxc1 is required for primordial germ cell migration and 
antral follicle development.

Mattiske D(1), Kume T, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Box 3709, Durham, 
NC 27710, USA.

Foxc1 encodes a forkhead/winged helix transcription factor expressed in many
embryonic tissues. Previous studies have investigated defects in the urogenital
system of Foxc1 null mutants, but the mechanisms underlying the abnormal
development of the gonad have not been explored. From earliest stages, the mutant
ovaries are smaller than normal, with fewer germ cells and disorganized somatic
issue. No bursa membrane is formed, and the oviduct remains uncoiled. Although
germ cells are specified correctly, many of them do not migrate to the gonadal
ridge, remaining trapped in the hindgut. Consequently, the number initially
reaching the gonad is less than 25% of normal. Once in the ovary, germ cells
proliferate normally, but the supporting somatic cells are not organized
correctly. Since mutant embryos die at birth, further development was followed in
ovaries grafted underneath the kidney capsule of ovariectomized females.
Transplanted ovaries display normal folliculogenesis up to preantral stages.
However, no follicles develop beyond early antral stages. Mutant follicles are
often polyovulatory and have disrupted theca and granulosa cell layers. We
conclude that alongside its previously known roles in kidney, cardiovascular and 
eye development, Foxc1 has essential functions during at least two stages of
gonad development-germ cell migration and folliculogenesis.

PMID: 16412416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Biol. 2005;4(3):11. Epub 2005 Dec 14.

Compound developmental eye disorders following inactivation of TGFbeta signaling 
in neural-crest stem cells.

Ittner LM(1), Wurdak H, Schwerdtfeger K, Kunz T, Ille F, Leveen P, Hjalt TA,
Suter U, Karlsson S, Hafezi F, Born W, Sommer L.

Author information: 
(1)Research Laboratory for Calcium Metabolism, Orthopedic University Hospital
Balgrist, CH-8008 Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Development of the eye depends partly on the periocular mesenchyme
derived from the neural crest (NC), but the fate of NC cells in mammalian eye
development and the signals coordinating the formation of ocular structures are
poorly understood.
RESULTS: Here we reveal distinct NC contributions to both anterior and posterior 
mesenchymal eye structures and show that TGFbeta signaling in these cells is
crucial for normal eye development. In the anterior eye, TGFbeta2 released from
the lens is required for the expression of transcription factors Pitx2 and Foxc1 
in the NC-derived cornea and in the chamber-angle structures of the eye that
control intraocular pressure. TGFbeta enhances Foxc1 and induces Pitx2 expression
in cell cultures. As in patients carrying mutations in PITX2 and FOXC1, TGFbeta
signal inactivation in NC cells leads to ocular defects characteristic of the
human disorder Axenfeld-Rieger's anomaly. In the posterior eye, NC cell-specific 
inactivation of TGFbeta signaling results in a condition reminiscent of the human
disorder persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous. As a secondary effect, retinal
patterning is also disturbed in mutant mice.
CONCLUSION: In the developing eye the lens acts as a TGFbeta signaling center
that controls the development of eye structures derived from the NC. Defective
TGFbeta signal transduction interferes with NC-cell differentiation and survival 
anterior to the lens and with normal tissue morphogenesis and patterning
posterior to the lens. The similarity to developmental eye disorders in humans
suggests that defective TGFbeta signal modulation in ocular NC derivatives
contributes to the pathophysiology of these diseases.

PMCID: PMC1414066
PMID: 16403239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Expert Rev Mol Med. 2005 Nov 8;7(25):1-17.

Current molecular understanding of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

Hjalt TA(1), Semina EV.

Author information: 
(1)Lund University, Department of Experimental Medical Research, BMC B12,
Tornavägen 10, SE-22184 Lund, Sweden. tord.hjalt@med.lu.se

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS) is a rare autosomal dominant inherited disorder
affecting the development of the eyes, teeth and abdomen. The syndrome is
characterised by complete penetrance but variable expressivity. The ocular
component of the ARS phenotype has acquired most clinical attention and has been 
dissected into a spectrum of developmental eye disorders, of which open-angle
glaucoma represents the main challenge in terms of treatment. Mutations in
several chromosomal loci have been implicated in ARS, including PITX2, FOXC1 and 
PAX6. Full-spectrum ARS is caused primarily by mutations in the PITX2 gene. The
homeobox transcription factor PITX2 is produced as at least four different
transcriptional and splicing isoforms, with different biological properties.
Intriguingly, PITX2 is also involved in left-right polarity determination,
although asymmetry defects are not a feature of ARS. In experimental animal
models and in cell culture experiments using PITX2, abundant evidence indicates
that a narrow window of expression level of this gene is vital for its correct
function.

PMID: 16274491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Int J Paediatr Dent. 2005 Nov;15(6):459-63.

Dental anomalies in Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

O'Dwyer EM(1), Jones DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, Arrowe Park Hospital, Upton, UK.

The authors describe the case of a 10-year-old girl presenting with
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS), a rare autosomal dominant condition. The patient 
showed severe hypodontia, microdontia and short roots. Early diagnosis of the
syndrome from its dento-facial and systemic features is important so that
subsequent ocular complications may be prevented.

PMID: 16238657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Development. 2005 Nov;132(21):4789-800. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Retinoic acid-dependent eye morphogenesis is orchestrated by neural crest cells.

Matt N(1), Dupé V, Garnier JM, Dennefeld C, Chambon P, Mark M, Ghyselinck NB.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC Collège 
de France, BP10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Using genetic approaches in the mouse, we show that the primary target tissue of 
retinoic acid (RA) action during eye morphogenesis is not the retina nor the
corneal ectoderm, which both express RA-synthesizing retinaldehyde dehydrogenases
(RALDH1 and RALDH3), but the neural crest cell-derived periocular mesenchyme
(POM), which is devoid of RALDH. In POM, the effects of the paracrine RA signal
are mediated by the nuclear RA receptors heterodimers RXRalpha/RARbeta and
RXRalpha/RARgamma. These heterodimers appear to control: (1) the remodeling of
the POM through activation of Eya2-related apoptosis; (2) the expression of Foxc1
and Pitx2, which play crucial roles in anterior eye segment development; and (3) 
the growth of the ventral retina. We additionally show that RALDH1 and RALDH3 are
the only enzymes that are required for RA synthesis in the eye region from E10.5 
to E13.5, and that patterning of the dorsoventral axis of the retina does not
require RA.

PMID: 16207763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Int J Cancer. 2006 Mar 1;118(5):1165-72.

Gene expression profiles relate to SS18/SSX fusion type in synovial sarcoma.

Fernebro J(1), Francis P, Edén P, Borg A, Panagopoulos I, Mertens F,
Vallon-Christersson J, Akerman M, Rydholm A, Bauer HC, Mandahl N, Nilbert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Lund University, SE-221 85 Lund, Sweden.
Josefin.Fernebro@med.lu.se

We applied 27k spotted cDNA microarray slides to assess gene expression profiles 
in 26 samples from 24 patients with synovial sarcomas (SS). The data were
analyzed in relation to histopathologic type, cytogenetic aberrations, gene
fusion type and development of distant metastases. Supervised analysis based on
gene fusion type in 12 SS with SS18/SSX1 and 9 with SS18/SSX2 revealed
significant differences in gene expression profiles. Among the discriminators
were several genes that have previously been found to be upregulated in SS,
including AXL, ZIC2, SPAG7, AGRN, FOXC1, NCAM1 and multiple metallothioneins.
Histopathology and degree of cytogenetic complexity did not significantly
influence expression, whereas a genetic signature that related to development of 
metastases could be discerned, albeit with a high false-positive rate. In
conclusion, our findings demonstrate differentially expressed genes for the 2
major gene fusion variants in SS, SS18/SSX1 and SS18/SSX2, and thereby suggest
that these result in different downstream effects.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16152617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2005 Nov;94(2):185-93.

Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 stimulates gene expression in MDA-MB-435
human breast cancer cells by means of its ability to inhibit metalloproteinases.

Porter JF(1), Sharma S, Wilson DL, Kappil MA, Hart RP, Denhardt DT.

Author information: 
(1)The Graduate Program in Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Nelson
Laboratories, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (TIMP-1) is a widely expressed, secreted
protein that functions primarily to inhibit members of a large family of
metalloproteinases (MPs). Because of the ability of TIMP-1 to inhibit MPs, it
functions in many of the same pathophysiological processes as these enzymes, e.g.
wound healing, ovulation, angiogenesis, and cancer cell metastasis. TIMP-1 can
also stimulate proliferation ([3H]thymidine incorporation) and cellular anabolic 
processes (Alamar Blue reduction). This stimulation has been shown to be
dependent on the MP-inhibitory ability of TIMP-1 in the human breast cancer cell 
line MDA-MB-435 (Porter et al., Br J Cancer 90: 463, 2004). To shed light on the 
mechanism by which TIMP-1 stimulates cellular anabolic processes, an
oligonucleotide microarray analysis was performed over a time course of TIMP-1
treatment of MDA-MB-435 cells. Fifteen genes whose mRNAs were differentially
regulated were identified. Six (Importin-7, MGC10471, FOXC1, subunit p20 of
Arp2/3 complex, mitochondrial ribosomal protein L32, and the serine/threonine
kinase-4 (MST1)) of these genes were confirmed by quantitative real time PCR.
These same mRNAs were shown to be regulated by the synthetic hydroxamate
MP-inhibitor GM6001 but not by its inactive derivative GM6001*, suggesting that
the differential regulation occurs through the MP-inhibitory ability of TIMP-1.
These results suggest a complex action of TIMP-1 on cancer cells mediated by
constitutively active cell surface metalloproteinases that release factors
regulating cell signaling pathways; they may account for the paradoxical
observation that elevated levels of TIMP-1 in tumors can correlate with an
adverse prognosis.

PMID: 16142437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Nov;13(11):1169-71.

Partial iris hypoplasia in a patient with an interstitial subtelomeric 6p
deletion not including the forkhead transcription factor gene FOXC1.

Koolen DA, Knoers NV, Nillesen WM, Slabbers GH, Smeets D, de Leeuw N, Sistermans 
EA, de Vries BB.

Comment on
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2003 Jan;11(1):89-92.

PMID: 16118645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Sep 15;14(18):2619-27. Epub 2005 Aug 4.

The establishment of a predictive mutational model of the forkhead domain through
the analyses of FOXC2 missense mutations identified in patients with hereditary
lymphedema with distichiasis.

Berry FB(1), Tamimi Y, Carle MV, Lehmann OJ, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada 
T6G 2H7. fberry@ualberta.ca

The FOX family of transcription factor genes is an evolutionary conserved, yet
functionally diverse class of transcription factors that are important for
regulation of energy homeostasis, development and oncogenesis. The proteins
encoded by FOX genes are characterized by a conserved DNA-binding domain known as
the forkhead domain (FHD). To date, disease-causing mutations have been
identified in eight human FOX genes. Many of these mutations result in single
amino acid substitutions in the FHD. We analyzed the molecular consequences of
two disease-causing missense mutations (R121H and S125L) occurring in the FHD of 
the FOXC2 gene that were identified in patients with hereditary lymphedema with
distichiasis (LD) to test the predictive capacity of a FHD structure/function
model. On the basis of the FOXC2 solution structure, both FOXC2 missense
mutations are located on the DNA-recognition helix of the FHD. A mutation model
based on the parologous FOXC1 protein predicts that these FOXC2 missense
mutations will impair the DNA-binding and transcriptional activation ability of
the FOXC2 protein. When these mutations were analyzed biochemically, we found
that both mutations did indeed reduce the DNA binding and transcriptional
capacity. In addition, the R121H mutation affected nuclear localization of FOXC2.
Together, these data indicate that these FOXC2 missense mutations are functional 
nulls and that FOXC2 haploinsufficiency underlies hereditary LD and validates the
predictive ability of the FOXC1-based FHD mutational model.

PMID: 16081467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jul;233(3):847-52.

Foxc1 integrates Fgf and Bmp signalling independently of twist or noggin during
calvarial bone development.

Rice R(1), Rice DP, Thesleff I.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Programme, Institute of Biotechnology, University of
Helsinki, Finland. ritva.rice@kcl.ac.uk

Calvarial bone and suture development is under complex regulation where bone
morphogenetic protein (Bmp) and fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signalling
interact with Msx2/Twist and Noggin and regulate frontal bone primordia
proliferation and suture fusion, respectively. We have shown previously that the 
winged helix transcription factor Foxc1, which is necessary for calvarial bone
development, is required for the Bmp regulation of Msx2. We now show that FGF2
regulates the expression of Foxc1, indicating that Foxc1 integrates Bmp and Fgf
signalling pathways. We also show that Foxc1 is not needed for the acquisition of
osteogenic potential or for the differentiation of osteoblasts. The expression of
Fgf receptors and Twist were normal in Foxc1-deficient calvarial mesenchyme, and 
ectopic FGF2 was able to induce the expression Osteopontin. Furthermore, we
demonstrate that Foxc1 does not participate in the regulation of Noggin
expression. Our findings indicate that Foxc1 integrates the Bmp and Fgf
signalling pathways independently of Twist or Noggin. This signalling network is 
essential for the correct patterning and growth of calvarial bones.

PMID: 15906377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2005 May;46(5):1572-80.

The lacrimal gland transcriptome is an unusually rich source of rare and poorly
characterized gene transcripts.

Ozyildirim AM(1), Wistow GJ, Gao J, Wang J, Dickinson DP, Frierson HF Jr, Laurie 
GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, UVa Health System, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA 22908 USA.

PURPOSE: To sequence and comprehensively analyze human and mouse lacrimal gland
transcriptomes as part of the NEIBank project.
METHODS: cDNA libraries generated from normal human and mouse lacrimal glands
were sequenced and analyzed by PHRED, RepeatMasker, BLAST, and GRIST. Human
"lacrimal-preferred genes" and putative gene regulatory elements were
respectively identified in UniGene and ConSite, and gene clustering was analyzed 
by chromosomal mapping. "Hypothetical proteins," identified by keyword search,
were verified by genomic alignment and queried in the Conserved Domain database
and GEO Profiles.
RESULTS: The top six transcripts in human and mouse differed, revealing a
previously unappreciated molecular divergence. The human transcriptome is
enriched with transcripts from 29 lacrimal-preferred genes and a content of
poorly characterized hypothetical proteins, proportionally greater than in all
other tissues. Only 45% of lacrimal preferred, but 71% of hypotheticals, have
mouse orthologs. Many of the latter display apparently altered cancer expression 
in the CGAP SAGE library collection-often in keeping with predicted WD40, protein
kinase, Src homology 2 and 3, RhoGEF, and pleckstrin homology domains involved in
cell signaling. At the genomic level, lacrimal-expressed genes show some evidence
of clustering, particularly on human chromosomes 9 and 12. Binding sites for
TFAP2A, FOXC1, and other transcription factors are predicted.
CONCLUSIONS: Interspecies divergence cautions against use of mouse models of
human dry eye syndromes. Lacrimal preferred and hypothetical proteins, gene
clustering, and putative gene regulatory elements together provide new clues for 
a molecular understanding of lacrimal gland function and mechanisms of
coordinated tissue-specific transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 15851553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Apr 1;134A(1):3-11.

Subtelomeric deletions of chromosome 6p: molecular and cytogenetic
characterization of three new cases with phenotypic overlap with
Ritscher-Schinzel (3C) syndrome.

Descipio C(1), Schneider L, Young TL, Wasserman N, Yaeger D, Lu F, Wheeler PG,
Williams MS, Bason L, Jukofsky L, Menon A, Geschwindt R, Chudley AE, Saraiva J,
Schinzel AA, Guichet A, Dobyns WE, Toutain A, Spinner NB, Krantz ID.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics and Molecular Biology, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, and The University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

We have identified six children in three families with subtelomeric deletions of 
6p25 and a recognizable phenotype consisting of ptosis, posterior embryotoxon,
optic nerve abnormalities, mild glaucoma, Dandy-Walker malformation,
hydrocephalus, atrial septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, and mild mental
retardation. There is considerable clinical overlap between these children and
individuals with the Ritscher-Schinzel (or cranio-cerebello-cardiac (3C))
syndrome (OMIM #220210). Clinical features of 3C syndrome include craniofacial
anomalies (macrocephaly, prominent forehead and occiput, foramina parietalia,
hypertelorism, down-slanting palpebral fissures, ocular colobomas, depressed
nasal bridge, narrow or cleft palate, and low-set ears), cerebellar malformations
(variable manifestations of a Dandy-Walker malformation with moderate mental
retardation), and cardiac defects (primarily septal defects). Since the original 
report, over 25 patients with 3C syndrome have been reported. Recessive
inheritance has been postulated based on recurrence in siblings born to
unaffected parents and parental consanguinity in two familial cases. Molecular
and cytogenetic mapping of the 6p deletions in these three families with
subtelomeric deletions of chromosome 6p have defined a 1.3 Mb minimally deleted
critical region. To determine if 6p deletions are common in 3C syndrome, we
analyzed seven unrelated individuals with 3C syndrome for deletions of this
region. Three forkhead genes (FOXF1 and FOXQ1 from within the critical region,
and FOXC1 proximal to this region) were evaluated as potential candidate disease 
genes for this disorder. No deletions or disease-causing mutations were
identified.

PMID: 15704124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(4):1415-24.

FOXC1 transcriptional regulatory activity is impaired by PBX1 in a filamin
A-mediated manner.

Berry FB(1), O'Neill MA, Coca-Prados M, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
fberry@ualberta.ca

FOXC1 mutations underlie Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder
that is characterized by a spectrum of ocular and nonocular phenotypes and
results in an increased susceptibility to glaucoma. Proteins interacting with
FOXC1 were identified in human nonpigmented ciliary epithelial cells. Here we
demonstrate that FOXC1 interacts with the actin-binding protein filamin A (FLNA).
In A7 melanoma cells possessing elevated levels of nuclear FLNA, FOXC1 is unable 
to activate transcription and is partitioned to an HP1alpha, heterochromatin-rich
region of the nucleus. This inhibition is mediated through an interaction between
FOXC1 and the homeodomain protein PBX1a. In addition, we demonstrate that
efficient nuclear and subnuclear localization of PBX1 is mediated by FLNA.
Together, these data reveal a mechanism by which structural proteins such as FLNA
can influence the activity of a developmentally and pathologically important
transcription factor such as FOXC1. Given the resemblance of the skeletal
phenotypes caused by FOXC1 loss-of-function mutations and FLNA gain-of-function
mutations, this inhibitory activity of FLNA on FOXC1 may contribute to the
pathogenesis of FLNA-linked skeletal disorders.

PMCID: PMC548007
PMID: 15684392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Feb 1;132A(4):381-5.

Axenfeld-Rieger malformation and distinctive facial features: Clues to a
recognizable 6p25 microdeletion syndrome.

Maclean K(1), Smith J, St Heaps L, Chia N, Williams R, Peters GB, Onikul E,
McCrossin T, Lehmann OJ, Adès LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, 
New South Wales, Australia. k.maclean@victorchang.unsw.edu.au

Deletion of distal 6p is associated with a distinctive clinical phenotype
including Axenfeld-Rieger malformation, hearing loss, congenital heart disease,
dental anomalies, developmental delay, and a characteristic facial appearance. We
report the case of a child where recognition of the specific ocular and facial
phenotype, led to identification of a 6p microdeletion arising from a de novo
6:18 translocation. Detailed analysis confirmed deletion of the FOXC1 forkhead
gene cluster at 6p25. CNS anomalies included hydrocephalus and hypoplasia of the 
cerebellum, brainstem, and corpus callosum with mild to moderate developmental
delay. Unlike previous reports, hearing was normal.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15654696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Ophthalmic Genet. 2004 Dec;25(4):257-70.

Molecular basis of Peters anomaly in Saudi Arabia.

Edward D(1), Al Rajhi A, Lewis RA, Curry S, Wang Z, Bejjani B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences and Pathology, University of
Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, USA.

Peters anomaly (PA) and primary congenital glaucoma (PCG) are genetically and
phenotypically distinct conditions. Mutations in cytochrome P4501B1 (CYP1B1) are 
the most common cause of PCG in Saudi Arabia. Recent evidence suggests that there
may be common genetic factors to these conditions. To determine the molecular
basis of PA, 11 study subjects with PA from 10 Saudi Arabian families were
recruited. Experienced ophthalmologists examined all affected subjects and most
of their available unaffected relatives. The diagnosis of PA was confirmed by
pathological examination of excised corneal buttons in seven subjects. The coding
exons of FOXC1, PITX2, and PAX6 were screened and those of CYP1B1 and FOXE3
sequenced. Homozygous CYP1B1 mutations were identified in six individuals in five
families. Five individuals were homozygous for G61E and one was homozygous for
143del10. No mutations were identified in FOXC1, PITX2, PAX6, or FOXE3. The
clinical or pathologic phenotype of the subjects with CYP1B1 mutations was not
different from that of the other PA patients in this study. Two families included
at least one individual with homozygous CYP1B1 mutations and no ocular anomalies 
(nonpenetrant). Mutations in CYP1B1 may be a substantive cause for PA in this
population. Thus, PA and PCG may share a common molecular pathophysiology.
Indeed, PA and PCG may share the same spectrum of anterior segment dysgenesis.
Finally, the occurrence of PA, PCG, and unaffected individuals with identical
homozygous CYP1B1 mutations in the same sibship suggests the presence of
modifiers that modulate the clinical severity of the phenotypic expression of the
same CYP1B1 mutation(s).

PMID: 15621878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Jan 15;132A(2):175-80.

Subtelomeric 6p deletion: clinical, FISH, and array CGH characterization of two
cases.

Le Caignec C(1), De Mas P, Vincent MC, Bocéno M, Bourrouillou G, Rival JM, David 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalo-Universitaire, Nantes, France.
lecaignec@hotmail.com

Thirty patients have been described with cytogenetically visible deletion of the 
short arm of chromosome 6. However, subtelomeric 6p deletion detected by
subtelomeric specific probes has been reported only twice. We report two new
patients with terminal 6p deletion detected by subtelomeric screening using
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The two patients exhibited mental
retardation, ocular abnormalities, hearing loss, and a characteristic facial
appearance. Detailed FISH analyses with probes covering the distal 6p25 region
estimated the size of the terminal deletions to approximately 5.5 Mb and
approximately 4.8 Mb. Array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH)
was used to confirm the cryptic deletions. Most patients with subtelomeric
defects lack a characteristic phenotype. However, some of the subtelomeric
deletions result in a specific phenotype, which can direct the clinician towards 
the diagnosis. Submicroscopic 6p deletion appears to be a recognizable clinical
phenotype, and this region should be thoroughly investigated with FISH probes,
including at least a subtelomeric 6p probe and a probe covering FOXC1, for
patients presenting with a characteristic facial appearance, ocular
abnormalities, predominantly anterior-chamber eye defects, hearing loss, and
mental retardation.

PMID: 15578619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Int J Dev Biol. 2004;48(8-9):1015-29.

Anterior segment development relevant to glaucoma.

Gould DB(1), Smith RS, John SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609, USA.

Development of the ocular anterior segment involves a series of inductive
interactions between neural ectoderm, surface ectoderm and periocular mesenchyme.
The timing of these events is well established but less is known about the
molecular mechanisms involved. Various genes that participate in these processes 
have been identified. As the roles of more genes are determined, developmental
pathways and networks will emerge. Here, we focus on recent advances made using
mouse models. We summarize key morphological events in formation of anterior
chamber structures, including the aqueous humor drainage structures that are
involved in intraocular pressure (IOP) regulation and glaucoma. We discuss the
developmental roles of genes that associate with abnormal anterior segment
development and elevated IOP or glaucoma (including Bmp4, Cyp1b1, Foxc1, Foxc2,
Pitx2, Lmx1b and Tyr ) and how some of these genes may fit into developmental
networks.

PMID: 15558492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Am J Pathol. 2004 Nov;165(5):1633-41.

PITX2 gain-of-function in Rieger syndrome eye model.

Holmberg J(1), Liu CY, Hjalt TA.

Author information: 
(1)Lund University, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Section for Cell
and Developmental Biology, BMC B12, Tornavägen 10, SE-22184 Lund, Sweden.

The human autosomal-dominant disorder Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome presents with
defects in development of the eyes, teeth, and umbilicus. The eye manifests with 
iris ruptures, irido-corneal adhesions, cloudy corneas, and glaucoma.
Transcription factors such as PITX2 and FOXC1 have been found to carry point
mutations, causing the disorder. However, for approximately 40% of the cases, the
pathogenesis is unknown. It has been reported that some mutations in PITX2
increase transactivation, whereas most mutations cause defects in DNA binding or 
transactivation. It is not known whether up-regulation of PITX2 activity can
cause the disorder as well. Here we test this hypothesis directly by
overexpressing PITX2A as a transgene in mouse corneal mesenchyme and iris, using 
keratocan-flanking sequences. The mice presented with corneal opacification,
corneal hypertrophy, irido-corneal adhesions, and severely degenerated retina,
resembling glaucoma. The corneal hypertrophy also resembles the corneal
hypertrophy of Pitx2-/- mice. Control transgenic mice carrying point mutations
T68P or K88E in PITX2A were normal. These findings indicate a novel pathogenetic 
mechanism in which excess corneal and iridal PITX2A cause glaucoma and anterior
defects that closely resemble Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

PMCID: PMC1618668
PMID: 15509533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Nov;45(11):3904-13.

Identification of target genes regulated by FOXC1 using nickel agarose-based
chromatin enrichment.

Tamimi Y(1), Lines M, Coca-Prados M, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

PURPOSE: To overcome the problem of antibody availability, often encountered
during chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, nickel agarose-based
chromatin enrichment (NACE) was developed. Based on the affinity of
(His)-6-tagged proteins for the nickel ion, this modified form of ChIP allows the
isolation of chromatin in the absence of specific antibodies.
METHODS: Nonpigmented ciliary epithelium cells were transfected with
(His)-6-tagged FOXC1. FOXC1-enriched chromatin complexes were isolated by using
the tight electrostatic interaction between histidine residues of the recombinant
FOXC1 protein and nickel. One hundred fifty NACE-enriched clones were sequenced
and subjected to in silico and biochemical analyses.
RESULTS: Twenty-six clones were detected near known genes: Eight were near
predicted but uncharacterized genes, eight were within areas where neither known 
nor predicted genes have yet been mapped, four were chimeric, and the rest were
either repetitive (n=81) or poor-quality (n=23) sequences. Twenty of the 26 known
genes were expressed in the eye. Five of the NACE-enriched clones (BMP2K, DACH,
FVT-1, SIX-1, and PGE-2 receptor), as well as nine clones selected from the
literature, were validated by PCR amplification in two independent lots of
NACE-enriched chromatin. All five NACE-selected genes were detected in two
independent assays, as well as four (BMP7, SMAD2, TGF-B1, and WNT6) of the nine
genes selected from the literature, consistent with these genes' being regulated 
by FOXC1.
CONCLUSIONS: NACE is a useful technique allowing specific chromatin enrichment in
cases where antibodies are unavailable. Specific recovery of PTGER, DACH1, WNT6, 
and FVT-1 implicates FOXC1 in a variety of cellular events including modulation
of intraocular pressure, cell cycle, ocular development, and oncogenesis.

PMID: 15505035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Arch Ophthalmol. 2004 Oct;122(10):1527-33.

Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly: a novel mutation in the forkhead box C1 (FOXC1) gene in 
a 4-generation family.

Mortemousque B(1), Amati-Bonneau P, Couture F, Graffan R, Dubois S, Colin J,
Bonneau D, Morissette J, Lacombe D, Raymond V.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Ophtalmologie, Centre Hospitalier et Universitaire Bordeaux,
Bordeaux, France.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize DNA mutations in a pedigree of Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly
(ARA) (Online Mendelian Inheritance of Man 601631), a clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous, autosomal dominantly inherited disorder associated with anterior
chamber abnormalities and glaucoma.
DESIGN: Observational case-control and DNA linkage and screening studies.
PARTICIPANTS: Affected (10 cases) and unaffected (5 controls) members of a family
with ARA.
METHODS: Clinical characteristics of ARA were documented by history or physical
examination of symptomatic individuals. With their informed consent, a blood
sample was collected from each of 10 affected and 5 unaffected family members.
DNA was tested for linkage to the IRID1 locus at chromosome 6p25, a known locus
for ARA/Rieger syndrome. A candidate gene previously mapped at this locus, FOXC1,
was screened for mutations in cases and controls. Main Outcome Measure Linkage of
the ARA phenotype at the 6p25 locus and mutation detected in FOXC1.
RESULTS: Direct sequencing of FOXC1 detected a new mutation, T272C, that
segregated with the ARA phenotype in this family and was not detected in DNA from
family members without ARA. This mutation, a T-->C transition, is predicted to
result in a change of isoleucine to threonine (Ile9lThr) in a highly conserved
location within the first helix of the forkhead domain.
CONCLUSION: Characterization of the FOXC1 mutation in family members with ARA
furthers our understanding of the molecular origin of developmental glaucoma and 
other anterior segment disorders.

PMID: 15477465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Oct;4(6):611-9.

Foxc2 is expressed in developing lymphatic vessels and other tissues associated
with lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome.

Dagenais SL(1), Hartsough RL, Erickson RP, Witte MH, Butler MG, Glover TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, 4909 Buhl, Box 0618,
1241 E. Catherine Street, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0618, USA. sdagenai@umich.edu

The molecular events involved in lymphatic development are poorly understood.
Hence, the genes responsible for hereditary lymphedema are of great interest due 
to the potential for providing insights into the mechanisms of lymphatic
development, the diagnosis, prevention and treatment of lymphedema, and
lymphangiogenesis during tumor growth. Mutations in the FOXC2 transcription
factor cause a major form of hereditary lymphedema, the lymphedema-distichiasis
syndrome. We have conducted a study of Foxc2 expression during mouse development 
using immunohistochemistry, and examined its expression in lymphatics compared to
its paralog Foxc1 and to Vegfr-3, Prox1 and other lymphatic and blood vascular
proteins. We have found that Foxc2 is expressed in lymphatic primordia, jugular
lymph sacs, lymphatic collectors and capillaries, as well as in podocytes,
developing eyelids and other tissues associated with abnormalities in
lymphedema-distichiasis syndrome.

PMID: 15465483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Sep;45(9):3081-90.

Gene expression profile of the rat eye iridocorneal angle: NEIBank expressed
sequence tag analysis.

Ahmed F(1), Torrado M, Zinovieva RD, Senatorov VV, Wistow G, Tomarev SI.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Mechanisms of Glaucoma, Laboratory of Molecular and
Developmental Biology, National Eye Institute, Bethesda, MD 20814-9692, USA.

PURPOSE: To characterize gene expression pattern in the combined tissues of the
rat iridocorneal angle by expressed sequence tag (EST) analysis, as part of the
NEIBank project.
METHODS: RNA was extracted from dissected tissues of the rat iridocorneal angle
(iris, ciliary body, trabecular meshwork, and Schlemm's canal) and used to
construct unamplified, non-normalized cDNA libraries in the pSPORT1 vector.
Approximately 5000 clones were sequenced from the 5'-end. Clones were clustered
and identified using the GRIST software, a procedure based on BLAST comparisons. 
Complete sequences of several novel cDNAs showing eye-preferred expression
patterns were obtained. The expression patterns of several genes have been
investigated by Northern blot and in situ hybridization, as well as by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: After analysis and removal of non-mRNA sequences, 2195 independent
clusters, potentially representing individual eye angle-expressed clones were
obtained. The expression profile of the combined rat eye angle tissues was more
similar to that of the human iris than to human trabecular meshwork. Several
cDNAs encoding transcription factors essential for normal eye development and
function including Pax-6, Six3, c-Maf, Maf1, Sox-4, Foxc1, Rx, and Ldb2 were
present among sequenced clones. A number of tested cDNAs showed eye-preferred
expression patterns. Myocilin, which is abundant in human eye angle tissues, was 
not observed in the rat collection; however, transcripts for three other
olfactomedin-domain proteins were seen. Latrotoxin receptor (CL1AA) and optimedin
were shown to be expressed in the iris and ciliary body, as well as in the
ganglion and inner nuclear cell layers of the retina, whereas the rat orthologue 
of the human HNOEL-iso gene was expressed in the iris and sclera and less
actively in the trabecular meshwork, retina, and optic nerve.
CONCLUSIONS: The iridocorneal libraries are a good source of novel
uncharacterized genes and molecular markers for the tissues of the eye angle.
Although myocilin is not abundantly expressed in rat eye angle, other
olfactomedin-containing genes are expressed there and may play important roles in
normal eye function and disease.

Copyright Association for Research in Vision and Ophthalmology

PMID: 15326124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Aug 6;32(14):4182-93. Print 2004.

Essential structural and functional determinants within the forkhead domain of
FOXC1.

Saleem RA(1), Banerjee-Basu S, Murphy TC, Baxevanis A, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Department of Ophthalmology, 832 Medical
Sciences Building, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2H7.

The forkhead domain (FHD)-containing developmental transcription factor FOXC1 is 
mutated in patients presenting with Axenfeld-Rieger malformations. In this paper,
we report the introduction of positive, negative or neutral charged amino acids
into critical positions within the forkhead domain of FOXC1 in an effort to
better understand the essential structural and functional determinants within the
FHD. We found that FOXC1 is intolerant of mutations at I87. Additionally,
alterations of amino acids within alpha-helix 1 of the FOXC1 FHD affected both
nuclear localization and transactivation. Amino acids within alpha-helix 3 were
also found to be necessary for transactivation and can have roles in correct
localization. Interestingly, changing amino acids within alpha-helix 3,
particularly R127, resulted in altered DNA-binding specificity and granted FOXC1 
the ability to bind to a novel DNA sequence. Given the limited topological
variation of FHDs, due to the high conservation of residues, we anticipate that
models of forkhead domain function derived from these data will be relevant to
other members of the FOX family of transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC514369
PMID: 15299087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2004 Aug;45(8):2531-8.

The wing 2 region of the FOXC1 forkhead domain is necessary for normal
DNA-binding and transactivation functions.

Murphy TC(1), Saleem RA, Footz T, Ritch R, McGillivray B, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

PURPOSE: To determine the biochemical defects that underlie Axenfeld-Rieger
malformations, to determine a functional role for wing 2 in FOXC1, and to
understand how mutations in this region disrupt FOXC1 function.
METHODS: Sequencing DNA from patients with Axenfeld-Rieger malformation resulted 
in the identification of two novel missense mutations (G165R and R169P) in wing 2
of FOXC1. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to introduce these mutations, as
well as previously reported mutation (M161K), into the FOXC1 cDNA. These FOXC1
mutants were evaluated to determine their ability to localize to the nucleus,
bind DNA and activate gene expression.
RESULTS: Two novel missense mutations were identified in unrelated patients, in
wing 2 of the FOXC1 forkhead domain. Because there had been no previous
biochemical analysis, the mutation M161K was also investigated. All three mutant 
proteins localized correctly to the nucleus. The G165R mutation maintained
wild-type levels of DNA binding; however, both the M161K and R169P mutations
displayed reduced DNA binding ability. Biochemical analysis showed that all three
mutations disrupt FOXC1's transactivation ability.
CONCLUSIONS: Biochemical analysis of mutations G165R and R169P and of a
previously reported mutation, M161K, demonstrate the functional significance of
wing 2. M161K and R169P disrupt DNA binding of FOXC1, consistent with the
hypothesis that wing 2 is necessary for DNA binding. The results also suggest
that wing 2 plays a role in gene activation. These results provide the first
insights into how mutations in wing 2 disrupt FOXC1 function.

PMID: 15277473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. BMC Med Genet. 2004 Jun 25;5:17.

Phenotypic and molecular assessment of seven patients with 6p25 deletion
syndrome: relevance to ocular dysgenesis and hearing impairment.

Gould DB(1), Jaafar MS, Addison MK, Munier F, Ritch R, MacDonald IM, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
dbg@jax.org

BACKGROUND: Thirty-nine patients have been described with deletions involving
chromosome 6p25. However, relatively few of these deletions have had molecular
characterization. Common phenotypes of 6p25 deletion syndrome patients include
hydrocephalus, hearing loss, and ocular, craniofacial, skeletal, cardiac, and
renal malformations. Molecular characterization of deletions can identify genes
that are responsible for these phenotypes.
METHODS: We report the clinical phenotype of seven patients with terminal
deletions of chromosome 6p25 and compare them to previously reported patients.
Molecular characterization of the deletions was performed using polymorphic
marker analysis to determine the extents of the deletions in these seven 6p25
deletion syndrome patients.
RESULTS: Our results, and previous data, show that ocular dysgenesis and hearing 
impairment are the two most highly penetrant phenotypes of the 6p25 deletion
syndrome. While deletion of the forkhead box C1 gene (FOXC1) probably underlies
the ocular dysgenesis, no gene in this region is known to be involved in hearing 
impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: Ocular dysgenesis and hearing impairment are the two most common
phenotypes of 6p25 deletion syndrome. We conclude that a locus for dominant
hearing loss is present at 6p25 and that this locus is restricted to a region
distal to D6S1617. Molecular characterization of more 6p25 deletion patients will
aid in refinement of this locus and the identification of a gene involved in
dominant hearing loss.

PMCID: PMC455682
PMID: 15219231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Dev Biol. 2004 Jul 1;271(1):176-89.

The forkhead genes, Foxc1 and Foxc2, regulate paraxial versus intermediate
mesoderm cell fate.

Wilm B(1), James RG, Schultheiss TM, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

During vertebrate embryogenesis, the newly formed mesoderm is allocated to the
paraxial, intermediate, and lateral domains, each giving rise to different cell
and tissue types. Here, we provide evidence that the forkhead genes, Foxc1 and
Foxc2, play a role in the specification of mesoderm to paraxial versus
intermediate fates. Mouse embryos lacking both Foxc1 and Foxc2 show expansion of 
intermediate mesoderm markers into the paraxial domain, lateralization of somite 
patterning, and ectopic and disorganized mesonephric tubules. In gain of function
studies in the chick embryo, Foxc1 and Foxc2 negatively regulate intermediate
mesoderm formation. By contrast, their misexpression in the prospective
intermediate mesoderm appears to drive cells to acquire paraxial fate, as
revealed by expression of the somite markers Pax7 and Paraxis. Taken together,
the data indicate that Foxc1 and Foxc2 regulate the establishment of paraxial
versus intermediate mesoderm cell fates in the vertebrate embryo.

PMID: 15196959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Tokai J Exp Clin Med. 2003 Oct;28(3):121-6.

Screening for mutations in BMP4 and FOXC1 genes in congenital anomalies of the
kidney and urinary tract in humans.

Nakano T(1), Niimura F, Hohenfellner K, Miyakita E, Ichikawa I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tokai University School of Medicine, Isehara,
Kanagawa, Japan. 0ammd007@is.icc.u-tokai.ac.jp

Recent studies have demonstrated in mice that bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4)
and forkhead transcription factor 1 (FOXC1) are involved in the organogenesis of 
the kidney and urinary tract and that derangement of either gene, BMP4 or FOXC1, 
leads to development of congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract
(CAKUT). In order to determine whether human CAKUT is associated with
abnormalities in BMP4 or FOXC1, we established a PCR-based methodology for the
DNA sequence analysis of BMP4 and FOXC1 in humans. Our initial screening
identified an insertion mutation in FOXC1 with a triplet GGC in three of the
seven patients with CAKUT. In the present study, no mutation was detected in the 
coding sequence of BMP4.

PMID: 15055404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Am J Med Genet A. 2004 Jan 30;124A(3):280-7.

FOXC1 gene deletion is associated with eye anomalies in ring chromosome 6.

Zhang HZ(1), Li P, Wang D, Huff S, Nimmakayalu M, Qumsiyeh M, Pober BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA.

We report a case of ring chromosome 6 presenting with growth and mental
retardation, cerebral dysgenesis, eye malformations, mixed hearing loss, and
abnormal physical features. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and
microsatellite genotyping demonstrated segmental deletions of less than 6 Mb on
6p and 1-2 Mb on 6q. The primary karyotype is designated as
46,XY,r(6)(p25q27).ish r(6)(p25.1q27)(D6S344-, FOXC1-, D6S1574+, D6S281-,
D6S297+). Secondary structural and numerical variants of the ring 6 were observed
in 16% of the cells analyzed. Intragenic genotyping revealed deletion of the
paternal FOXC1 gene, haploinsufficiency of which has been reported to cause eye
anterior chamber developmental defects. Accordingly, we propose that our
patient's ophthalmologic abnormalities result from haploinsufficiency of the
transcription factor FOXC1. We present clinical and cytogenetic summaries on 23
reported cases of ring 6 and categorize them into mild, moderate, and severely
affected groups. Further phenotype comparisons between cases with ring 6 and
cases with only 6p or 6q terminal deletions suggest that genes important for
hearing, vision, and central nervous system development remain to be identified
in chromosome 6 terminal regions. Molecular definition of the fusion points and
tissue mosaicism studies are necessary to better understand the
genotype-phenotype correlation of ring 6. We recommend ophthalmology, audiology, 
cardiology, and central nervous system examinations be part of the routine
evaluation for children with a ring chromosome 6.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14708101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Anat Rec A Discov Mol Cell Evol Biol. 2004 Jan;276(1):22-33.

Smooth muscle stem cells.

Hirschi KK(1), Majesky MW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cell and Gene Therapy, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, 
USA.

Vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs) originate from multiple types of progenitor
cells. In the embryo, the most well studied SMC progenitor is the cardiac neural 
crest stem cell. Smooth muscle differentiation in the neural crest lineage is
controlled by a combination of cell intrinsic factors, including Pax3, Tbx1,
FoxC1, and serum response factor, interacting with various extrinsic factors in
the local environment such as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), Wnts,
endothelin (ET)-1, and FGF8. Additional sources of multipotential cells that give
rise to vascular SMCs in the embryo include proepicardial cells and possibly
endothelial progenitor cells. In the adult, vascular SMCs must continually repair
arterial injuries and maintain functional mass in response to changing demands
upon the vessel wall. Recent evidence suggests that this is accomplished, in
part, by recruiting multipotential vascular progenitors from bone marrow-derived 
stem cells as well as from less well defined sources within adult tissues
themselves. This article will review our current understanding of the origins of 
vascular SMCs from multipotential stem and progenitor cells in developing as well
as adult vasculature.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14699631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Pediatr Nephrol. 2004 Mar;19(3):249-55. Epub 2003 Dec 13.

Genetic determination of nephrogenesis: the Pax/Eya/Six gene network.

Brodbeck S, Englert C.

Development of the kidney serves as a paradigm to understand the mechanisms
underlying the formation of an organ. The first sign of kidney development is the
interaction between two tissues derived from the intermediate mesoderm, the
metanephrogenic mesenchyme and the nephric duct. Many of the genes that play a
crucial role in early kidney development, such as Pax2, Eya1, Six1, Six2, Sall1, 
Foxc1, Wt1, and the Hox11 genes, are expressed in the mesenchyme and encode
transcription factors that--with few exceptions--are involved in regulation of
the Gdnf gene. Moreover, mutations in a number of these genes in humans are
associated with kidney diseases. Interestingly, many of the components regulating
early kidney development are conserved throughout evolution and are also involved
in eye and muscle formation in mammals, as well as in eye development in
Drosophila. Genetic and biochemical studies in Drosophila and mice indicate that 
these genes and their respective products act in a complex network of
interdependencies and positive and negative feedback loops. Genetic experiments
have allowed us to begin to characterize the complex interactions between the
individual components, but it will require additional biochemical and functional 
experiments to eventually understand the molecular functions of each of the
participating proteins.

PMID: 14673635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Dent Res. 2003 Dec;82(12):1008-12.

Novel identification of a four-base-pair deletion mutation in PITX2 in a Rieger
syndrome family.

Wang Y(1), Zhao H, Zhang X, Feng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prosthodontics, School of Stomatology, Peking University, 22
Zhong Guan Cun Nan Da Jie, Beijing 100081, People's Republic of China.

Rieger syndrome is one of the most serious causes of tooth agenesis. Mutations in
the PITX2, FOXC1, and PAX6 genes have been associated with Rieger syndrome. We
have studied a three-generation Chinese family affected with Rieger syndrome and 
showing prominent dental abnormalities. Mutational screening and sequence
analysis of the PITX2 gene revealed a previously unidentified four-base-pair
deletion of nucleotides 717-720 in exon 5 in all affected members. The mutation
causes a frame shift after Thr44, the 7th amino acid of the homeo-domain, and
introduces a premature stop codon in the gene sequence. This deletion is the
first unquestionable loss-of-function mutation, deleting all the functionally
important parts of the protein. Our novel discovery indicates that the
oligodontia and other phenotypes of Rieger syndrome observed in this family are
due to this PITX2 mutation, and these data further support the critical role of
PIXT2 in tooth morphogenesis.

PMID: 14630904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003 Nov;44(11):4608-12.

Identification and analysis of a novel mutation in the FOXC1 forkhead domain.

Saleem RA(1), Murphy TC, Liebmann JM, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

PURPOSE: To determine the genetic and biochemical defects that underlie
Axenfeld-Rieger malformations, identify the pathogenic mutation causing these
malformations, and understand how these mutations alter protein function.
METHODS: FOXC1 was amplified from a proband with Axenfeld-Rieger malformations
and the proband's mother. PCR products were sequenced to identify the pathogenic 
mutation. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to introduce this mutation into the 
FOXC1 cDNA. A synthetic mutation at the same position was also introduced, and
both natural and synthetic proteins were tested for their ability to localize to 
the nucleus, bind DNA, and transactivate gene expression.
RESULTS: A novel missense mutation (L86F) was identified in FOXC1 in this family.
The mutation is located in alpha-helix 1 of the forkhead domain. Biochemical
assays showed that the L86F mutation does not affect nuclear localization of
FOXC1, but reduces DNA binding and significantly reduces transactivation. The
severity of the disruption to FOXC1 protein activity does not appear to
correspond well with the severity of the phenotype in the patient. Analogous
studies using a L86P, a known alpha-helix breaker, severely disrupts FOXC1
function, revealing the importance of helix 1 in FOXC1 structure and function.
CONCLUSIONS: A novel mutation in helix 1 of the FOXC1 forkhead domain has been
identified and the importance of position 86 in FOXC1 activity demonstrated.
These studies also identified the role of helix 1 in FOXC1 function and provide
further evidence for the lack of strong genotype-phenotype correlation in FOXC1
pathogenesis. Normal development appears to be dependent on tight upper and lower
thresholds of FOXC1 activity.

PMID: 14578375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Appl Genet. 2001;42(2):211-21.

Forkhead genes and human disease.

Erickson RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Angel Charity for Children, Wings for Genetic Research, Steele Memorial
Children's Research Center, Department of Pediatrics, University of Arizona
College of Medicine, Tucson, USA. erickson@peds.arizona.edu

Forkhead, or Fox-box genes, code for winged helix transcription factors that make
up a multi-gene family. Two human genetic diseases have recently been associated 
with loss of function of one allele of different Fox-box genes: Axenfeld-Rieger
anomaly of the anterior eye chamber associated with haploinsufficiency of FOXC1
and lymphedema-distichiasis associated with haploinsufficiency of FOXC2. Earlier,
both genes had been studied intensively for their transcription patterns and for 
the phenotypes of knockouts. These studies are reviewed and related to the
phenotypes found in the two human disorders.

PMID: 14564054  [PubMed]


282. Dev Biol. 2003 Oct 1;262(1):75-87.

Progression of calvarial bone development requires Foxc1 regulation of Msx2 and
Alx4.

Rice R(1), Rice DP, Olsen BR, Thesleff I.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Programme, Institute of Biotechnology, P.O. Box 56,
00014 University of Helsinki, Finland. rharonen@operoni.helsinki.fi

Calvarial bones form by direct ossification of mesenchyme. This requires
condensation of mesenchymal cells which then proliferate and differentiate into
osteoblasts. Congenital hydrocephalus (ch) mutant mice lack the forkhead/winged
helix transcription factor Foxc1. In ch mutant mice, calvarial bones remain
rudimentary at the sites of initial osteogenic condensations. In this study, we
have localized the ossification defect in ch mutants to the calvarial mesenchyme,
which lacks the expression of transcription factors Msx2 and Alx4. This lack of
expression is associated with a reduction in the proliferation of osteoprogenitor
cells. We have previously shown that BMP induces Msx2 in calvarial mesenchyme
(Development 125, 1241-1251, 1998). Here, we show that BMP also induces Alx4 in
this tissue. We also show that BMP-induced expression of Msx2 and Alx4 requires
Foxc1. We therefore suggest that Foxc1 regulates BMP-mediated osteoprogenitor
proliferation and that this regulation is required for the progression of
osteogenesis beyond the initial condensations in calvarial bone development.

PMID: 14512019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Nov 15;12(22):2993-3005. Epub 2003 Sep 23.

Structural and functional analyses of disease-causing missense mutations in the
forkhead domain of FOXC1.

Saleem RA(1), Banerjee-Basu S, Berry FB, Baxevanis AD, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, T6G
2H7.

Five missense mutations (P79L, P79T, I91S, I91T and R127H) within the forkhead
DNA-binding domain of the FOXC1 transcription factor, identified in patients with
Axenfeld-Rieger (AR) malformations, were studied to identify the effects of these
mutations on FOXC1 structure and function. Molecular modeling and threading
analyses predict that the I91S and T mutations may generate local disruptions to 
the structure of the forkhead domain while the R127H mutation alters the
electrostatic charge of the DNA binding surface of the forkhead domain. The P79L 
and T mutations are not predicted to grossly perturb the structure of the
forkhead domain. Biological analyses indicate that all of these missense
mutations cause a range of FOXC1 perturbations, including nuclear localization
defects, reduced or abolished DNA binding capacity, and a reduction in the
transactivation capacity of FOXC1. These experiments extend our previous
hypothesis that reduced transactivation of appropriate target genes by FOXC1,
underlie AR malformations mapping to human chromosome 6p25. Importantly, these
results can also be applied to predict the consequences of the molecular effects 
of mutations of other FOX genes that have analogous missense mutations, including
FOXP2, FOXE3 and FOXC2.

PMID: 14506133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Trends Genet. 2003 Jun;19(6):339-44.

Fox's in development and disease.

Lehmann OJ(1), Sowden JC, Carlsson P, Jordan T, Bhattacharya SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, London EC1V 9EL,
UK. ojlehmann@yahoo.com

Since the first forkhead (Fox) gene was identified, the importance of this family
of transcription factors has increased steadily with the discoveries of the
diverse range of developmental processes that they regulate in eukaryotes. Among 
other processes, the Fox factors are important in the establishment of the body
axis and the development of tissues from all three germ layers. In this article, 
we present some of the recent data on this gene family with reference to selected
phenotypes observed in patients and model organisms, and the sensitivity of
developmental processes to alterations in forkhead gene dosage.

PMID: 12801727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Ophthalmic Genet. 2003 Jun;24(2):111-6.

A novel syndrome of congenital lid and punctal anomalies, corneal and
chorioretinal dystrophy.

Lee TK(1), Hébert M, MacDonald IM.

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada T6G 2H7.

A 28-year old woman had an ocular syndrome consisting of congenital lid and
punctal anomalies, and corneal and chorioretinal dystrophy without facial
dysmorphism. These combined malformations of the ocular adnexae and both anterior
and posterior ocular segments have not been previously described and appear to
represent a novel syndrome. Direct sequencing of PAX6 and the DNA-binding domain 
of FOXC1 failed to detect a mutation.

PMID: 12789575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003 Jun;44(6):2627-33.

Novel anterior segment phenotypes resulting from forkhead gene alterations:
evidence for cross-species conservation of function.

Lehmann OJ(1), Tuft S, Brice G, Smith R, Blixt A, Bell R, Johansson B, Jordan T, 
Hitchings RA, Khaw PT, John SW, Carlsson P, Bhattacharya SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United
Kingdom. ojlehmann@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: Mutations in murine and human versions of an ancestrally related gene
usually result in similar phenotypes. However, interspecies differences exist,
and in the case of two forkhead transcription factor genes (FOXC1 and FOXC2),
these differences include corneal or anterior segment phenotypes, respectively.
This study was undertaken to determine whether such discrepancies provide an
opportunity for identifying novel human-murine ocular phenotypes.
METHODS: Four pedigrees with early-onset glaucoma phenotypes secondary to
segmental chromosomal duplications or deletions encompassing FOXC1 and 18
individuals from 9 FOXC2 mutation pedigrees underwent detailed ocular
phenotyping. Subsequently, mice with mutations in Foxc1 or a related forkhead
gene, Foxe3, were assessed for features of the human phenotypes.
RESULTS: A significant increase in central corneal thickness was present in
affected individuals from the segmental duplication pedigrees compared with their
unaffected relatives (mean increase 13%, maximum 35%, P < 0.05). Alterations in
corneal thickness were present in mice heterozygous and homozygous for Foxe3
mutations but neither in Foxc1 heterozygotes nor the small human segmental
deletion pedigree. Mutations in FOXC2 resulted in ocular anterior segment
anomalies. These were more severe and prevalent with mutations involving the
forkhead domain.
CONCLUSIONS: Normal corneal development is dependent on the precise dose and
levels of activity of certain forkhead transcription factors. The altered corneal
thickness attributable to increased forkhead gene dosage is particularly
important, because it may affect the clinical management of certain glaucoma
subtypes and lead to excessive treatment. The FOXC1 and Foxe3 data, taken
together with the novel ocular phenotypes of FOXC2 mutations, highlight the
remarkable cross-species conservation of function among forkhead genes.

PMID: 12766066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2003 Apr;44(4):1402-5.

PITs and FOXes in ocular genetics: the Cogan lecture.

Walter MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
mwalter@ualberta.ca

PMID: 12657570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Science. 2003 Mar 7;299(5612):1578-81.

Modification of ocular defects in mouse developmental glaucoma models by
tyrosinase.

Libby RT(1), Smith RS, Savinova OV, Zabaleta A, Martin JE, Gonzalez FJ, John SW.

Author information: 
(1)Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME 04609, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2003 Mar 7;299(5612):1527-8.

Mutations in the cytochrome P450 family 1, subfamily B, polypeptide 1 (CYP1B1)
gene are a common cause of human primary congenital glaucoma (PCG). Here we show 
that Cyp1b1-/- mice have ocular drainage structure abnormalities resembling those
reported in human PCG patients. Using Cyp1b1-/- mice, we identified the
tyrosinase gene (Tyr) as a modifier of the drainage structure phenotype, with Tyr
deficiency increasing the magnitude of dysgenesis. The severe dysgenesis in eyes 
lacking both CYP1B1 and TYR was alleviated by administration of the tyrosinase
product dihydroxyphenylalanine (l-dopa). Tyr also modified the drainage structure
dysgenesis in mice with a mutant Foxc1 gene, which is also involved in PCG. These
experiments raise the possibility that a tyrosinase/l-dopa pathway modifies human
PCG, which could open new therapeutic avenues.

PMID: 12624268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Science. 2003 Mar 7;299(5612):1527-8.

Biomedicine. A new angle on ocular development.

Alward WL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Iowa College of
Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. wallace-alward@uiowa.edu

Comment on
    Science. 2003 Mar 7;299(5612):1578-81.

PMID: 12624251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Am J Ophthalmol. 2003 Mar;135(3):368-75.

A family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and Peters Anomaly caused by a point
mutation (Phe112Ser) in the FOXC1 gene.

Honkanen RA(1), Nishimura DY, Swiderski RE, Bennett SR, Hong S, Kwon YH, Stone
EM, Sheffield VC, Alward WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University
of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

PURPOSE: Mutations of the forkhead transcription factor gene FOXC1 result in
anterior segment anomalies. No description of the spectrum of defects resulting
from a single point mutation of this gene exists in the ophthalmology literature.
We have screened all available patients with Axenfeld-Rieger genes (PITX2 and
FOXC1). In this report, we clinically characterize the spectrum of ocular and
systemic manifestations in one family resulting from a previously reported point 
mutation (Phe112Ser) in FOXC1.
DESIGN: Observational case series.
METHODS: Ten members of a multigenerational family were examined for signs of
glaucoma, anterior segment abnormalities, and systemic features of
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. The examinations were performed in an ophthalmology
examination room or in the patients' homes. Blood was obtained from 10 members
and screened for mutations in FOXC1 using direct DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: A single mutation causing a T to C change in codon 112 (Phe112Ser) of
FOXC1 was present in six members of the family. Five of these six patients were
examined and all demonstrated anterior segment anomalies. One patient had
Axenfeld anomaly, one had Rieger syndrome, and one had both Axenfeld anomaly and 
Peters anomaly. Additionally, some members demonstrated cardiac abnormalities,
which may be secondary to their FOXC1 mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: A wide spectrum of clinical phenotypes can result from a single
point mutation of FOXC1. This report confirms that Rieger syndrome (with dental
and facial abnormalities) can be caused by a mutation in FOXC1. It is also the
first report of Peters anomaly being caused by a FOXC1 mutation.

Copyright 2003 by Elsevier Science Inc.

PMID: 12614756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Vis. 2003 Feb 18;9:43-8.

Mutation spectrum of FOXC1 and clinical genetic heterogeneity of Axenfeld-Rieger 
anomaly in India.

Komatireddy S(1), Chakrabarti S, Mandal AK, Reddy AB, Sampath S, Panicker SG,
Balasubramanian D.

Author information: 
(1)Brien Holden Eye Research Centre, Hyderabad Eye Research Foundation,
Hyderabad, India.

PURPOSE: Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly (ARA) is a form of anterior segment dysgenesis
of the eye, mainly caused by mutations in the FOXC1 gene. We had earlier reported
a novel mutation in the wing region of FOXC1 in an autosomal dominant family. The
present study was aimed to identify the spectrum of mutations in the FOXC1 gene
in a cohort of Indian ARA patients from different ethnic backgrounds, and to
understand its role in the disease pathogenesis.
METHODS: Two new autosomal dominant families and seven sporadic cases of ARA from
different ethnic backgrounds were screened for mutations by direct sequencing of 
the coding region of the FOXC1 gene. Another autosomal dominant ARA family that
was previously reported by us was also included for comparative analysis of
clinical genetic parameters. The segregation of the mutations in the autosomal
dominant families was analyzed by haplotype and restriction analysis.
Genotype-phenotype correlation were also undertaken to study the role of FOXC1 in
phenotypic manifestation in the patient cohort.
RESULTS: Three of the nine ARA cases harbored mutations in FOXC1, of which two
novel nonsense mutations Q2X and Q123X, resulted in haploinsufficiency of the
gene product. The missense mutation (M161K) that we previously reported in an
autosomal dominant family was also found in another family. Haplotype analysis of
these two families suggested multiple founders in the same ethnic group. The
mutations resulted in variable expressions of phenotype among the patients as
assessed from their prognosis based on visual outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant genetic heterogeneity of FOXC1 was observed in a
multi-ethnic population studied in this region of India resulting in variable ARA
phenotypes. The different visual outcome seen in the patients suggest a variable 
expression of FOXC1 and also provide some insight for understanding the gene
functions in this population.

PMID: 12592227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Genes Dev. 2003 Jan 15;17(2):269-81.

Tbx1 is regulated by tissue-specific forkhead proteins through a common Sonic
hedgehog-responsive enhancer.

Yamagishi H(1), Maeda J, Hu T, McAnally J, Conway SJ, Kume T, Meyers EN,
Yamagishi C, Srivastava D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9148, USA. Hiroyuki.Yamagishi@UTSouthwestern.edu

Haploinsufficiency of Tbx1 is likely a major determinant of cardiac and
craniofacial birth defects associated with DiGeorge syndrome. Although mice
deficient in Tbx1 exhibit pharyngeal and aortic arch defects, the developmental
program and mechanisms through which Tbx1 functions are relatively unknown. We
identified a single cis-element upstream of Tbx1 that recognized winged
helix/forkhead box (Fox)-containing transcription factors and was essential for
regulation of Tbx1 transcription in the pharyngeal endoderm and head mesenchyme. 
The Tbx1 regulatory region was responsive to signaling by Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in
vivo. We show that Shh is necessary for aortic arch development, similar to Tbx1,
and is also required for expression of Foxa2 and Foxc2 in the pharyngeal endoderm
and head mesenchyme, respectively. Foxa2, Foxc1, or Foxc2 could bind and activate
transcription through the critical cis-element upstream of Tbx1, and Foxc
proteins were required, within their expression domains, for Tbx1 transcription
in vivo. We propose that Tbx1 is a direct transcriptional target of Fox proteins 
and that Fox proteins may serve an intermediary role in Shh regulation of Tbx1.

PMCID: PMC195981
PMID: 12533514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Eur J Hum Genet. 2003 Jan;11(1):89-92.

Cryptic subtelomeric 6p deletion in a girl with congenital malformations and
severe language impairment.

Anderlid BM(1), Schoumans J, Hallqvist A, Ståhl Y, Wallin A, Blennow E,
Nordenskjöld M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Clinical Genetics Unit, Karolinska
Institutet at Karolinska Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.
britt.marie.anderlid@cmm.ki.se

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Nov;13(11):1169-71.

Several cases with microscopically visible, terminal 6p deletions have been
described, and a distinct clinical phenotype has emerged, including developmental
delay, congenital heart malformations, ocular abnormalities, hearing loss and a
characteristic facial appearance. We report a patient with a submicroscopic 6p
deletion, detected by subtelomeric screening using fluorescence in situ
hybridisation. This girl presented with typical facial dysmorphic features,
hearing impairment, malformation of the anterior eye segment, an ASD and severe
language impairment. However, her cognitive functions were within the normal
range. Detailed FISH analysis with 20 BAC probes covering the distal 6p25 region 
estimated the size of the terminal deletion to 2.1 Mb, and thus this case narrows
down the critical region for the 6p phenotype. The forkhead transcription factor 
gene FOXC1, involved in a spectrum of anterior eye chamber disorders, is deleted 
in this patient, together with several characterised and putative genes with yet 
unknown function.

PMID: 12529712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2002 Dec;43(12):3613-6.

Novel mutation in FOXC1 wing region causing Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly.

Panicker SG(1), Sampath S, Mandal AK, Reddy AB, Ahmed N, Hasnain SE.

Author information: 
(1)Prof. Brien Holden Eye Research Centre, Hyderabad Eye Research Foundation, L. 
V. Prasad Eye Institute, India. shirly@lvpeye.stph.net

PURPOSE: To determine the possible molecular genetic defect underlying
Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly (ARA) and to identify the pathogenic mutation causing
this anterior segment dysgenesis in an Indian pedigree.
METHODS: The FOXC1 gene was amplified from genomic DNA of members of an
ARA-affected family and control subjects using four novel sets of primers. The
amplicons were directly sequenced, and the sequences were analyzed to identify
the disease-causing mutation.
RESULTS: A heterozygous novel missense mutation was identified in the coding
region of the FOXC1 gene in all three patients in this family. Consistent with
the autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, the mutation segregated with the
disease phenotype and was fully penetrant. The mutation was found in the wing
region of the highly conserved forkhead domain of the FOXC1 gene and resulted in 
a very severe phenotype leading to blindness.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to demonstrate that a mutation in the FOXC1 
wing region can cause an anterior segment dysgenesis of the eye. This mutation
resulted in blindness in the ARA-affected family, and the findings suggest that
the FOXC1 wing region has a functional role in the normal development of the eye.
Moreover, this is the first study from India to report the genetic etiology of
Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly. Genotype-phenotype correlations of FOXC1 may help in
establishing the disease prognosis and also in understanding the clinical and
genetic heterogeneity associated with various anterior segment dysgenesis caused 
by this gene.

PMID: 12454026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Genomics. 2002 Nov;80(5):465-72.

Identification of FOXC1 as a TGF-beta1 responsive gene and its involvement in
negative regulation of cell growth.

Zhou Y(1), Kato H, Asanoma K, Kondo H, Arima T, Kato K, Matsuda T, Wake N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cell Therapeutics, Department of Molecular Genetics,
Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 4546 Tsurumihara, Beppu,
Oita, 874-0838, Japan.

We cloned the forkhead box C1 (FOXC1) gene, a member of the forkhead/winged-helix
transcription factor family, as a transforming growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1)
responsive gene. We showed that TGF-beta1 upregulated transcription of FOXC1 in
several human cancer cell lines. Ectopic expression of FOXC1 cDNA in HeLa cells, 
which lack both copies of the FOXC1 allele, restores the potential of TGF-beta1
to inhibit cell growth by arresting cells in the G0/G1 phase. In addition,
screens of primary endometrial and ovarian cancers revealed homozygous deletion
of FOXC1 in 6.7% of them, one nonsense and one missense mutation of FOXC1, and
transcriptional silencing in 11.7% of primary cancers. Evidence that a
significant fraction of primary cancers exhibited somatic mutations suggests that
FOXC1 functions as a tumor suppressor through TGF-beta1 mediated signals.

PMID: 12408963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2002 Jun;43(6):1843-9.

Ocular developmental abnormalities and glaucoma associated with interstitial 6p25
duplications and deletions.

Lehmann OJ(1), Ebenezer ND, Ekong R, Ocaka L, Mungall AJ, Fraser S, McGill JI,
Hitchings RA, Khaw PT, Sowden JC, Povey S, Walter MA, Bhattacharya SS, Jordan T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, London, United
Kingdom. ojlehmann@yahoo.com

PURPOSE: Mutations in the forkhead transcription factor gene FOXC1 on 6p25 cause 
a range of ocular developmental abnormalities, with associated glaucoma. However,
FOXC1 mutations have not been found in all similarly affected pedigrees mapping
to this interval. This study was undertaken to investigate the potential role of 
6p25 rearrangements in causing such phenotypes.
METHODS: Two large families with autosomal dominant iris hypoplasia and
early-onset glaucoma, 21 probands with Axenfeld-Rieger phenotypes not
attributable to PITX2 mutations, and 7 individuals with documented 6p25
cytogenetic rearrangements, were investigated by genotyping and fluorescence in
situ hybridization, with markers and probes from the 6p25 region.
RESULTS: Interstitial 6p25 duplications were present in the unrelated families
with iris hypoplasia, whereas an interstitial 6p25 deletion was identified in one
Axenfeld-Rieger pedigree. Larger cytogenetic rearrangements, leading to trisomy
or monosomy of the 6p25 region, resulted in microcornea and Rieger syndrome
phenotypes, respectively. All the rearrangements encompassed FOXC1, increasing or
decreasing the number of FOXC1 copies present, and appeared to correlate with the
phenotypes observed.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings represent the first example of both interstitial
duplications and deletions cosegregating with a human developmental disorder that
is attributable to altered dose of transcription factor. The data presented
provide additional evidence for the pathogenicity of altered gene dosage of FOXC1
and suggest that a common mechanism is responsible for rearrangements of 6p25.

PMID: 12036988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Hum Mol Genet. 2002 May 15;11(10):1177-84.

Molecular genetics of Axenfeld-Rieger malformations.

Lines MA(1), Kozlowski K, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Ocular Genetics Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, 8-32 Medical Sciences
Building, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada T6G 2E1.

Axenfeld-Rieger (AR) malformations are autosomal dominant developmental defects
of the anterior segment of the eye, and often result in glaucomatous blindness.
AR malformations are associated with mutations in two transcription factor genes 
(PITX2 and FOXC1) expressed throughout eye ontogeny. Studies of
disease-associated mutant proteins have provided insights into the aetiology of
AR malformations, while delineating residues and domains important to DNA
binding, transactivation and nuclear localization. The availability of mouse
models for both PITX2 and FOXC1 has allowed detailed study of their expression
and mutant phenotypes. Dissection of the normal functions and domain structures
of these factors will aid in future elucidation of how alterations of the
developmental program produce the dysgenic phenotypes seen in AR. There are at
least two AR loci still awaiting molecular cloning on chromosomes 13q14 and
16q24. Identification of further genes implicated in aberrations of human ocular 
development will advance our understanding of the mechanisms whereby pattern is
established in the eye, and may be of clinical value in treating the glaucoma
that is the most serious consequence of AR malformations.

PMID: 12015277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2002 Apr;13(2):55-60.

Genetic basis of glaucoma.

WuDunn D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Indiana University, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, 
USA. dwudunn@iupui.edu

The application of molecular genetic techniques to the study of glaucoma has
accelerated greatly during the past few years. In addition to localizing and
identifying genes for specific types of glaucoma, researchers have begun to
characterize the gene products and investigate molecular mechanisms involved in
glaucoma. Much research has been focused on the gene expression, protein
processing, and mutations of MYOC/TIGR, which is associated with both
juvenile-and adult-onset primary open angle glaucoma. Investigations of other
glaucoma-related genes, such as PITX2, FOXC1, and CYP1B1, are enabling a better
understanding of anterior segment development and its relation to glaucoma.

PMID: 11880716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Glaucoma. 2002 Feb;11(1):51-6.

Genetic analysis of PITX2 and FOXC1 in Rieger Syndrome patients from Brazil.

Borges AS(1), Susanna R Jr, Carani JC, Betinjane AJ, Alward WL, Stone EM,
Sheffield VC, Nishimura DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and Otorrinolaryngology, Glaucoma Service
University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

PURPOSE: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is a genetically heterogeneous, autosomal
dominant disorder that is characterized by anterior segment defects, glaucoma,
and extraocular anomalies. This study examined the two genes known to cause
Rieger syndrome, PITX2 and FOXC1, for mutations in five Brazilian families with
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
METHODS: Five families with a total of 23 persons affected by Axenfeld-Rieger
syndrome were recruited for this study. A sequencing-based mutation screen was
undertaken for the PITX2 and FOXC1 genes. Linkage analysis was used to study one 
large family for which no mutations were detected in the PITX2 or FOXC1 genes.
RESULTS: Two of the five families harbored mutations in the PITX2 gene, but none 
of the families had a detectable FOXC1 mutation. Haplotypic analysis of three
Rieger syndrome regions in a large family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome excluded 
linkage to the 4q25 (PITX2), 6p25 (FOXC1), and 13q14 (RIEG2) regions.
CONCLUSIONS: It appears that the PITX2 gene is responsible for a significant
portion of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome in the Brazilian population. Furthermore,
there is also evidence for the presence of genetic heterogeneity of the disorder 
within the Brazilian population. Finally, a large family with Axenfeld-Rieger
syndrome has been identified that does not appear to harbor any of the three
known loci. Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome gene segregation in this family likely
represents a novel locus.

PMID: 11821690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 22;277(12):10292-7. Epub 2002 Jan 8.

FOXC1 transcriptional regulation is mediated by N- and C-terminal activation
domains and contains a phosphorylated transcriptional inhibitory domain.

Berry FB(1), Saleem RA, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2H7,
Canada. fberry@ualberta.ca

Mutations in the FOXC1 gene result in Axenfeld-Rieger malformations of the
anterior segment of the eye and lead to an increased susceptibility of glaucoma. 
To understand how the FOXC1 protein may function in contributing to these
malformations, we identified functional regions in FOXC1 required for nuclear
localization and transcriptional regulation. Two regions in the FOXC1 forkhead
domain, one rich in basic amino acid residues, and a second, highly conserved
among all FOX proteins, were necessary for nuclear localization of the FOXC1
protein. However, only the basic region was sufficient for nuclear localization. 
Two transcriptional activation domains were identified in the extreme N- and
C-terminal regions of FOXC1. A transcription inhibitory domain was located at the
central region of the protein. This region was able to reduce the
trans-activation potential of the C-terminal activation domain, as well as the
GAL4 activation domain. Lastly, we demonstrate that FOXC1 is a phosphoprotein,
and a number of residues predicted to be phosphorylated were localized to the
FOXC1 inhibitory domain. Removal of residues 215-366 resulted in a
transcriptionally hyperactive FOXC1 protein, which displayed a reduced level of
phosphorylation. These results indicate that FOXC1 is under complex regulatory
control with multiple functional domains modulating FOXC1 transcriptional
regulation.

PMID: 11782474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Glaucoma. 2001 Dec;10(6):477-82.

Screening for mutations of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome caused by FOXC1 gene in
Japanese patients.

Kawase C(1), Kawase K, Taniguchi T, Sugiyama K, Yamamoto T, Kitazawa Y, Alward
WL, Stone EM, Nishimura DY, Sheffield VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Gifu University School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan.

PURPOSE: Mutations in the forkhead transcription factor gene (FOXC1) have been
recently shown to cause some cases of juvenile glaucoma associated with a variety
of anterior-segment anomalies. The purpose of this study was to investigate the
clinical features of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome caused by FOXC1 mutations in
Japanese patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: After informed consent was obtained, genomic DNA was
isolated from peripheral blood. The DNA-sequence changes were analyzed using
single-strand conformation polymorphism analysis and automated sequencing in six 
Japanese probands with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
RESULTS: The authors identified four mutations: pedigree 1 (26-47ins22), 2
(Ile91Ser), 3 (286ins1), and 4 (Arg127His). Two pedigrees showed new mutations in
FOXC1. In pedigrees 1,2, and 4, younger generations had iris hypoplasia with
severe early-onset glaucoma, whereas their parents had posterior embryotoxon
without glaucoma. Pedigree 3 had a single affected person with iris hypoplasia
and posterior embryotoxon with a mild increase of intraocular pressure.
CONCLUSION: Four different FOXC1 mutations were found in four of six Japanese
pedigrees with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome. This was a new mutation in two pedigrees
that was not found in earlier generations. This study confirms that mutations in 
this gene cause maldevelopment of the anterior segment of the eye.

PMID: 11740218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Am J Ophthalmol. 2001 Oct;132(4):572-5.

A novel (Pro79Thr) mutation in the FKHL7 gene in a Japanese family with
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.

Suzuki T(1), Takahashi K, Kuwahara S, Wada Y, Abe T, Tamai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 1-1,
Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 980-8574, Japan. TS@oph.med.tohoku.ac.jp

PURPOSE: To report the ocular and genetic findings of a Japanese family with
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome associated with a novel Pro79Thr mutation in the FKHL7
gene.
METHODS: Observational case series. Genomic DNA of patients from a family with
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome was extracted from leukocytes, and exons of the FKHL7
gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction for direct sequencing.
RESULTS: Molecular genetic analysis disclosed that one Japanese family with
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome had a heterozygous C to A transversion in the first
nucleotide at codon 79, designated Pro79Thr mutation in the FKHL7 gene.
CONCLUSION: Considering this novel Pro79Thr mutation together with previously
reported findings, it is indicated that the clinical features of Axenfeld-Rieger 
syndrome may depend on the portion of the FKHL7 gene affected by the mutation,
although more case reports are needed to clarify genotype-phenotype correlations 
of the FKHL7 gene.

PMID: 11589884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Genes Dev. 2001 Sep 15;15(18):2483-93.

The winged helix transcription factor Foxc1a is essential for somitogenesis in
zebrafish.

Topczewska JM(1), Topczewski J, Shostak A, Kume T, Solnica-Krezel L, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Vanderbilt
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2175, USA.

Previous studies identified zebrafish foxc1a and foxc1b as homologs of the mouse 
forkhead gene, Foxc1. Both genes are transcribed in the unsegmented presomitic
mesoderm (PSM), newly formed somites, adaxial cells, and head mesoderm. Here, we 
show that inhibiting synthesis of Foxc1a (but not Foxc1b) protein with two
different morpholino antisense oligonucleotides blocks formation of morphological
somites, segment boundaries, and segmented expression of genes normally
transcribed in anterior and posterior somites and expression of paraxis
implicated in somite epithelialization. Patterning of the anterior PSM is also
affected, as judged by the absence of mesp-b, ephrinB2, and ephA4 expression, and
the down-regulation of notch5 and notch6. In contrast, the expression of other
genes, including mesp-a and papc, in the anterior of somite primordia, and the
oscillating expression of deltaC and deltaD in the PSM appear normal.
Nevertheless, this expression is apparently insufficient for the maturation of
the presumptive somites to proceed to the stage when boundary formation occurs or
for the maintenance of anterior/posterior patterning. Mouse embryos that are
compound null mutants for Foxc1 and the closely related Foxc2 have no
morphological somites and show abnormal expression of Notch signaling pathway
genes in the anterior PSM. Therefore, zebrafish foxc1a plays an essential and
conserved role in somite formation, regulating both the expression of paraxis and
the A/P patterning of somite primordia.

PMCID: PMC312789
PMID: 11562356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Genes Dev. 2001 Sep 15;15(18):2470-82.

The murine winged helix transcription factors, Foxc1 and Foxc2, are both required
for cardiovascular development and somitogenesis.

Kume T(1), Jiang H, Topczewska JM, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

The murine Foxc1/Mf1 and Foxc2/Mfh1 genes encode closely related forkhead/winged 
helix transcription factors with overlapping expression in the forming somites
and head mesoderm and endothelial and mesenchymal cells of the developing heart
and blood vessels. Embryos lacking either Foxc1 or Foxc2, and most compound
heterozygotes, die pre- or perinatally with similar abnormal phenotypes,
including defects in the axial skeleton and cardiovascular system. However,
somites and major blood vessels do form. This suggested that the genes have
similar, dose-dependent functions, and compensate for each other in the early
development of the heart, blood vessels, and somites. In support of this
hypothesis, we show here that compound Foxc1; Foxc2 homozygotes die earlier and
with much more severe defects than single homozygotes alone. Significantly, they 
have profound abnormalities in the first and second branchial arches, and the
early remodeling of blood vessels. Moreover, they show a complete absence of
segmented paraxial mesoderm, including anterior somites. Analysis of compound
homozygotes shows that Foxc1 and Foxc2 are both required for transcription in the
anterior presomitic mesoderm of paraxis, Mesp1, Mesp2, Hes5, and Notch1, and for 
the formation of sharp boundaries of Dll1, Lfng, and ephrinB2 expression. We
propose that the two genes interact with the Notch signaling pathway and are
required for the prepatterning of anterior and posterior domains in the
presumptive somites through a putative Notch/Delta/Mesp regulatory loop.

PMCID: PMC312788
PMID: 11562355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Mol Vis. 2001 Apr 17;7:89-94.

Optimal procedure for extracting RNA from human ocular tissues and expression
profiling of the congenital glaucoma gene FOXC1 using quantitative RT-PCR.

Wang WH(1), McNatt LG, Shepard AR, Jacobson N, Nishimura DY, Stone EM, Sheffield 
VC, Clark AF.

Author information: 
(1)Alcon Research, Ltd., Fort Worth, TX 76134, USA.

PURPOSE: To develop methods for obtaining high quality RNA from human donor eyes 
and to determine the expression profile of the congenital glaucoma gene FOXC1 in 
human ocular tissues.
METHODS: To obtain high quality RNA from donor eyes, several different
preservation methods were tested including storing eyes on ice, freezing eyes,
and placing eyes in the commercial fixative RNAlaterTM prior to dissection and
RNA extraction. Nine different ocular tissues from human donors were dissected
and examined. Pigment-free total RNA was isolated and used for quantitative
real-time RT-PCR using FOXC1 and GAPDH (internal standard) primers to assess the 
quality and expression of FOXC1.
RESULTS: An expression profile of FOXC1 in human ocular tissues was determined
using quantitative PCR of RNA isolated using a simple and effective procedure for
ocular tissue preservation and pigment-free RNA isolation. Higher quality RNA was
obtained from human donor eyes preserved in RNAlaterTM compared to RNA extracted 
from eyes stored on ice or frozen at -80 degrees C. RNA extraction techniques
that removed interfering pigment from ocular tissues produced RNA that could be
easily amplified by PCR. In the adult human eye, expression of FOXC1 was greatest
in the trabecular meshwork (TM) followed by the optic nerve head, choroid/RPE,
ciliary body, cornea, and iris. FOXC1 expression levels were much lower in other 
non-ocular human tissues, such as liver, muscle, lung, heart, and kidney.
CONCLUSIONS: Using an optimized donor eye preservation method and tissue RNA
isolation procedure, we show that the FOXC1 transcription factor gene, which is
known to be associated with developmental glaucoma, also may have an important
role in the adult eye.

PMID: 11320352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Trends Mol Med. 2001 Feb;7(2):51.

'Forkhead' gene expression balanced on a knife-edge.

Osborne LR.

PMID: 11286739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Mar;68(3):627-41.

Analyses of the effects that disease-causing missense mutations have on the
structure and function of the winged-helix protein FOXC1.

Saleem RA(1), Banerjee-Basu S, Berry FB, Baxevanis AD, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 
2H7, Canada.

Five missense mutations of the winged-helix FOXC1 transcription factor, found in 
patients with Axenfeld-Rieger (AR) malformations, were investigated for their
effects on FOXC1 structure and function. Molecular modeling of the FOXC1 forkhead
domain predicted that the missense mutations did not alter FOXC1 structure.
Biochemical analyses indicated that, whereas all mutant proteins correctly
localize to the cell nucleus, the I87M mutation reduced FOXC1-protein levels.
DNA-binding experiments revealed that, although the S82T and S131L mutations
decreased DNA binding, the F112S and I126M mutations did not. However, the F112S 
and I126M mutations decrease the transactivation ability of FOXC1. All the FOXC1 
mutations had the net effect of reducing FOXC1 transactivation ability. These
results indicate that the FOXC1 forkhead domain contains separable DNA-binding
and transactivation functions. In addition, these findings demonstrate that
reduced stability, DNA binding, or transactivation, all causing a decrease in the
ability of FOXC1 to transactivate genes, can underlie AR malformations.

PMCID: PMC1274476
PMID: 11179011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Feb;68(2):364-72. Epub 2001 Jan 18.

A spectrum of FOXC1 mutations suggests gene dosage as a mechanism for
developmental defects of the anterior chamber of the eye.

Nishimura DY(1), Searby CC, Alward WL, Walton D, Craig JE, Mackey DA, Kawase K,
Kanis AB, Patil SR, Stone EM, Sheffield VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Mutations in the forkhead transcription-factor gene (FOXC1), have been shown to
cause defects of the anterior chamber of the eye that are associated with
developmental forms of glaucoma. Discovery of these mutations was greatly
facilitated by the cloning and characterization of the 6p25 breakpoint in a
patient with both congenital glaucoma and a balanced-translocation event
involving chromosomes 6 and 13. Here we describe the identification of novel
mutations in the FOXC1 gene in patients with anterior-chamber defects of the eye.
We have detected nine new mutations (eight of which are novel) in the FOXC1 gene 
in patients with anterior-chamber eye defects. Of these mutations, five
frameshift mutations predict loss of the forkhead domain, as a result of
premature termination of translation. Of particular interest is the fact that two
families have a duplication of 6p25, involving the FOXC1 gene. These data suggest
that both FOXC1 haploinsufficiency and increased gene dosage can cause
anterior-chamber defects of the eye.

PMCID: PMC1235270
PMID: 11170889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mech Dev. 2001 Feb;100(2):343-7.

Sequence and expression of zebrafish foxc1a and foxc1b, encoding conserved
forkhead/winged helix transcription factors.

Topczewska JM(1), Topczewski J, Solnica-Krezel L, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Vanderbilt
Medical Center, Nashville, TN 37232-2175, USA.

Mouse Foxc1 (previously Mf1) is a member of the conserved forkhead/winged helix
transcription factor gene family. It is expressed in many mesodermal tissues
including paraxial mesoderm of the trunk and head, prechondrogenic mesenchyme,
branchial arches and developing kidney. Homozygous mutants die perinatally with
hydrocephalus and skeletal, cardiovascular, ocular and genitourinary defects.
Here, we report the cloning and expression of two zebrafish foxc1 homologues,
foxc1a and foxc1b. During gastrulation and somitogenesis both genes have similar 
expression patterns in the hypoblast, paraxial and presomitic mesoderm, somites
and trunk adaxial cells. Expression in the somites is downregulated as they
differentiate, but is maintained in the sclerotome. Later, some differences in
expression pattern emerge. For example, only foxc1a transcripts are detected in
the pronephros primodia and in the head mesoderm around the eyes, while only
foxc1b is expressed in the pharyngeal arches and pectoral fins. Early expression 
of foxc1a in the paraxial mesoderm is modified in chordino, swirl, somitabun, and
spadetail mutants.

PMID: 11165495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;67(5):1129-35. Epub 2000 Sep 27.

Chromosomal duplication involving the forkhead transcription factor gene FOXC1
causes iris hypoplasia and glaucoma.

Lehmann OJ(1), Ebenezer ND, Jordan T, Fox M, Ocaka L, Payne A, Leroy BP, Clark
BJ, Hitchings RA, Povey S, Khaw PT, Bhattacharya SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Ophthalmology, London, England 
EC1V 9EL. OJLehmann@yahoo.com

The forkhead transcription factor gene FOXC1 (formerly FKHL7) is responsible for 
a number of glaucoma phenotypes in families in which the disease maps to 6p25,
although mutations have not been found in all families in which the disease maps 
to this region. In a large pedigree with iris hypoplasia and glaucoma mapping to 
6p25 (peak LOD score 6.20 [recombination fraction 0] at D6S967), no FOXC1
mutations were detected by direct sequencing. However, genotyping with
microsatellite repeat markers suggested the presence of a chromosomal duplication
that segregated with the disease phenotype. The duplication was confirmed in
affected individuals by FISH with markers encompassing FOXC1. These results
provide evidence of gene duplication causing developmental disease in humans,
with increased gene dosage of either FOXC1 or other, as yet unknown genes within 
the duplicated segment being the probable mechanism responsible for the
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1288555
PMID: 11007653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Am J Ophthalmol. 2000 Jul;130(1):107-15.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome in the age of molecular genetics.

Alward WL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa
City, Iowa 52242, USA. wallace-alward@uiowa.edu

PURPOSE: To review the molecular genetics of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and related
phenotypes and to discuss how this information might affect the way that we
classify these disorders.
METHODS: A review of historical and recent literature on Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome
and related disorders. The review includes clinical and molecular genetic
literature relevant to these phenotypes.
RESULTS: Three chromosomal loci have recently been demonstrated to link to
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome and related phenotypes. These loci are on chromosomes
4q25, 6p25, and 13q14. The genes at chromosomes 4q25 and 6p25 have been
identified as PITX2 and FKHL7, respectively. Mutations in these genes can cause a
wide variety of phenotypes that share features with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome.
Axenfeld anomaly, Rieger anomaly, Rieger syndrome, iridogoniodysgenesis anomaly, 
iridogoniodysgenesis syndrome, iris hypoplasia, and familial glaucoma
iridogoniodysplasia all have sufficient genotypic and phenotypic overlap that
they should be considered one condition.
CONCLUSIONS: Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome is a term that can be used to describe a
variety of overlapping phenotypes. To date, at least three known genetic loci can
cause these disorders. The single most important feature of these phenotypes is
that they confer a 50% or greater risk of developing glaucoma. Currently there is
a fairly arbitrary grouping of disorders into small categories. Considering all
of these phenotypes under the heading of Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome will allow
easier communication between clinicians and scientists and eliminate arbitrary
and confusing subclassification.

PMID: 11004268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Hum Mol Genet. 2000 Apr 12;9(7):1021-32.

Haploinsufficiency of the transcription factors FOXC1 and FOXC2 results in
aberrant ocular development.

Smith RS(1), Zabaleta A, Kume T, Savinova OV, Kidson SH, Martin JE, Nishimura DY,
Alward WL, Hogan BL, John SW.

Author information: 
(1)The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME
04609, USA.

Anterior segment developmental disorders, including Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly
(ARA), variably associate with harmfully elevated intraocular pressure (IOP),
which causes glaucoma. Clinically observed dysgenesis does not correlate with
IOP, however, and the etiology of glaucoma development is not understood. The
forkhead transcription factor genes Foxc1 (formerly Mf1 ) and Foxc2 (formerly
Mfh1 ) are expressed in the mesenchyme from which the ocular drainage structures 
derive. Mutations in the human homolog of Foxc1, FKHL7, cause dominant anterior
segment defects and glaucoma in various families. We show that Foxc1 (+/-)mice
have anterior segment abnormalities similar to those reported in human patients. 
These abnormalities include small or absent Schlemm's canal, aberrantly developed
trabecular meshwork, iris hypoplasia, severely eccentric pupils and displaced
Schwalbe's line. The penetrance of clinically obvious abnormalities varies with
genetic background. In some affected eyes, collagen bundles were half normal
diameter, or collagen and elastic tissue were very sparse. Thus, abnormalities in
extracellular matrix synthesis or organization may contribute to development of
the ocular phenotypes. Despite the abnormalities in ocular drainage structures in
Foxc1 (+/-)mice, IOP was normal in almost all mice analyzed, on all genetic
backgrounds and at all ages. Similar abnormalities were found in Foxc2 (+/-)mice,
but no disease-associated mutations were identified in the human homolog FKHL14
in 32 ARA patients. Foxc1 (+/-)and Foxc2 (+/-)mice are useful models for studying
anterior segment development and its anomalies, and may allow identification of
genes that interact with Foxc1 and Foxc2 (or FKHL7 and FKHL14 ) to produce a
phenotype with elevated IOP and glaucoma.

PMID: 10767326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Eur J Hum Genet. 2000 Jan;8(1):71-4.

Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome resulting from mutation of the FKHL7 gene on chromosome 
6p25.

Mirzayans F(1), Gould DB, Héon E, Billingsley GD, Cheung JC, Mears AJ, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.

Mutations in the forkhead-like 7 (FKHL7) gene have been recently shown to cause
juvenile glaucoma and anterior segment anomalies. We report on a three-generation
family with Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS), harboring an alteration in the FKHL7 
gene. Genetic linkage analyses excluded the ARS phenotype from chromosomes 4q25
and 13q14, the locations of the PITX2 and RIEG2 loci, respectively. Evidence of
linkage was observed with markers at 6p25, near the FKHL7 gene. Direct sequencing
of FKHL7 detected a C67T mutation that segregated with the ARS phenotype in this 
family, but was not detected in over 80 control chromosomes. This mutation is
predicted to cause a nonsense mutation of the FKHL7 protein (Gln23Stop) upstream 
of the forkhead DNA-binding domain, and thus to generate a truncated FKHL7
protein product. This discovery broadly implicates FKHL7 in ocular, craniofacial,
dental, and umbilical development.

PMID: 10713890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Development. 2000 Apr;127(7):1387-95.

Murine forkhead/winged helix genes Foxc1 (Mf1) and Foxc2 (Mfh1) are required for 
the early organogenesis of the kidney and urinary tract.

Kume T(1), Deng K, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt
University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2175, USA.

The murine genes, Foxc1 and Foxc2 (previously, Mf1 and Mfh1), encode
forkhead/winged helix transcription factors with virtually identical DNA-binding 
domains and overlapping expression patterns in various embryonic tissues.
Foxc1/Mf1 is disrupted in the mutant, congenital hydrocephalus (Foxc1/Mf1(ch)),
which has multiple developmental defects. We show here that, depending on the
genetic background, most Foxc1 homozygous mutants are born with abnormalities of 
the metanephric kidney, including duplex kidneys and double ureters, one of which
is a hydroureter. Analysis of embryos reveals that Foxc1 homozygotes have ectopic
mesonephric tubules and ectopic anterior ureteric buds. Moreover, expression in
the intermediate mesoderm of Glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor (Gdnf), a
primary inducer of the ureteric bud, is expanded more anteriorly in Foxc1
homozygous mutants compared with wild type. These findings support the hypothesis
of Mackie and Stephens concerning the etiology of duplex kidney and hydroureter
in human infants with congenital kidney abnormalities (Mackie, G. G. and
Stephens, F. G. (1975) J. Urol. 114, 274-280). Previous studies established that 
most Foxc1(lacZ )Foxc2(tm1) compound heterozygotes have the same spectrum of
cardiovascular defects as single homozygous null mutants, demonstrating
interaction between the two genes in the cardiovascular system. Here, we show
that most compound heterozygotes have hypoplastic kidneys and a single
hydroureter, while all heterozygotes are normal. This provides evidence that the 
two genes interact in kidney as well as heart development.

PMID: 10704385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Med Genet. 1999 Sep;36(9):708-10.

An interstitial deletion of 6p24-p25 proximal to the FKHL7 locus and including
AP-2alpha that affects anterior eye chamber development.

Davies AF(1), Mirza G, Flinter F, Ragoussis J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Guy's Hospital, King's College,
London, UK.

The FKHL7 gene has been implicated in the pathogenesis of glaucoma/autosomal
dominant iridogoniodysgenesis (IGDA) (IRID1). This has been supported by
mutations in some glaucoma and IGDA patients and the development of anterior eye 
chamber anomalies in patients with 6p deletions affecting the 6p25 region. We
report a case with anterior eye chamber anomalies and an interstitial deletion of
6p24-p25 that does not include the FKHL7 gene, suggesting the possible additional
involvement of another locus, within 6p24-6p25, in anterior eye chamber
development. A candidate gene is AP-2alpha, which is contained within the deleted
segment and plays a role in anterior eye chamber development.

PMCID: PMC1734421
PMID: 10507730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Dev Biol. 1999 Sep 15;213(2):418-31.

Roles for the winged helix transcription factors MF1 and MFH1 in cardiovascular
development revealed by nonallelic noncomplementation of null alleles.

Winnier GE(1), Kume T, Deng K, Rogers R, Bundy J, Raines C, Walter MA, Hogan BL, 
Conway SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee, 37232-2175, USA.

The murine Mf1 and Mfh1 genes have overlapping patterns of expression in the
embryo and encode forkhead/winged helix transcription factors with virtually
identical DNA binding domains. Previous studies have shown that Mfh1 null mutants
have severe cardiovascular defects, including interruptions and coarctations of
the aortic arch and ventricular septal defects (Iida et al., Development 124,
4627-4638, 1997). Here, we show that Mf1(lacZ) homozygous null mutants also have 
a similar spectrum of cardiovascular abnormalities. Moreover, most embryos doubly
heterozygous for Mfh1(tm1) and Mf1(lacZ) die before birth with interruptions and 
coarctations of the aortic arch, dysgenesis of the aortic and pulmonary valves,
ventricular septal defects, and other cardiac anomalies. This nonallelic
noncomplementation and the similar patterns of expression of the two genes in the
mesenchyme and endothelial cells of the branchial arches, outflow tract, and
heart suggest that Mf1 and Mfh1 play interactive roles in the morphogenesis of
the cardiovascular system. Implications for the development of human congenital
heart defects are discussed.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10479458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Dev Dyn. 1999 Sep;216(1):16-27.

Expression of the Mf1 gene in developing mouse hearts: implication in the
development of human congenital heart defects.

Swiderski RE(1), Reiter RS, Nishimura DY, Alward WL, Kalenak JW, Searby CS, Stone
EM, Sheffield VC, Lin JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242-1324, USA.

The transcription factor FKHL7 gene has recently been associated with the
anterior segment dysgenesis disorder of the eye known as Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly 
(ARA). A growing body of evidence indicates that mutations in FKHL7 cause not
only defects in the anterior segment of the eye but defects in the heart valves
and septa as well. In order to evaluate its contribution to normal heart
septation and valve formation, expression of the mouse homologue Mf1 in embryonic
hearts was analyzed by in situ hybridization. A weak but significant level of Mf1
expression could be detected in the endocardium of mouse embryos as early as day 
8.5 post-conception (p.c.). Mf1 expression was undetectable in the hearts of day 
9.5 p.c. embryos, but by day 10.5-11 p.c., Mf1 transcripts could be found again
in the endocardium of both the atrium and ventricle and a relatively strong
signal was observed in the dorsal portion of the septum primum, in what appeared 
to be the spinal vestibule. At day 13 p.c. when aortic and pulmonary trunks are
separated, relatively more Mf1 transcripts were detected in the leaflets of
aortic, pulmonary, and venous valves, the ventral portion of the septum primum,
as well as in the single layer of cells on the edges of the atrioventricular
cushion tissues. Surprisingly, there was no signal detected in the developing
interventricular septum. At day 15 p.c., overall Mf1 signals were greatly
decreased. However, significant levels of expression could still be observed in
the atrial septum, the tricuspid valve, the mitral valve, and in the venous valve
but not in the interventricular septum. The temporal and spatial expression
patterns of the Mf1 gene in developing mouse hearts suggest that Mf1 may play a
critical role in the formation of valves and septa with the exception of the
interventricular septum. This is further supported by our studies showing that
mutations in the FKHL7 gene were associated with defects in the anterior segment 
of the eye as well as atrial septal defects or mitral valve defects. Dev Dyn
1999;216:16-27.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10474162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Dev Biol. 1999 Jul 15;211(2):306-22.

The forkhead/winged-helix gene, Mf1, is necessary for the normal development of
the cornea and formation of the anterior chamber in the mouse eye.

Kidson SH(1), Kume T, Deng K, Winfrey V, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Cape Town, Observatory, 
7925, South Africa.

Mf1, which encodes a winged-helix/forkhead transcription factor, is the murine
homolog of human FKHL7, mutated in individuals with autosomal dominant inherited 
dysgenesis of the anterior segment of the eye (Axenfeld-Reiger anomaly). Mouse
embryos homozygous for null mutations in Mf1 (Mf1(lacZ) and Mf1(ch)) show
severely abnormal development of the anterior segment. The cornea fails to
separate from the lens, resulting in the complete absence of an anterior chamber.
There is no differentiation of the inner corneal endothelial layer, as judged by 
electron microscopy and by absence of labeling with monoclonal antibody to zonula
occludens protein 1, a normal component of occluding junctions in wild-type
endothelial cells. In addition, the mutant corneal stroma is disorganized and the
epithelium thicker than normal. The Mf1 gene is normally expressed in the
periocular mesenchyme at E11.5 but is downregulated as the corneal endothelium
differentiates. In contrast, Mf1(lacZ) expression persists longer in mutant
corneal mesenchyme, and abnormal expression is also seen in the mutant corneal
epithelium. Based on classical studies with the chick embryonic eye, a model is
proposed for the differentiation of the mammalian corneal endothelium from
mesenchyme in response to putative signals from the lens. Possible roles for Mf1 
in this process are discussed.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10395790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Apr;8(4):625-37.

Pleiotropic skeletal and ocular phenotypes of the mouse mutation congenital
hydrocephalus (ch/Mf1) arise from a winged helix/forkhead transcriptionfactor
gene.

Hong HK(1), Lass JH, Chakravarti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics BRB 721 and Center for Human Genetics, Case Western
Reserve University School of Medicine and University Hospitals of Cleveland,
10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4955, USA.

Congenital hydrocephalus is an etiologically diverse, poorly understood, but
relatively common birth defect. Most human cases are sporadic with familial forms
showing considerable phenotypic and etiologic heterogeneity. We have studied the 
autosomal recessive mouse mutation congenital hydrocephalus ( ch ) to identify
candidate human hydrocephalus genes and their modifiers. ch mice have a
congenital, lethal hydrocephalus in association with multiple developmental
defects, notably skeletal defects, in tissues derived from the cephalic neural
crest. We utilized positional cloning methods to map ch in the vicinity of
D13Mit294 and confirm that the ch phenotype is caused by homozygosity for a
nonsense mutation in a gene encoding a winged helix/forkhead transcription factor
( Mf1 ). Based on linked genetic markers, we performed detailed phenotypic
characterization of mutant homozygotes and heterozygotes to demonstrate the
pleiotropic effects of the mutant gene. Surprisingly, ch heterozygotes have the
glaucoma-related distinct phenotype of multiple anterior segment defects
resembling Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly. We also localized a second member of this
gene family ( Hfh1 ), a candidate for other developmental defects, approximately 
470 kb proximal to Mf1.

PMID: 10072431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Am J Hum Genet. 1998 Nov;63(5):1316-28.

Mutations of the forkhead/winged-helix gene, FKHL7, in patients with
Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly.

Mears AJ(1), Jordan T, Mirzayans F, Dubois S, Kume T, Parlee M, Ritch R, Koop B, 
Kuo WL, Collins C, Marshall J, Gould DB, Pearce W, Carlsson P, Enerbäck S,
Morissette J, Bhattacharya S, Hogan B, Raymond V, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Ophthalmology and Medical Genetics, University of Alberta,
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Genetic linkage, genome mismatch scanning, and analysis of patients with
alterations of chromosome 6 have indicated that a major locus for development of 
the anterior segment of the eye, IRID1, is located at 6p25. Abnormalities of this
locus lead to glaucoma. FKHL7 (also called "FREAC3"), a member of the
forkhead/winged-helix transcription-factor family, has also been mapped to 6p25. 
DNA sequencing of FKHL7 in five IRID1 families and 16 sporadic patients with
anterior-segment defects revealed three mutations: a 10-bp deletion predicted to 
cause a frameshift and premature protein truncation prior to the FKHL7 forkhead
DNA-binding domain, as well as two missense mutations of conserved amino acids
within the FKHL7 forkhead domain. Mf1, the murine homologue of FKHL7, is
expressed in the developing brain, skeletal system, and eye, consistent with
FKHL7 having a role in ocular development. However, mutational screening and
genetic-linkage analyses excluded FKHL7 from underlying the anterior-segment
disorders in two IRID1 families with linkage to 6p25. Our findings demonstrate
that, although mutations of FKHL7 result in anterior-segment defects and glaucoma
in some patients, it is probable that at least one more locus involved in the
regulation of eye development is also located at 6p25.

PMCID: PMC1377542
PMID: 9792859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Mech Dev. 1998 Aug;76(1-2):169-73.

Expression pattern of the winged helix factor XFD-11 during Xenopus
embryogenesis.

Köster M(1), Dillinger K, Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Biochemie, Universität Ulm, Albert Einstein Allee 11, D-89081, Ulm, 
Germany.

We have identified a cDNA encoding a novel Xenopus winged helix transcription
factor termed as XFD-11 (Xenopus fork head domain). The DNA binding domain is
most closely related to those of human or murine FREAC-3 (FKHL7/MF-1/FKH-1)
proteins. The XFD-11 gene is activated at late blastula/early gastrula and
transcription proceeds throughout embryogenesis. Early expression is found in
ventral and lateral but not in dorsal mesoderm. At neurula stages, transcripts
are found in posterior mesoderm except for the dorsal midline, and the gene is
also transcribed at the lateral border of the neural plate and within anterior
neuroectoderm. At later stages of development, transcripts are detected within
the pronephros, the heart, within neural crest cells surrounding the eye, in the 
mandibular, hyoid and branchial arches, and within the tail.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 9767159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Gene. 1998 Oct 5;220(1-2):77-82.

The mouse Fkh1/Mf1 gene: cDNA sequence, chromosomal localization and expression
in adult tissues.

Hiemisch H(1), Schütz G, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Division Molecular Biology of the Cell I, German Cancer Research Center, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 280, D-69120, Heidelberg, Germany.

The 'winged helix' or 'forkhead' transcription factor gene family is defined by a
common 100-amino-acid DNA-binding motif. Here, we describe the chromosomal
position, start site of transcription, sequence and adult expression pattern of
the mouse Fkh1/Mf1 (Forkhead homologue 1/mesoderm/mesenchyme forkhead 1) gene.
This gene contains one exon and encodes a protein of 553 amino acids that is
highly related to the mouse MFH1 protein. The Fkh1/Mf1 mRNA is expressed widely
in adult tissues. Linkage analysis showed that the Fkh1/Mf1 gene is localized to 
chromosome 13 at 17.02cM from the centromer, in close proximity to Bmp6 and Hfh1,
another distinct member of the winged helix gene family.

PMID: 9767123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cell. 1998 Jun 12;93(6):985-96.

The forkhead/winged helix gene Mf1 is disrupted in the pleiotropic mouse mutation
congenital hydrocephalus.

Kume T(1), Deng KY, Winfrey V, Gould DB, Walter MA, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Vanderbilt University Medical Center,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2175, USA.

Mf1 encodes a forkhead/winged helix transcription factor expressed in many
embryonic tissues, including prechondrogenic mesenchyme, periocular mesenchyme,
meninges, endothelial cells, and kidney. Homozygous null Mf1lacZ mice die at
birth with hydrocephalus, eye defects, and multiple skeletal abnormalities
identical to those of the classical mutant, congenital hydrocephalus. We show
that congenital hydrocephalus involves a point mutation in Mf1, generating a
truncated protein lacking the DNA-binding domain. Mesenchyme cells from Mf1lacZ
embryos differentiate poorly into cartilage in micromass culture and do not
respond to added BMP2 and TGFbeta1. The differentiation of arachnoid cells in the
mutant meninges is also abnormal. The human Mf1 homolog FREAC3 is a candidate
gene for ocular dysgenesis and glaucoma mapping to chromosome 6p25-pter, and
deletions of this region are associated with multiple developmental disorders,
including hydrocephaly and eye defects.

PMID: 9635428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Nat Genet. 1998 Jun;19(2):140-7.

The forkhead transcription factor gene FKHL7 is responsible for glaucoma
phenotypes which map to 6p25.

Nishimura DY(1), Swiderski RE, Alward WL, Searby CC, Patil SR, Bennet SR, Kanis
AB, Gastier JM, Stone EM, Sheffield VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City 52242, USA.

A number of different eye disorders with the presence of early-onset glaucoma as 
a component of the phenotype have been mapped to human chromosome 6p25. These
disorders have been postulated to be either allelic to each other or associated
with a cluster of tightly linked genes. We have identified two primary congenital
glaucoma (PCG) patients with chromosomal anomalies involving 6p25. In order to
identify a gene involved in PCG, the chromosomal breakpoints in a patient with a 
balanced translocation between 6p25 and 13q22 were cloned. Cloning of the 6p25
breakpoint led to the identification of two candidate genes based on proximity to
the breakpoint. One of these, FKHL7, encoding a forkhead transcription factor, is
in close proximity to the breakpoint in the balanced translocation patient and is
deleted in a second PCG patient with partial 6p monosomy. Furthermore, FKHL7 was 
found to harbour mutations in patients diagnosed with Rieger anomaly (RA),
Axenfeld anomaly (AA) and iris hypoplasia (IH). This study demonstrates that
mutations in FKHL7 cause a spectrum of glaucoma phenotypes.

PMID: 9620769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


