
1. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2016 Mar 8:1-6. [Epub ahead of print]

Interstitial stromal progenitors during kidney development: here, there and
everywhere.

Fanni D(1), Gerosa C(1), Vinci L(1), Ambu R(1), Dessì A(2), Eyken PV(3), Fanos
V(2), Faa G(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Division of Pathology , Department of Surgical Sciences, University of
Cagliari , Cagliari , Italy . (2)b Department of Surgical Sciences , NICU Center 
and Puericulture Institute and Neonatal Section, University of Cagliari ,
Cagliari , Italy , and. (3)c Department of Pathology , University Hospitals, KU ,
Leuven , Belgium.

In recent years, the renal interstitium has been identified as the site of
multiple cell types, giving rise to multiple contiguous cellular networks with
multiple fundamental structural and functional roles. Few studies have been
carried out on the morphological and functional properties of the
stromal/interstitial renal cells during the intrauterine life. This work was
aimed at reviewing the peculiar features of renal interstitial stem/progenitor
cells involved in kidney development. The origin of the renal interstitial
progenitor cells remains unknown. During kidney development, besides the
Six2<U+2009>+<U+2009>cells of the cap mesenchyme, a self-renewing progenitor population,
characterized by the expression of Foxd1, represents the first actor of the
non-nephrogenic lineage. Foxd1<U+2009>+<U+2009>interstitial progenitors originate the cortical 
and the renal medullary interstitial progenitors. Here, the most important
stromal/interstitial compartments present in the developing human kidney will be 
analyzed: capsular stromal cells, cortical interstitial cells, medullary
interstitial cells, the interstitium inside the renal stem cell niche, Hilar
interstitial cells and Ureteric interstitial cells. Data reported here indicate
that the different interstitial compartments of the developing kidney are formed 
by different cell types that characterize the different renal areas. Further
studies are needed to better characterize the different pools of renal
interstitial progenitors and their role in human nephrogenesis.

PMID: 26866875  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Clin Invest. 2016 Feb 1;126(2):721-31. doi: 10.1172/JCI82819. Epub 2016 Jan 5.

DNA methyltransferase inhibition restores erythropoietin production in fibrotic
murine kidneys.

Chang YT, Yang CC, Pan SY, Chou YH, Chang FC, Lai CF, Tsai MH, Hsu HL, Lin CH,
Chiang WC, Wu MS, Chu TS, Chen YM, Lin SL.

Renal erythropoietin-producing cells (REPCs) remain in the kidneys of patients
with chronic kidney disease, but these cells do not produce sufficient
erythropoietin in response to hypoxic stimuli. Treatment with HIF stabilizers
rescues erythropoietin production in these cells, but the mechanisms underlying
the decreased response of REPCs in fibrotic kidneys to anemic stimulation remain 
elusive. Here, we show that fibroblast-like FOXD1+ progenitor-derived kidney
pericytes, which are characterized by the expression of a1 type I collagen and
PDGFRß, produce erythropoietin through HIF2a regulation but that production is
repressed when these cells differentiate into myofibroblasts. DNA
methyltransferases and erythropoietin hypermethylation are upregulated in
myofibroblasts. Exposure of myofibroblasts to nanomolar concentrations of the
demethylating agent 5-azacytidine increased basal expression and hypoxic
induction of erythropoietin. Mechanistically, the profibrotic factor TGF-ß1
induced hypermethylation and repression of erythropoietin in pericytes; these
effects were prevented by 5-azacytidine treatment. These findings shed light on
the molecular mechanisms underlying erythropoietin repression in kidney
myofibroblasts and demonstrate that clinically relevant, nontoxic doses of
5-azacytidine can restore erythropoietin production and ameliorate anemia in the 
setting of kidney fibrosis in mice.

PMCID: PMC4731189 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26731474  [PubMed - in process]


3. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 29;5:15676. doi: 10.1038/srep15676.

Sall1 in renal stromal progenitors non-cell autonomously restricts the excessive 
expansion of nephron progenitors.

Ohmori T(1), Tanigawa S(1,)(2), Kaku Y(1), Fujimura S(3), Nishinakamura R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kidney Development, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan. (2)Program 
for leading graduate schools, HIGO program, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo,
Kumamoto 860-0811, Japan. (3)Liaison Laboratory Promotion Facility, Institute of 
Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Kumamoto
860-0811, Japan.

The mammalian kidney develops from reciprocal interactions between the
metanephric mesenchyme and ureteric bud, the former of which contains nephron
progenitors. The third lineage, the stroma, fills up the interstitial space and
is derived from distinct progenitors that express the transcription factor Foxd1.
We showed previously that deletion of the nuclear factor Sall1 in nephron
progenitors leads to their depletion in mice. However, Sall1 is expressed not
only in nephron progenitors but also in stromal progenitors. Here we report that 
specific Sall1 deletion in stromal progenitors leads to aberrant expansion of
nephron progenitors, which is in sharp contrast with a nephron
progenitor-specific deletion. The mutant mice also exhibited cystic kidneys after
birth and died before adulthood. We found that Decorin, which inhibits
Bmp-mediated nephron differentiation, was upregulated in the mutant stroma. In
contrast, the expression of Fat4, which restricts nephron progenitor expansion,
was reduced mildly. Furthermore, the Sall1 protein binds to many stroma-related
gene loci, including Decorin and Fat4. Thus, the expression of Sall1 in stromal
progenitors restricts the excessive expansion of nephron progenitors in a
non-cell autonomous manner, and Sall1-mediated regulation of Decorin and Fat4
might at least partially underlie the pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4625151
PMID: 26511275  [PubMed - in process]


4. BMC Genomics. 2015 Oct 28;16(1):874. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2022-2.

Prior infection with Type A Francisella tularensis antagonizes the pulmonary
transcriptional response to an aerosolized Toll-like receptor 4 agonist.

Walters KA(1), Olsufka R(2), Kuestner RE(3), Wu X(4), Wang K(5), Skerrett SJ(6), 
Ozinsky A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
Kathie.Walters@systemsbiology.org. (2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98104, USA.
rachael.olsufka@uky.edu. (3)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N,
Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. Rolf.Kuestner@systemsbiology.org. (4)Institute for
Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
Xiagang.Wu@systemsbiology.org. (5)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave.
N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. Kai.Wang@systemsbiology.com. (6)Division of Pulmonary
and Critical Care Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98104, USA.
shawn@u.washington.edu. (7)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N,
Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. aozinsky@systemsbiology.org.

BACKGROUND: Francisella infection attenuates immune cell infiltration and
expression of selected pro-inflammatory cytokines in response to endogenous LPS, 
suggesting the bacteria is actively antagonizing at least some part of the
response to Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) engagement. The ability of different
Francisella strains to inhibit the ability of E. coli LPS to induce a pulmonary
inflammatory response, as measured by gene expression profiling, was examined to 
define the scope of modulation and identify of inflammatory genes/pathways that
are specifically antagonized by a virulent F. tularensis infection.
RESULTS: Prior aerosol exposure to F. tularensis subsp. tularensis, but not the
live attenuated strain (LVS) of F. tularensis subsp. holarctica or F. novicida,
significantly antagonized the transcriptional response in the lungs of infected
mice exposed to aerosolized E. coli LPS. The response to E. coli LPS was not
completely inhibited, suggesting that the bacteria is targeting further
downstream of the TLR4 molecule. Analysis of the promotors of LPS-responsive
genes that were perturbed by Type A Francisella infection identified candidate
transcription factors that were potentially modulated by the bacteria, including 
multiple members of the forkhead transcription factor family (FoxA1, Foxa2,
FoxD1, Foxd3, Foxf2, FoxI1, Fox03, Foxq1), IRF1, CEBPA, and Mef2. The annotated
functional roles of the affected genes suggested that virulent Francisella
infection suppressed cellular processes including mRNA processing, antiviral
responses, intracellular trafficking, and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton.
Surprisingly, despite the broad overall suppression of LPS-induced genes by
virulent Francisella, and contrary to what was anticipated from prior studies,
Type A Francisella did not inhibit the expression of the majority of LPS-induced 
cytokines, nor the expression of many classic annotated inflammatory genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, this analysis demonstrates clear differences in the
ability of different Francisella strains to modulate TLR4 signaling and
identifies genes/pathways that are specifically targeted by virulent Type A
Francisella.

PMCID: PMC4625460
PMID: 26510639  [PubMed - in process]


5. Physiol Rep. 2015 Oct;3(10). pii: e12537. doi: 10.14814/phy2.12537.

Renal stromal miRNAs are required for normal nephrogenesis and glomerular
mesangial survival.

Phua YL(1), Chu JY(1), Marrone AK(1), Bodnar AJ(1), Sims-Lucas S(1), Ho J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Rangos Research Center, School of Medicine, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh 
of UPMC University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Nephrology, School of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (2)Rangos Research Center, School of Medicine,
Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania Department of Pediatrics, Division of Nephrology, School of
Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
jacqueline.ho2@chp.edu.

MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that post-transcriptionally regulate mRNA
levels. While previous studies have demonstrated that miRNAs are indispensable in
the nephron progenitor and ureteric bud lineage, little is understood about
stromal miRNAs during kidney development. The renal stroma (marked by expression 
of FoxD1) gives rise to the renal interstitium, a subset of peritubular
capillaries, and multiple supportive vascular cell types including pericytes and 
the glomerular mesangium. In this study, we generated FoxD1(GC);Dicer(fl/fl)
transgenic mice that lack miRNA biogenesis in the FoxD1 lineage. Loss of Dicer
activity resulted in multifaceted renal anomalies including perturbed
nephrogenesis, expansion of nephron progenitors, decreased renin-expressing
cells, fewer smooth muscle afferent arterioles, and progressive mesangial cell
loss in mature glomeruli. Although the initial lineage specification of FoxD1(+) 
stroma was not perturbed, both the glomerular mesangium and renal interstitium
exhibited ectopic apoptosis, which was associated with increased expression of
Bcl2l11 (Bim) and p53 effector genes (Bax, Trp53inp1, Jun, Cdkn1a, Mmp2, and
Arid3a). Using a combination of high-throughput miRNA profiling of the
FoxD1(+)-derived cells and mRNA profiling of differentially expressed transcripts
in FoxD1(GC);Dicer(fl/fl) kidneys, at least 72 miRNA:mRNA target interactions
were identified to be suppressive of the apoptotic program. Together, the results
support an indispensable role for stromal miRNAs in the regulation of apoptosis
during kidney development.

© 2015 The Authors. Physiological Reports published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of the American Physiological Society and The Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4632944
PMID: 26438731  [PubMed]


6. Development. 2015 Nov 15;142(22):3933-42. doi: 10.1242/dev.125120. Epub 2015 Oct 
1.

Opposing Shh and Fgf signals initiate nasotemporal patterning of the zebrafish
retina.

Hernández-Bejarano M(1), Gestri G(2), Spawls L(2), Nieto-López F(1), Picker A(3),
Tada M(2), Brand M(3), Bovolenta P(4), Wilson SW(5), Cavodeassi F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), C/Nicolás Cabrera 1,
28049, Madrid, Spain. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University
College London, Gower Street, London WC1 6BT, UK. (3)Center of Regenerative
Therapies Dresden (CRTD), Biotechnology Center, Dresden University of Technology,
01062 Dresden, Germany. (4)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), 
C/Nicolás Cabrera 1, 28049, Madrid, Spain CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
C/Nicolás Cabrera 1, 28049, Madrid, Spain. (5)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1 6BT,
UK s.wilson@ucl.ac.uk fcavodeassi@cbm.csic.es. (6)Centro de Biología Molecular
Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), C/Nicolás Cabrera 1, 28049, Madrid, Spain CIBER de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), C/Nicolás Cabrera 1, 28049, Madrid, Spain
s.wilson@ucl.ac.uk fcavodeassi@cbm.csic.es.

The earliest known determinants of retinal nasotemporal identity are the
transcriptional regulators Foxg1, which is expressed in the prospective nasal
optic vesicle, and Foxd1, which is expressed in the prospective temporal optic
vesicle. Previous work has shown that, in zebrafish, Fgf signals from the dorsal 
forebrain and olfactory primordia are required to specify nasal identity in the
dorsal, prospective nasal, optic vesicle. Here, we show that Hh signalling from
the ventral forebrain is required for specification of temporal identity in the
ventral optic vesicle and is sufficient to induce temporal character when
activated in the prospective nasal retina. Consequently, the evaginating optic
vesicles become partitioned into prospective nasal and temporal domains by the
opposing actions of Fgfs and Shh emanating from dorsal and ventral domains of the
forebrain primordium. In absence of Fgf activity, foxd1 expression is established
irrespective of levels of Hh signalling, indicating that the role of Shh in
promoting foxd1 expression is only required in the presence of Fgf activity. Once
the spatially complementary expression of foxd1 and foxg1 is established, the
boundary between expression domains is maintained by mutual repression between
Foxd1 and Foxg1.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4712879
PMID: 26428010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Kidney Int Suppl (2011). 2014 Nov;4(1):26-33.

The FOXD1 lineage of kidney perivascular cells and myofibroblasts: functions and 
responses to injury.

Gomez IG(1), Duffield JS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Pathology, University of Washington , Seattle,
Washington, USA. (2)Departments of Medicine and Pathology, University of
Washington , Seattle, Washington, USA ; Biogen Idec , Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA.

Recent studies have identified a poorly appreciated yet extensive population of
perivascular mesenchymal cells in the kidney, which are derived from metanephric 
mesenchyme progenitor cells during nephrogenesis at which time they express the
transcription factor FOXD1. Some studies have called these resident fibroblasts, 
whereas others have called them pericytes. Regardless of nomenclature, many are
partially integrated into the capillary basement membrane and contribute in
important ways to the homeostasis of peritubular capillaries. Fate-mapping
studies using conditional CreER recombinase-mediated tracing of discrete cell
cohorts have identified these pericytes and resident fibroblasts as the major
precursor population of interstitial myofibroblasts in animal models of kidney
disease. Here, we will review the evidence that they are the major population of 
myofibroblast precursors, highlight some critical functions in homeostasis, and
focus on the cell signaling pathways that are important to their differentiation 
into, and persistence as myofibroblasts.

PMCID: PMC4536957
PMID: 26312147  [PubMed]


8. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2015 Sep 15;309(6):R650-7. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00313.2015. Epub 2015 Aug 5.

Vascular versus tubular renin: role in kidney development.

Sequeira-Lopez ML(1), Nagalakshmi VK(2), Li M(2), Sigmund CD(3), Gomez RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia; and msl7u@virginia.edu. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia; and.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, University of Iowa Hospitals and Clinics Center
for Hypertension Research, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.

Renin, the key regulated enzyme of the renin-angiotensin system regulates blood
pressure, fluid-electrolyte homeostasis, and renal morphogenesis. Whole body
deletion of the renin gene results in severe morphological and functional
derangements, including thickening of renal arterioles, hydronephrosis, and
inability to concentrate the urine. Because renin is found in vascular and
tubular cells, it has been impossible to discern the relative contribution of
tubular versus vascular renin to such a complex phenotype. Therefore, we deleted 
renin independently in the vascular and tubular compartments by crossing Ren1(c
fl/fl) mice to Foxd1-cre and Hoxb7-cre mice, respectively. Deletion of renin in
the vasculature resulted in neonatal mortality that could be rescued with daily
injections of saline. The kidneys of surviving mice showed the absence of renin, 
hypertrophic arteries, hydronephrosis, and negligible levels of plasma renin. In 
contrast, lack of renin in the collecting ducts did not affect kidney morphology,
intra-renal renin, or circulating renin in basal conditions or in response to a
homeostatic stress, such as sodium depletion. We conclude that renin generated in
the renal vasculature is fundamental for the development and integrity of the
kidney, whereas renin in the collecting ducts is dispensable for normal kidney
development and cannot compensate for the lack of renin in the vascular
compartment. Further, the main source of circulating renin is the kidney
vasculature.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4591368 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26246508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 15;10(6):e0129242. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129242.
eCollection 2015.

Maintenance of Mouse Nephron Progenitor Cells in Aggregates with Gamma-Secretase 
Inhibitor.

Yuri S(1), Nishikawa M(1), Yanagawa N(1), Jo OD(1), Yanagawa N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical and Research Services, Greater Los Angeles Veterans Affairs Healthcare
System at Sepulveda, North Hills, California, United States of America;
University of California at Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America.

Knowledge on how to maintain and expand nephron progenitor cells (NPC) in vitro
is important to provide a potentially valuable source for kidney replacement
therapies. In our present study, we examined the possibility of optimizing NPC
maintenance in the "re-aggregate" system. We found that Six2-expressing
(Six2(+))-NPC could be maintained in aggregates reconstituted with dispersed
cells from E12.5 mouse embryonic kidneys for at least up to 21 days in culture.
The maintenance of Six2(+)-NPC required the presence of ureteric bud cells. The
number of Six2(+)-NPC increased by more than 20-fold at day 21, but plateaued
after day 14. In an attempt to further sustain NPC proliferation by passage
subculture, we found that the new (P1) aggregates reconstituted from the original
(P0) aggregates failed to maintain NPC. However, based on the similarity between 
P1 aggregates and aggregates derived from E15.5 embryonic kidneys, we suspected
that the differentiated NPC in P1 aggregates may interfere with NPC maintenance. 
In support of this notion, we found that preventing NPC differentiation by DAPT, 
a <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor that inhibits Notch signaling pathway, was effective to
maintain and expand Six2(+)-NPC in P1 aggregates by up to 65-fold. The
Six2(+)-NPC in P1 aggregates retained their potential to epithelialize upon
exposure to Wnt signal. In conclusion, we demonstrated in our present study that 
the "re-aggregation" system can be useful for in vitro maintenance of NPC when
combined with <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor.

PMCID: PMC4468097
PMID: 26075891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Anticancer Res. 2015 Jan;35(1):261-8.

FOXD1 expression is associated with poor prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer.

Nakayama S(1), Soejima K(2), Yasuda H(1), Yoda S(1), Satomi R(1), Ikemura S(1),
Terai H(1), Sato T(1), Yamaguchi N(3), Hamamoto J(1), Arai D(1), Ishioka K(1),
Ohgino K(1), Naoki K(4), Betsuyaku T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of Medicine, Keio University School
of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Division of Pulmonary Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan
ksoejima@cpnet.med.keio.ac.jp. (3)Department of Internal medicine, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center, New York, NY, U.S.A. (4)Division of Pulmonary Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan Keio
Cancer Center, Keio University Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.

AIM: Clinical microarray datasets were analyzed to search for new therapeutic
targets and prognostic markers of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Microarray datasets from 90 lung cancer specimens, were
analyzed with focus on the FOXD1 gene. Levels of FOXD1 mRNA were assessed in lung
cancer cell lines and these levels were correlated with survival.
RESULTS: FOXD1-knockdown led to suppression of cell proliferation. Moreover,
patients with high FOXD1 expression survived for a significantly shorter time
than those with low FOXD1 expression.
CONCLUSION: The expression status of FOXD1 is a novel prognostic factor and may
lead to new treatment strategies for NSCLC.

Copyright© 2015 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25550559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jan 2;456(1):232-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.11.064. Epub 2014 Nov 22.

FOXD1 promotes breast cancer proliferation and chemotherapeutic drug resistance
by targeting p27.

Zhao YF(1), Zhao JY(1), Yue H(1), Hu KS(2), Shen H(2), Guo ZG(3), Su XJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of the General
Hospital of CPLA, Beijing 100048, China. (2)Department of Anesthesiology, The
General Hospital of CPLA, Beijing 100853, China. (3)Department of Anesthesiology,
The First Affiliated Hospital of the General Hospital of CPLA, Beijing 100048,
China. Electronic address: gsgzg304@163.com. (4)Department of Anesthesiology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of the General Hospital of CPLA, Beijing 100048, China.
Electronic address: lucusebibi@163.com.

Forkhead transcription factors are essential for diverse processes in early
embryonic development and organogenesis. As a member of the forkhead family,
FOXD1 is required during kidney development and its inactivation results in
failure of nephron progenitor cells. However, the role of FOXD1 in carcinogenesis
and progression is still limited. Here, we reported that FOXD1 is a potential
oncogene in breast cancer. We found that FOXD1 is up-regulated in breast cancer
tissues. Depletion of FOXD1 expression decreases the ability of cell
proliferation and chemoresistance in MDA-MB-231 cells, whereas overexpression of 
FOXD1 increases the ability of cell proliferation and chemoresistance in MCF-7
cells. Furthermore, we observed that FOXD1 induces G1 to S phase transition by
targeting p27 expression. Our results suggest that FOXD1 may be a potential
therapy target for patients with breast cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25462566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2015 Jan 15;308(2):R138-49. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00428.2014. Epub 2014 Nov 26.

The earliest metanephric arteriolar progenitors and their role in kidney vascular
development.

Sequeira-Lopez ML(1), Lin EE(2), Li M(2), Hu Y(2), Sigmund CD(3), Gomez RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Virginia School of Medicine,
Charlottesville, Virginia; and msl7u@virginia.edu. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia; and.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Roy J. and Lucille A. Carver College of Medicine, 
University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa.

The development of the kidney arterioles is poorly understood. Mature arterioles 
contain several functionally and morphologically distinct cell types, including
smooth muscle, endothelial, and juxtaglomerular cells, and they are surrounded by
interconnected pericytes, fibroblasts, and other interstitial cells. We have
shown that the embryonic kidney possesses all of the necessary precursors for the
development of the renal arterial tree, and those precursors assemble in situ to 
form the kidney arterioles. However, the identity of those precursors was
unclear. Within the embryonic kidney, several putative progenitors marked by the 
expression of either the winged-forkhead transcription factor 1 (Foxd1+
progenitor), the aspartyl-protease renin (Ren+ progenitor), and/or hemangioblasts
(Scl+ progenitor) are likely to differentiate and endow most of the cells of the 
renal arterial tree. However, the lineage relationships and the role of these
distinct progenitors in renal vascular morphogenesis have not been delineated.
We, therefore, designed a series of experiments to ascertain the hierarchical
lineage relationships between Foxd1+ and Ren+ progenitors and the role of these
two precursors in the morphogenesis and patterning of the renal arterial tree.
Results show that 1) Foxd1+ cells are the precursors for all the mural cells
(renin cells, smooth muscle cells, perivascular fibroblasts, and pericytes) of
the renal arterial tree and glomerular mesangium, and 2) Foxd1 per se directs the
origin, number, orientation, and cellular composition of the renal vessels.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4297861
PMID: 25427768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Oct 14;3(4):650-62. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.08.008.
Epub 2014 Sep 18.

Identification of a multipotent self-renewing stromal progenitor population
during mammalian kidney organogenesis.

Kobayashi A(1), Mugford JW(2), Krautzberger AM(3), Naiman N(4), Liao J(4),
McMahon AP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, 7
Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Renal Division, Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 4 Blackfan
Circle, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, 1350 Massachusetts
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. Electronic address: akiok@uw.edu. (2)Department
of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, 7 Divinity Avenue,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. (3)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology,
Harvard University, 7 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Department of
Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Eli and Edythe Broad Center for
Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, W. M. Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 1425 San Pablo Street, Los
Angeles, CA 90089, USA. (4)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 4 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. (5)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, 7
Divinity Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, 1350
Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Department of Stem Cell Biology
and Regenerative Medicine, Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine 
and Stem Cell Research, W. M. Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, 1425 San Pablo Street, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

The mammalian kidney is a complex organ consisting of multiple cell types. We
previously showed that the Six2-expressing cap mesenchyme is a multipotent
self-renewing progenitor population for the main body of the nephron, the basic
functional unit of the kidney. However, the cellular mechanisms establishing
stromal tissues are less clear. We demonstrate that the Foxd1-expressing cortical
stroma represents a distinct multipotent self-renewing progenitor population that
gives rise to stromal tissues of the interstitium, mesangium, and pericytes
throughout kidney organogenesis. Fate map analysis of Foxd1-expressing cells
demonstrates that a small subset of these cells contributes to Six2-expressing
cells at the early stage of kidney outgrowth. Thereafter, there appears to be a
strict nephron and stromal lineage boundary derived from Six2-expressing and
Foxd1-expressing cell types, respectively. Taken together, our observations
suggest that distinct multipotent self-renewing progenitor populations coordinate
cellular differentiation of the nephron epithelium and renal stroma during
mammalian kidney organogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4223698
PMID: 25358792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jan;11(1):386-92. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2709. Epub 2014 Oct 20.

Comparative transcriptome analysis between metastatic and non-metastatic gastric 
cancer reveals potential biomarkers.

Feng D(1), Ye X(2), Zhu Z(3), Wei Z(3), Cai Q(3), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Changhai Hospital, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Health Statistics, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 
200433, P.R. China. (3)Department of Gastrointestine Surgery, Shanghai Changzheng
Hospital, Shanghai 200003, P.R. China.

The transcriptome of metastatic gastric cancer (GC) was compared to that of
non-metastatic GC to identify metastasis-related biomarkers. The gene expression 
dataset GSE21328, comprising 2 metastatic GC samples and 2 non-metastatic GC
samples, was downloaded from the Gene Expression Omnibus database. Differential
expression analysis was performed with the package limma of Bioconductor to
identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment
analysis was performed to identify significantly altered biological functions. In
addition, the transcriptional regulatory and protein-protein interaction networks
were constructed with information from the UCSC genome browser and STRING
database, respectively, followed by functional enrichment analysis of all of the 
genes in these two networks. A total of 584 DEGs were identified, of which 175
were upregulated and 409 downregulated. Clustering analysis confirmed that these 
genes can distinguish metastatic from non-metastatic GC. Upregulated genes were
enriched for the xenobiotic metabolic process, while downregulated genes were
enriched for immune response and related pathways. Among the 584 DEGs, six genes 
(DAND5, EGR2, FOXD1, LMO2, PRRX2 and STAT1) were shown to encode transcription
factors, which were used to establish the transcriptional regulatory network with
169 target genes, forming 175 nodes. The proteins of this network were
significantly enriched for the process of negative regulation of cell
differentiation. In conclusion, this study identified a range of DEGs in
metastatic GC, which may enhance our current knowledge on this disease. Among
these genes, STAT1 and EGR2 may constitute potential biomarkers of GC metastasis.

PMID: 25334039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 May;26(5):1126-37. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013060584. Epub 2014 
Sep 8.

Functional genetic targeting of embryonic kidney progenitor cells ex vivo.

Junttila S(1), Saarela U(1), Halt K(1), Manninen A(1), Pärssinen H(1), Lecca
MR(2), Brändli AW(3), Sims-Lucas S(4), Skovorodkin I(1), Vainio SJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Biocenter Oulu, Infotech Oulu, Center for Cell Matrix Research, Faculty of
Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland;
(2)Functional Genomics Center Zurich, University of Zurich/ETH Zurich, Zurich,
Switzerland; (3)Walter-Brendel-Centre of Experimental Medicine,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Munich, Germany; and. (4)Rangos Research
Center, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh Medical
Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. (5)Biocenter Oulu, Infotech Oulu, Center for
Cell Matrix Research, Faculty of Biochemistry and Molecular Medicine, University 
of Oulu, Oulu, Finland; seppo.vainio@oulu.fi.

The embryonic mammalian metanephric mesenchyme (MM) is a unique tissue because it
is competent to generate the nephrons in response to Wnt signaling. An ex vivo
culture in which the MM is separated from the ureteric bud (UB), the natural
inducer, can be used as a classic tubule induction model for studying
nephrogenesis. However, technological restrictions currently prevent using this
model to study the molecular genetic details before or during tubule induction.
Using nephron segment-specific markers, we now show that tubule induction in the 
MM ex vivo also leads to the assembly of highly segmented nephrons. This
induction capacity was reconstituted when MM tissue was dissociated into a cell
suspension and then reaggregated (drMM) in the presence of human recombinant bone
morphogenetic protein 7/human recombinant fibroblast growth factor 2 for 24 hours
before induction. Growth factor-treated drMM also recovered the capacity for
organogenesis when recombined with the UB. Cell tracking and time-lapse imaging
of chimeric drMM cultures indicated that the nephron is not derived from a single
progenitor cell. Furthermore, viral vector-mediated transduction of green
fluorescent protein was much more efficient in dissociated MM cells than in
intact mesenchyme, and the nephrogenic competence of transduced drMM progenitor
cells was preserved. Moreover, drMM cells transduced with viral vectors mediating
Lhx1 knockdown were excluded from the nephric tubules, whereas cells transduced
with control vectors were incorporated. In summary, these techniques allow
reproducible cellular and molecular examinations of the mechanisms behind
nephrogenesis and kidney organogenesis in an ex vivo organ culture/organoid
setting.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4413750 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25201883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Nov;53(11):917-33. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22204. Epub
2014 Jul 17.

Deregulated FOX genes in Hodgkin lymphoma.

Nagel S(1), Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

FOX genes encode transcription factors which regulate basic developmental
processes during embryogenesis and in the adult. Several FOX genes show
deregulated expression in particular malignancies, representing oncogenes or
tumor suppressors. Here, we screened six Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) cell lines for FOX
gene activity by comparative microarray profiling, revealing overexpression of
FOXC1 and FOXD1, and reduced transcription of FOXN3, FOXO1, and FOXP1. In silico 
expression analyses of these FOX gene candidates in HL patient samples supported 
the cell line data. Chromosomal analyses demonstrated an amplification of the
FOXC1 locus at 6p25 and a gain of the FOXR2 locus at Xp11, indicting genomic
aberrations for their upregulation. Comparative expression profiling and ensuing 
stimulation experiments revealed implementation of the TGFß- and WNT-signaling
pathways in deregulation of FOXD1 and FOXN3. Functional analysis of FOXP1
implicated miR9 and miR34a as upstream regulators and PAX5, TCF3, and RAG2 as
downstream targets. A similar exercise for FOXC1 revealed repression of MSX1 and 
activation of IPO7, both mediating inhibition of the B-cell specific homeobox
gene ZHX2. Taken together, our data show that aberrantly expressed FOX genes and 
their downstream targets are involved in the pathogenesis of HL via deregulation 
of B-cell differentiation and may represent useful diagnostic markers and/or
therapeutic targets.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25043849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jun;124(6):2299-306. doi: 10.1172/JCI72267. Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Cellular and molecular mechanisms in kidney fibrosis.

Duffield JS.

Fibrosis is a characteristic feature of all forms of chronic kidney disease.
Deposition of pathological matrix in the interstitial space and within the walls 
of glomerular capillaries as well as the cellular processes resulting in this
deposition are increasingly recognized as important factors amplifying kidney
injury and accelerating nephron demise. Recent insights into the cellular and
molecular mechanisms of fibrogenesis herald the promise of new therapies to slow 
kidney disease progression. This review focuses on new findings that enhance
understanding of cellular and molecular mechanisms of fibrosis, the
characteristics of myofibroblasts, their progenitors, and molecular pathways
regulating both fibrogenesis and its resolution.

PMCID: PMC4038570
PMID: 24892703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Dev Dyn. 2014 Jul;243(7):853-63. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24134. Epub 2014 Apr 17.

Developmental origins and functions of stromal cells in the normal and diseased
mammalian kidney.

Li W(1), Hartwig S, Rosenblum ND.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Program 
in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.

The kidney is a model developmental paradigm of vertebrate organogenesis. As in
many other organs, kidney development involves reciprocal inductive tissue
interactions between multiple cell lineages. The most well defined of these
interactions occurs between the ureteric bud and the nephrogenic mesenchyme. A
population of mesenchymal cells distinct from nephrogenic precursors and termed
stromal cells, have been relatively understudied. Yet existing knowledge
indicates that stromal cells are critical regulators in the normal and diseased
kidney. This commentary reviews current knowledge regarding the origin and
functional roles of the stromal cell population during kidney development. Gaps
in our current understanding of renal stromal cells and future directions needed 
to advance this expanding field of study are highlighted.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24687874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 5;9(2):e88400. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088400. eCollection 
2014.

Ablation of the renal stroma defines its critical role in nephron progenitor and 
vasculature patterning.

Hum S(1), Rymer C(1), Schaefer C(1), Bushnell D(1), Sims-Lucas S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Rangos Research Center, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, United States of America ; Department of Pediatrics, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of
America.

The renal stroma is an embryonic cell population located in the cortex that
provides a structural framework as well as a source of endothelial progenitors
for the developing kidney. The exact role of the renal stroma in normal kidney
development hasn't been clearly defined. However, previous studies have shown
that the genetic deletion of Foxd1, a renal stroma specific gene, leads to severe
kidney malformations confirming the importance of stroma in normal kidney
development. This study further investigates the role of renal stroma by ablating
Foxd1-derived stroma cells themselves and observing the response of the remaining
cell populations. A Foxd1cre (renal stroma specific) mouse was crossed with a
diphtheria toxin mouse (DTA) to specifically induce apoptosis in stromal cells.
Histological examination of kidneys at embryonic day 13.5-18.5 showed a lack of
stromal tissue, mispatterning of renal structures, and dysplastic and/or fused
horseshoe kidneys. Immunofluorescence staining of nephron progenitors,
vasculature, ureteric epithelium, differentiated nephron progenitors, and
vascular supportive cells revealed that mutants had thickened nephron progenitor 
caps, cortical regions devoid of nephron progenitors, aberrant vessel patterning 
and thickening, ureteric branching defects and migration of differentiated
nephron structures into the medulla. The similarities between the renal
deformities caused by Foxd1 genetic knockout and Foxd1DTA mouse models reveal the
importance of Foxd1 in mediating and maintaining the functional integrity of the 
renal stroma.

PMCID: PMC3914987
PMID: 24505489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3197. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4197.

Foxd1 is a mediator and indicator of the cell reprogramming process.

Koga M(1), Matsuda M(1), Kawamura T(2), Sogo T(3), Shigeno A(2), Nishida E(4),
Ebisuya M(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, Kobe 650-0047, Japan [2]
Career-Path Promotion Unit for Young Life Scientists, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8501, Japan [3] Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8502, Japan. (2)1] Career-Path Promotion Unit for Young Life Scientists,
Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan [2] Department of Biomedical Sciences,
College of Life Sciences, Ritsumeikan University, Shiga 525-8577, Japan. (3)1]
Career-Path Promotion Unit for Young Life Scientists, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8501, Japan [2] Division of Translational Research, Kyoto Medical Center,
National Hospital Organization, Kyoto 612-8555, Japan. (4)1] Graduate School of
Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan [2] JST, CREST, Tokyo
102-0075, Japan. (5)1] RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, Kobe 650-0047,
Japan [2] Career-Path Promotion Unit for Young Life Scientists, Kyoto University,
Kyoto 606-8501, Japan [3] JST, CREST, Tokyo 102-0075, Japan.

It remains unclear how changes in gene expression profiles that establish a
pluripotent state are induced during cell reprogramming. Here we identify two
forkhead box transcription factors, Foxd1 and Foxo1, as mediators of gene
expression programme changes during reprogramming. Knockdown of Foxd1 or Foxo1
reduces the number of iPSCs, and the double knockdown further reduces it.
Knockout of Foxd1 inhibits downstream transcriptional events, including the
expression of Dax1, a component of the autoregulatory network for maintaining
pluripotency. Interestingly, the expression level of Foxd1 is transiently
increased in a small population of cells in the middle stage of reprogramming.
The transient Foxd1 upregulation in this stage is correlated with a future cell
fate as iPSCs. Fate mapping analyses further reveal that >95% of iPSC colonies
are derived from the Foxd1-positive cells. Thus, Foxd1 is a mediator and
indicator of successful progression of reprogramming.

PMID: 24496101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 28;446(1):15-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.01.135. Epub 2014 Jan 31.

Expression of Drosophila forkhead transcription factors during kidney
development.

Baek JI(1), Choi SY(1), Chacon-Heszele MF(1), Zuo X(1), Lipschutz JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, and VAMC, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, and VAMC,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Medicine, Philadelphia Veterans
Affairs Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address:
jhlipsch@mail.med.upenn.edu.

The Drosophila forkhead (Dfkh) family of transcription factors has over 40 family
members. One Dfkh family member, BF2 (aka FoxD1), has been shown, by targeted
disruption, to be essential for kidney development. In order to determine if
other Dfkh family members were involved in kidney development and to search for
new members of this family, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was performed using degenerate primers of the consensus sequence of the 
DNA binding domain of this family and developing rat kidney RNA. The RT-PCR
product was used to probe RNA from a developing rat kidney (neonatal), from a
20-day old kidney, and from an adult kidney. The RT-PCR product hybridized only
to a developing kidney RNA transcript of ~2.3 kb (the size of BF2). A lambda gt10
mouse neonatal kidney library was then screened, using the above-described RT-PCR
product as a probe. Three lambda phage clones were isolated that strongly
hybridized to the RT-PCR probe. Sequencing of the RT-PCR product and the lambda
phage clones isolated from the developing kidney library revealed Dfkh BF2. In
summary, only Dfkh family member BF2, which has already been shown to be
essential for nephrogenesis, was identified in our screen and no other candidate 
Dfkh family members were identified.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4016985
PMID: 24491558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 May;53(5):381-91. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22149. Epub
2014 Feb 1.

Clear cell sarcoma of the kidney demonstrates an embryonic signature indicative
of a primitive nephrogenic origin.

Karlsson J(1), Holmquist Mengelbier L, Ciornei CD, Naranjo A, O'Sullivan MJ,
Gisselsson D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University, University and Regional
Laboratories, Lund, Sweden.

Clear cell sarcoma of the kidney (CCSK) is a tumor affecting children with a
median age of 3 years at diagnosis. The cell of origin of CCSK is unknown and
data on the molecular changes giving rise to CCSK is scarce. This has hindered
the identification of positive diagnostic markers and development of molecularly 
targeted treatment protocols for CCSK. We have characterized a panel of CCSK to
gain information regarding its molecular profile and possible origin.
High-resolution genomic analysis with single nucleotide polymorphism array of 37 
tumors did not reveal any clues to the mechanisms behind tumor development as
remarkably few genetic imbalances were found. Gene expression analysis revealed a
highly characteristic gene signature, enriched for pathways involved in embryonic
development, including kidney formation. The presence of markers for two
different developmental lineages in the embryonic kidney was therefore
investigated in the tumor cells. FOXD1 which identifies cells giving rise to
stromal elements, and CITED1, a marker for cells primed for nephrogenic
epithelial differentiation, were both highly expressed in CCSK. In addition, the 
early embryonic marker OSR1 was expressed at higher levels in CCSK than in Wilms 
tumor, normal fetal kidney or adult kidney. As this marker discriminates the
intermediate mesoderm from other mesodermal structures, our study could suggest
that CCSK arises from a mesodermal cell type that retains the capacity to
initiate differentiation towards both nephrons and stroma, but remains locked in 
a primitive state.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4334316
PMID: 24488803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 May;41(5):2745-55. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3129-2. Epub 2014
Jan 22.

Effect of dietary n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids on transcription factor
regulation in the bovine endometrium.

Waters SM(1), Coyne GS, Kenny DA, Morris DG.

Author information: 
(1)Animal and Bioscience Research Department, Animal and Grassland Research and
Innovation Centre, Teagasc, Grange, Dunsany, Co. Meath, Ireland,
sinead.waters@teagasc.ie.

Dietary n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acid (n-3 PUFA) supplementation is postulated
to have positive effects on fertility. The impact of dietary n-3 PUFA
supplementation on physiological and biochemical processes involved in
reproduction is likely to be associated with significant alterations in gene
expression in key reproductive tissues which is in turn regulated by
transcription factors. Beef heifers were supplemented with a rumen protected
source of either a saturated fatty acid or high n-3 PUFA diet per animal per day 
for 45 days and uterine endometrial tissue was harvested post slaughter. A
microarray analysis was conducted and bioinformatic tools were employed to
evaluate the effect of n-3 PUFA supplementation on gene expression in the bovine 
endometrium. Clustering of microarray gene expression data was performed to
identify co-expressed genes. Functional annotation of each cluster of genes was
carried out using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Furthermore, oPOSSUM was employed
to identify transcription factors involved in gene expression changes due to
supplementary PUFA. Gene functions which showed a significant response to n-3
PUFA supplementation included tissue development, immune function and
reproductive function. Numerous transcription factors such as FOXD1, FOXD3,
NFKB1, ESR1, PGR, FOXA2, NKX3-1 and PPARa were identified as potential regulators
of gene expression in the endometrium of cattle supplemented with n-3 PUFA. This 
study demonstrates the complex nature of the alterations in the transcriptional
regulation process in the uterine endometrium of cattle following dietary
supplementation which may positively influence the uterine environment.

PMID: 24449365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 31;8(12):e84155. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084155.
eCollection 2013.

Stromal protein Ecm1 regulates ureteric bud patterning and branching.

Paroly SS(1), Wang F(1), Spraggon L(1), Merregaert J(2), Batourina E(1), Tycko
B(3), Schmidt-Ott KM(4), Grimmond S(5), Little M(5), Mendelsohn C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Irving Cancer Research Center, Columbia University, New
York, New York, United States of America. (2)Laboratory of Molecular
Biotechnology, Department of Biochemistry, University of Antwerp, Wilrijk,
Belgium. (3)Institute for Cancer Genetics & Taub Institute for Research on
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University, New York, New York,
United States of America. (4)Max-Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
Robert-Roessle-Str. Berlin, Germany. (5)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The
University of Queensland St Lucia QLD, Australia.

The interactions between the nephrogenic mesenchyme and the ureteric bud during
kidney development are well documented. While recent studies have shed some light
on the importance of the stroma during renal development, many of the signals
generated in the stroma, the genetic pathways and interaction networks involving 
the stroma are yet to be identified. Our previous studies demonstrate that
retinoids are crucial for branching of the ureteric bud and for patterning of the
cortical stroma. In the present study we demonstrate that autocrine retinoic acid
(RA) signaling in stromal cells is critical for their survival and patterning,
and show that Extracellular matrix 1, Ecm1, a gene that in humans causes
irritable bowel syndrome and lipoid proteinosis, is a novel RA-regulated target
in the developing kidney, which is secreted from the cortical stromal cells
surrounding the cap mesenchyme and ureteric bud. Our studies suggest that Ecm1 is
required in the ureteric bud for regulating the distribution of Ret which is
normally restricted to the tips, as inhibition of Ecm1 results in an expanded
domain of Ret expression and reduced numbers of branches. We propose a model in
which retinoid signaling in the stroma activates expression of Ecm1, which in
turn down-regulates Ret expression in the ureteric bud cleft, where bifurcation
normally occurs and normal branching progresses.

PMCID: PMC3877229
PMID: 24391906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Development. 2014 Jan;141(2):346-54. doi: 10.1242/dev.100271. Epub 2013 Dec 18.

Notch signaling is required for the formation of mesangial cells from a stromal
mesenchyme precursor during kidney development.

Boyle SC(1), Liu Z, Kopan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Mesangial cells are specialized pericyte/smooth muscle cells that surround and
constrain the vascular network within the glomerulus of the kidney. They are
derived from the stromal mesenchyme, a progenitor population distinct from
nephron stem cells. Whether mesangial cells have a distinct origin from vascular 
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and the pathways that govern their specification are 
unknown. Here we show that Notch signaling in stromal progenitors is essential
for mesangial cell formation but is dispensable for the smooth muscle and
interstitial cell lineages. Deletion of RBPjk, the common DNA-binding partner of 
all active Notch receptors, with Foxd1(tgCre) results in glomerular aneurysm and 
perinatal death from kidney failure. This defect occurs early in glomerular
development as stromal-derived, desmin-positive cells fail to coalesce near
forming nephrons and thus do not invade the vascular cleft of the S-shaped body. 
This is in contrast to other mutants in which the loss of the mesangium was due
to migration defects, and suggests that loss of Notch signaling results in a
failure to specify this population from the stroma. Interestingly,
Pdgfrb-positive VSMCs do not enter the vascular cleft and cannot rescue the
mesangial deficiency. Notch1 and Notch2 act redundantly through <U+03B3>-secretase and
RBPjk in this process, as individual mutants have mesangial cells at birth.
Together, these data demonstrate a unique origin of mesangial cells and
demonstrate a novel, redundant function for Notch receptors in mesangial cell
specification, proliferation or survival during kidney development.

PMCID: PMC4074211
PMID: 24353058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Genes Dev. 2013 Dec 15;27(24):2736-48. doi: 10.1101/gad.227926.113.

Inferring the choreography of parental genomes during fertilization from
ultralarge-scale whole-transcriptome analysis.

Park SJ(1), Komata M, Inoue F, Yamada K, Nakai K, Ohsugi M, Shirahige K.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Center, the Institute of Medical Science, the University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan;

Fertilization precisely choreographs parental genomes by using gamete-derived
cellular factors and activating genome regulatory programs. However, the
mechanism remains elusive owing to the technical difficulties of preparing large 
numbers of high-quality preimplantation cells. Here, we collected >14 × 10(4)
high-quality mouse metaphase II oocytes and used these to establish detailed
transcriptional profiles for four early embryo stages and parthenogenetic
development. By combining these profiles with other public resources, we found
evidence that gene silencing appeared to be mediated in part by noncoding RNAs
and that this was a prerequisite for post-fertilization development. Notably, we 
identified 817 genes that were differentially expressed in embryos after
fertilization compared with parthenotes. The regulation of these genes was
distinctly different from those expressed in parthenotes, suggesting functional
specialization of particular transcription factors prior to first cell cleavage. 
We identified five transcription factors that were potentially necessary for
developmental progression: Foxd1, Nkx2-5, Sox18, Myod1, and Runx1. Our very
large-scale whole-transcriptome profile of early mouse embryos yielded a novel
and valuable resource for studies in developmental biology and stem cell
research. The database is available at http://dbtmee.hgc.jp.

PMCID: PMC3877761
PMID: 24352427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Cell Commun Signal. 2014 Mar;8(1):3-4. doi: 10.1007/s12079-013-0219-1. Epub
2013 Dec 8.

Mesenchymal cells emerge as primary contributors to fibrosis in multiple tissues.

Tsang M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Western University, Dental Science 
Building, London, ON, N6A 5C1, Canada, mtsang24@uwo.ca.

A longstanding controversy exists regarding the cellular origin of myofibroblasts
in tissue fibrosis. A recent study by Hung and colleagues (Am J Respir Crit Care 
Med 188(7):820-830, 2013) used genetic fate mapping of FoxD1 embryonic progenitor
cells to show a major and direct contribution of mesenchymal cells to
fibrogenesis in the lung. Future studies using FoxD1-specific inducible knockout 
models of pro-fibrotic genes such as CCN2 will be valuable for determining
anti-fibrotic drug targets. The emergence of pericyte-like myofibroblast
precursors also raises the question of whether mesenchymal stem cells in various 
niches contribute to fibrotic responses throughout the body.

PMCID: PMC3972387
PMID: 24318933  [PubMed]


28. Development. 2014 Jan;141(1):17-27. doi: 10.1242/dev.089078. Epub 2013 Nov 27.

FOXD1 promotes nephron progenitor differentiation by repressing decorin in the
embryonic kidney.

Fetting JL(1), Guay JA, Karolak MJ, Iozzo RV, Adams DC, Maridas DE, Brown AC,
Oxburgh L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, 81
Research Drive, Scarborough, ME 04074, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2014 Feb;10(2):65.

Forkhead transcription factors are essential for diverse processes in early
embryonic development and organogenesis. Foxd1 is required during kidney
development and its inactivation results in failure of nephron progenitor cell
differentiation. Foxd1 is expressed in interstitial cells adjacent to nephron
progenitor cells, suggesting an essential role for the progenitor cell niche in
nephrogenesis. To better understand how cortical interstitial cells in general,
and FOXD1 in particular, influence the progenitor cell niche, we examined the
differentiation states of two progenitor cell subtypes in Foxd1(-/-) tissue. We
found that although nephron progenitor cells are retained in a primitive
CITED1-expressing compartment, cortical interstitial cells prematurely
differentiate. To identify pathways regulated by FOXD1, we screened for target
genes by comparison of Foxd1 null and wild-type tissues. We found that the gene
encoding the small leucine-rich proteoglycan decorin (DCN) is repressed by FOXD1 
in cortical interstitial cells, and we show that compound genetic inactivation of
Dcn partially rescues the failure of progenitor cell differentiation in the Foxd1
null. We demonstrate that DCN antagonizes BMP/SMAD signaling, which is required
for the transition of CITED1-expressing nephron progenitor cells to a state that 
is primed for WNT-induced epithelial differentiation. On the basis of these
studies, we propose a mechanism for progenitor cell retention in the Foxd1 null
in which misexpressed DCN produced by prematurely differentiated interstitial
cells accumulates in the extracellular matrix, inhibiting BMP7-mediated
transition of nephron progenitor cells to a compartment in which they can respond
to epithelial induction signals.

PMCID: PMC3865747
PMID: 24284212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Dev Biol. 2014 Jan 15;385(2):396-404. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.11.010. Epub 2013
Nov 16.

A novel N-terminal motif is responsible for the evolution of neural
crest-specific gene-regulatory activity in vertebrate FoxD3.

Ono H(1), Kozmik Z(2), Yu JK(3), Wada H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tsukuba 305-8572, Japan. (2)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences 
of the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague 4, Czech Republic.
(3)Institute of Cellular and Organismic Biology, Academia Sinica, 128 Academia
Road, Section 2, Nankang, Taipei 11529, Taiwan; Institute of Oceanography,
National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. (4)Graduate School of Life and 
Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba 305-8572, Japan.
Electronic address: hwada@biol.tsukuba.ac.jp.

The neural crest is unique to vertebrates and has allowed the evolution of their 
complicated craniofacial structures. During vertebrate evolution, the acquisition
of the neural crest must have been accompanied by the emergence of a new gene
regulatory network (GRN). Here, to investigate the role of protein evolution in
the emergence of the neural crest GRN, we examined the neural crest cell (NCC)
differentiation-inducing activity of chordate FoxD genes. Amphioxus and
vertebrate (Xenopus) FoxD proteins both exhibited transcriptional repressor
activity in Gal4 transactivation assays and bound to similar DNA sequences in
vitro. However, whereas vertebrate FoxD3 genes induced the differentiation of
ectopic NCCs when overexpressed in chick neural tube, neither amphioxus FoxD nor 
any other vertebrate FoxD paralogs exhibited this activity. Experiments using
chimeric proteins showed that the N-terminal portion of the vertebrate FoxD3
protein is critical to its NCC differentiation-inducing activity. Furthermore,
replacement of the N-terminus of amphioxus FoxD with a 39-amino-acid segment from
zebrafish FoxD3 conferred neural crest-inducing activity on amphioxus FoxD or
zebrafish FoxD1. Therefore, fixation of this N-terminal amino acid sequence may
have been crucial in the evolutionary recruitment of FoxD3 to the vertebrate
neural crest GRN.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24252777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2014 Jan;306(2):F249-58. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00313.2013. Epub 2013 Nov 13.

RBP-J in FOXD1+ renal stromal progenitors is crucial for the proper development
and assembly of the kidney vasculature and glomerular mesangial cells.

Lin EE(1), Sequeira-Lopez ML, Gomez RA.

Author information: 
(1)MR4 Bldg. Rm. 2001, Univ. of Virginia School of Medicine, 409 Lane Rd.,
Charlottesville, VA 22908. rg@virginia.edu.

The mechanisms underlying the establishment, development, and maintenance of the 
renal vasculature are poorly understood. Here, we propose that the transcription 
factor "recombination signal binding protein for immunoglobulin kappa J region"
(RBP-J) plays a key role in the differentiation of the mural cells of the kidney 
arteries and arterioles, as well as the mesangial cells of the glomerulus.
Deletion of RBP-J in renal stromal cells of the forkhead box D1 (FOXD1) lineage, 
which differentiate into all the mural cells of the kidney arterioles along with 
mesangial cells and pericytes, resulted in significant kidney abnormalities and
mortality by day 30 postpartum (P30). In newborn mutant animals, we observed a
decrease in the total number of arteries and arterioles, along with thinner
vessel walls, and depletion of renin cells. Glomeruli displayed striking
abnormalities, including a failure of FOXD1-descendent cells to populate the
glomerulus, an absence of mesangial cells, and in some cases complete loss of
glomerular interior structure and the development of aneurysms. By P30, the
kidney malformations were accentuated by extensive secondary fibrosis and
glomerulosclerosis. We conclude that RBP-J is essential for proper formation and 
maintenance of the kidney vasculature and glomeruli.

PMCID: PMC3920017
PMID: 24226518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Curr Pathobiol Rep. 2013 Sep 1;1(3). doi: 10.1007/s40139-013-0025-8.

Myofibroblasts in Fibrotic Kidneys.

Nakagawa N(1), Duffield JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology Kidney Research Institute, Center for Lung Biology,
Institute of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, WA, USA.

Fibrosis of the kidney glomerulus and interstitium are characteristic features of
almost all chronic kidney diseases. Fibrosis is tightly associated with
destruction of capillaries, inflammation, and epithelial injury which progresses 
to loss of nephrons, and replacement of kidney parenchyma with scar tissue.
Understanding the origins and nature of the cells known as myofibroblasts that
make scar tissue is central to development of new therapeutics for kidney
disease. Whereas many cell lineages in the body have become defined by
well-established markers, myofibroblasts have been much harder to identify with
certainty. Recent insights from genetic fate mapping and the use of dynamic
reporting of cells that make fibrillar collagen in mice have identified with
greater clarity the major population of myofibroblasts and their precursors in
the kidney. This review will explore the nature of these cells in health and
disease of the kidney to underst and their central role in the pathogenesis of
kidney disease.

PMCID: PMC3810972
PMID: 24187654  [PubMed]


32. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Mar 25;385(1-2):62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.09.034. 
Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Fox tales: regulation of gonadotropin gene expression by forkhead transcription
factors.

Thackray VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine and Center for Reproductive Science and
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, United States.
Electronic address: vthackray@ucsd.edu.

Luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) are produced by
pituitary gonadotrope cells and are required for steroidogenesis, the maturation 
of ovarian follicles, ovulation, and spermatogenesis. Synthesis of LH and FSH is 
tightly regulated by a complex network of signaling pathways activated by
hormones including gonadotropin-releasing hormone, activin and sex steroids.
Members of the forkhead box (FOX) transcription factor family have been shown to 
act as important regulators of development, homeostasis and reproduction. In this
review, we focus on the role of four specific FOX factors (FOXD1, FOXL2, FOXO1
and FOXP3) in gonadotropin hormone production and discuss our current
understanding of the molecular function of these factors derived from studies in 
mouse genetic and cell culture models.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3947687
PMID: 24099863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Oct 1;188(7):765-6. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201308-1494ED.

New light is shed on the enigmatic origin of the lung myofibroblast.

Rosas IO(1), Kottmann RM, Sime PJ.

Author information: 
(1)1 Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston 
Massachusetts and Harvard Medical School Boston Massachusetts.

Erratum in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Dec 1;188(11):1378. Kottman, Robert M [corrected 
to Kottmann, Robert M].

Comment on
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Oct 1;188(7):820-30.

PMCID: PMC3826276
PMID: 24083856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Oct 1;188(7):820-30. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201212-2297OC.

Role of lung pericytes and resident fibroblasts in the pathogenesis of pulmonary 
fibrosis.

Hung C(1), Linn G, Chow YH, Kobayashi A, Mittelsteadt K, Altemeier WA, Gharib SA,
Schnapp LM, Duffield JS.

Author information: 
(1)1 Center for Lung Biology, Pulmonary and Critical Medicine.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2013 Oct 1;188(7):765-6.

RATIONALE: The origin of cells that make pathologic fibrillar collagen matrix in 
lung disease has been controversial. Recent studies suggest mesenchymal cells may
contribute directly to fibrosis.
OBJECTIVES: To characterize discrete populations of mesenchymal cells in the
normal mouse lung and to map their fate after bleomycin-induced lung injury.
METHODS: We mapped the fate of Foxd1-expressing embryonic progenitors and their
progeny during lung development, adult homeostasis, and after fibrosing injury in
Foxd1-Cre; Rs26-tdTomato-R mice. We studied collagen-I(a)1-producing cells in
normal and diseased lungs using Coll-GFP(Tg) mice.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Foxd1-expressing embryonic progenitors enter lung 
buds before 13.5 days post-conception, expand, and form an extensive lineage of
mesenchymal cells that have characteristics of pericytes. A
collagen-I(a)1-expressing mesenchymal population of distinct lineage is also
found in adult lung, with features of a resident fibroblast. In contrast to
resident fibroblasts, Foxd1 progenitor-derived pericytes are enriched in
transcripts for innate immunity, vascular development, WNT signaling pathway, and
cell migration. Foxd1 progenitor-derived pericytes expand after bleomycin lung
injury, and activate expression of collagen-I(a)1 and the myofibroblast marker
aSMA in fibrotic foci. In addition, our studies suggest a distinct lineage of
collagen-I(a)1-expressing resident fibroblasts that also expands after lung
injury is a second major source of myofibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the lung contains an extensive population of Foxd1 
progenitor-derived pericytes that are an important lung myofibroblast precursor
population.

PMCID: PMC3826269
PMID: 23924232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 18;8(6):e65993. Print 2013.

Endothelial Progenitors Exist within the Kidney and Lung Mesenchyme.

Sims-Lucas S(1), Schaefer C, Bushnell D, Ho J, Logar A, Prochownik E, Gittes G,
Bates CM.

Author information: 
(1)Rangos Research Center, Children's Hospital of Pittsburgh, University of
Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America ;
Division of Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, Children's Hospital of
Pittsburgh, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The renal endothelium has been debated as arising from resident hemangioblast
precursors that transdifferentiate from the nephrogenic mesenchyme
(vasculogenesis) and/or from invading vessels (angiogenesis). While the
Foxd1-positive renal cortical stroma has been shown to differentiate into cells
that support the vasculature in the kidney (including vascular smooth muscle and 
pericytes) it has not been considered as a source of endothelial cell
progenitors. In addition, it is unclear if Foxd1-positive mesenchymal cells in
other organs such as the lung have the potential to form endothelium. This study 
examines the potential for Foxd1-positive cells of the kidney and lung to give
rise to endothelial progenitors. We utilized immunofluorescence (IF) and
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to co-label Foxd1-expressing cells
(including permanently lineage-tagged cells) with endothelial markers in
embryonic and postnatal mice. We also cultured FACsorted Foxd1-positive cells,
performed in vitro endothelial cell tubulogenesis assays and examined for
endocytosis of acetylated low-density lipoprotein (Ac-LDL), a functional assay
for endothelial cells. Immunofluorescence and FACS revealed that a subset of
Foxd1-positive cells from kidney and lung co-expressed endothelial cell markers
throughout embryogenesis. In vitro, cultured embryonic Foxd1-positive cells were 
able to differentiate into tubular networks that expressed endothelial cell
markers and were able to endocytose Ac-LDL. IF and FACS in both the kidney and
lung revealed that lineage-tagged Foxd1-positive cells gave rise to a significant
portion of the endothelium in postnatal mice. In the kidney, the stromal-derived 
cells gave rise to a portion of the peritubular capillary endothelium, but not of
the glomerular or large vessel endothelium. These findings reveal the
heterogeneity of endothelial cell lineages; moreover, Foxd1-positive mesenchymal 
cells of the developing kidney and lung are a source of endothelial progenitors
that are likely critical to patterning the vasculature.

PMCID: PMC3688860
PMID: 23823180  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


36. J Neurosci. 2013 May 15;33(20):8596-607. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2083-12.2013.

Shh/Boc signaling is required for sustained generation of ipsilateral projecting 
ganglion cells in the mouse retina.

Sánchez-Arrones L(1), Nieto-Lopez F, Sánchez-Camacho C, Carreres MI, Herrera E,
Okada A, Bovolenta P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid 28049, Spain.

Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling is an important determinant of vertebrate retinal 
ganglion cell (RGC) development. In mice, there are two major RGC populations:
(1) the Islet2-expressing contralateral projecting (c)RGCs, which both produce
and respond to Shh; and (2) the Zic2-expressing ipsilateral projecting RGCs
(iRGCs), which lack Shh expression. In contrast to cRGCs, iRGCs, which are
generated in the ventrotemporal crescent (VTC) of the retina, specifically
express Boc, a cell adhesion molecule that acts as a high-affinity receptor for
Shh. In Boc(-/-) mutant mice, the ipsilateral projection is significantly
decreased. Here, we demonstrate that this phenotype results, at least in part,
from the misspecification of a proportion of iRGCs. In Boc(-/-) VTC, the number
of Zic2-positive RGCs is reduced, whereas more Islet2/Shh-positive RGCs are
observed, a phenotype also detected in Zic2 and Foxd1 null embryos. Consistent
with this observation, organization of retinal projections at the dorsal lateral 
geniculate nucleus is altered in Boc(-/-) mice. Analyses of the molecular and
cellular consequences of introducing Shh into the developing VTC and Zic2 and Boc
into the central retina indicate that Boc expression alone is insufficient to
fully activate the ipsilateral program and that Zic2 regulates Shh expression.
Taking these data together, we propose that expression of Boc in cells from the
VTC is required to sustain Zic2 expression, likely by regulating the levels of
Shh signaling from the nearby cRGCs. Zic2, in turn, directly or indirectly,
counteracts Shh and Islet2 expression in the VTC and activates the ipsilateral
program.

PMCID: PMC3827538
PMID: 23678105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52156. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052156. Epub 2012 Dec 19.

The forkhead transcription factor, Foxd1, is necessary for pituitary luteinizing 
hormone expression in mice.

Gumbel JH(1), Patterson EM, Owusu SA, Kabat BE, Jung DO, Simmons J, Hopkins T,
Ellsworth BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois, 
USA.

The pituitary gland regulates numerous physiological functions including growth, 
reproduction, temperature and metabolic homeostasis, lactation, and response to
stress. Pituitary organogenesis is dependent on signaling factors that are
produced in and around the developing pituitary. The studies described in this
report reveal that the forkhead transcription factor, Foxd1, is not expressed in 
the developing mouse pituitary gland, but rather in the mesenchyme surrounding
the pituitary gland, which is an essential source of signaling factors that
regulate pituitary organogenesis. Loss of Foxd1 causes a morphological defect in 
which the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland protrudes through the cartilage
plate that is developing ventral to the pituitary at embryonic days (e)14.5,
e16.5, and e18.5. The number of proliferating pituitary cells is increased at
e14.5 and e16.5. Loss of Foxd1 also results in significantly decreased levels of 
Lhb expression at e18.5. This decrease in Lhb expression does not appear to be
due to a change in the number of gonadotrope cells in the pituitary gland.
Previous studies have shown that loss of the LIM homeodomain factor, Lhx3, which 
is activated by the FGF signaling pathway, results in loss of LH production.
Although there is a difference in Lhb expression in Foxd1 null mice, the
expression pattern of LHX3 is not altered in Foxd1 null mice. These studies
suggest that Foxd1 is indirectly required for normal Lhb expression and cartilage
formation.

PMCID: PMC3526578
PMID: 23284914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Bone. 2013 Mar;53(1):194-203. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2012.12.008. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Glast-expressing progenitor cells contribute to heterotopic ossification.

Kan L(1), Peng CY, McGuire TL, Kessler JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg Medical School, 303 
East Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. l-kan@northwestern.edu

Heterotopic ossification (HO), acquired or hereditary, is the formation of true
bone outside the normal skeleton. Although the lineages of cells contributing to 
bone formation during normal development are well defined, the precise lineages
of cells that contribute to HO are not clear. This study utilized Cre-lox based
genetic lineage tracing to examine the contribution to HO of cells that expressed
either FoxD1 or Glast. Both lineages contributed broadly to different normal
tissues, and FoxD1-cre labeled cells contributed to normal bone formation.
Despite the similarity in labeling patterns of normal tissues, and the
significant contribution of FoxD1-cre labeled cells to normal bone, only
Glast-creERT labeled progenitors contributed significantly to HO at all stages,
suggesting that the cell populations that normally contribute to physiological
bone formation, such as the Foxd1-cre labeled cells, may not participate in
pathological HO. Further, identification of Glast-expressing cells as precursors 
that give rise to HO should help with the molecular targeting of this population 
both for the prevention and for the treatment of HO.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3793345
PMID: 23262027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41146. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041146. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

Androgen-responsive microRNAs in mouse Sertoli cells.

Panneerdoss S(1), Chang YF, Buddavarapu KC, Chen HI, Shetty G, Wang H, Chen Y,
Kumar TR, Rao MK.

Author information: 
(1)Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute, The University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, United States of America.

Although decades of research have established that androgen is essential for
spermatogenesis, androgen's mechanism of action remains elusive. This is in part 
because only a few androgen-responsive genes have been definitively identified in
the testis. Here, we propose that microRNAs--small, non-coding RNAs--are one
class of androgen-regulated trans-acting factors in the testis. Specifically, by 
using androgen suppression and androgen replacement in mice, we show that
androgen regulates the expression of several microRNAs in Sertoli cells. Our
results reveal that several of these microRNAs are preferentially expressed in
the testis and regulate genes that are highly expressed in Sertoli cells. Because
androgen receptor-mediated signaling is essential for the pre- and post-meiotic
germ cell development, we propose that androgen controls these events by
regulating Sertoli/germ cell-specific gene expression in a microRNA-dependent
manner.

PMCID: PMC3401116
PMID: 22911753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Jul 20;212(2):212-21. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2012.05.023. Epub 
2012 Jun 5.

Maternal exposure to di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate alters kidney development through
the renin-angiotensin system in offspring.

Wei Z(1), Song L, Wei J, Chen T, Chen J, Lin Y, Xia W, Xu B, Li X, Chen X, Li Y, 
Xu S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Environment and Health, Ministry of Education, School of
Public Health, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

Di-(2-ethylhexyl)phthalate (DEHP) is a widely used industrial plasticizer to
which humans are widely exposed. We investigated the consequences of maternal
exposure to DEHP on nephron formation, examined the programming of renal function
and blood pressure and explored the mechanism in offspring. Maternal rats were
treated with vehicle, 0.25 and 6.25mg/kg body weight/day DEHP respectively from
gestation day 0 to postnatal day 21. Maternal DEHP exposure resulted in lower
number of nephrons, higher glomerular volume and smaller Bowman's capsule in the 
DEHP-treated offspring at weaning, as well as glomerulosclerosis, interstitial
fibrosis and effacement of podocyte foot processes in adulthood. In the
DEHP-treated offspring, the renal function was lower and the blood pressure was
higher. The renal protein expression of renin and angiotensin II was reduced at
birth day and increased at weaning. Maternal DEHP exposure also led to reduced
mRNA expression of some renal development involved genes at birth day, including 
Foxd1, Gdnf, Pax2 and Wnt11. While, the mRNA expression of some genes was raised,
including Bmp4, Cdh11, Calm1 and Ywhab. These data show that maternal DEHP
exposure impairs the offspring renal development, resulting in a nephron deficit,
and subsequently elevated blood pressure later in life. Our findings suggest that
DEHP exposure in developmental periods may affect the development of nephrons and
adult renal disease through inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22677342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23410. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023410. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

Hox10 genes function in kidney development in the differentiation and integration
of the cortical stroma.

Yallowitz AR(1), Hrycaj SM, Short KM, Smyth IM, Wellik DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of America.

Organogenesis requires the differentiation and integration of distinct
populations of cells to form a functional organ. In the kidney, reciprocal
interactions between the ureter and the nephrogenic mesenchyme are required for
organ formation. Additionally, the differentiation and integration of stromal
cells are also necessary for the proper development of this organ. Much remains
to be understood regarding the origin of cortical stromal cells and the pathways 
involved in their formation and function. By generating triple mutants in the
Hox10 paralogous group genes, we demonstrate that Hox10 genes play a critical
role in the developing kidney. Careful examination of control kidneys show that
Foxd1-expressing stromal precursor cells are first observed in a cap-like pattern
anterior to the metanephric mesenchyme and these cells subsequently integrate
posteriorly into the kidney periphery as development proceeds. While the initial 
cap-like pattern of Foxd1-expressing cortical stromal cells is unaffected in
Hox10 mutants, these cells fail to become properly integrated into the kidney,
and do not differentiate to form the kidney capsule. Consistent with loss of
cortical stromal cell function, Hox10 mutant kidneys display reduced and aberrant
ureter branching, decreased nephrogenesis. These data therefore provide critical 
novel insights into the cellular and genetic mechanisms governing cortical cell
development during kidney organogenesis. These results, combined with previous
evidence demonstrating that Hox11 genes are necessary for patterning the
metanephric mesenchyme, support a model whereby distinct populations in the
nephrogenic cord are regulated by unique Hox codes, and that differential Hox
function along the AP axis of the nephrogenic cord is critical for the
differentiation and integration of these cell types during kidney organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3156768
PMID: 21858105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Biol Cell. 2011 Jul 1;22(13):2409-21. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E10-12-0932. Epub 2011
May 5.

Focal adhesion kinase protein regulates Wnt3a gene expression to control cell
fate specification in the developing neural plate.

Fonar Y(1), Gutkovich YE, Root H, Malyarova A, Aamar E, Golubovskaya VM, Elias S,
Elkouby YM, Frank D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Rappaport Family Institute for Research in the
Medical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology,
Haifa 31096, Israel.

Focal adhesion kinase (FAK) is a cytoplasmic tyrosine kinase protein localized to
regions called focal adhesions, which are contact points between cells and the
extracellular matrix. FAK protein acts as a scaffold to transfer
adhesion-dependent and growth factor signals into the cell. Increased FAK
expression is linked to aggressive metastatic and invasive tumors. However,
little is known about its normal embryonic function. FAK protein knockdown during
early Xenopus laevis development anteriorizes the embryo. Morphant embryos
express increased levels of anterior neural markers, with reciprocally reduced
posterior neural marker expression. Posterior neural plate folding and
convergence-extension is also inhibited. This anteriorized phenotype resembles
that of embryos knocked down zygotically for canonical Wnt signaling. FAK and
Wnt3a genes are both expressed in the neural plate, and Wnt3a expression is FAK
dependent. Ectopic Wnt expression rescues this FAK morphant anteriorized
phenotype. Wnt3a thus acts downstream of FAK to balance anterior-posterior cell
fate specification in the developing neural plate. Wnt3a gene expression is also 
FAK dependent in human breast cancer cells, suggesting that this FAK-Wnt linkage 
is highly conserved. This unique observation connects the FAK- and Wnt-signaling 
pathways, both of which act to promote cancer when aberrantly activated in
mammalian cells.

PMCID: PMC3128541
PMID: 21551070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Neurosci. 2011 Apr 13;31(15):5673-81. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0394-11.2011.

Transcription factor Foxd1 is required for the specification of the temporal
retina in mammals.

Carreres MI(1), Escalante A, Murillo B, Chauvin G, Gaspar P, Vegar C, Herrera E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas y 
Universidad Miguel Hernández, Campus San Juan de Alicante, 03550 Alicante, Spain.

The organization of the visual system is different in birds and mammals. In both,
retinal axons project topographically to the visual targets in the brain; but
whereas in birds visual fibers from the entire retina decussate at the optic
chiasm, in mammals, a number of axons from the temporal retina diverge at the
midline to project ipsilaterally. Gain-of-function experiments in chick raised
the hypothesis that the transcription factor Foxd1 specifies retinal temporal
identity. However, it remains unknown whether Foxd1 is necessary for this
function. In mammals, the crucial role of Foxd1 in the patterning of the optic
chiasm region has complicated the interpretation of its cell-autonomous function 
in the retina. Furthermore, target molecules identified for Foxd1 are different
in chicks and mice, leading to question the function of Foxd1 in mammals. Here we
show that in the mouse, Foxd1 imprints temporal features in the retina such as
axonal ipsilaterality and rostral targeting in collicular areas and that EphA6 is
a Foxd1 downstream effector that sends temporal axons to the rostral colliculus. 
In addition, our data support a model in which the desensitization of EphA6 by
ephrinA5 in cis is not necessary for the proper functioning of EphA6. Overall,
these results indicate that Foxd1 functions as a conserved determinant of
temporal identity but reveal that the downstream effectors, and likely their
mechanisms of action, are different in mammals and birds.

PMID: 21490208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2011 May;20(3):297-305. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0b013e328344c3d4.

Mechanisms of fibrosis: the role of the pericyte.

Schrimpf C(1), Duffield JS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Inflammation Research, Renal Division, Department of Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Until recently kidney pericytes were little known. This review
will update readers about key new findings concerning pericyte abundance,
function in kidney vascular biology and major role in fibrogenesis. Moreover
readers will become familiar with the central role of pericyte-endothelial
interactions in peritubular capillary health or rarefaction and the pivotal role 
these may play in renal ischemia.
RECENT FINDINGS: Pericytes are stromal cells that partially cover capillary
walls. Pericytes were recently identified as collagen-1a1 producing cells in
healthy adult kidney. Kinetic mathematical modeling studies indicated they were
the source of scar-forming myofibroblasts. Comprehensive fate mapping of kidney
stroma confirmed that pericytes and perivascular fibroblasts, not epithelium,
were the major source of myofibroblasts. Blockade of pericyte-endothelial
cross-talk in response to renal injury prevents both microvascular rarefaction
and interstitial fibrosis. The detachment of pericytes from endothelium under
pathological conditions and differentiation into myofibroblasts leads to pericyte
deficiency at the microvascular interstitial interface, resulting in unstable
microvasculature and thence vessel rarefaction, ultimately leading to nephron
ischemia. To develop new therapeutic strategies, a better understanding of not
only pericyte detachment and migration from capillaries, but also
pericyte-endothelial crosstalk in health and injury is required.
SUMMARY: This review summarizes the functional role of pericytes during fibrosis,
focusing on myofibroblast origins and pericyte-endothelial cross-talk.

PMID: 21422927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Pediatr Nephrol. 2011 Sep;26(9):1395-406. doi: 10.1007/s00467-010-1750-4. Epub
2011 Jan 14.

Defining and redefining the nephron progenitor population.

Hendry C(1), Rumballe B, Moritz K, Little MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
4072, Australia.

It has long been appreciated that the mammalian kidney arises via reciprocal
interactions between an epithelial ureteric epithelium and the surrounding
metanephric mesenchyme. More recently, lineage tracing has confirmed that the
portion of the metanephric mesenchyme closest to the advancing ureteric tips, the
cap mesenchyme, represents the progenitor population for the nephron epithelia.
This Six2(+)Cited1(+) population undergoes self-renewal throughout nephrogenesis 
while retaining the potential to epithelialize. In contrast, the Foxd1(+) portion
of the metanephric mesenchyme shows no epithelial potential, developing instead
into the interstitial, perivascular, and possibly endothelial elements of the
kidney. The cap mesenchyme rests within a nephrogenic niche, surrounded by the
stroma and the ureteric tip. While the role of Wnt signaling in nephron induction
is known, there remains a lack of clarity over the intrinsic and extrinsic
regulation of cap mesenchyme specification, self-renewal, and nephron potential. 
It is also not known what regulates cessation of nephrogenesis, but there is no
nephron generation in response to injury during the postnatal period. In this
review, we will examine what is and is not known about this nephron progenitor
population and discuss how an increased understanding of the regulation of this
population may better explain the observed variation in final nephron number and 
potentially facilitate the reinitiation or prolongation of nephron formation.

PMCID: PMC3189495
PMID: 21229268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Kidney Int. 2011 Mar;79(5):494-501. doi: 10.1038/ki.2010.338. Epub 2010 Sep 22.

Origin of new cells in the adult kidney: results from genetic labeling
techniques.

Duffield JS(1), Humphreys BD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Renal Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. bhumphreys@partners.org

For nearly 100 years, developmental biologists have utilized fate mapping to
understand the contributions of progenitor populations to organogenesis. More
recently, Cre-Lox technology has allowed genetic fate mapping in adult mice,
clarifying cell hierarchies in adult kidney disease models. In
ischemia-reperfusion injury, genetic labeling of epithelial cells has
demonstrated that intrinsic epithelial cells are responsible for nephron repair
and not an interstitial or other non-epithelial cell type. In fibrotic kidney
injury, fate mapping techniques have strongly challenged the theory that
epithelial cells traverse the basement membrane to become myofibroblasts in a
process of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and also indicate that
interstitial pericytes/perivascular fibroblasts are the authentic myofibroblast
progenitor pool. This mini review will summarize the fate mapping approach in
mice, convey recent developments in kidney disease models, and outline future
opportunities to apply this technology to better understand the cellular
mechanisms of adult kidney homeostasis and disease.

PMID: 20861816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Physiol Genomics. 2010 Oct;42A(2):114-30. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00065.2010. Epub 2010 Jul 27.

Discovery and characterization of nutritionally regulated genes associated with
muscle growth in Atlantic salmon.

Bower NI(1), Johnston IA.

Author information: 
(1)Scottish Oceans Institute, School of Biology, University of St Andrews, St
Andrews, Fife, United Kingdom. nib@st-andrews.ac.uk

A genomics approach was used to identify nutritionally regulated genes involved
in growth of fast skeletal muscle in Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar L.). Forward
and reverse subtractive cDNA libraries were prepared comparing fish with zero
growth rates to fish growing rapidly. We produced 7,420 ESTs and assembled them
into nonredundant clusters prior to annotation. Contigs representing 40
potentially unrecognized nutritionally responsive candidate genes were
identified. Twenty-three of the subtractive library candidates were also
differentially regulated by nutritional state in an independent fasting-refeeding
experiment and their expression placed in the context of 26 genes with
established roles in muscle growth regulation. The expression of these genes was 
also determined during the maturation of a primary myocyte culture, identifying
13 candidates from the subtractive cDNA libraries with putative roles in the
myogenic program. During early stages of refeeding DNAJA4, HSPA1B, HSP90A, and
CHAC1 expression increased, indicating activation of unfolded protein response
pathways. Four genes were considered inhibitory to myogenesis based on their in
vivo and in vitro expression profiles (CEBPD, ASB2, HSP30, novel transcript
GE623928). Other genes showed increased expression with feeding and highest in
vitro expression during the proliferative phase of the culture (FOXD1, DRG1) or
as cells differentiated (SMYD1, RTN1, MID1IP1, HSP90A, novel transcript
GE617747). The genes identified were associated with chromatin modification
(SMYD1, RTN1), microtubule stabilization (MID1IP1), cell cycle regulation (FOXD1,
CEBPD, DRG1), and negative regulation of signaling (ASB2) and may play a role in 
the stimulation of myogenesis during the transition from a catabolic to anabolic 
state in skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC2957792
PMID: 20663983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Differentiation. 2010 Apr-Jun;79(4-5):272-84. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2010.01.004.
Epub 2010 Feb 18.

Redirection of renal mesenchyme to stromal and chondrocytic fates in the presence
of TGF-beta2.

Sims-Lucas S(1), Young RJ, Martinez G, Taylor D, Grimmond SM, Teasdale R, Little 
MH, Bertram JF, Caruana G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, School of Biomedical
Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.

Many members of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily have
been shown to be important regulators of metanephric development. In this study, 
we characterized the effect of TGF-beta2 on metanephric development. Rat and
mouse metanephroi cultured in the presence of exogenous TGF-beta2 for up to 15
days were small, and contained rudimentary ureteric branches and few glomeruli.
These metanephroi were mostly comprised of mesenchymal cells, with two cell
populations (designated Type 1 and Type 2 cells) evident. Type 1 cells were only 
observed when TGF-beta2 was added from the commencement of culture, they
resembled chondroblasts and were Alcian Blue and Col IIB positive. Type 2 cells
were observed whenever TGF-beta2 was added to the media, formed a band at the
periphery of the explants consisting of 5-10 layers of spindle-shaped cells, and 
were alpha-smooth muscle actin positive. Molecular and RNA in situ hybridization 
analysis of metanephroi cultured in the presence of TGF-beta2 for 6 days
demonstrated that Type 1 and 2 cells were negative for Pax2, WT1, GDNF and FoxD1.
Gene expression profiling demonstrated an upregulation of chondrocyte, myogenic
and stromal genes, some of which were identified as markers of Type 1 and Type 2 
cells. In addition, TGF-beta2 was capable of maintaining the survival of mouse
isolated metanephric mesenchyme (iMM) in the absence of serum or inductive
signals from the ureteric epithelium. TGF-beta2 also induced the differentiation 
of iMM into Type 1 and 2 cells. The presence of chondrocytes and muscle in these 
cultures is reminiscent of the cell types found in some Wilms' tumors. These
studies demonstrate that TGF-beta2 is capable of differentiating metanephric
mesenchyme away from a renal cell fate.

PMID: 20163909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2010 Apr;3(2):187-98. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.109.904813. Epub 2010 Feb 2.

Human tyrosine hydroxylase natural genetic variation: delineation of functional
transcriptional control motifs disrupted in the proximal promoter.

Zhang K(1), Zhang L, Rao F, Brar B, Rodriguez-Flores JL, Taupenot L, O'Connor DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, Center for Human Genetics and
Genomics, University of California at San Diego, USA.

BACKGROUND: Tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) is the rate-limiting enzyme in
catecholamine biosynthesis. Common genetic variation at the human TH promoter
predicts alterations in autonomic activity and blood pressure, but how such
variation influences human traits and, specifically, whether such variation
affects transcription are not yet known.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Pairwise linkage disequilibrium across the TH locus
indicated that common promoter variants (C-824T, G-801C, A-581G, and G-494A) were
located in a single 5' linkage disequilibrium block in white, black, Hispanic,
and Asian populations. Polymorphisms C-824T and A-581G were located in highly
conserved regions and were predicted to disrupt known transcriptional control
motifs myocyte enhancer factor-2 (MEF2), sex-determining region Y (SRY), and
forkhead box D1 (FOXD1) at C-824T and G/C-rich binding factors specificity
protein 1 (SP1), activating enhancer-binding protein 2 (AP2)], early growth
response protein 1 (EGR1) at A-581G. At C-824T and A-581G, promoter and
luciferase reporter plasmids indicated differential allele strength (T>C at
C-824T; G>A at A-581G) under both basal circumstances and secretory stimulation. 
C-824T and A-581G displayed the most pronounced effects on both transcription in 
cella and catecholamine secretion in vivo. We further probed the functional
significance of C-824T and A-581G by cotransfection of trans-activating factors
in cella; MEF2, SRY, and FOXD1 differentially activated C-824T, whereas the
G/C-rich binding factors SP1, AP2, and EGR1 differentially activated A-581G. At
C-824T, factor MEF2 acted in a directionally coordinate fashion (at T>C) to
explain the in vivo trait associations, whereas at A-581G, factors SP1, AP2, and 
EGR1 displayed similar differential actions (at G>A). Finally, chromatin
immunoprecipitation demonstrated that the endogenous factors bound to the motifs 
in cella.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that common genetic variants in the proximal TH
promoter, especially at C-824T and A-581G, are functional in cella and alter
transcription so as to explain promoter marker-on-trait associations in vivo.
MEF2, FOXD1, and SRY contribute to functional differences in C-824T expression,
whereas SP1, AP2, and EGR1 mediate those of A-581G. The SRY effect on TH
transcription suggests a mechanism whereby male and female sex may differ in
sympathetic activity and hence blood pressure. These results point to new
strategies for diagnostic and therapeutic intervention into disorders of human
autonomic function and their cardiovascular consequences.

PMCID: PMC3064953
PMID: 20124442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Oncol Res. 2009;18(2-3):47-56.

Identification of genes with differential expression in chemoresistant epithelial
ovarian cancer using high-density oligonucleotide microarrays.

Ju W(1), Yoo BC, Kim IJ, Kim JW, Kim SC, Lee HP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Medical Research Institute,
College of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul, South Korea.
goodmorning@ewha.ac.kr

A major obstacle in treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer is chemoresistance.
The aim of this study was to determine whether distinct gene expression profiles 
are associated with chemoresistance in epithelial ovarian carcinoma. We performed
global gene expression analysis in 13 primary epithelial ovarian cancer tissues
including 5 primary chemosensitive tumors and 8 primary chemoresistant tumors
using Affymetrix HGU133A microarray. The gene expression patterns of
chemosensitive tumors were compared with those of chemoresistant tumors using
fold change. Validity of microarray results was examined by semiquantitative
RT-PCR. We identified over 320 genes differentially expressed in chemoresistant
epithelial ovarian cancer (> or = twofold). Upregulated genes in chemoresistant
tumors included cell cycle regulating genes (TOP2A, BCAT1, CDCA8, CCNA2, CENPE), 
and genes with previously known mechanisms in tumorigenesis (S100A9, APOA1,
RNF125, IFI16). Downregulated genes in chemoresistant tumors included genes
related to cell adhesion (MUC5B, CITED2), transcription regulating genes (FOXD1, 
MAD1L1, PAX2), genes involving signal transduction (SOSTDC1, SNX1, SFRP1, FOXA2, 
PLK2), and stress protein gene (TP53AP1). These data show that gene expression
profiling can discriminate primary chemoresistant from primary chemosensitive
ovarian cancers. This type of molecular profiling could provide a basis for
additional functional studies.

PMID: 20066894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Syndromol. 2010;1(5):255-261. Epub 2011 May 18.

FOXD1 Duplication Causes Branchial Defects and Interacts with the TFAP2A Gene
Implicated in the Branchio-Oculo-Facial Syndrome in Causing Eye Effects in
Zebrafish.

Balikova I(1), Devriendt K, Fryns JP, Vermeesch JR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Catholic University Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Branchio-oculo-facial syndrome (BOFS) is a rare disorder characterized by
maldevelopment of the first and second branchial arches, skin defects, facial
dysmorphism, auricular, ophthalmological and oral abnormalities. A high clinical 
variability has been reported. Recently, mutations in TFAP2A were found to
underlie this condition. A small duplication on 5q13 was detected in 2 family
members with mild BOFS features. Molecular cytogenetic delineation of the
duplication demonstrated that only 7 genes are affected: LOC100289045, RGNEF,
UTP15, ANKRA2, FUNDC2P1, BTF3 and FOXD1. The latter is expressed in the
developing branchial arches and involved in cranio-facial development. Zebrafish 
embryos with combined inhibition of the expression of foxd1l and tfap2a show
optic axis defects. We identified a novel locus associated with a mild BOFS-like 
phenotype. The functional in vivo experiments suggest an interaction between
FOXD1 and TFAP2A.

PMCID: PMC3214949
PMID: 22140378  [PubMed]


52. Am J Pathol. 2010 Jan;176(1):85-97. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090517. Epub 2009
Dec 11.

Fate tracing reveals the pericyte and not epithelial origin of myofibroblasts in 
kidney fibrosis.

Humphreys BD(1), Lin SL, Kobayashi A, Hudson TE, Nowlin BT, Bonventre JV,
Valerius MT, McMahon AP, Duffield JS.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Division, Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Pathol. 2010 Jan;176(1):22-4.

Understanding the origin of myofibroblasts in kidney is of great interest because
these cells are responsible for scar formation in fibrotic kidney disease. Recent
studies suggest epithelial cells are an important source of myofibroblasts
through a process described as the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition; however,
confirmatory studies in vivo are lacking. To quantitatively assess the
contribution of renal epithelial cells to myofibroblasts, we used Cre/Lox
techniques to genetically label and fate map renal epithelia in models of kidney 
fibrosis. Genetically labeled primary proximal epithelial cells cultured in vitro
from these mice readily induce markers of myofibroblasts after transforming
growth factor beta(1) treatment. However, using either red fluorescent protein or
beta-galactosidase as fate markers, we found no evidence that epithelial cells
migrate outside of the tubular basement membrane and differentiate into
interstitial myofibroblasts in vivo. Thus, although renal epithelial cells can
acquire mesenchymal markers in vitro, they do not directly contribute to
interstitial myofibroblast cells in vivo. Lineage analysis shows that during
nephrogenesis, FoxD1-positive((+)) mesenchymal cells give rise to adult CD73(+), 
platelet derived growth factor receptor beta(+), smooth muscle actin-negative
interstitial pericytes, and these FoxD1-derivative interstitial cells expand and 
differentiate into smooth muscle actin(+) myofibroblasts during fibrosis,
accounting for a large majority of myofibroblasts. These data indicate that
therapeutic strategies directly targeting pericyte differentiation in vivo may
productively impact fibrotic kidney disease.

PMCID: PMC2797872
PMID: 20008127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 24;4(9):e7166. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007166.

Regulation of adipose tissue stromal cells behaviors by endogenic Oct4 expression
control.

Kim JH(1), Jee MK, Lee SY, Han TH, Kim BS, Kang KS, Kang SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biotechnology, Seoul National University, Seoul,
Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: To clarify the role of the POU domain transcription factor Oct4 in
Adipose Tissue Stromal Cells (ATSCs), we investigated the regulation of Oct4
expression and other embryonic genes in fully differentiated cells, in addition
to identifying expression at the gene and protein levels. The ATSCs and several
immature cells were routinely expressing Oct4 protein before and after
differentiating into specific lineages.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS AND CONCLUSIONS: Here, we demonstrated the role of
Oct4 in ATSCs on cell proliferation and differentiation. Exogenous Oct4 improves 
adult ATSCs cell proliferation and differentiation potencies through epigenetic
reprogramming of stemness genes such as Oct4, Nanog, Sox2, and Rex1. Oct4
directly or indirectly induces ATSCs reprogramming along with the activation of
JAK/STAT3 and ERK1/2. Exogenic Oct4 introduced a transdifferentiation priority
into the neural lineage than mesodermal lineage. Global gene expression analysis 
results showed that Oct4 regulated target genes which could be characterized as
differentially regulated genes such as pluripotency markers NANOG, SOX2, and KLF4
and markers of undifferentiated stem cells FOXD1, CDC2, and EPHB1. The negatively
regulated genes included FAS, TNFR, COL6A1, JAM2, FOXQ1, FOXO1, NESTIN, SMAD3,
SLIT3, DKK1, WNT5A, BMP1, and GLIS3 which are implicated in differentiation
processes as well as a number of novel genes. Finally we have demonstrated the
therapeutic utility of Oct4/ATSCs were introduced into the mouse traumatic brain,
engrafted cells was more effectively induces regeneration activity with high
therapeutic modality than that of control ATSCs. Engrafted Oct4/ATSCs efficiently
migrated and transdifferentiated into action potential carrying, functionally
neurons in the hippocampus and promoting the amelioration of lesion cavities.

PMCID: PMC2747014
PMID: 19777066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genes Immun. 2009 Oct;10(7):616-23. doi: 10.1038/gene.2009.52. Epub 2009 Jul 23.

Identification and analysis of the human CD160 promoter: implication of a
potential AML-1 binding site in promoter activation.

Schmitt C(1), Ghazi B, Bellier F, Bensussan A.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U976, Paris, France. christian.schmitt@inserm.fr

CD160 is a glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored multimer expressed at the cell
surface of subsets of cytotoxic T-lymphocytes and natural killer cells. Although 
CD160 is an important molecule for the control of cell-mediated cytotoxic
responses, the mechanisms of regulation of its expression is unknown. We
investigated the regulation of CD160 transcription by localizing and analyzing
its promoter. The CD160 gene is encoded on chromosome 1, contains 6 exons with
the translation initiation codon in exon 3. Bioinformatics analysis pointed to
three potential promoter regions, two upstream of exon 1 and one in front of exon
3. RACE-PCR analysis identified a single transcription start site (TSS) and
reporter gene transfections localized the active region immediately upstream of
exon 1. Sequential deletion analysis led to the identification of a 371 bp
sequence, located between -314 and +57 relative to the TSS, as the core promoter 
sequence driving CD160 gene transcription. Sequence alignment of the mouse and
human CD160 genomic promoter region revealed a strong homology in the 371 bp
sequence identified and pointed out to three conserved transcription factor
binding sites for acute myelogenous leukemia-1 (AML-1), FREAC-4 and Sox17.
Site-directed mutagenesis showed that the predicted AML-1 site is essential for
the regulation of CD160 gene expression.

PMID: 19626042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dev Biol. 2009 Jul 15;331(2):300-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.549. Epub 2009 
May 18.

Functional mode of FoxD1/CBF2 for the establishment of temporal retinal
specificity in the developing chick retina.

Takahashi H(1), Sakuta H, Shintani T, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Basic Biology, Higashiyama, Myodaiji-cho, Okazaki,
Japan.

Two winged-helix transcription factors, FoxG1 (previously called chick brain
factor1, CBF1) and FoxD1 (chick brain factor2, CBF2), are expressed specifically 
in the nasal and temporal regions of the developing chick retina, respectively.
We previously demonstrated that FoxG1 controls the expression of topographic
molecules including FoxD1, and determines the regional specificity of the nasal
retina. FoxD1 is known to prescribe temporal specificity, however, molecular
mechanisms and downstream targets have not been elucidated. Here we addressed the
genetic mechanisms for establishing temporal specificity in the developing retina
using an in ovo electroporation technique. Fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) and Wnt
first play pivotal roles in inducing the region-specific expression of FoxG1 and 
FoxD1 in the optic vesicle. Misexpression of FoxD1 represses the expression of
FoxG1, GH6, SOHo1, and ephrin-A5, and induces that of EphA3 in the retina. GH6
and SOHo1 repress the expression of FoxD1. In contrast to the inhibitory effect
of FoxG1 on bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling, FoxD1 does not alter the
expression of BMP4 or BMP2. Studies with chimeric mutants of FoxD1 showed that
FoxD1 acts as a transcription repressor in controlling its downstream targets in 
the retina. Taken together with previous findings, our data suggest that FoxG1
and FoxD1 are located at the top of the gene cascade for regional specification
along the nasotemporal (anteroposterior) axis in the retina, and FoxD1 determines
temporal specificity.

PMID: 19450575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Differentiation. 2009 Feb;77(2):199-208. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2008.10.007. Epub
2008 Nov 21.

Lumbo-sacral neural crest derivatives fate mapped with the aid of Wnt-1 promoter 
integrate but are not essential to kidney development.

Itäranta P(1), Viiri K, Kaartinen V, Vainio S.

Author information: 
(1)Oulu Center of Cell-Matrix Research, Biocenter Oulu, Laboratory of
Developmental Biology and Institute of Biomedicine, University of Oulu, Aapistie 
5A, PO Box 5000, FIN-90220 Oulu, Finland.

Neural crest (NC) cells may be involved in kidney organogenesis by providing
inductive signals and contributing to cells of the renal stroma. We show here
that the lumbo-sacral NC cells fate mapped with the aid of Wnt-1 promoter in the 
mouse migrate close to the metanephros at the initiation of organogenesis but
these cells remain superficial to the condensed Pax2-expressing mesenchymal
cells. NC-derived cells enter later into the kidney proper from the midline
region. The NC cells contribute also to development of the extra-adrenal
para-aortic bodies, Zuckerkandl's bodies and the nerve cord of the sympathetic
nervous system. Splotch (Sp(2H)/Sp(2H)) embryos, having a NC defect in the
lumbo-sacral region, develop a normal metanephros even though the kidney does not
express the NC markers Sox10, Phox2b and tyrosine hydroxylase. Consistent with
the histological findings, the kidneys of Sp(2H)/Sp(2H) embryos also express the 
stromal genes Foxd1, Hoxa10 and RARbeta normally. Wnt-1 promoter-marked wild-type
LacZ NC cells migrate intensely from the heterologous inducer tissue of the
embryonic dorsal spinal cord (SPC) to the kidney mesenchyme, but tubule induction
does not depend on NC migration, since the Sp(2H)/Sp(2H) SPC also induces
tubulogenesis. The Sp(2H)/Sp(2H) mesenchyme also remains competent for
tubulogenesis. We conclude that the NC cells fate mapped with the aid of Wnt-1
promoter migrate to the close to the metanephros and form later derivatives
integrating with the kidney, but they may not be essential to the development of 
the stromal cells nor they may provide critical morphogenetic signals to regulate
early kidney development in vivo.

PMID: 19281780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. BJU Int. 2009 Jun;103(11):1574-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2009.08351.x. Epub
2009 Feb 11.

Gene expression of forkhead transcription factors in the normal and diseased
human prostate.

van der Heul-Nieuwenhuijsen L(1), Dits NF, Jenster G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE To assess the expression of forkhead transcription factors (FOX) in
normal prostate and prostate diseases, as since the first FOX was identified, its
family members have been implicated in a variety of cellular processes, including
embryonic development and disease. MATERIAL AND METHODS We analysed a set of 12
different FOX genes by quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction in prostate zones, prostate cancer, lymph node metastases, benign
prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), xenografts and several prostate cell lines. RESULTS 
There were striking differences among the expression of various FOX family
members; most prominent were the high expression of FOXF1 and FOXF2 in the normal
prostate transition zone and BPH, and their decreased expression in prostate
cancer. Interestingly, although the FOXF genes are stroma-specific, some of the
androgen-independent prostate cancer xenografts uniquely express these two genes.
FOXD1 and FOXD2 were more highly expressed in prostate cancer and lymph node
metastases. FOXA1 and FOXC1 have an opposite expression pattern for
androgen-dependent growth of prostate cancer cell lines and xenografts.
CONCLUSIONS Various members of the FOX family are differentially expressed in the
zones of the normal prostate and in benign and malignant outgrowths. The
expression profiles of FOXF1 and FOXF2 suggest a role in epithelial to
mesenchymal transition, while FOXA1 and FOXC1 expression is linked to
androgen-associated growth status of cancer.

PMID: 19220249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Neurochem Res. 2009 Aug;34(8):1380-92. doi: 10.1007/s11064-009-9918-7. Epub 2009 
Feb 4.

Lentiviral transfection of ependymal primary cultures facilitates the
characterisation of kinocilia-specific promoters.

Kowtharapu BS(1), Vincent FC, Bubis A, Verleysdonk S.

Author information: 
(1)Interfaculty Institute for Biochemistry, University of Tuebingen,
Hoppe-Seyler-Str. 4, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.

Ependymal primary cultures (EPCs) are an established model for studying ependymal
cell biochemistry and the biology of kinocilia-bearing cells. However, the
difficulty in causing them to express transgenes at high efficiency has been an
important drawback of the system. Indeed plasmid-based transfection attempts
remain at an efficiency below 1% and fail to elicit reporter gene expression,
namely green fluorescent protein (GFP) synthesis, in any of the kinocilia-bearing
cells of the cultures. Human immunodeficiency virus pseudotyped with the
vesicular stomatitis virus envelope glycoprotein (HIV/VSV-G) and encoding GFP
under the control of the ubiquitously recognised promoter of elongation factor 1 
alpha (EF1alpha) also does not cause transgene expression in the
kinocilia-bearing cells of an EPC when applied at multiplicities of infection
(MOIs) of up to 40 and destroys the culture when the MOI is increased further. In
contrast, HIV/VSV-G encoding GFP under the control of a promoter specifically
active in kinocilia-bearing cells leads to transgene expression in up to 79% of
the kinociliated cells of an EPC when applied at an MOI of 20. This has permitted
the initial characterisation of the promoter for the gene specifically
transcribed in kinocilia-bearing cells, wdr16. The results have identified two
regions of 100 nucleotides length each, which are critical for promoter activity 
and contain putative binding sites for the transcription factors Foxd1, Sox17 and
Spz1. It appears that wdr16 is controlled by a bidirectional promoter also
responsible for regulating the syntaxin 8 gene.

PMID: 19191024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Virol. 2009 Feb;83(4):1892-910. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01373-08. Epub 2008 Dec 3.

The C proteins of human parainfluenza virus type 1 (HPIV1) control the
transcription of a broad array of cellular genes that would otherwise respond to 
HPIV1 infection.

Boonyaratanakornkit JB(1), Bartlett EJ, Amaro-Carambot E, Collins PL, Murphy BR, 
Schmidt AC.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Infectious Diseases, Respiratory Viruses Section, National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-8007, USA.

Human parainfluenza virus type 1 (HPIV1) is an important respiratory pathogen in 
children and the most common cause of viral croup. We performed a
microarray-based analysis of gene expression kinetics to examine how wild-type
(wt) HPIV1 infection altered gene expression in human respiratory epithelial
cells and what role beta interferon played in this response. We similarly
evaluated HPIV1-P(C-), a highly attenuated and apoptosis-inducing virus that does
not express any of the four C proteins, and HPIV1-C(F170S), a less attenuated
mutant that contains a single point mutation in C and, like wt HPIV1, does not
efficiently induce apoptosis, to examine the role of the C proteins in
controlling host gene expression. We also used these data to investigate whether 
the phenotypic differences between the two C mutants could be explained at the
transcriptional level. Mutation or deletion of the C proteins of HPIV1 permitted 
the activation of over 2,000 cellular genes that otherwise would be repressed by 
HPIV1 infection. Thus, the C proteins profoundly suppress the response of human
respiratory cells to HPIV1 infection. Cellular pathways targeted by the HPIV1 C
proteins were identified and their transcriptional control was analyzed using
bioinformatics. Transcription factor binding sites for IRF and NF-kappaB were
overrepresented in some of the C protein-targeted pathways, but other pathways
were dominated by less-known factors, such as forkhead transcription factor
FOXD1. Surprisingly, the host responses to the P(C-) and C(F170S) mutants were
very similar, and only subtle differences in the expression kinetics of caspase 3
and TRAIL receptor 2 were observed. Thus, changes in host cell transcription did 
not reflect the striking phenotypic differences observed between these two
viruses.

PMCID: PMC2643784
PMID: 19052086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Development. 2008 Dec;135(24):4081-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.023572. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Foxg1 regulates retinal axon pathfinding by repressing an ipsilateral program in 
nasal retina and by causing optic chiasm cells to exert a net axonal
growth-promoting activity.

Tian NM(1), Pratt T, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, The University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK.

Mammalian binocular vision relies on the divergence of retinal ganglion cell
axons at the optic chiasm, with strictly controlled numbers projecting
contralaterally and ipsilaterally. In mouse, contralateral projections arise from
the entire retina, whereas ipsilateral projections arise from ventrotemporal
retina. We investigate how development of these patterns of projection is
regulated by the contralateral determinant Foxg1, a forkhead box transcription
factor expressed in nasal retina and at the chiasm. In nasal retina, loss of
Foxg1 causes increased numbers of ipsilateral projections and ectopic expression 
of the ipsilateral determinants Zic2, Ephb1 and Foxd1, indicating that nasal
retina is competent to express an ipsilateral program that is normally suppressed
by Foxg1. Using co-cultures that combine Foxg1-expressing with Foxg1-null retinal
explants and chiasm cells, we provide functional evidence that Foxg1 promotes
contralateral projections through actions in nasal retina, and that in chiasm
cells, Foxg1 is required for the generation of a hitherto unrecognized activity
supporting RGC axon growth.

PMID: 19004857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Expert Rev Clin Immunol. 2006 Nov;2(6):869-76. doi: 10.1586/1744666X.2.6.869.

Interactions of Fox proteins with inflammatory transcription-factor pathways.

Peng SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Arthritis Research Inflammation, Autoimmunity and Transplantation Research
Roche Palo Alto, LLC3431 Hillview Ave, Mailstop R7-101 Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. 
stanford.peng@roche.com

The forkhead (Fox) protein family includes a wide diversity of 'winged helix'
transcription factors, now known to play critical roles in immune homeostasis.
Although Foxp3 remains the most widely studied member for its role in the
development and/or function of regulatory T cells, which extrinsically modulate
the activity of effector leukocytes, other family members, such as Foxj1, Foxo3a 
and Foxd1, have received growing attention for their importance in the
cell-intrinsic regulation of immune homeostasis, especially in T cells, by
antagonizing the activity of proinflammatory transcription-factor pathways, such 
as the nuclear factor-kappaB or nuclear factor of activated T-cell families. This
review summarizes a present understanding of these factors in this context.

PMID: 20476975  [PubMed]


62. Dev Biol. 2006 Nov 1;299(1):238-49. Epub 2006 Jul 31.

c-kit delineates a distinct domain of progenitors in the developing kidney.

Schmidt-Ott KM(1), Chen X, Paragas N, Levinson RS, Mendelsohn CL, Barasch J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University College of Physicians and
Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Early inductive events in mammalian nephrogenesis depend on an interaction
between the ureteric bud and the metanephric mesenchyme. However, mounting
evidence points towards an involvement of additional cell types--such as stromal 
cells and angioblasts--in growth and patterning of the nephron. In this study,
through analysis of the stem cell factor (SCF)/c-kit ligand receptor pair, we
describe an additional distinct cell population in the early developing kidney.
While SCF is restricted to the ureteric bud, c-kit-positive cells are located
within the renal interstitium, but are negative for Foxd1, an established marker 
of stromal cells. In fact, the c-kit-positive domain is continuous with a central
mesodermal cell mass ventral and lateral to the dorsal aorta, while
Foxd1-expressing stromal cells are continuous with a dorsal perisomitic cell
population suggesting distinct intraembryonic origins for these cell types. A
subset of c-kit-positive cells expresses Flk-1 and podocalyxin, suggesting that
this cell population includes angioblasts and their progenitors. c-kit activation
is not required for the survival of these cells in vivo, because white spotting
(c-kit(W/W)) mice, carrying a natural inactivating mutation of c-kit, display
normal intrarenal distribution of the c-kit-positive cells at E13.5. In addition,
early kidney development in these mutants is preserved up to the stage when
anemia compromises global embryonic development. In contrast, under defined
conditions in organ cultures of metanephric kidneys, c-kit-positive cells,
including the Flk-1-positive subset, undergo apoptosis after treatment with
STI-571, an inhibitor of c-kit tyrosine phosphorylation. This is associated with 
reductions in ureteric bud branching and nephron number. Conversely, exogenous
SCF expands the c-kit-positive population, including Flk-1-positive angioblasts, 
and accelerates kidney development in vitro. These data suggest that ureteric
bud-derived SCF elicits growth-promoting effects in the metanephric kidney by
expanding one or more components of the interstitial c-kit-positive progenitor
pool.

PMID: 16942767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Immunol. 2006 Apr 15;176(8):4793-803.

Coordination of NF-kappaB and NFAT antagonism by the forkhead transcription
factor Foxd1.

Lin L(1), Peng SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Forkhead transcription factors play critical roles in the maintenance of immune
homeostasis. In this study, we demonstrate that this regulation most likely
involves intricate interactions between the forkhead family members and
inflammatory transcription factors: the forkhead member Foxd1 coordinates the
regulation of the activity of two key inflammatory transcription factors, NF-AT
and NF-kappaB, with Foxd1 deficiency resulting in multiorgan, systemic
inflammation, exaggerated Th cell-derived cytokine production, and T cell
proliferation in autologous MLRs. Foxd1-deficient T cells possess increased
activity of both NF-AT and NF-kappaB: the former correlates with the ability of
Foxd1 to regulate casein kinase 1, an NF-AT inhibitory kinase; the latter with
the ability of Foxd1 to regulate Foxj1, which regulates the NF-kappaB inhibitory 
subunit IkappaB beta. Thus, Foxd1 modulates inflammatory reactions and prevents
autoimmunity by directly regulating anti-inflammatory regulators of the NF-AT
pathway, and by coordinating the suppression of the NF-kappaB pathway via Foxj1. 
These findings indicate the presence of a general network of forkhead proteins
that enforce T cell quiescence.

PMID: 16585573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Front Biosci. 2006 May 1;11:1607-19.

Insights into transcriptional regulation by FOXP3.

Carson BD(1), Lopes JE, Soper DM, Ziegler SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

FoxP3 recently entered the spotlight as a critical component of regulatory T cell
development and function. Several groups are presently engaged in an effort to
uncover the mechanistic details of its contribution to this critical T cell
subset. Despite this, the mechanism of FoxP3-mediated transcriptional repression 
and the affected target genes are still largely unknown. First, we discuss
insights from work on other Fox family members with an emphasis on those with
known roles in the immune system. Second, we review recent data concerning the
molecular mechanism of FoxP3 function and its role in human disease. Finally, we 
consider what is known about FoxP3 target genes and their effect on T cell
physiology.

PMID: 16368541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Differentiation. 2005 Jul;73(6):303-12.

Polyamines are involved in murine kidney development controlling expression of
c-ret, E-cadherin, and Pax2/8 genes.

Loikkanen I(1), Lin Y, Railo A, Pajunen A, Vainio S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oulu, PO Box 3000, FIN-90014 Oulu,
Finland.

Polyamines play an important role in cell growth and differentiation. We studied 
changes in morphogenesis and the expression of the developmental control genes in
the embryonic mouse kidney in response to polyamine depletion, using a kidney
organ culture approach and reducing the polyamine pools with
alpha-difluoromethylornithine (DFMO), an irreversible suicide inhibitor of
ornithine decarboxylase (ODC). We found that inhibition of ODC results in a
systematic kidney organogenesis phenotype, in that the DFMO-treated kidney
specimens were of smaller size, had less epithelial ureteric bud branches, and
their mesenchymal-derived tubule formation was retarded. These dysmorphologies
were shown to be associated with changes in cell proliferation. Whole-mount in
situ experiments revealed that inhibition of ODC causes increases in epithelial
c-ret and E-cadherin and a decrease in mesenchymal Pax-8 expression, whereas
levels of epithelial Wnt-11, mesenchymal GDNF, FoxD1, and Pax-2 transcripts
remain unchanged. We studied regulation of the Pax-2 gene by analyzing a mouse
line in which lacZ was driven by an 8.5 kb Pax-2 enhancer in the epithelial
ureteric bud, and found that Pax-2 expression, as indicated by lacZ expression,
increased after DFMO treatment. Transient transfection experiments in HEK 293
cells with the minimal Pax-2 promoter showed enhanced transcription upon
reduction of the polyamine pools. We propose that ODC and polyamines have an
important role in kidney organogenesis, being involved in the regulation of the
expression of genes implicated in epithelial-mesenchymal tissue interactions.

PMID: 16138831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 15;280(15):14943-7. Epub 2005 Feb 16.

Smad6s regulates plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 through a protein kinase
C-beta-dependent up-regulation of transforming growth factor-beta.

Berg DT(1), Myers LJ, Richardson MA, Sandusky G, Grinnell BW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories,
Indianapolis, Indiana 46285, USA.

Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1) is a serpin class protease inhibitor
that plays a central role in the regulation of vascular function and tissue
remodeling by modulating thrombosis, inflammation, and the extracellular matrix. 
A central mediator controlling PAI-1 is transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta), which induces its expression and promotes fibrosis. We have found
that a unique member of the Smad family of signal transduction molecules, Smad6s,
modulates the expression of PAI-1. Overexpression of Smad6s in endothelial cells 
increases promoter activity and PAI-1 secretion, and an antisense to Smad6s
suppresses the induction of PAI-1 by TGF-beta. The effect of Smad6s on the PAI-1 
promoter appeared to be the result of increase binding of the forkhead winged
helix factor FoxD1 to a TGF-beta-responsive element. Furthermore, the effect of
Smad6s on PAI-1 up-regulation and on FoxD1 binding was found to result from
up-regulation of TGF-beta and could be inhibited by the blocking TGF-beta
signaling with Smad7. The ability of Smad6s to regulate the TGF-beta promoter and
subsequent PAI-1 induction was suppressed by a selective protein kinase C-beta
(PKC-beta) inhibitor. Consistent with the in vitro data, we found that increased 
Smad6s in diseased vessels correlated with increased TGF-beta and PAI-1 levels.
Overall, our results demonstrate that the level of Smad6s can alter the level of 
TGF-beta and the subsequent induction of PAI-1 via a FoxD1 transcription site.
Furthermore, our data suggest that this process, which is up-regulated in
diseased vessels, can be modulated by the inhibition of PKC-beta.

PMID: 15716278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Development. 2005 Feb;132(3):529-39. Epub 2005 Jan 5.

Foxd1-dependent signals control cellularity in the renal capsule, a structure
required for normal renal development.

Levinson RS(1), Batourina E, Choi C, Vorontchikhina M, Kitajewski J, Mendelsohn
CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Development of the metanephric kidney involves the establishment of discrete
zones of induction and differentiation that are crucial to the future radial
patterning of the organ. Genetic deletion of the forkhead transcription factor,
Foxd1, results in striking renal abnormalities, including the loss of these
discrete zones and pelvic fused kidneys. We have investigated the molecular and
cellular basis of the kidney phenotypes displayed by Foxd1-null embryos and
report here that they are likely to be caused by a failure in the correct
formation of the renal capsule. Unlike the single layer of Foxd1-positive stroma 
that comprises the normal renal capsule, the mutant capsule contains
heterogeneous layers of cells, including Bmp4-expressing cells, which induce
ectopic phospho-Smad1 signaling in nephron progenitors. This missignaling
disrupts their early patterning, which, in turn, causes mispatterning of the
ureteric tree, while delaying and disorganizing nephrogenesis. In addition, the
defects in capsule formation prevent the kidneys from detaching from the body
wall, thus explaining their fusion and pelvic location. For the first time,
functions have been ascribed to the renal capsule that include delineation of the
organ and acting as a barrier to inappropriate exogenous signals, while providing
a source of endogenous signals that are crucial to the establishment of the
correct zones of induction and differentiation.

PMID: 15634693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Development. 2004 Nov;131(22):5727-39.

Foxd1 is required for proper formation of the optic chiasm.

Herrera E(1), Marcus R, Li S, Williams SE, Erskine L, Lai E, Mason C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology and Center for Neurobiology
and Behavior, Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 630 West
168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

In animals with binocular vision, retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons from each eye
sort in the developing ventral diencephalon to project to ipsi- or contralateral 
targets, thereby forming the optic chiasm. Ipsilaterally projecting axons arise
from the ventrotemporal (VT) retina and contralaterally projecting axons
primarily from the other retinal quadrants. The winged helix transcription factor
Foxd1 (previously known as BF-2, Brain Factor 2) is expressed in VT retina, as
well as in the ventral diencephalon during the formation of the optic chiasm. We 
report here that in embryos lacking Foxd1, both retinal development and chiasm
morphogenesis are disrupted. In the Foxd1 deficient retina, proteins designating 
the ipsilateral projection, such as Zic2 and EphB1, are missing, and the domain
of Foxg1 (BF-1) expands from nasal retina into the VT crescent. In retina-chiasm 
co-cultures, VT RGCs from Foxd1 deficient retina are not repulsed by chiasm
cells, and in vivo many VT RGCs aberrantly project contralaterally. However, even
though the ipsilateral program is lost in the retina, a larger than normal
uncrossed component develops in Foxd1 deficient embryos. Chiasm defects include
axon stalling in the chiasm and a reduction in the total number of RGCs
projecting to the optic tract. In addition, in the Foxd1 deficient ventral
diencephalon, Foxg1 invades the Foxd1 domain, Zic2 and Islet1 expression are
minimized, and Slit2 prematurely expands, changes that could contribute to axon
projection errors. Thus, Foxd1 plays a dual role in the establishment of the
binocular visual pathways: first, in specification of the VT retina, acting
upstream of proteins directing the ipsilateral pathway; and second, in the
patterning of the developing ventral diencephalon where the optic chiasm forms.

PMID: 15509772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Development. 2004 Aug;131(15):3773-84. Epub 2004 Jul 7.

The winged helix transcription factor Foxg1 facilitates retinal ganglion cell
axon crossing of the ventral midline in the mouse.

Pratt T(1), Tian NM, Simpson TI, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Biomedical Sciences, George Square, The
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK. t.pratt@ed.ac.uk

During normal development, retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) project axons along the 
optic nerve to the optic chiasm on the ventral surface of the hypothalamus. In
rodents, most RGC growth cones then cross the ventral midline to join the
contralateral optic tract; those that do not cross join the ipsilateral optic
tract. Contralaterally projecting RGCs are distributed across the retina whereas 
ipsilaterally projecting RGCs are concentrated in temporal retina. The
transcription factor Foxg1 (also known as BF1) is expressed at several key
locations along this pathway. Analysis of Foxg1 expression using lacZ reporter
transgenes shows that Foxg1 is normally expressed in most, if not all, nasal RGCs
but not in most temporal RGCs, neither at the time they project nor earlier in
their lineage. Foxg1 is also expressed at the optic chiasm. Mice that lack Foxg1 
die at birth and, although the shape of their eyes is abnormal, their retinas
still project axons to the brain via the optic chiasm. Using anterograde and
retrograde tract tracing, we show that there is an eightfold increase in the
ipsilateral projection in Foxg1-/- embryos. The distributions of cells expressing
the transcription factors Foxg1 and Nkx2.2, and cell-surface molecules Ephb2,
ephrin B2 and SSEA-1 (Fut4) have been correlated to the normally developing
retinothalamic projection and we show they are not much altered in the developing
Foxg1-/- retina and optic chiasm. As much of the increased ipsilateral projection
in Foxg1-/- embryos arises from temporal RGCs that are unlikely to have an
autonomous requirement for Foxg1, we propose that the phenotype reflects at least
in part a requirement for Foxg1 outwith the RGCs themselves, most likely at the
optic chiasm.

PMID: 15240555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Lab Anim (NY). 2004 Feb;33(2):8.

Second childhood for neuronal precursors.

Eisenstein M.

PMID: 15235633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mech Dev. 2004 Jun;121(6):547-57.

Identification of kidney mesenchymal genes by a combination of microarray
analysis and Sall1-GFP knockin mice.

Takasato M(1), Osafune K, Matsumoto Y, Kataoka Y, Yoshida N, Meguro H, Aburatani 
H, Asashima M, Nishinakamura R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Stem Cell Regulation, The Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Minato-ku Shirokanedai, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

SALL1, a causative gene for Townes-Brocks syndrome, encodes a zinc finger
protein, and its mouse homolog (Sall1) is essential for metanephros development, 
as noted during gene targeting. In the embryonic kidney, Sall1 is expressed
abundantly in mesenchyme-derived structures from condensed mesenchyme, S-,
comma-shaped bodies, to renal tubules and podocytes. We generated mice in which a
green fluorescent protein (GFP) gene was inserted into the Sall1 locus and we
isolated the GFP-positive population from embryonic kidneys of these mice by
fluorescein-activated cell sorting. The GFP-positive population indeed expressed 
mesenchymal genes, while the negative population expressed genes in the ureteric 
bud. To systematically search for genes expressed in the mesenchyme-derived
cells, we compared gene expression profiles in the GFP-positive and -negative
populations using microarray analysis, followed by in situ hybridization. We
detected many genes known to be important for metanephros development including
Sall1, GDNF, Raldh2, Pax8 and FoxD1, and genes expressed abundantly in the
metanephric mesenchyme such as Unc4.1, Six2, Osr-2 and PDGFc. We also found
groups of genes including SSB-4, Smarcd3, micro-Crystallin, TRB-2, which are not 
known to be expressed in the metanephric mesenchyme. Therefore a combination of
microarray technology and Sall1-GFP mice is useful for systematic identification 
of genes expressed in the developing kidney.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 15172686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Cell. 2004 May 21;14(4):416-8.

FoxO: linking new signaling pathways.

Arden KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and University of California San Diego
School of Medicine, San Diego, CA, USA.

Two recent reports reveal new roles for FoxO proteins in cell proliferation and
tumorigenesis. Seoane and colleagues show that FoxO proteins play key roles in
the TGFbeta-dependent activation of p21Cip1 by partnering with Smad3 and Smad4.
FoxG1, a protein from a distinct Fox subfamily, binds FoxO/Smad complexes and
blocks p21Cip1 expression. These interactions establish a relationship between
the PI3K pathway, FoxG1, and the TGFbeta/Smad pathways. The second report
identifies IkappaB kinase as a negative regulator of FoxO proteins, suggesting a 
mechanism for relieving negative regulation of cell cycle and promoting tumor
cell proliferation.

PMID: 15149589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Science. 2004 Jan 2;303(5654):56-9.

Foxg1 suppresses early cortical cell fate.

Hanashima C(1), Li SC, Shen L, Lai E, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and the Department of Cell Biology, The
Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University Medical Center, 
540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2004 Jan 2;303(5654):48-9.

During mammalian cerebral corticogenesis, progenitor cells become progressively
restricted in the types of neurons they can produce. The molecular mechanism that
determines earlier versus later born neuron fate is unknown. We demonstrate here 
that the generation of the earliest born neurons, the Cajal-Retzius cells, is
suppressed by the telencephalic transcription factor Foxg1. In Foxg1 null
mutants, we observed an excess of Cajal-Retzius neuron production in the cortex. 
By conditionally inactivating Foxg1 in cortical progenitors that normally produce
deep-layer cortical neurons, we demonstrate that Foxg1 is constitutively required
to suppress Cajal-Retzius cell fate. Hence, the competence to generate the
earliest born neurons during later cortical development is actively suppressed
but not lost.

PMID: 14704420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Science. 2004 Jan 2;303(5654):48-9.

Neuroscience. Sealing cortical cell fate.

Levitt P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Kennedy Center for Research on Human Development and Department of 
Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37203, USA.
pat.levitt@vanderbilt.edu

Comment on
    Science. 2004 Jan 2;303(5654):56-9.

PMID: 14704417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Endocrinology. 2003 Dec;144(12):5615-22. Epub 2003 Sep 18.

Insulin inhibition of transcription stimulated by the forkhead protein Foxo1 is
not solely due to nuclear exclusion.

Tsai WC(1), Bhattacharyya N, Han LY, Hanover JA, Rechler MM.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney
Diseases, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1758, USA.

The FOXO family of forkhead transcription factors stimulates the transcription of
target genes involved in many fundamental cell processes, including cell
survival, cell cycle progression, DNA repair, and insulin sensitivity. The
activity of FOXO proteins is principally regulated by activation of protein
kinase B (PKB)/Akt by insulin and other cytokines. PKB/Akt phosphorylates three
consensus sites in FOXO proteins, leading to their export from the nucleus and
the inhibition of FOXO-stimulated transcription. It has been widely accepted that
the decreased transcription results from reduced abundance of FOXO proteins in
the nucleus. In the present study we mutated Leu375 to alanine in the nuclear
export signal of Foxo1 (mouse FOXO1), so that it would remain in the nucleus of
H4IIE rat hepatoma cells after insulin treatment, and determined whether insulin 
could still inhibit transcription stimulated by the Foxo1 mutant. Despite the
retention of the Foxo1 mutant in the nucleus, insulin inhibited
L375A-Foxo1-stimulated transcription to the same extent as transcription
stimulated by wild-type Foxo1. Similar results were obtained using reporter
plasmids containing the rat IGF-binding protein-1 promoter or a minimal promoter 
with three copies of the insulin response element to which FOXO proteins bind. We
conclude that insulin can inhibit Foxo1-stimulated transcription even when
nuclear export of Foxo1 is prevented, indicating that insulin inhibition can
occur by direct mechanisms that do not depend on altering the subcellular
distribution of the transcription factor.

PMID: 14500580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Curr Biol. 2003 Sep 16;13(18):1625-9.

Transcriptional activation of placental growth factor by the forkhead/winged
helix transcription factor FoxD1.

Zhang H(1), Palmer R, Gao X, Kreidberg J, Gerald W, Hsiao L, Jensen RV, Gullans
SR, Haber DA.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Stromal-epithelial interactions play an important role in renal organogenesis.
Expression of the forkhead/winged helix transcription factor FoxD1 (BF-2) is
restricted to stromal cells in the embryonic renal cortex, but it mediates its
effects on the adjacent ureteric bud and metanephric mesenchyme, which fail to
grow and differentiate in BF-2 null mice. BF-2 is therefore likely to regulate
transcription of factors secreted by stromal cells that modulate the
differentiation of neighboring epithelial cells. Here, we used cells with
inducible expression of BF-2, combined with microarray analysis, to identify
Placental Growth Factor (PlGF), a Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF)
family member previously implicated in angiogenesis, as a downstream target of
BF-2. BF-2 binds to a conserved HNF3beta site in the PlGF promoter and activates 
transcription. PlGF is precisely coexpressed with BF-2, both temporally and
spatially, within the developing renal stroma, and it is completely absent in
BF-2 null kidney stroma. Addition of PlGF to in vitro kidney organ cultures
stimulates branching of the ureteric bud. Our observations indicate that PlGF is 
a direct and physiologically relevant transcriptional target of BF-2. The
contribution of PlGF toward stromal signals that regulate epithelial
differentiation suggests novel functions for a growth factor previously
implicated in reactive angiogenesis.

PMID: 13678594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Immunol. 2003 Aug 15;171(4):1623-9.

FOXO transcription factors as regulators of immune homeostasis: molecules to die 
for?

Birkenkamp KU(1), Coffer PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Diseases, University Medical Center, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Regulation of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) activity has been demonstrated
to be critical for correct lymphocyte function. The molecular targets of this
lipid kinase have been the subject of extensive research, and many functional
effects of PI3K activation are thought to be mediated by the serine-threonine
kinase protein kinase B (PKB/c-akt). Genetic analyses in the nematode worm
Caenorhabditis elegans have identified a novel PI3K-regulated signaling pathway
that regulates organism lifespan through inhibition of a Forkhead (FOX)
transcription factor, DAF-16. Recent studies have subsequently revealed an
evolutionarily conserved signaling module in higher eukaryotes in which PKB can
directly phosphorylate and inactive a family of Forkhead box class O (FOXO)
transcription factors. Phosphorylation results in nuclear exclusion and
inhibition of transcription. FOXO transcription factors have been found to play
critical roles in regulation of proliferation, apoptosis and control of oxidative
stress. This occurs through both activation and repression of target gene
expression by multiple mechanisms. Here the regulation and function of these
transcription factors is discussed with specific relevance to immune homeostasis.
A greater understanding of the regulation and function of this signaling pathway 
in lymphocytes may provide novel therapeutic opportunities for immune diseases.

PMID: 12902457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Oncogene. 2003 Jun 5;22(23):3655-68.

MLL-mediated transcriptional gene regulation investigated by gene expression
profiling.

Schraets D(1), Lehmann T, Dingermann T, Marschalek R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Biology, Biocenter N230, University of
Frankfurt/Main, Marie-Curie-Str. 9, D-60439 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

The human mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene is involved in about 50 different
chromosomal translocations, associated with the disease phenotype of acute
leukemia. However, the normal function of MLL is less understood. Homozygous
knockouts of murine Mll were embryonal lethal, while heterozygous disruption led 
to aberrant hox gene expression associated with skeletal malformations, growth
retardation, and impaired hematopoiesis. To understand MLL functions on the
molecular level, gene expression profiling experiments were performed with a pair
of murine cell lines (MLL(+/+) and MLL(-/-)). Microarray hybridization
experiments revealed 197 potential target genes that are differentially
expressed, providing new and important clues about MLL functions.

PMID: 12789274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Kidney Int. 2003 Mar;63(3):835-44.

Evidence that bone morphogenetic protein 4 has multiple biological functions
during kidney and urinary tract development.

Miyazaki Y(1), Oshima K, Fogo A, Ichikawa I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-2584, USA.

BACKGROUND: We have suggested that bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4), acting on
the Wolffian duct and ureter epithelium, determines the budding site of the
ureter by locally antagonizing ubiquitous inductive signal(s) from the
metanephric mesenchyme. In the present study, we examine the effect of BMP4 on
the development of metanephric and periureteral mesenchymal cells, which express 
the BMP type I receptor gene, Bmpr1a (Alk3).
METHODS: Urogenital tissues obtained from Bmp4 heterozygous null mutant (Bmp4+/-)
embryos at different stages, and metanephric and ureteral tissue explants
cultured in the presence of recombinant BMP4 were subjected to morphologic,
immunohistochemical and in situ hybridization analyses. To examine the
chemotactic activity of BMP4 for periureteral mesenchymal cells, a modified
Boyden chamber assay was performed.
RESULTS: Many of the kidneys of newborn Bmp4+/- mice contained multicystic
dysplastic regions. This morphology was preceded by abnormally high apoptotic
activity in the metanephric mesenchyme of mutant embryos at E14.5. In whole
metanephric explants, BMP4 uniformly promoted the expansion of the Pax2-negative 
and weakly Foxd1 (previously Bf2) -positive peripheral stromal compartment of
metanephric mesenchyme in the presence of fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2). In
addition, in isolated metanephric mesenchyme, BMP4-loaded beads prevented
apoptosis locally. Thus, BMP4 prevents cell death and promotes the growth of the 
metanephric mesenchyme. The effect of BMP4 on periureteral mesenchyme is
different from its effect on metanephric mesenchyme. In utero, periureteral
mesenchymal cells condense around the ureter epithelium, followed by
differentiation into smooth muscle cells at a site where Bmp4 is intensely
expressed. Analysis of Bmp4+/- ureters at E15.5 reveals that the alpha-smooth
muscle actin (alpha-SMA)-positive cells are low in number. In vitro, BMP4-loaded 
beads promote the accumulation of periureteral mesenchymal cells to form several 
cell layers surrounding the beads. In addition, in a Boyden chamber assay, BMP4
increases the migration of periureteral mesenchymal cells through the filter.
Thus, BMP4 can serve as a chemoattractant for periureteral mesenchymal cells and 
induce locally the smooth muscle layer of the ureter at Bmp4-expressing sites.
CONCLUSION: Depending on local context, BMP4 has several biological actions on
the morphogenesis of different portions of the excretory system, namely, the
development of the ureterovesical junction, the ureter, and the kidney.

PMID: 12631064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Gene Expr Patterns. 2002 Dec;2(3-4):275-82.

Characterisation and developmental expression of mouse Plu-1, a homologue of a
human nuclear protein (PLU-1) which is specifically up-regulated in breast
cancer.

Madsen B(1), Spencer-Dene B, Poulsom R, Hall D, Lu PJ, Scott K, Shaw AT, Burchell
JM, Freemont P, Taylor-Papadimitriou J.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Biology Group, Guy's Hospital, St Thomas Street, London SE1 9RT,
UK.

PLU-1 is a novel breast cancer associated nuclear protein containing highly
conserved domains including the PLU domain, putative DNA/chromatin binding
motifs, and PHD/LAP domains. Here we report the cloning of the mouse homologue
(Plu-1), and document its expression in adult tissues, mammary tumours and the
embryo. The overall homology with human PLU-1 is 94% at the protein level, with
almost 100% identity in the conserved domains, suggesting functional
conservation. As with human PLU-1 the expression of Plu-1 in adult tissues is
restricted, with high expression being seen only in testis, while expression in
mammary tumours from c-neu transgenic mice is high. Plu-1 is also differentially 
expressed in the adult mammary gland. In the developing embryo Plu-1 is expressed
in a temporally restricted fashion with tissue specific expression being limited 
to parts of the developing brain, whisker follicle, mammary bud, thymus, limbs,
intervertebral disc, olfactory epithelium, teeth, eye, and stomach. The temporal 
and spatial expression patterns of the transcription factors Bf-1 and Pax9,
recently found to bind to PLU-1 through the PLU domain overlap with Plu-1
expression during development. Thus Plu-1 appears to play an important role in
mouse embryonic development which may involve interaction with Pax9 and Bf-1.

PMID: 12617814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Oncogene. 2002 Nov 21;21(53):8196-205.

Novel genes regulated by Sonic Hedgehog in pluripotent mesenchymal cells.

Ingram WJ(1), Wicking CA, Grimmond SM, Forrest AR, Wainwright BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience and Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, The University of Queensland, Queensland 4072, Australia.

Sonic Hedgehog is a secreted morphogen involved in patterning a wide range of
structures in the developing embryo. Disruption of the Hedgehog signalling
cascade leads to a number of developmental disorders and plays a key role in the 
formation of a range of human cancers. The identification of genes regulated by
Hedgehog is crucial to understanding how disruption of this pathway leads to
neoplastic transformation. We have used a Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) responsive mouse
cell line, C3H/10T1/2, to provide a model system for hedgehog target gene
discovery. Following activation of cell cultures with Shh, RNA was used to
interrogate microarrays to investigate downstream transcriptional consequences of
hedgehog stimulation. As a result 11 target genes have been identified, seven of 
which are induced (Thrombomodulin, GILZ, BF-2, Nr4a1, IGF2, PMP22, LASP1) and
four of which are repressed (SFRP-1, SFRP-2, Mip1-gamma, Amh) by Shh. These
targets have a diverse range of putative functions and include transcriptional
regulators and molecules known to be involved in regulating cell growth or
apoptosis. The corroboration of genes previously implicated in hedgehog
signalling, along with the finding of novel targets, demonstrates both the
validity and power of the C3H/10T1/2 system for Shh target gene discovery.

PMID: 12444557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Neuron. 2002 Nov 14;36(4):623-34.

Neurotrophin-3 is required for appropriate establishment of thalamocortical
connections.

Ma L(1), Harada T, Harada C, Romero M, Hebert JM, McConnell SK, Parada LF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Developmental Biology and Kent Waldrep Foundation Center for Basic 
Research on Nerve Growth and Regeneration, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

In the vertebrate brain, the thalamus serves as a relay and integration station
for diverse neuronal information en route from the periphery to the cortex.
Formation of the thalamocortical tract occurs during pre- and postnatal
development, with distinct thalamic nuclei projecting to specific cortical
regions. The molecular forces that underlie the invasion by axons into specific
cortical layers followed by activity-dependent maturation of synapses are poorly 
understood. We show that genetic ablation of neurotrophin-3 (NT-3) in the mouse
neocortex results in reduction of a set of anatomically distinct axonal bundles
projecting from thalamus through cortical white matter. These bundles include
thalamocortical axons that normally establish connections with retrosplenial and 
visual cortex, sites of early postnatal NT-3 expression. These results implicate 
neurotrophins in the critical stage of precise thalamocortical connections.

PMID: 12441052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Dev Dyn. 2002 Nov;225(3):289-97.

An amphioxus winged helix/forkhead gene, AmphiFoxD: insights into vertebrate
neural crest evolution.

Yu JK(1), Holland ND, Holland LZ.

Collaborators: Holland LZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Marine Biology Research Division, Scripps Institution of Oceanography,
University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0202, USA.
jkyu@ucsd.edu

During amphioxus development, the neural plate is bordered by cells expressing
many genes with homologs involved in vertebrate neural crest induction. However, 
these amphioxus cells evidently lack additional genetic programs for the cell
delaminations, migrations, and differentiations characterizing definitive
vertebrate neural crest. We characterize an amphioxus winged helix/forkhead gene 
(AmphiFoxD) closely related to vertebrate FoxD genes. Phylogenetic analysis
indicates that the AmphiFoxD is basal to vertebrate FoxD1, FoxD2, FoxD3, FoxD4,
and FoxD5. One of these vertebrate genes (FoxD3) consistently marks neural crest 
during development. Early in amphioxus development, AmphiFoxD is expressed
medially in the anterior neural plate as well as in axial (notochordal) and
paraxial mesoderm; later, the gene is expressed in the somites, notochord,
cerebral vesicle (diencephalon), and hindgut endoderm. However, there is never
any expression in cells bordering the neural plate. We speculate that an
AmphiFoxD homolog in the common ancestor of amphioxus and vertebrates was
involved in histogenic processes in the mesoderm (evagination and delamination of
the somites and notochord); then, in the early vertebrates, descendant paralogs
of this gene began functioning in the presumptive neural crest bordering the
neural plate to help make possible the delaminations and cell migrations that
characterize definitive vertebrate neural crest.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12412011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Neuron. 2002 Sep 12;35(6):1029-41.

BMP signaling is required locally to pattern the dorsal telencephalic midline.

Hébert JM(1), Mishina Y, McConnell SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, 385 Serra Mall, CA
94305, USA.

BMPs have been proposed to pattern the medial-lateral axis of the telencephalon
in a concentration-dependent manner, thus helping to subdivide the embryonic
telencephalon into distinct forebrain regions. Using a CRE/loxP genetic approach,
we tested this hypothesis by disrupting the Bmpr1a gene in the telencephalon. In 
mutants, BMP signaling was compromised throughout the dorsal telencephalon, but
only the most dorsalmedial derivative, the choroid plexus, failed to be specified
or differentiate. Choroid plexus precursors remained proliferative and did not
adopt the fate of their lateral telencephalic neighbors. These results
demonstrate that BMP signaling is required for the formation of the most dorsal
telencephalic derivative, the choroid plexus, and that BMP signaling plays an
essential role in locally patterning the dorsal midline. Our data fail to support
a more global, concentration-dependent role in specifying telencephalic cell
fates.

PMID: 12354394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Neurosci. 2002 Oct 1;22(19):8523-31.

Disruption of early events in thalamocortical tract formation in mice lacking the
transcription factors Pax6 or Foxg1.

Pratt T(1), Quinn JC, Simpson TI, West JD, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, United
Kingdom.

Early events in the formation of the thalamocortical tract remain poorly
understood. Recent work has suggested that thalamocortical axons follow a path
pioneered by transient thalamic afferents originating from the medial part of the
ventral telencephalon. We studied the development of these transient afferents
and the thalamocortical tract in mutant mice lacking transcription factors
normally expressed in the dorsal thalamus or ventral telencephalon. Pax6 is
expressed in the dorsal thalamus, but not in the medial part of the ventral
telencephalon, and the thalamocortical tract fails to form in Pax6(-/-) embryos. 
We found that transient thalamic afferents from the ventral telencephalon do not 
form in Pax6(-/-) embryos; this may contribute to the failure of their
thalamocortical development. The distribution of Pax6(-/-) cells in Pax6(-/-)<-->
Pax6(+/+) chimeras supports conclusions drawn from forebrain marker gene
expression that Pax6 is not required for the normal development of the medial
part of the ventral telencephalon but is required in the dorsal thalamus. Failure
of the transient afferent pathway to develop is therefore likely a cell
nonautonomous defect reflecting primary defects in the thalamus. We then examined
the formation of thalamic afferents and efferents in Foxg1(-/-) embryos, which
lack recognizable ventral telencephalic structures. In these embryos thalamic
efferents navigate correctly through the thalamus but fail to turn laterally into
the telencephalon, whereas other axons are able to cross the
diencephalic/telencephalic boundary. Our results support a role for the ventral
telencephalon in guiding the early development of the thalamocortical tract and
identify a new role for the transcription factor Pax6 in regulating the ability
of the thalamus to attract ventral telencephalic afferents.

PMID: 12351726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Neuron. 2002 Aug 15;35(4):671-80.

FGFR1 is required for the development of the auditory sensory epithelium.

Pirvola U(1), Ylikoski J, Trokovic R, Hébert JM, McConnell SK, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, 00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
ulla.pirvola@helsinki.fi

The mammalian auditory sensory epithelium, the organ of Corti, comprises the hair
cells and supporting cells that are pivotal for hearing function. The origin and 
development of their precursors are poorly understood. Here we show that
loss-of-function mutations in mouse fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (Fgfr1)
cause a dose-dependent disruption of the organ of Corti. Full inactivation of
Fgfr1 in the inner ear epithelium by Foxg1-Cre-mediated deletion leads to an 85% 
reduction in the number of auditory hair cells. The primary cause appears to be
reduced precursor cell proliferation in the early cochlear duct. Thus, during
development, FGFR1 is required for the generation of the precursor pool, which
gives rise to the auditory sensory epithelium. Our data also suggest that FGFR1
might have a distinct later role in intercellular signaling within the
differentiating auditory sensory epithelium.

PMID: 12194867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Neurosci. 2002 Aug 1;22(15):6526-36.

Brain factor-1 controls the proliferation and differentiation of neocortical
progenitor cells through independent mechanisms.

Hanashima C(1), Shen L, Li SC, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The winged helix gene Brain factor-1 (BF1) has a pleiotropic role in the
development of the cerebral hemispheres of the brain. Mice lacking BF1 have
defects in the morphogenesis of the structures of the dorsal telencephalon (e.g.,
neocortex) and the ventral telencephalon (e.g., the basal ganglia). This study
focuses on the functions of BF1 in the dorsal telencephalon. We showed previously
that telencephalic progenitor cells lacking BF1 differentiate into neurons
prematurely. Here, we demonstrate that the loss of BF1 also results in an early
lengthening of the cell cycle in neocortical progenitors. To investigate the
mechanisms by which BF1 regulates progenitor cell proliferation and
differentiation in the developing brain, we have replaced the endogenous BF1
protein with a DNA binding defective form of BF1 in mice, BF1(NHAA). The
BF1(NHAA) protein restores the growth of the dorsal telencephalon, by improving
the proliferation of progenitor cells. However, the BF1(NHAA) protein does not
correct the early neuronal differentiation associated with the loss of BF1. In
contrast, replacement of endogenous BF1 with wild-type BF1 corrects the defects
in both the proliferation and differentiation of neocortical progenitors. These
results demonstrate that BF1 controls progenitor cell proliferation and
differentiation in the neocortex through distinct DNA binding-independent and
binding-dependent mechanisms.

PMID: 12151532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. EMBO J. 2002 Jul 1;21(13):3337-46.

Telencephalon-specific Rb knockouts reveal enhanced neurogenesis, survival and
abnormal cortical development.

Ferguson KL(1), Vanderluit JL, Hébert JM, McIntosh WC, Tibbo E, MacLaurin JG,
Park DS, Wallace VA, Vooijs M, McConnell SK, Slack RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road,
Ottawa, ON, Canada K1H 8M5.

Correct cell cycle regulation and terminal mitosis are critical for nervous
system development. The retinoblastoma (Rb) protein is a key regulator of these
processes, as Rb-/- embryos die by E15.5, exhibiting gross hematopoietic and
neurological defects. The extensive apoptosis in Rb-/- embryos has been
attributed to aberrant S phase entry resulting in conflicting growth control
signals in differentiating cells. To assess the role of Rb in cortical
development in the absence of other embryonic defects, we examined mice with
telencephalon-specific Rb deletions. Animals carrying a floxed Rb allele were
interbred with mice in which cre was knocked into the Foxg1 locus. Unlike
germline knockouts, mice specifically deleted for Rb in the developing
telencephalon survived until birth. In these mutants, Rb-/- progenitor cells
divided ectopically, but were able to survive and differentiate. Mutant brains
exhibited enhanced cellularity due to increased proliferation of neuroblasts.
These studies demonstrate that: (i) cell cycle deregulation during
differentiation does not necessitate apoptosis; (ii) Rb-deficient mutants exhibit
enhanced neuroblast proliferation; and (iii) terminal mitosis may not be required
to initiate differentiation.

PMCID: PMC126087
PMID: 12093735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 21;277(25):22902-8. Epub 2002 Apr 9.

Mechanisms of FOXC2- and FOXD1-mediated regulation of the RI alpha subunit of
cAMP-dependent protein kinase include release of transcriptional repression and
activation by protein kinase B alpha and cAMP.

Dahle MK(1), Grønning LM, Cederberg A, Blomhoff HK, Miura N, Enerbäck S, Taskén
KA, Taskén K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
University of Oslo, N-0317 Oslo, Norway.

We have reported recently that mice overexpressing the forkhead/winged helix
transcription factor FOXC2 are lean and show increased responsiveness to insulin 
due to sensitization of the beta-adrenergic cAMP-PKA(+) pathway and increased
levels of the RI alpha subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) (Cederberg,
A., Grønning, L. M., Ahren, B., Taskén, K., Carlsson, P., and Enerbäck, S. (2001)
Cell 106, 563-573). In this present study, we reveal that FOXC2 and a related
factor, FOXD1, specifically activate the 1b promoter of the RI alpha gene in
adipocytes and testicular Sertoli cells, respectively. By deletional mapping, we 
discovered two different mechanisms by which the Fox proteins activated
expression from the RI alpha 1b promoter. In 3T3-L1 adipocytes, an upstream
region represses promoter activity under basal conditions. Bandshift experiments 
indicate that overexpression of FOXC2 promotes the release of a potential
repressor from this region. In Sertoli cells, sequences downstream of the
transcription start sites mediate the activating effect of FOXD1, and protein
kinase B alpha/Akt1 strongly induces this effect. Furthermore, we show that an
inactive FOXD1 mutant lowers the cAMP-mediated induction of the RI alpha 1b
reporter construct. In summary, winged helix transcription factors of the
FOXC/FOXD families function as regulators of the RI alpha subunit of PKA and may 
integrate hormonal signals acting through protein kinase B and cAMP in a
cell-specific manner.

PMID: 11943768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Development. 2001 Jul;128(13):2525-36.

Requirement of FoxD3-class signaling for neural crest determination in Xenopus.

Sasai N(1), Mizuseki K, Sasai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Embryology and Neurobiology, and. Department of
Molecular and Cellular Biology, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences, Kyoto
University, Sakyo, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Fox factors (winged-helix transcription factors) play important roles in early
embryonic patterning. We show here that FoxD3 (Forkhead 6) regulates neural crest
determination in Xenopus embryos. Expression of FoxD3 in the presumptive neural
crest region starts at the late gastrula stage in a manner similar to that of
Slug, and overlaps with that of Zic-r1. When overexpressed in the embryo and in
ectodermal explants, FoxD3 induces expression of neural crest markers.
Attenuation of FoxD3-related signaling by a dominant-negative FoxD3 construct
(FoxD3delN) inhibits neural crest differentiation in vivo without suppressing the
CNS marker Sox2. Interestingly, these loss-of-function phenotypes are reversed by
coinjecting SLUG: In animal cap explants, neural crest differentiation induced by
Slug and Wnt3a is also inhibited by FoxD3delN but not by a dominant-negative form
of XBF2. Loss-of-function studies using dominant-negative forms of FoxD3 and Slug
indicate that Slug induction by Zic factors requires FoxD3-related signaling, and
that FoxD3 and Slug have different requirements in inducing downstream neural
crest markers. These data demonstrate that FoxD3 (or its closely related factor) 
is an essential upstream regulator of neural crest determination.

PMID: 11493569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30224-30. Epub 2001 May 31.

Functional cloning of the proto-oncogene brain factor-1 (BF-1) as a Smad-binding 
antagonist of transforming growth factor-beta signaling.

Rodriguez C(1), Huang LJ, Son JK, McKee A, Xiao Z, Lodish HF.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Using the plasminogen activator inhibitor (PAI) promoter to drive the expression 
of a reporter gene (mouse CD2), we devised a system to clone negative regulators 
of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling pathway. We infected 
a TGF-beta-responsive cell line (MvLu1) with a retroviral cDNA library, selecting
by fluorescence-activated cell sorter single cells displaying low PAI promoter
activity in response to TGF-beta. Using this strategy we cloned the
proto-oncogene brain factor-1 (BF-1). BF-1 represses the PAI promoter in part by 
associating with both unphosphorylated Smad3 (in the cytoplasm) and
phosphorylated Smad3 (in the nucleus), thus preventing its binding to DNA. BF-1
also associates with Smad1, -2, and -4; the Smad MH2 domain binds to BF-1, and
the C-terminal segment of BF-1 is uniquely and solely required for binding to
Smads. Further, BF-1 represses another TGF-beta-induced promoter (p15), it
up-regulates a TGF-beta-repressed promoter (Cyclin A), and it reverses the growth
arrest caused by TGF-beta. Our results suggest that BF-1 is a general inhibitor
of TGF-beta signaling and as such may play a key role during brain development.

PMID: 11387330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Mar;21(6):1962-72.

The winged-helix protein brain factor 1 interacts with groucho and hes proteins
to repress transcription.

Yao J(1), Lai E, Stifani S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada.

Brain factor 1 (BF-1) is a winged-helix transcriptional repressor that plays
important roles in both progenitor cell differentiation and regional patterning
in the mammalian telencephalon. The aim of this study was to elucidate the
molecular mechanisms underlying BF-1 functions. It is shown here that BF-1
interacts in vivo with global transcriptional corepressors of the Groucho family 
and also associates with the histone deacetylase 1 protein. The ability of BF-1
to mediate transcriptional repression is promoted by Groucho and inhibited by the
histone deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A, suggesting that BF-1 recruits
Groucho and histone deacetylase activities to repress transcription. Our studies 
also provide the first demonstration that Groucho mediates a specific interaction
between BF-1 and the basic helix-loop-helix protein Hes1 and that BF-1
potentiates transcriptional repression by Hes1 in a Groucho-dependent manner.
These findings suggest that Groucho participates in the transcriptional functions
of BF-1 by acting as both a corepressor and an adapter between BF-1 and Hes1.
Taken together with the demonstration that these proteins are coexpressed in
telencephalic neural progenitor cells, these results also suggest that complexes 
of BF-1, Groucho, and Hes factors may be involved in the regulation of progenitor
cell differentiation in the telencephalon.

PMCID: PMC86788
PMID: 11238932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Genes Dev. 2000 Oct 1;14(19):2486-500.

The forkhead transcription factor UNC-130 is required for the graded spatial
expression of the UNC-129 TGF-beta guidance factor in C. elegans.

Nash B(1), Colavita A, Zheng H, Roy PJ, Culotti JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto
M5S 1A8, Canada.

Secreted proteins required for cellular movements along the circumference of the 
body wall in Caenorhabditis elegans include UNC-6/netrin and the novel TGF-beta
UNC-129. Expression of these proteins is graded along the dorsoventral (D/V)
axis, providing polarity information to guide migrations. Here we show that the
graded expression of UNC-129 in dorsal but not ventral body muscles depends on
unc-130, which encodes a Forkhead transcription factor. The phenotype of unc-130 
mutants closely mimics the reported effects of ectopically expressing unc-129 in 
both dorsal and ventral body muscles (). This fits our present finding that
unc-130 cell autonomously represses unc-129 expression in the ventral body
muscles. Thus the cell-specific effects of unc-130 on ventral, but not dorsal,
body muscle expression of unc-129 accounts for the D/V polarity information
required for UNC-129-mediated guidance. Genetic interactions between unc-130 and 
other guidance genes show that several molecular pathways function in parallel to
guide the ventral to dorsal migration of distal tip cells (DTCs) and axonal
growth cones in C. elegans. Genetic interactions confirm that UNC-129 does not
require the only known type II TGF-beta receptor in C. elegans (DAF-4) for its
guidance functions. Also, unc-130 is partially required for male tail
morphogenesis and for embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC316974
PMID: 11018016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6201-11.

BF-1 interferes with transforming growth factor beta signaling by associating
with Smad partners.

Dou C(1), Lee J, Liu B, Liu F, Massague J, Xuan S, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The winged-helix (WH) BF-1 gene, which encodes brain factor 1 (BF-1) (also known 
as foxg1), is essential for the proliferation of the progenitor cells of the
cerebral cortex. Here we show that BF-1-deficient telencephalic progenitor cells 
are more apt to leave the cell cycle in response to transforming growth factor
beta (TGF-beta) and activin. We found that ectopic expression of BF-1 in vitro
inhibits TGF-beta mediated growth inhibition and transcriptional activation.
Surprisingly, we found that the ability of BF-1 to function as a TGF-beta
antagonist does not require its DNA binding activity. Therefore, we investigated 
whether BF-1 can inhibit Smad-dependent transcriptional responses by interacting 
with Smads or Smad binding partners. We found that BF-1 does not interact with
Smads. Because the identities of the Smad partners mediating growth inhibition by
TGF-beta are not clearly established, we examined a model reporter system which
is known to be activated by activin and TGF-beta through Smads and the WH factor 
FAST-2. We demonstrate that BF-1 associates with FAST-2. This interaction is
dependent on the same region of protein which mediates its ability to interfere
with the antiproliferative activity of TGF-beta and with TGF-beta-dependent
transcriptional activation. Furthermore, the interaction of FAST-2 with BF-1 is
mediated by the same domain which is required for FAST-2 to interact with Smad2. 
We propose a model in which BF-1 interferes with transcriptional responses to
TGF-beta by interacting with FAST-2 or with other DNA binding proteins which
function as Smad2 partners and which have a common mode of interaction with
Smad2.

PMCID: PMC86095
PMID: 10938097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Dev Biol. 2000 Jun 15;222(2):296-306.

Targeting of cre to the Foxg1 (BF-1) locus mediates loxP recombination in the
telencephalon and other developing head structures.

Hébert JM(1), McConnell SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
94305-5020, USA.

The use of genetics to study the development of the telencephalon and derivatives
such as the cerebral cortex has been limited. The telencephalon begins to form
midway through gestation, and targeted mutations in genes suspected of playing
roles in its development often lead to early phenotypes that preclude analysis of
their role at later stages. This problem can be circumvented using a Cre/loxP
recombination system. A mouse line was produced in which cre was targeted to the 
Foxg1 (BF-1) locus, a gene expressed specifically in the telencephalon and
discrete head structures. Crosses between Foxg1-Cre mice and three separate loxP 
reporter mice generated embryos with recombination patterns matching that
expected from the normal pattern of Foxg1 expression. Recombination occurs
invariably in the telencephalon, anterior optic vesicle, otic vesicle, facial and
head ectoderm, olfactory epithelium, mid-hindbrain junction, and pharyngeal
pouches. Recombination in some animals also occurs less efficiently in tissues
not known to express Foxg1. We show that the genetic background of the parental
mice and the loxP target allele can each contribute to differences in the exact
pattern of recombination. Collectively, these data show that Foxg1-Cre mice
should be useful in the deletion or ectopic expression of any floxed target gene 
in a Foxg1-like pattern.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10837119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cereb Cortex. 1999 Sep;9(6):543-50.

Dual role of brain factor-1 in regulating growth and patterning of the cerebral
hemispheres.

Dou CL(1), Li S, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10021, USA. c-dou@ski.mskcc.org

Brain factor-1 (BF-1) is a winged-helix (WH) transcription factor with a
restricted pattern of expression in the neural tube. In the embryo, BF-1 is
localized to the progenitor cells of the most rostral neural tube, the
telencephalic neuroepithelium. Expression of BF-1 persists in the adult brain in 
the structures derived from the telencephalon, including the cerebral cortex, the
hippocampus, the olfactory bulbs and the basal ganglia. Targeted disruption of
the BF-1 gene in mice results in hypoplasia of the cerebral hemispheres.
Proliferation of the telencephalic neuroepithelium is decreased and neuronal
differentiation occurs prematurely. The forebrain of the BF-1 (-/-) mutant also
displays dorsal-ventral patterning defects. Development of the ventral (basal)
region of the telencephalon is more severely affected than the dorsal region.
These anomalies are associated with the ectopic expression of BMP4 in the dorsal 
telencephalic neuroepithelium and the loss of shh in the ventral telencephalon.
These results raise the possibility that BF-1 may modulate both progenitor cell
proliferation and regional patterning by regulating the expression or activity of
inductive signals which act on the telencephalic neuroepithelium.

PMID: 10498272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Dev Dyn. 1999 Aug;215(4):332-43.

Dynamics of placodal lineage development revealed by targeted transgene
expression.

Hatini V(1), Ye X, Balas G, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Division, Cornell University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Examination of the expression pattern of the winged-helix transcription factor
BF-1 outside of the neural tube in mouse embryos suggests that BF-1 is restricted
to a population of cells that gives rise to the ectodermal placodes and their
derivatives. Within the sensory cranial nerve ganglia, the expression of BF-1
distinguishes cells that arise from the placodes from those derived from the
neural crest. Expression of a lacZ transgene targeted to the BF-1 locus was used 
to follow the placodal lineage during mouse development. Analysis of placodal
development in mice with a targeted deletion of BF-1 reveals that, although BF-1 
is required for proliferation of the cells arising from the nasal placode, it is 
not required for the proliferation, survival, or both, of placode-derived cells
in the sensory cranial nerve ganglia. Dev Dyn 1999;215:332-343.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10417822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Biol. 1999 Jul 1;211(1):53-63.

Dorsal-ventral patterning defects in the eye of BF-1-deficient mice associated
with a restricted loss of shh expression.

Huh S(1), Hatini V, Marcus RC, Li SC, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York, 10021, USA.

Brain factor 1 (BF-1) is a winged-helix transcription factor with restricted
expression in the anterior optic vesicle and in the telencephalic neuroepithelium
of the neural tube. We have previously found that targeted disruption of the BF-1
gene results in hypoplasia of the cerebral hemispheres, which is more severe in
structures derived from the ventral telencephalon. Here we show that the loss of 
BF-1 leads to multiple developmental anomalies of the eyes. The most ventral
structure arising from the optic vesicle, the optic stalk, is missing and is
replaced by an expanded retina. Ventral closure of the optic cup and choroid
fissure does not occur. These dorsal-ventral patterning defects are not limited
to the BF-1-expressing (anterior) cells, but also involve the cells of the
posterior optic vesicle. Sonic hedgehog (shh) expression within the ventral
telencephalic neuroepithelium is specifically lost in the BF-1(-/-) mutant. Taken
together, these findings suggest that shh produced at this site plays a role in
patterning the developing eye. This localized deficit in shh expression may also 
contribute to the prominence of the ventral defects in the telencephalon of the
BF-1(-/-) mutant.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10373304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Mech Dev. 1999 Jan;80(1):15-27.

Xenopus brain factor-2 controls mesoderm, forebrain and neural crest development.

Gómez-Skarmeta JL(1), de la Calle-Mustienes E, Modolell J, Mayor R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Biología del Desarrollo, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de
Chile, Santiago, Chile.

The forkhead type Brain Factor 2 from mouse and chicken help pattern the
forebrain, optic vesicle and kidney. We have isolated a Xenopus homolog (Xbf2)
and found that during gastrulation it is expressed in the dorsolateral mesoderm, 
where it helps specify this territory by downregulating BMP-4 and its downstream 
genes. Indeed, Xbf2 overexpression caused partial axis duplication. Interference 
with BMP-4 signaling also occurs in isolated animal caps, since Xbf2 induces
neural tissue. Within the neurula forebrain, Xbf2 and the related Xbf1 gene are
expressed in the contiguous diencephalic and telencephalic territories,
respectively, and each gene represses the other. Finally, Xbf2 seems to
participate in the control of neural crest migration. Our data suggest that XBF2 
interferes with BMP-4 signaling, both in mesoderm and ectoderm.

PMID: 10096060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Dev Genes Evol. 1998 Oct;208(8):431-9.

Conservation of BF-1 expression in amphioxus and zebrafish suggests evolutionary 
ancestry of anterior cell types that contribute to the vertebrate telencephalon.

Toresson H(1), Martinez-Barbera JP, Bardsley A, Caubit X, Krauss S.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Lund
University, S-22362 Lund, Sweden.

The forkhead domain containing transcription factor BF-1 has been shown to play a
major role in the correct development of the cerebral hemispheres in the mouse.
BF-1 orthologs have been isolated from zebrafish and the cephalocordate
amphioxus. In both species, BF-1 is expressed in the anterior neural tube. In
zebrafish zBF-1 expression is restricted to anterior portions of the otic vesicle
and to the presumptive telencephalon. In amphioxus AmphiBF-1 is transiently seen 
in the frontal part of the first somite and, at 3 days of development, in a small
number of cells in the cerebral vesicle (cv). The anterior expression of BF-1 in 
chordates and vertebrates and of slp-1/2 in Drosophila suggests that BF-1 is
crucial for an evolutionarily conserved specification of anterior neuronal cell
types.

PMID: 9799423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Development. 1997 Jul;124(14):2709-18.

Inductive interactions direct early regionalization of the mouse forebrain.

Shimamura K(1), Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Langley Porter Psychiatric Institute, University 
of California at San Francisco, 94143-0984, USA.

The cellular and molecular mechanisms that regulate regional specification of the
forebrain are largely unknown. We studied the expression of transcription factors
in neural plate explants to identify tissues, and the molecules produced by these
tissues, that regulate medial-lateral and local patterning of the prosencephalic 
neural plate. Molecular properties of the medial neural plate are regulated by
the prechordal plate perhaps through the action of Sonic Hedgehog. By contrast,
gene expression in the lateral neural plate is regulated by non-neural ectoderm
and bone morphogenetic proteins. This suggests that the forebrain employs the
same medial-lateral (ventral-dorsal) patterning mechanisms present in the rest of
the central nervous system. We have also found that the anterior neural ridge
regulates patterning of the anterior neural plate, perhaps through a mechanism
that is distinct from those that regulate general medial-lateral patterning. The 
anterior neural ridge is essential for expression of BF1, a gene encoding a
transcription factor required for regionalization and growth of the telencephalic
and optic vesicles. In addition, the anterior neural ridge expresses Fgf8, and
recombinant FGF8 protein is capable of inducing BF1, suggesting that FGF8
regulates the development of anterolateral neural plate derivatives. Furthermore,
we provide evidence that the neural plate is subdivided into distinct
anterior-posterior domains that have different responses to the inductive signals
from the prechordal plate, Sonic Hedgehog, the anterior neural ridge and FGF8. In
sum, these results suggest that regionalization of the forebrain primordia is
established by several distinct patterning mechanisms: (1) anterior-posterior
patterning creates transverse zones with differential competence within the
neural plate, (2) patterning along the medial-lateral axis generates
longitudinally aligned domains and (3) local inductive interactions, such as a
signal(s) from the anterior neural ridge, further define the regional
organization.

PMID: 9226442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Bioessays. 1996 Sep;18(9):705-7.

A new role for the stromal cells in kidney development.

Bard J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Edinburgh University, Scotland.

New observations by Hatini et al. on the 'winged helix' transcription factor BF-2
will make us change our views about kidney development. This gene is only
expressed in stromal cells associated with the kidney medulla and cortex, but the
BF-2 knockout has unexpected abnormalities. Although the stromal cells appear
normal, the kidney is small, the ducts have limited branching and, instead of the
many normal nephrogenic aggregates, there are relatively few large mesenchymal
aggregates that fail to differentiate. The stromal cells thus seem to produce
factors regulating other aspects of kidney development, while the abnormalities
highlight a series of unsolved problems in kidney morphogenesis.

PMID: 8831286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Genes Dev. 1996 Jun 15;10(12):1467-78.

Essential role of stromal mesenchyme in kidney morphogenesis revealed by targeted
disruption of Winged Helix transcription factor BF-2.

Hatini V(1), Huh SO, Herzlinger D, Soares VC, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program and Division of Endocrinology, Cornell University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, New York 10021, USA.

Metanephric mesenchyme gives rise to both the epithelial cells of the nephron and
the stromal cells of the mature kidney. The function of the stroma. in kidney
morphogenesis is poorly understood. We have generated mice with a null mutation
in the Winged Helix (WH) transcription factor BF-2 to examine its function during
development. BF-2 expression within the developing kidney is restricted to the
stromal cell lineage. Homozygotes die within the first 24 hr after birth with
abnormal kidneys. Mutant kidneys are small, fused longitudinally, and rotated 90 
degrees ventrally. Histological examination reveals a smaller collecting system, 
numerous large condensations of mesenchyme, and a decrease in the number of
nephrons. Using molecular markers we show that induction and condensation of the 
nephrogenic mesenchyme occurs normally in mutant. The disruption of BF-2 reduces 
the rate of differentiation of the condensed mesenchyme into tubular epithelium, 
as well as the rate of growth and branching of the ureter and collecting system. 
Our findings demonstrate that BF-2 and stromal cells have essential functions
during kidney morphogenesis. Furthermore, they suggest that BF-2 controls the
production, by the stroma, of signals or factors that are required for the normal
transition of induced mesenchyme into tubular epithelium and full growth and
branching of the collecting system.

PMID: 8666231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Mol Cell Neurosci. 1996 Apr;7(4):304-21.

Clonal cell lines produced by infection of neocortical neuroblasts using multiple
oncogenes transduced by retroviruses.

Chun J(1), Jaenisch R.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139,
USA. jchun@ucsd.edu

Toward understanding the early molecular development of neocortical neurons, we
report the generation of two clonal murine cell lines derived by sequential
oncogenic retroviral infection of neocortical neuronal precursors. The resulting 
cell lines stably express the telencephalon-specific gene BF-1 and a gene
enriched in the neocortical ventricular zone, vzg-1. They also express early
neuronal but not glial markers, possess neuron-like processes without chemical
synapses by ultrastructure, and appear pyramidal or bipolar with processes
resembling apical dendrites, bifurcating and beaded axons, or growth cones.
Immortalization appears to have occurred through the expression of oncogene
combinations SV40 large T with vras or SV40 large T with both vsrc and vmyc.
These cell lines may represent developing neocortical neuroblasts blocked from
complete differentiation, and they should be useful in the isolation and analysis
of genes involved in early neocortical development.

PMID: 8793865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 1996 Apr;37(1-2):96-104.

Characterization of the structure and function of the gene for transcription
factor BF-1, an essential regulator of forebrain development.

Li H(1), Tao W, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Division, Cornell University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New 
York, NY 10021, USA.

Brain factor-1 (BF-1) is a winged-helix transcription factor which has been shown
to be essential for the development of the cerebral hemispheres. We report here
the cloning and characterization of the mouse BF-1 gene. We have identified two
classes of alternatively spliced mouse BF-1 cDNA which are transcribed from
distinct promoters. Both classes of cDNA encode identical BF-1 proteins. The
class 1 mouse cDNA is the homolog of the previously reported rat and human BF-1
cDNAs, and accounts for about 90-95% of BF-1 expression in brain. Primer
extension analyses show that the major promoter, P1, is TATA-less and has
multiple transcription start sites. We identified neural cell lines which express
BF-1 primarily from the P1 promoter, including the OBL21a and OBL21 cell lines
derived from the olfactory bulb. Expression of BF-1 is highest in proliferating
OBL21 cells, declining as the cells differentiate in vitro. This correlates well 
with the reduction of BF-1 expression as the cells of the telencephalic
neuroepithelium differentiate. Using these cells, we demonstrate that the genomic
region between -3.7kb and -79 bp upstream of the P1 promoter contains
cell-specific enhancer activity in transient transfection assays.

PMID: 8738140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Neuron. 1995 Jun;14(6):1141-52.

Winged helix transcription factor BF-1 is essential for the development of the
cerebral hemispheres.

Xuan S(1), Baptista CA, Balas G, Tao W, Soares VC, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Genetics Program, Cornell University Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York
10021, USA.

We generated mice with a null mutation of the forebrain-restricted transcription 
factor BF-1 to examine its function in brain development. Heterozygous animals
have an apparently normal phenotype. Homozygous null BF-1 mutants die at birth
and have a dramatic reduction in the size of the cerebral hemispheres. The
development of the ventral telencephalon is more severely affected than that of
the dorsal telencephalon. Telencephalic neuroepithelial cells are specified in
the BF-1 mutant, but their proliferation is reduced. Dorsal telencephalic
neuroepithelial cells also differentiate prematurely, leading to early depletion 
of the progenitor population. These results suggest that BF-1 controls the
morphogenesis of the telencephalon by regulating the rate of neuroepithelial cell
proliferation and the timing of neuronal differentiation.

PMID: 7605629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Neurobiol. 1994 Oct;25(10):1293-309.

Expression of winged helix genes, BF-1 and BF-2, define adjacent domains within
the developing forebrain and retina.

Hatini V(1), Tao W, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Genetics Program, Sloan-Kettering Division, Cornell
University Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York 10021.

One of the earliest events in the development of the central nervous system is
the establishment of positional identity along the anteroposterior (A-P) axis of 
the neuroepithelium. In recent years, regulatory genes with regionally restricted
expression in the neuroepithelium have been identified which are believed to
specify its developmental fate. We have previously described Brain Factor-1
(BF-1), a winged helix (WH) transcription factor expressed in the telencephalic
neuroepithelium (Tao and Lai, 1992) Neuron 8:957-966. Here we report the cloning 
of the mouse cDNA for a novel WH protein, BF-2. We show that BF-2 is a
sequence-specific DNA binding protein with a binding specificity distinct from
BF-1. Its expression in the CNS during embryogenesis is restricted to the rostral
diencephalic neuroepithelium. The caudal boundary of BF-2 expression is at the
zona limitans intrathalamica. Rostrally, the BF-2 expression domain is adjacent
to that of BF-1. The expression domains of these two factors define a boundary
within the developing forebrain neuroepithelium. The BF-1/BF-2 boundary also
extends laterally to divide the optic stalk and the retina into nasal (anterior) 
and temporal (posterior) domains. These observations suggest that in addition to 
playing a role in the subdivision of the forebrain, these two WH factors may also
function to establish positional information in the retinal neuroepithelium.

PMID: 7815060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Neuron. 1992 May;8(5):957-66.

Telencephalon-restricted expression of BF-1, a new member of the HNF-3/fork head 
gene family, in the developing rat brain.

Tao W(1), Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York 10021.

We have previously characterized a novel transcription factor family in mammals, 
the HNF-3 family, by the members' homology to one another and to the Drosophila
homeotic gene fork head. The expression of fork head is restricted to the
anterior and posterior termini of the early fly embryo. Brain factor 1 (BF-1) is 
a new member of this family isolated from rat brain with an expression pattern
and DNA binding specificity distinct from the HNF-3 genes. Expression is highly
restricted in the developing neural tube to its rostral end, which gives rise to 
the telencephalon. These results suggest that BF-1 plays an important role in the
establishment of the regional subdivision of the developing brain and in the
development of the telencephalon.

PMID: 1350202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


