
1. J Neurosci Methods. 2016 Mar 29. pii: S0165-0270(16)30023-1. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2016.03.017. [Epub ahead of print]

Directed differentiation of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons from human
pluripotent stem cells.

Hu Y(1), Qu ZY(2), Cao SY(2), Li Q(2), Ma L(3), Krencik R(4), Xu M(2), Liu Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell and Neural Regeneration, School of Pharmacy, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing, China; State Key Laboratory of Reproductive
Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (2)Institute for Stem Cell 
and Neural Regeneration, School of Pharmacy, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
China. (3)Department of Human Anatomy and Histology, School of Basic Medical
Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (4)Waisman Center, University of
Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA. (5)Institute for Stem Cell and Neural Regeneration, 
School of Pharmacy, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. Electronic
address: yanliu@njmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCNs) play critical roles in
learning, memory and cognition. Dysfunction or degeneration of BFCNs may connect 
to neuropathology, such as Alzheimer's disease, Down's syndrome and dementia.
Generation of functional BFCNs may contribute to the studies of cell-based
therapy and pathogenesis that is related to learning and memory deficits.
NEW METHOD: Here we describe a detail method for robust generation of BFCNs from 
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and human induced pluripotent stem cells
(hiPSCs). In this method, BFCN progenitors are patterned from hESC or
hiPSC-derived primitive neuroepithelial cells, with the treatment of sonic
hedgehog (SHH) or combination with its agonist Purmorphamine, and by co-culturing
with human astrocytes.
RESULTS: At day 20, ~90% hPSC-derived progenitors expressed NKX2.1, which is a
transcriptional marker for MGE. Moreover, around 40% of NKX2.1+ cells
co-expressed OLIG2 and ~15% of NKX2.1+ cells co-expressed ISLET1, which are
ventral markers. At day 35, ~40% neurons robustly express ChAT, most of which are
co-labeled with NKX2.1, ISLET1 and FOXG1, indicating the basal forebrain-like
identity. At day 45, these neurons express mature neuronal markers MAP2,
Synapsin, and VAChT.
COMPARISON WITH EXISTING METHOD(S): In this method, undefined conditions
including genetic modification or cell-sorting are avoided. As a choice, feeder
free conditions are used to avoid ingredients of animal origin. Moreover,
Purmorphamine can be substituted for SHH to induce ventral progenitors
effectively and economically.
CONCLUSION: We provide an efficient method to generate BFCNs from multiple hPSC
lines, which offers the potential application for disease modeling and
pharmacological studies.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 27036311  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Neurology. 2016 Mar 30. pii: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000002585. [Epub ahead of print]

Delineation of the movement disorders associated with FOXG1 mutations.

Papandreou A(1), Schneider RB(1), Augustine EF(1), Ng J(1), Mankad K(1), Meyer
E(1), McTague A(1), Ngoh A(1), Hemingway C(1), Robinson R(1), Varadkar SM(1),
Kinali M(1), Salpietro V(1), O'Driscoll MC(1), Basheer SN(1), Webster RI(1),
Mohammad SS(1), Pula S(1), McGowan M(1), Trump N(1), Jenkins L(1), Elmslie F(1), 
Scott RH(1), Hurst JA(1), Perez-Duenas B(1), Paciorkowski AR(1), Kurian MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)From Molecular Neurosciences (A.P., J.N., E.M., A.M., A.N., S.S.M., B.P.-D.,
M.A.K.), Developmental Neurosciences Programme, University College
London-Institute of Child Health; Departments of Neurology (A.P., C.H., R.R.,
S.M.V., M.A.K.) and Neuroradiology (K.M.), Department of Molecular Genetics,
North East Thames Regional Genetics Services (N.T., L.J.), and Department of
Clinical Genetics (R.H.S., J.A.H.), Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK; Department of Neurology (R.B.S., E.F.A., A.R.P.),
Center for Human Experimental Therapeutics (E.F.A.), and Departments of
Pediatrics and Biomedical Genetics (A.R.P.), University of Rochester Medical
Center, NY; Gene Transfer Technology Group (J.N.), UCL-Institute for Women's
Health, London; Departments of Paediatric Neurology (M.K., V.S.) and Paediatrics 
(M.C.O.), Chelsea and Westminster NHS Foundation Trust, London; Department of
Perinatal Neurology (S.N.B.), Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK; Institute for
Neuroscience and Muscle Research (R.I.W.), Department of Neurology (R.I.W.), and 
Neuroimmunology Group, Institute for Neuroscience and Muscle Research (S.S.M.),
The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia; Child Development Centre 
(S.P., M.M.) and South West Thames Regional Genetics Service (F.E.), St George's 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; and Department of Child
Neurology (B.P.-D.) and Centre for Biomedical Research in Rare Diseases
(CIBERER-ISCIII) (B.P.-D.), Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Spain. (2)From Molecular Neurosciences (A.P., J.N., E.M., A.M., A.N., S.S.M.,
B.P.-D., M.A.K.), Developmental Neurosciences Programme, University College
London-Institute of Child Health; Departments of Neurology (A.P., C.H., R.R.,
S.M.V., M.A.K.) and Neuroradiology (K.M.), Department of Molecular Genetics,
North East Thames Regional Genetics Services (N.T., L.J.), and Department of
Clinical Genetics (R.H.S., J.A.H.), Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK; Department of Neurology (R.B.S., E.F.A., A.R.P.),
Center for Human Experimental Therapeutics (E.F.A.), and Departments of
Pediatrics and Biomedical Genetics (A.R.P.), University of Rochester Medical
Center, NY; Gene Transfer Technology Group (J.N.), UCL-Institute for Women's
Health, London; Departments of Paediatric Neurology (M.K., V.S.) and Paediatrics 
(M.C.O.), Chelsea and Westminster NHS Foundation Trust, London; Department of
Perinatal Neurology (S.N.B.), Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK; Institute for
Neuroscience and Muscle Research (R.I.W.), Department of Neurology (R.I.W.), and 
Neuroimmunology Group, Institute for Neuroscience and Muscle Research (S.S.M.),
The Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, Australia; Child Development Centre 
(S.P., M.M.) and South West Thames Regional Genetics Service (F.E.), St George's 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK; and Department of Child
Neurology (B.P.-D.) and Centre for Biomedical Research in Rare Diseases
(CIBERER-ISCIII) (B.P.-D.), Hospital Sant Joan de Déu, Universitat de Barcelona, 
Spain. manju.kurian@ucl.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: The primary objective of this research was to characterize the
movement disorders associated with FOXG1 mutations.
METHODS: We identified patients with FOXG1 mutations who were referred to either 
a tertiary movement disorder clinic or tertiary epilepsy service and
retrospectively reviewed medical records, clinical investigations, neuroimaging, 
and available video footage. We administered a telephone-based questionnaire
regarding the functional impact of the movement disorders and perceived efficacy 
of treatment to the caregivers of one cohort of participants.
RESULTS: We identified 28 patients with FOXG1 mutations, of whom 6 had previously
unreported mutations. A wide variety of movement disorders were identified, with 
dystonia, choreoathetosis, and orolingual/facial dyskinesias most commonly
present. Ninety-three percent of patients had a mixed movement disorder
phenotype. In contrast to the phenotype classically described with FOXG1
mutations, 4 patients with missense mutations had a milder phenotype, with
independent ambulation, spoken language, and normocephaly. Hyperkinetic
involuntary movements were a major clinical feature in these patients. Of the
symptomatic treatments targeted to control abnormal involuntary movements, most
did not emerge as clearly beneficial, although 4 patients had a
caregiver-reported response to levodopa.
CONCLUSIONS: Abnormal involuntary movements are a major feature of FOXG1
mutations. Our study delineates the spectrum of movement disorders and confirms
an expanding clinical phenotype. Symptomatic treatment may be considered for
severe or disabling cases, although further research regarding potential
treatment strategies is necessary.

© 2016 American Academy of Neurology.

PMID: 27029630  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Neuroscience. 2016 Mar 19. pii: S0306-4522(16)00250-5. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.03.027. [Epub ahead of print]

Visual impairment in FOXG1-mutated individuals and mice.

Boggio EM(1), Pancrazi L(2), Gennaro M(3), Lo Rizzo C(4), Mari F(4), Meloni I(5),
Ariani F(4), Panighini A(1), Novelli E(1), Biagioni M(6), Strettoi E(1), Hayek
J(7), Rufa A(8), Pizzorusso T(9), Renieri A(10), Costa M(2).

Author information: 
(1)CNR Neuroscience Institute, Pisa, Italy. (2)CNR Neuroscience Institute, Pisa, 
Italy; Scuola Normale Superiore, BioSNS Lab, Pisa, Italy. (3)CNR Neuroscience
Institute, Pisa, Italy; NEUROFARBA Department, University of Firenze, Firenze,
Italy. (4)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy; Genetica Medica,
Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. (5)Medical Genetics,
University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (6)CNR Neuroscience Institute, Pisa, Italy;
Tuscan Doctorate School, University of Firenze, Firenze, Italy. (7)Child
Neuropsychiatry Unit, University Hospital, AOUS, Siena, Italy. (8)Eye Tracking
and Visual Application Lab (EVAlab), University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (9)CNR
Neuroscience Institute, Pisa, Italy; NEUROFARBA Department, University of
Firenze, Firenze, Italy. Electronic address: tommaso@in.cnr.it. (10)Medical
Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy; Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. Electronic address:
alessandra.renieri@unisi.it.

The Forkead Box G1 (FOXG1 in humans, Foxg1 in mice) gene encodes for a
DNA-binding transcription factor, essential for the development of the
telencephalon in mammalian forebrain. Mutations in FOXG1 have been reported to be
involved in the onset of Rett Syndrome, for which sequence alterations of MECP2
and CDKL5 are known. While visual alterations are not classical hallmarks of Rett
syndrome, an increasing body of evidence shows visual impairment in patients and 
in MeCP2and CDKL5 animal models. Herein we focused on the functional role of
FOXG1 in the visual system of animal models (Foxg1(+/Cre) mice) and of a cohort
of subjects carrying FOXG1 mutations or deletions. Visual physiology of
Foxg1(+/Cre) mice was assessed by visually evoked potentials, which revealed a
significant reduction in response amplitude and visual acuity with respect to
wild-type littermates. Morphological investigation showed abnormalities in the
organization of excitatory/inhibitory circuits in the visual cortex. No
alterations were observed in retinal structure. By examining a cohort of
FOXG1-mutated individuals with a panel of neuro-ophthalmological assessments, we 
found that all of them exhibited visual alterations compatible with high-level
visual dysfunctions. In conclusion our data show that Foxg1 haploinsufficiency
results in an impairment of mouse and human visual cortical function.

Copyright © 2016 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27001178  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. J Med Genet. 2016 Mar 18. pii: jmedgenet-2015-103263. doi:
10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103263. [Epub ahead of print]

Improving diagnosis and broadening the phenotypes in early-onset seizure and
severe developmental delay disorders through gene panel analysis.

Trump N(1), McTague A(2), Brittain H(1), Papandreou A(2), Meyer E(2), Ngoh A(2), 
Palmer R(1), Morrogh D(1), Boustred C(1), Hurst JA(1), Jenkins L(1), Kurian
MA(2), Scott RH(3).

Author information: 
(1)North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children, London, UK. (2)Molecular Neurosciences, Developmental Neurosciences
Programme, University College London Institute of Child Health, London, UK
Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, UK.
(3)North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street Hospital for 
Children, London, UK Genetics and Genomic Medicine Unit, University College
London Institute of Child Health, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: We sought to investigate the diagnostic yield and mutation spectrum
in previously reported genes for early-onset epilepsy and disorders of severe
developmental delay.
METHODS: In 400 patients with these disorders with no known underlying aetiology 
and no major structural brain anomaly, we analysed 46 genes using a combination
of targeted sequencing on an Illumina MiSeq platform and targeted, exon-level
microarray copy number analysis.
RESULTS: We identified causative mutations in 71/400 patients (18%). The
diagnostic rate was highest among those with seizure onset within the first two
months of life (39%), although overall it was similar in those with and without
seizures. The most frequently mutated gene was SCN2A (11 patients, 3%). Other
recurrently mutated genes included CDKL5, KCNQ2, SCN8A (six patients each),
FOXG1, MECP2, SCN1A, STXBP1 (five patients each), KCNT1, PCDH19, TCF4 (three
patients each) and ATP1A3, PRRT2 and SLC9A6 (two patients each). Mutations in
EHMT1, GABRB3, LGI1, MBD5, PIGA, UBE3A and ZEB2 were each found in single
patients. We found mutations in a number of genes in patients where either the
electroclinical features or dysmorphic phenotypes were atypical for the
identified gene. In only 11 cases (15%) had the clinician sufficient certainty to
specify the mutated gene as the likely cause before testing.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data demonstrate the considerable utility of a gene panel
approach in the diagnosis of patients with early-onset epilepsy and severe
developmental delay disorders., They provide further insights into the phenotypic
spectrum and genotype-phenotype correlations for a number of the causative genes 
and emphasise the value of exon-level copy number testing in their analysis.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26993267  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. J Assoc Res Otolaryngol. 2016 Mar 15. [Epub ahead of print]

QTL Mapping of Endocochlear Potential Differences between C57BL/6J and BALB/cJ
mice.

Ohlemiller KK(1), Kiener AL(2), Gagnon PM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Central Institute for the Deaf at Washington
University School of Medicine, Fay and Carl Simons Center for Hearing and
Deafness, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid, St. Louis, MO,
63110, USA. kohlemiller@wustl.edu. (2)Department of Speech and Hearing Science,
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (3)Department of Otolaryngology,
Central Institute for the Deaf at Washington University School of Medicine, Fay
and Carl Simons Center for Hearing and Deafness, Washington University School of 
Medicine, 660 S. Euclid, St. Louis, MO, 63110, USA.

We reported earlier that the endocochlear potential (EP) differs between C57BL/6J
(B6) and BALB/cJ (BALB) mice, being lower in BALBs by about 10 mV (Ohlemiller et 
al. Hear Res 220: 10-26, 2006). This difference corresponds to strain differences
with respect to the density of marginal cells in cochlear stria vascularis. After
about 1 year of age, BALB mice also tend toward EP reduction that correlates with
further marginal cell loss. We therefore suggested that early sub-clinical
features of the BALB stria vascularis may predispose these mice to a condition
modeling Schuknecht's strial presbycusis. We further reported (Ohlemiller et al. 
J Assoc Res Otolaryngol 12: 45-58, 2011) that the acute effects of a 2-h 110 dB
SPL noise exposure differ between B6 and BALB mice, such that the EP remains
unchanged in B6 mice, but is reduced by 40-50 mV in BALBs. In about 25 % of
BALBs, the EP does not completely recover, so that permanent EP reduction may
contribute to noise-induced permanent threshold shifts in BALBs. To identify
genes and alleles that may promote natural EP variation as well as noise-related 
EP reduction in BALB mice, we have mapped related quantitative trait loci (QTLs) 
using 12 recombinant inbred (RI) strains formed from B6 and BALB (CxB1-CxB12). EP
and strial marginal cell density were measured in B6 mice, BALB mice, their F1
hybrids, and RI mice without noise exposure, and 1-3 h after broadband noise
(4-45 kHz, 110 dB SPL, 2 h). For unexposed mice, the strain distribution patterns
for EP and marginal cell density were used to generate preliminary QTL maps for
both EP and marginal cell density. Six QTL regions were at least statistically
suggestive, including a significant QTL for marginal cell density on chromosome
12 that overlapped a weak QTL for EP variation. This region, termed Maced
(Marginal cell density QTL) supports the notion of marginal cell density as a
genetically influenced contributor to natural EP variation. Candidate genes for
Maced notably include Foxg1, Foxa1, Akap6, Nkx2-1, and Pax9. Noise exposure
produced significant EP reductions in two RI strains as well as significant EP
increases in two RI strains. QTL mapping of the EP in noise-exposed RI mice
yielded four suggestive regions. Two of these overlapped with QTL regions we
previously identified for noise-related EP reduction in CBA/J mice (Ohlemiller et
al. Hear Res 260: 47-53, 2010) on chromosomes 5 and 18 (Nirep). The present map
may narrow the Nirep interval to a ~10-Mb region of proximal Chr. 18 that
includes Zeb1, Arhgap12, Mpp7, and Gjd4. This study marks the first exploration
of natural gene variants that modulate the EP. Their orthologs may underlie some 
human hearing loss that originates in the lateral wall.

PMID: 26980469  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Cell Host Microbe. 2016 Mar 9;19(3):388-99. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2016.02.009.

Bacterial Peptidoglycan Transverses the Placenta to Induce Fetal
Neuroproliferation and Aberrant Postnatal Behavior.

Humann J(1), Mann B(1), Gao G(1), Moresco P(1), Ramahi J(1), Loh LN(1), Farr
A(1), Hu Y(1), Durick-Eder K(1), Fillon SA(1), Smeyne RJ(2), Tuomanen EI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital,
Memphis, TN 38105, USA. (2)Department of Neurobiology, St. Jude Children's
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. (3)Department of Infectious Diseases, 
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA. Electronic
address: elaine.tuomanen@stjude.org.

Maternal infection during pregnancy is associated with adverse outcomes for the
fetus, including postnatal cognitive disorders. However, the underlying
mechanisms are obscure. We find that bacterial cell wall peptidoglycan (CW), a
universal PAMP for TLR2, traverses the murine placenta into the developing fetal 
brain. In contrast to adults, CW-exposed fetal brains did not show any signs of
inflammation or neuronal death. Instead, the neuronal transcription factor FoxG1 
was induced, and neuroproliferation leading to a 50% greater density of neurons
in the cortical plate was observed. Bacterial infection of pregnant dams,
followed by antibiotic treatment, which releases CW, yielded the same result.
Neuroproliferation required TLR2 and was recapitulated in vitro with fetal
neuronal precursor cells and TLR2/6, but not TLR2/1, ligands. The fetal
neuroproliferative response correlated with abnormal cognitive behavior in
CW-exposed pups following birth. Thus, the bacterial CW-TLR2 signaling axis
affects fetal neurodevelopment and may underlie postnatal cognitive disorders.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4787272 [Available on 2017-03-09]
PMID: 26962947  [PubMed - in process]


7. Dev Biol. 2016 Apr 1;412(1):139-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.02.011. Epub 2016
Feb 16.

Generation and analysis of an improved Foxg1-IRES-Cre driver mouse line.

Kawaguchi D(1), Sahara S(2), Zembrzycki A(2), O'Leary DD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. Electronic address: dkawaguchi@mol.f.u-tokyo.ac.jp.
(2)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 
La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Foxg1 expression is highly restricted to the telencephalon and other head
structures in the early embryo. This expression pattern has been exploited to
generate conditional knockout mice, based on a widely used Foxg1-Cre knock-in
line (Foxg1(tm1(cre)Skm)), in which the Foxg1 coding region was replaced by the
Cre gene. The utility of this line, however, is severely hampered for two
reasons: (1) Foxg1-Cre mice display ectopic and unpredictable Cre activity, and
(2) Foxg1 haploinsufficiency can produce neurodevelopmental phenotypes. To
overcome these issues, we have generated a new Foxg1-IRES-Cre knock-in mouse
line, in which an IRES-Cre cassette was inserted in the 3'UTR of Foxg1 locus,
thus preserving the endogenous Foxg1 coding region and un-translated gene
regulatory sequences in the 3'UTR, including recently discovered microRNA target 
sites. We further demonstrate that the new Foxg1-IRES-Cre line displays
consistent Cre activity patterns that recapitulated the endogenous Foxg1
expression at embryonic and postnatal stages without causing defects in cortical 
development. We conclude that the new Foxg1-IRES-Cre mouse line is a unique and
advanced tool for studying genes involved in the development of the telencephalon
and other Foxg1-expressing regions starting from early embryonic stages.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26896590  [PubMed - in process]


8. BMC Genet. 2016 Feb 11;17(1):39. doi: 10.1186/s12863-016-0345-x.

Discovery of candidate genes for nonsyndromic cleft lip palate through
genome-wide linkage analysis of large extended families in the Malay population.

Mohamad Shah NS(1), Salahshourifar I(2), Sulong S(3), Wan Sulaiman WA(4), Halim
AS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Reconstructive Science Unit, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains
Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia. sya_escoe@yahoo.co.uk. (2)Department of Biology,
School of Basic Sciences, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Isfahan, Iran. isalahshouri@gmail.com. (3)Human Genome Center, School of Medical 
Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia. ssarina@usm.my.
(4)Reconstructive Science Unit, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains
Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia. wazman@usm.my. (5)School of Medical Sciences,
Health Campus, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia. ashalim@usm.my.

BACKGROUND: Nonsyndromic orofacial clefts are one of the most common birth
defects worldwide. It occurs as a result of genetic or environmental factors.
This study investigates the genetic contribution to nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or
palate through the analysis of family pedigrees. Candidate genes associated with 
the condition were identified from large extended families from the Malay
population.
RESULTS: A significant nonparametric linkage (NPL) score was detected in family
100. Other suggestive NPL and logarithm of the odds (LOD) scores were attained
from families 50, 58, 99 and 100 under autosomal recessive mode. Heterogeneity
LOD (HLOD) score<U+2009>=<U+2009>1 was determined for all families, confirming genetic
heterogeneity of the population and indicating that a proportion of families
might be linked to each other. Several candidate genes in linkage intervals were 
determined; LPHN2 at 1p31, SATB2 at 2q33.1-q35, PVRL3 at 3q13.3, COL21A1 at
6p12.1, FOXP2 at 7q22.3-q33, FOXG1 and HECTD1 at 14q12 and TOX3 at 16q12.1.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified several novel and known candidate genes for
nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or palate through genome-wide linkage analysis.
Further analysis of the involvement of these genes in the condition will shed
light on the disease mechanism. Comprehensive genetic testing of the candidate
genes is warranted.

PMCID: PMC4751652
PMID: 26868259  [PubMed - in process]


9. Genet Med. 2016 Jan 21. doi: 10.1038/gim.2015.186. [Epub ahead of print]

Diagnostic exome sequencing provides a molecular diagnosis for a significant
proportion of patients with epilepsy.

Helbig KL(1), Farwell Hagman KD(1), Shinde DN(1), Mroske C(1), Powis Z(1), Li
S(2), Tang S(1), Helbig I(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Genomics, Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, California, USA.
(2)Department of Bioinformatics, Ambry Genetics, Aliso Viejo, California, USA.
(3)Division of Neurology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA. (4)Department of Neuropediatrics, University Medical Center
Schleswig-Holstein, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany.

PURPOSE: To assess the yield of diagnostic exome sequencing (DES) and to
characterize the molecular findings in characterized and novel disease genes in
patients with epilepsy.
METHODS: In an unselected sample of 1,131 patients referred for DES, overall
results were compared between patients with and without epilepsy. DES results
were examined based on age of onset and epilepsy diagnosis.
RESULTS: Positive/likely positive results were identified in 112/293 (38.2%)
epilepsy patients compared with 210/732 (28.7%) patients without epilepsy (P =
0.004). The diagnostic yield in characterized disease genes among patients with
epilepsy was 33.4% (105/314). KCNQ2, MECP2, FOXG1, IQSEC2, KMT2A, and STXBP1 were
most commonly affected by de novo alterations. Patients with epileptic
encephalopathies had the highest rate of positive findings (43.4%). A likely
positive novel genetic etiology was proposed in 14/200 (7%) patients with
epilepsy; this frequency was highest in patients with epileptic encephalopathies 
(17%). Three genes (COQ4, DNM1, and PURA) were initially reported as likely
positive novel disease genes and were subsequently corroborated in independent
peer-reviewed publications.
CONCLUSION: DES with analysis and interpretation of both characterized and novel 
genetic etiologies is a useful diagnostic tool in epilepsy, particularly in
severe early-onset epilepsy. The reporting on novel genetic etiologies may
further increase the diagnostic yield.Genet Med advance online publication 21
January 2016Genetics in Medicine (2016); doi:10.1038/gim.2015.186.

PMID: 26795593  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Dev Dyn. 2016 Mar;245(3):414-26. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24376. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

Ectodermal Wnt controls nasal pit morphogenesis through modulation of the
BMP/FGF/JNK signaling axis.

Zhu XJ(1), Liu Y(1), Yuan X(1), Wang M(1), Zhao W(1), Yang X(1), Zhang X(1), Hsu 
W(2), Qiu M(1,)(3), Zhang Z(4), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, College of Life and
Environmental Science, Hangzhou Normal University, Zhejiang, China. (2)Department
of Biomedical Genetics, Center for Oral Biology, James P Wilmot Cancer Center,
University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York. (3)Department of
Anatomical Sciences and Neurobiology, University of Louisville, Louisville,
Kentucky. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, Tulane University Medical center, New
Orleans, Louisiana.

BACKGROUND: Mutations of WNT3, WNT5A, WNT9B, and WNT11 genes are associated with 
orofacial birth defects, including nonsyndromic cleft lip with cleft palate in
humans. However, the source of Wnt ligands and their signaling effects on the
orofacial morphogenetic process remain elusive.
RESULTS: Using Foxg1-Cre to impair Wnt secretion through the inactivation of
Gpr177/mWls, we investigate the relevant regulation of Wnt production and
signaling in nasal-facial development. Ectodermal ablation of Gpr177 leads to
severe facial deformities resulting from dramatically reduced cell proliferation 
and increased cell death due to a combined loss of WNT, FGF and BMP signaling in 
the developing facial prominence. In the invaginating nasal pit, the Gpr177
disruption also causes a detrimental effect on migration of the olfactory
epithelial cells into the mesenchymal region. The blockage of Wnt secretion
apparently impairs the olfactory epithelial cells through modulation of JNK
signaling.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study thus suggests the head ectoderm, including the facial
ectoderm and the neuroectoderm, as the source of canonical as well as
noncanonical Wnt ligands during early development of the nasal-facial prominence.
Both ß-catenin-dependent and -independent signaling pathways are required for
proper development of these morphogenetic processes. Developmental Dynamics
245:414-426, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4774528 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26661618  [PubMed - in process]


11. BMC Biol. 2015 Nov 30;13:103. doi: 10.1186/s12915-015-0210-9.

Loss of Ezh2 promotes a midbrain-to-forebrain identity switch by direct gene
derepression and Wnt-dependent regulation.

Zemke M(1), Draganova K(2), Klug A(3), Schöler A(4), Zurkirchen L(5), Gay MH(6), 
Cheng P(7), Koseki H(8), Valenta T(9), Schübeler D(10), Basler K(11), Sommer
L(12).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Anatomy, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
martina.zemke@anatom.uzh.ch. (2)Institute of Anatomy, University of Zürich,
Zürich, Switzerland. kalina.draganova@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (3)Institute of
Anatomy, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. annika.klug@uzh.ch.
(4)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
anne.schoeler@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (5)Institute of Anatomy, University of
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. luis.zurkirchen@uzh.ch. (6)Institute of Anatomy,
University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. max.g@unibas.ch. (7)Department of
Dermatology, University Hospital Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland. Phil.Cheng@usz.ch. 
(8)RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, RIKEN Yokohama Institute,
Yokohama, Japan. koseki@rcai.riken.go.jp. (9)Institute of Molecular Life
Sciences, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. tomas.valenta@imls.uzh.ch.
(10)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.
Dirk.Schubeler@fmi.ch. (11)Institute of Molecular Life Sciences, University of
Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. konrad.basler@imls.uzh.ch. (12)Institute of Anatomy,
University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland. lukas.sommer@anatom.uzh.ch.

BACKGROUND: Precise spatiotemporal control of gene expression is essential for
the establishment of correct cell numbers and identities during brain
development. This process involves epigenetic control mechanisms, such as those
mediated by the polycomb group protein Ezh2, which catalyzes trimethylation of
histone H3K27 (H3K27me3) and thereby represses gene expression.
RESULTS: Herein, we show that Ezh2 plays a crucial role in the development and
maintenance of the midbrain. Conditional deletion of Ezh2 in the developing
midbrain resulted in decreased neural progenitor proliferation, which is
associated with derepression of cell cycle inhibitors and negative regulation of 
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. Of note, Ezh2 ablation also promoted ectopic expression 
of a forebrain transcriptional program involving derepression of the forebrain
determinants Foxg1 and Pax6. This was accompanied by reduced expression of
midbrain markers, including Pax3 and Pax7, as a consequence of decreased
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.
CONCLUSION: Ezh2 is required for appropriate brain growth and maintenance of
regional identity by H3K27me3-mediated gene repression and control of canonical
Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC4665911
PMID: 26621269  [PubMed - in process]


12. Cereb Cortex. 2015 Nov 29. pii: bhv297. [Epub ahead of print]

Impaired Interneuron Development after Foxg1 Disruption.

Yang Y(1), Shen W(1), Ni Y(1), Su Y(1), Yang Z(2), Zhao C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of
Anatomy and Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Southeast University, Nanjing
210009, China. (2)Institutes of Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China. (3)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE,
Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, School of Medicine, Southeast University,
Nanjing 210009, China Center of Depression, Beijing Institute for Brain
Disorders, Beijing 100069, China.

Interneurons play pivotal roles in the modulation of cortical function; however, 
the mechanisms that control interneuron development remain unclear. This study
aimed to explore a new role for Foxg1 in interneuron development. By crossing
Foxg1(fl/fl) mice with a Dlx5/6-Cre line, we determined that conditional
disruption of Foxg1 in the subpallium results in defects in interneuron
development. In developing interneurons, the expression levels of several
receptors, including roundabout-1, Eph receptor A4, and C-X-C motif receptor 4/7,
were strongly downregulated, which led to migration defects after Foxg1 ablation.
The transcription factors Dlx1/2 and Mash1, which have been reported to be
involved in interneuron development, were significantly upregulated at the mRNA
levels. Foxg1 mutant cells developed shorter neurites and fewer branches and
displayed severe migration defects in vitro. Notably, Prox1, which is a
transcription factor that functions as a key regulator in the development of
excitatory neurons, was also dramatically upregulated at both the mRNA and
protein levels, suggesting that Prox1 is also important for interneuron
development. Our work demonstrates that Foxg1 may act as a critical upstream
regulator of Dlx1/2, Mash1, and Prox1 to control interneuron development. These
findings will further our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of
interneuron development.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26620267  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Stem Cell Res. 2015 Nov;15(3):731-41. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2015.10.014. Epub 2015
Oct 24.

Rapid generation of sub-type, region-specific neurons and neural networks from
human pluripotent stem cell-derived neurospheres.

Begum AN(1), Guoynes C(2), Cho J(1), Hao J(3), Lutfy K(4), Hong Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona,
CA 91766-1854, USA. (2)Graduate College of Biomedical Sciences, Western
University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA 91766, USA. (3)College of Veterinary
Medicine, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA 91766-1854, USA;
Graduate College of Biomedical Sciences, Western University of Health Sciences,
Pomona, CA 91766, USA. (4)College of Pharmacy, Western University of Health
Sciences, Pomona, CA 91766, USA. (5)College of Veterinary Medicine, Western
University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA 91766-1854, USA; Graduate College of
Biomedical Sciences, Western University of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA 91766,
USA. Electronic address: yhong@westernu.edu.

Stem cell-based neuronal differentiation has provided a unique opportunity for
disease modeling and regenerative medicine. Neurospheres are the most commonly
used neuroprogenitors for neuronal differentiation, but they often clump in
culture, which has always represented a challenge for neurodifferentiation. In
this study, we report a novel method and defined culture conditions for
generating sub-type or region-specific neurons from human embryonic and induced
pluripotent stem cells derived neurosphere without any genetic manipulation.
Round and bright-edged neurospheres were generated in a supplemented knockout
serum replacement medium (SKSRM) with 10% CO2, which doubled the expression of
the NESTIN, PAX6 and FOXG1 genes compared with those cultured with 5% CO2.
Furthermore, an additional step (AdSTEP) was introduced to fragment the
neurospheres and facilitate the formation of a neuroepithelial-type monolayer
that we termed the "neurosphederm". The large neural tube-type rosette (NTTR)
structure formed from the neurosphederm, and the NTTR expressed higher levels of 
the PAX6, SOX2 and NESTIN genes compared with the neuroectoderm-derived
neuroprogenitors. Different layers of cortical, pyramidal, GABAergic,
glutamatergic, cholinergic neurons appeared within 27days using the
neurosphederm, which is a shorter period than in traditional
neurodifferentiation-protocols (42-60days). With additional supplements and
timeline dopaminergic and Purkinje neurons were also generated in culture too.
Furthermore, our in vivo results indicated that the fragmented neurospheres
facilitated significantly better neurogenesis in severe combined immunodeficiency
(SCID) mouse brains compared with the non-fragmented neurospheres. Therefore,
this neurosphere-based neurodifferentiation protocol is a valuable tool for
studies of neurodifferentiation, neuronal transplantation and high throughput
screening assays.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4698048 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26613348  [PubMed - in process]


14. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2016 Feb;55(2):131-42. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22319. Epub
2015 Nov 6.

An infant with MLH3 variants, FOXG1-duplication and multiple, benign cranial and 
spinal tumors: A clinical exome sequencing study.

Kansal R(1), Li X(1), Shen J(2), Samuel D(3), Laningham F(4), Lee H(1), Panigrahi
GB(5), Shuen A(5,)(6), Kantarci S(1), Dorrani N(7), Reiss J(1), Shintaku P(1),
Deignan JL(1), Strom SP(1), Pearson CE(5,)(6), Vilain E(7,)(8), Grody
WW(1,)(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles,
David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, 90095. (2)Medical Genetics and 
Metabolism, Valley Children's Hospital, Madera, CA, 93636.
(3)Hematology/Oncology, Valley Children's Hospital, Madera, CA, 93636.
(4)Department of Radiology, Valley Children's Hospital, Madera, CA, 93636.
(5)Program of Genetics & Genome Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Peter
Gilgan Center for Research and Learning, Toronto, Ontario, MSG 0A4, Canada.
(6)Program of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, M5S
1A1, Canada. (7)Pediatrics, University of California at Los Angeles, David Geffen
School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, 90095. (8)Human Genetics, University of
California at Los Angeles, David Geffen School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA,
90095.

A 4-month-old male infant presented with severe developmental delay, cerebellar, 
brainstem, and cutaneous hemangiomas, bilateral tumors (vestibular, hypoglossal, 
cervical, and lumbar spinal), and few café-au-lait macules. Cerebellar and lumbar
tumor biopsies revealed venous telangiectasia and intraneural perineuroma,
respectively. Sequencing NF1, NF2, and RASA1 (blood), and NF2 and SMARCB1 (lumbar
biopsy) was negative for pathogenic mutations. Clinical exome sequencing (CES),
requested for tumor syndrome diagnosis, revealed two heterozygous missense
variants, c.359T>C;p.Phe120Ser and c.3344G>A;p.Arg1115Gln, in MLH3
(NM_001040108.1), a DNA mismatch repair (MMR) gene, Polyphen-predicted as
probably damaging, and benign, respectively. Sanger sequencing confirmed both
variants in the proband, and their absence in the mother; biological father
unavailable. Both biopsied tissues were negative for microsatellite instability, 
and expressed MLH1, MSH2, PMS2, MSH6, and MLH3 immunohistochemically. Chromosomal
microarray showed a 133 kb segment copy number duplication of 14q12 region
encompassing FOXG1, possibly explaining the developmental delay, but not the
tumors. The presence of MLH3 variants with multiple benign neural and vascular
tumors was intriguing for their possible role in the pathogenesis of these
neoplasms, which were suspicious for, but not diagnostic of, constitutional MMR
deficiency. However, functional assays of non-neoplastic patient-derived cells
showed intact base-base MMR function. Also, no previous FOXG1-aberrant patient
was reported with tumors. We now report a 3-year-old FOXG1-duplicated patient
with a yet undescribed tumor syndrome with clinical features of neurofibromatosis
types I and II, where several validation studies could not ascertain the
significance of CES findings; further studies may elucidate precise mechanisms
and diagnosis for clinical management, including tumor surveillance. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26542077  [PubMed - in process]


15. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Dec 3;17(6):719-34. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.09.002. Epub
2015 Oct 29.

Rapid Conversion of Fibroblasts into Functional Forebrain GABAergic Interneurons 
by Direct Genetic Reprogramming.

Colasante G(1), Lignani G(2), Rubio A(1), Medrihan L(2), Yekhlef L(3), Sessa
A(1), Massimino L(1), Giannelli SG(1), Sacchetti S(2), Caiazzo M(1), Leo D(2),
Alexopoulou D(4), Dell'Anno MT(1), Ciabatti E(1), Orlando M(2), Studer M(5), Dahl
A(4), Gainetdinov RR(6), Taverna S(3), Benfenati F(2), Broccoli V(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neuroscience, Ospedale San Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano di
Tecnologia, 16163 Genoa, Italy. (3)Department of Neuroscience and Brain
Technologies, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 16163 Genoa, Italy;
Neuroimmunology Unit, Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, Milan 20132, Italy. (4)Deep Sequencing Group, Biotechnology Center TU 
Dresden, Fetscherstrasse 105, 01307 Dresden, Germany. (5)University of
Nice-Sophia Antipolis, 06108 Nice, France; INSERM, iBV, UMR 1091, 06108 Nice,
France. (6)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia, 16163 Genoa, Italy; Institute of Translational Biomedicine, St.
Petersburg State University, 199034 St. Petersburg, Russia. (7)Division of
Neuroscience, Ospedale San Raffaele, 20132 Milan, Italy; CNR Institute of
Neuroscience, 20129 Milan, Italy. Electronic address: broccoli.vania@hsr.it.

Transplantation of GABAergic interneurons (INs) can provide long-term functional 
benefits in animal models of epilepsy and other neurological disorders. Whereas
GABAergic INs can be differentiated from embryonic stem cells, alternative
sources of GABAergic INs may be more tractable for disease modeling and
transplantation. We identified five factors (Foxg1, Sox2, Ascl1, Dlx5, and Lhx6) 
that convert mouse fibroblasts into induced GABAergic INs (iGABA-INs) possessing 
molecular signatures of telencephalic INs. Factor overexpression activates
transcriptional networks required for GABAergic fate specification. iGABA-INs
display progressively maturing firing patterns comparable to cortical INs, form
functional synapses, and release GABA. Importantly, iGABA-INs survive and mature 
upon being grafted into mouse hippocampus. Optogenetic stimulation demonstrated
functional integration of grafted iGABA-INs into host circuitry, triggering
inhibition of host granule neuron activity. These five factors also converted
human cells into functional GABAergic INs. These properties suggest that
iGABA-INs have potential for disease modeling and cell-based therapeutic
approaches to neurological disorders.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26526726  [PubMed - in process]


16. Nat Med. 2015 Dec;21(12):1445-54. doi: 10.1038/nm.3982. Epub 2015 Nov 2.

An AKT3-FOXG1-reelin network underlies defective migration in human focal
malformations of cortical development.

Baek ST(1,)(2), Copeland B(1), Yun EJ(3), Kwon SK(4), Guemez-Gamboa A(1),
Schaffer AE(2), Kim S(5), Kang HC(1,)(6,)(7), Song S(1), Mathern GW(8,)(9),
Gleeson JG(1,)(2,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pediatric Brain Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, New 
York, USA. (2)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego
(UCSD), La Jolla, California, USA. (3)Department of Urology, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA. (4)Department of Neuroscience,
Columbia University, New York, New York, USA. (5)Severance Biomedical Science
Institute, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
(6)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Neurology, Pediatric Epilepsy 
Clinics, Severance Children's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea. (7)Epilepsy Research 
Center, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (8)Department 
of Neurosurgery, Mattel Children's Hospital, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA. (9)Department
of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, Mattel Children's Hospital, David
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California, USA. (10)Neurogenetics Laboratory, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Chevy Chase, Maryland, USA.

Focal malformations of cortical development (FMCDs) account for the majority of
drug-resistant pediatric epilepsy. Postzygotic somatic mutations activating the
phosphatidylinositol-4,5-bisphosphate-3-kinase (PI3K)-protein kinase B
(AKT)-mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway are found in a wide range of
brain diseases, including FMCDs. It remains unclear how a mutation in a small
fraction of cells disrupts the architecture of the entire hemisphere. Within
human FMCD-affected brain, we found that cells showing activation of the
PI3K-AKT-mTOR pathway were enriched for the AKT3(E17K) mutation. Introducing the 
FMCD-causing mutation into mouse brain resulted in electrographic seizures and
impaired hemispheric architecture. Mutation-expressing neural progenitors showed 
misexpression of reelin, which led to a non-cell autonomous migration defect in
neighboring cells, due at least in part to derepression of reelin transcription
in a manner dependent on the forkhead box (FOX) transcription factor FOXG1.
Treatments aimed at either blocking downstream AKT signaling or inactivating
reelin restored migration. These findings suggest a central AKT-FOXG1-reelin
signaling pathway in FMCD and support pathway inhibitors as potential treatments 
or therapies for some forms of focal epilepsy.

PMID: 26523971  [PubMed - in process]


17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Nov 10;112(45):13910-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1515190112. Epub 2015 Oct 27.

Foxg1 localizes to mitochondria and coordinates cell differentiation and
bioenergetics.

Pancrazi L(1), Di Benedetto G(2), Colombaioni L(3), Della Sala G(4), Testa G(1), 
Olimpico F(3), Reyes A(5), Zeviani M(5), Pozzan T(6), Costa M(7).

Author information: 
(1)Scuola Normale Superiore, 56126 Pisa, Italy; (2)Institute of Neuroscience,
Italian National Research Council, 35121 Padova, Italy; Venetian Institute of
Molecular Medicine, 35129 Padova, Italy; (3)Institute of Neuroscience, Italian
National Research Council, 56124 Pisa, Italy; (4)Institute of Neuroscience,
Italian National Research Council, 56124 Pisa, Italy; Department of Neuroscience,
Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health, University of Florence, 50139
Florence, Italy; (5)Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Medical Research Council,
Cambridge CB20XY, United Kingdom; (6)Institute of Neuroscience, Italian National 
Research Council, 35121 Padova, Italy; Venetian Institute of Molecular Medicine, 
35129 Padova, Italy; Department Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, 35121 
Padova, Italy tullio.pozzan@unipd.it costa@in.cnr.it. (7)Scuola Normale
Superiore, 56126 Pisa, Italy; Institute of Neuroscience, Italian National
Research Council, 56124 Pisa, Italy; tullio.pozzan@unipd.it costa@in.cnr.it.

Forkhead box g1 (Foxg1) is a nuclear-cytosolic transcription factor essential for
the forebrain development and involved in neurodevelopmental and cancer
pathologies. Despite the importance of this protein, little is known about the
modalities by which it exerts such a large number of cellular functions. Here we 
show that a fraction of Foxg1 is localized within the mitochondria in cell lines,
primary neuronal or glial cell cultures, and in the mouse cortex. Import of Foxg1
in isolated mitochondria appears to be membrane potential-dependent. Amino acids 
(aa) 277-302 were identified as critical for mitochondrial localization.
Overexpression of full-length Foxg1 enhanced mitochondrial membrane potential
(<U+0394><U+03A8>m) and promoted mitochondrial fission and mitosis. Conversely, overexpression 
of the C-term Foxg1 (aa 272-481), which is selectively localized in the
mitochondrial matrix, enhanced organelle fusion and promoted the early phase of
neuronal differentiation. These findings suggest that the different subcellular
localizations of Foxg1 control the machinery that brings about cell
differentiation, replication, and bioenergetics, possibly linking mitochondrial
functions to embryonic development and pathological conditions.

PMCID: PMC4653140 [Available on 2016-05-10]
PMID: 26508630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Animals (Basel). 2015 Aug 14;5(3):748-73. doi: 10.3390/ani5030382.

Relationships between Circulating Urea Concentrations and Endometrial Function in
Postpartum Dairy Cows.

Cheng Z(1), Oguejiofor CF(2), Swangchan-Uthai T(3), Carr S(4), Wathes DC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Production and Population Health, Royal Veterinary College,
North Mymms, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, UK. zcheng@rvc.ac.uk. (2)Department of
Production and Population Health, Royal Veterinary College, North Mymms,
Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, UK. coguejiofor@rvc.ac.uk. (3)Department of Production and
Population Health, Royal Veterinary College, North Mymms, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, 
UK. theerawat.s@chula.ac.th. (4)Department of Production and Population Health,
Royal Veterinary College, North Mymms, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, UK.
scarr@rvc.ac.uk. (5)Department of Production and Population Health, Royal
Veterinary College, North Mymms, Hertfordshire AL9 7TA, UK. dcwathes@rvc.ac.uk.

Both high and low circulating urea concentrations, a product of protein
metabolism, are associated with decreased fertility in dairy cows through poorly 
defined mechanisms. The rate of involution and the endometrial ability to mount
an adequate innate immune response after calving are both critical for subsequent
fertility. Study 1 used microarray analysis to identify genes whose endometrial
expression 2 weeks postpartum correlated significantly with the mean plasma urea 
per cow, ranging from 3.2 to 6.6 mmol/L. The biological functions of 781 mapped
genes were analysed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. These were predominantly
associated with tissue turnover (e.g., BRINP1, FOXG1), immune function (e.g.,
IL17RB, CRISPLD2), inflammation (e.g., C3, SERPINF1, SERPINF2) and lipid
metabolism (e.g., SCAP, ACBD5, SLC10A). Study 2 investigated the relationship
between urea concentration and expression of 6 candidate genes (S100A8, HSP5A,
IGF1R, IL17RB, BRINP1, CRISPLD2) in bovine endometrial cell culture. These were
treated with 0, 2.5, 5.0 or 7.5 mmol/L urea, equivalent to low, medium and high
circulating values with or without challenge by bacterial lipopolysaccharide
(LPS). LPS increased S100A8 expression as expected but urea treatment had no
effect on expression of any tested gene. Examination of the genes/pathways
involved suggests that plasma urea levels may reflect variations in lipid
metabolism. Our results suggest that it is the effects of lipid metabolism rather
than the urea concentration which probably alter the rate of involution and
innate immune response, in turn influencing subsequent fertility.

PMCID: PMC4598704
PMID: 26479384  [PubMed]


19. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 Oct 12. [Epub ahead of print]

The molecular and cellular signatures of the mouse eminentia thalami support its 
role as a signalling centre in the developing forebrain.

Adutwum-Ofosu KK(1,)(2), Magnani D(1,)(3), Theil T(1), Price DJ(1), Fotaki V(4).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Edinburgh, Centre for Integrative Physiology, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK. (2)Department of Anatomy,
College of Health Sciences, University of Ghana, Accra, Ghana. (3)MRC Centre for 
Regenerative Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, EH16 4SB, UK. (4)The
University of Edinburgh, Centre for Integrative Physiology, Hugh Robson Building,
George Square, Edinburgh, EH8 9XD, UK. vfotaki@ed.ac.uk.

The mammalian eminentia thalami (EmT) (or thalamic eminence) is an embryonic
forebrain structure of unknown function. Here, we examined the molecular and
cellular properties of the mouse EmT. We first studied mRNA expression of
signalling molecules and found that the EmT is a structure, rich in expression of
secreted factors, with Wnts being the most abundantly detected. We then examined 
whether EmT tissue could induce cell fate changes when grafted ectopically. For
this, we transplanted EmT tissue from a tau-GFP mouse to the ventral
telencephalon of a wild type host, a telencephalic region where Wnt signalling is
not normally active but which we showed in culture experiments is competent to
respond to Wnts. We observed that the EmT was able to induce in adjacent ventral 
telencephalic cells ectopic expression of Lef1, a transcriptional activator and a
target gene of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. These Lef1-positive;GFP-negative cells 
expressed the telencephalic marker Foxg1 but not Ascl1, which is normally
expressed by ventral telencephalic cells. These results suggest that the EmT has 
the capacity to activate Wnt/ß-catenin signalling in the ventral telencephalon
and to suppress ventral telencephalic gene expression. Altogether, our data
support a role of the EmT as a signalling centre in the developing mouse
forebrain.

PMID: 26459142  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


20. Mol Cell. 2015 Oct 15;60(2):307-18. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.09.002. Epub 2015 
Oct 8.

EGFR Mutation Promotes Glioblastoma through Epigenome and Transcription Factor
Network Remodeling.

Liu F(1), Hon GC(1), Villa GR(2), Turner KM(1), Ikegami S(1), Yang H(1), Ye Z(1),
Li B(1), Kuan S(1), Lee AY(1), Zanca C(1), Wei B(3), Lucey G(3), Jenkins D(1),
Zhang W(4), Barr CL(5), Furnari FB(6), Cloughesy TF(3), Yong WH(3), Gahman TC(1),
Shiau AK(1), Cavenee WK(7), Ren B(8), Mischel PS(9).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (2)Ludwig
Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; David Geffen UCLA School 
of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (3)David Geffen UCLA School of Medicine,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (5)Toronto Western Research
Institute, University Health Network, Toronto, ON M5T 2S8, Canada; Program in
Neurosciences and Mental Health, Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, ON M5T 2S8,
Canada. (6)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA;
Department of Pathology, UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
(7)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Department of
Medicine, UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Moores Cancer Center,
UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. (8)Ludwig Institute for Cancer 
Research, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Institute of Genomic Medicine, UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA; 
Moores Cancer Center, UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
Electronic address: biren@ucsd.edu. (9)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, La
Jolla, CA 92093, USA; Department of Pathology, UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla,
CA 92093, USA; Moores Cancer Center, UCSD School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093,
USA. Electronic address: pmischel@ucsd.edu.

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) gene amplification and mutations are the 
most common oncogenic events in glioblastoma (GBM), but the mechanisms by which
they promote aggressive tumor growth are not well understood. Here, through
integrated epigenome and transcriptome analyses of cell lines, genotyped clinical
samples, and TCGA data, we show that EGFR mutations remodel the activated
enhancer landscape of GBM, promoting tumorigenesis through a SOX9 and
FOXG1-dependent transcriptional regulatory network in vitro and in vivo. The most
common EGFR mutation, EGFRvIII, sensitizes GBM cells to the BET-bromodomain
inhibitor JQ1 in a SOX9, FOXG1-dependent manner. These results identify the role 
of transcriptional/epigenetic remodeling in EGFR-dependent pathogenesis and
suggest a mechanistic basis for epigenetic therapy.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4609298 [Available on 2016-10-15]
PMID: 26455392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Oct 7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.216. [Epub ahead of print]

Imbalance of excitatory/inhibitory synaptic protein expression in iPSC-derived
neurons from FOXG1(+/-) patients and in foxg1(+/-) mice.

Patriarchi T(1,)(2), Amabile S(1), Frullanti E(3), Landucci E(1), Lo Rizzo C(1), 
Ariani F(1,)(3), Costa M(4,)(5), Olimpico F(4), W Hell J(2), M Vaccarino
F(6,)(7), Renieri A(1,)(3), Meloni I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (2)Department of
Pharmacology, University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA. (3)Genetica
Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy. (4)Institute of
Neuroscience, Italian National Research Council, Pisa, Italy. (5)Scuola Normale
Superiore, Pisa, Italy. (6)Child Study Center, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (7)Department of Neurobiology, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder associated with
mutations in either MECP2, CDKL5 or FOXG1. The precise molecular mechanisms that 
lead to the pathogenesis of RTT have yet to be elucidated. We recently reported
that expression of GluD1 (orphan glutamate receptor d-1 subunit) is increased in 
iPSC-derived neurons obtained from patients with mutations in either MECP2 or
CDKL5. GluD1 controls synaptic differentiation and shifts the balance between
excitatory and inhibitory synapses toward the latter. Thus, an increase in GluD1 
might be a critical factor in the etiology of RTT by affecting the
excitatory/inhibitory balance in the developing brain. To test this hypothesis,
we generated iPSC-derived neurons from FOXG1(+/-) patients. We analyzed mRNA and 
protein levels of GluD1 together with key markers of excitatory and inhibitory
synapses in these iPSC-derived neurons and in Foxg1(+/-) mouse fetal (E11.5) and 
adult (P70) brains. We found strong correlation between iPSC-derived neurons and 
fetal mouse brains, where GluD1 and inhibitory synaptic markers (GAD67 and GABA
AR-a1) were increased, whereas the levels of a number of excitatory synaptic
markers (VGLUT1, GluA1, GluN1 and PSD-95) were decreased. In adult mice, GluD1
was decreased along with all GABAergic and glutamatergic markers. Our findings
further the understanding of the etiology of RTT by introducing a new
pathological event occurring in the brain of FOXG1(+/-) patients during embryonic
development and its time-dependent shift toward a general decrease in brain
synapses.European Journal of Human Genetics advance online publication, 7 October
2015; doi:10.1038/ejhg.2015.216.

PMID: 26443267  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Hum Pathol. 2015 Dec;46(12):1859-71. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.08.003. Epub
2015 Aug 24.

FOXG1 expression shows correlation with neuronal differentiation in cerebellar
development, aggressive phenotype in medulloblastomas, and survival in a
xenograft model of medulloblastoma.

Adesina AM(1), Veo BL(2), Courteau G(2), Mehta V(2), Wu X(2), Pang K(3), Liu
Z(3), Li XN(4), Peters L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030; Department of
Pediatrics-Hematology/Oncology, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030. Electronic address: aadesina@bcm.edu. (2)Department 
of Pathology and Immunology, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030. (3)Department of Pediatrics-Neurology, Jan and Dan
Duncan Neurological Research Institute, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College
of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030. (4)Department of Pediatrics-Hematology/Oncology, 
Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.

FOXG1 is a transcription factor that interacts with multiple signaling pathways
and modulates neuronal differentiation in the telencephalon. Dysregulation of
FOXG1 expression has been previously reported in medulloblastoma. In this study, 
we demonstrate a regional specific expression of FOXG1 and its colocalization
with Nestin expression in the premigratory mitotically active (outer) layer of
the external granular layer of the cerebellum. An inverse expression of the
granular precursor cell markers, Math1 and Musashi1, in the inner nonmitotic
migratory layer of the external granular layer and in the internal granular layer
was observed. Furthermore, modulation of FOXG1 in the medulloblastoma cell line, 
DAOY, was associated with the induction of neuronal differentiation markers and
significant changes in multiple signaling pathways regulating cell proliferation,
differentiation, survival, and apoptosis. Additionally, we observed enhanced
survival in intracerebellar mice xenografts injected with DAOY cells bearing
shFOXG1 constructs versus shLuciferase construct. Overall, these findings suggest
that down-modulation of FOXG1 is a prerequisite for the onset of neuronal
differentiation during cerebellar development and that a decrease of FOXG1 in
medulloblastoma cells offers a survival advantage in mice. We propose that the
disruption of signaling pathways that promote mature neuronal differentiation by 
overexpressed FOXG1 is a contributing event in the neoplastic transformation of
cerebellar stem cells.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 26433703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Development. 2015 Nov 15;142(22):3933-42. doi: 10.1242/dev.125120. Epub 2015 Oct 
1.

Opposing Shh and Fgf signals initiate nasotemporal patterning of the zebrafish
retina.

Hernández-Bejarano M(1), Gestri G(2), Spawls L(2), Nieto-López F(1), Picker A(3),
Tada M(2), Brand M(3), Bovolenta P(4), Wilson SW(5), Cavodeassi F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), C/Nicolás Cabrera 1,
28049, Madrid, Spain. (2)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University
College London, Gower Street, London WC1 6BT, UK. (3)Center of Regenerative
Therapies Dresden (CRTD), Biotechnology Center, Dresden University of Technology,
01062 Dresden, Germany. (4)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), 
C/Nicolás Cabrera 1, 28049, Madrid, Spain CIBER de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), 
C/Nicolás Cabrera 1, 28049, Madrid, Spain. (5)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University College London, Gower Street, London WC1 6BT,
UK s.wilson@ucl.ac.uk fcavodeassi@cbm.csic.es. (6)Centro de Biología Molecular
Severo Ochoa (CSIC-UAM), C/Nicolás Cabrera 1, 28049, Madrid, Spain CIBER de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), C/Nicolás Cabrera 1, 28049, Madrid, Spain
s.wilson@ucl.ac.uk fcavodeassi@cbm.csic.es.

The earliest known determinants of retinal nasotemporal identity are the
transcriptional regulators Foxg1, which is expressed in the prospective nasal
optic vesicle, and Foxd1, which is expressed in the prospective temporal optic
vesicle. Previous work has shown that, in zebrafish, Fgf signals from the dorsal 
forebrain and olfactory primordia are required to specify nasal identity in the
dorsal, prospective nasal, optic vesicle. Here, we show that Hh signalling from
the ventral forebrain is required for specification of temporal identity in the
ventral optic vesicle and is sufficient to induce temporal character when
activated in the prospective nasal retina. Consequently, the evaginating optic
vesicles become partitioned into prospective nasal and temporal domains by the
opposing actions of Fgfs and Shh emanating from dorsal and ventral domains of the
forebrain primordium. In absence of Fgf activity, foxd1 expression is established
irrespective of levels of Hh signalling, indicating that the role of Shh in
promoting foxd1 expression is only required in the presence of Fgf activity. Once
the spatially complementary expression of foxd1 and foxg1 is established, the
boundary between expression domains is maintained by mutual repression between
Foxd1 and Foxg1.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4712879
PMID: 26428010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Dec;167(12):3096-102. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37353. Epub 2015
Sep 14.

Familial recurrences of FOXG1-related disorder: Evidence for mosaicism.

McMahon KQ(1), Papandreou A(2,)(3,)(4), Ma M(5), Barry BJ(6), Mirzaa GM(7),
Dobyns WB(7), Scott RH(4,)(8), Trump N(8), Kurian MA(2,)(3), Paciorkowski
AR(1,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
New York. (2)Developmental Neurosciences, UCL-Institute of Child Health, London, 
United Kingdom. (3)Department of Neurology, Great Ormond Street Hospital, London,
United Kingdom. (4)Genetics and Genomics Medicine, UCL-Institute of Child Health,
London, United Kingdom. (5)University of Buffalo School of Medicine, Buffalo, New
York. (6)Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts. (7)Department of
Pediatrics, Division of Genetic Medicine, University of Washington, Center for
Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, Seattle,
Washington. (8)North East Thames Regional Genetics Service, Great Ormond Street
Hospital, London, United Kingdom. (9)Departments of Pediatrics and Biomedical
Genetics, Center for Neural Development and Disease, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, New York.

FOXG1-related disorders are caused by heterozygous mutations in FOXG1 and result 
in a spectrum of neurodevelopmental phenotypes including postnatal microcephaly, 
intellectual disability with absent speech, epilepsy, chorea, and corpus callosum
abnormalities. The recurrence risk for de novo mutations in FOXG1-related
disorders is assumed to be low. Here, we describe three unrelated sets of full
siblings with mutations in FOXG1 (c.515_577del63, c.460dupG, and c.572T<U+2009>><U+2009>G),
representing familial recurrence of the disorder. In one family, we have
documented maternal somatic mosaicism for the FOXG1 mutation, and all of the
families presumably represent parental gonadal (or germline) mosaicism. To our
knowledge, mosaicism has not been previously reported in FOXG1-related disorders.
Therefore, this report provides evidence that germline mosaicism for FOXG1
mutations is a likely explanation for familial recurrence and should be
considered during recurrence risk counseling for families of children with
FOXG1-related disorders. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4715619 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26364767  [PubMed - in process]


25. Dev Med Child Neurol. 2016 Jan;58(1):93-97. doi: 10.1111/dmcn.12894. Epub 2015
Sep 6.

The hyperkinetic movement disorder of FOXG1-related epileptic-dyskinetic
encephalopathy.

Cellini E(1), Vignoli A(2), Pisano T(1), Falchi M(1), Molinaro A(3), Accorsi
P(4), Bontacchio A(4), Pinelli L(5), Giordano L(4), Guerrini R(1); FOXG1 Syndrome
Study Group.

Collaborators: Fusco C, Bertani G.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Children's Hospital A Meyer -University of Florence,
Florence, Italy. (2)Department of Health Sciences, Epilepsy Center, San Paolo
Hospital, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. (3)School in Reproductive and
Developmental Science, University of Trieste and University of Brescia, Brescia, 
Italy. (4)Child Neurology and Psychiatry Unit, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.
(5)Neuroradiology Unit, Spedali Civili, Brescia, Italy.

AIM: Forkhead Box G1 (FOXG1) syndrome is a developmental encephalopathy
characterized by postnatal microcephaly, structural brain abnormalities, facial
dysmorphisms, severe delay with absent language, defective social interactions,
and epilepsy. Abnormal movements in FOXG1 syndrome have often been mentioned but 
not characterized.
METHOD: We clinically assessed and analysed video recordings of eight patients
with different mutations or copy number variations affecting the FOXG1 gene and
describe the peculiar pattern of the associated movement disorder.
RESULTS: The age of the patients in the study ranged from 2 to 17 years old (six 
females, two males). They had severe epilepsy and exhibited a complex motor
disorder including various combinations of dyskinetic and hyperkinetic movements 
featuring dystonia, chorea, and athetosis. The onset of the movement disorder was
apparent within the first year of life, reached its maximum expression within
months, and then remained stable.
INTERPRETATION: A hyperkinetic-dyskinetic movement disorder emerges as a
distinctive feature of the FOXG1-related phenotype. FOXG1 syndrome is as an
epileptic-dyskinetic encephalopathy whose clinical presentation bears
similarities with ARX- and STXBP1-gene related encephalopathies.

© 2015 Mac Keith Press.

PMID: 26344814  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


26. Cell Rep. 2015 Sep 1;12(9):1414-29. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.07.061. Epub 2015 
Aug 20.

Genomic DISC1 Disruption in hiPSCs Alters Wnt Signaling and Neural Cell Fate.

Srikanth P(1), Han K(2), Callahan DG(2), Makovkina E(2), Muratore CR(2), Lalli
MA(3), Zhou H(3), Boyd JD(2), Kosik KS(3), Selkoe DJ(2), Young-Pearse TL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Program in Neuroscience, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Harvard MD-PhD Program, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases,
Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(3)Neuroscience Research Institute, Department of Molecular Cellular and
Developmental Biology, Biomolecular Science and Engineering Program, University
of California, Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA. (4)Ann Romney Center 
for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: tyoung@rics.bwh.harvard.edu.

Genetic and clinical association studies have identified disrupted in
schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) as a candidate risk gene for major mental illness. DISC1 
is interrupted by a balanced chr(1;11) translocation in a Scottish family in
which the translocation predisposes to psychiatric disorders. We investigate the 
consequences of DISC1 interruption in human neural cells using TALENs or
CRISPR-Cas9 to target the DISC1 locus. We show that disruption of DISC1 near the 
site of the translocation results in decreased DISC1 protein levels because of
nonsense-mediated decay of long splice variants. This results in an increased
level of canonical Wnt signaling in neural progenitor cells and altered
expression of fate markers such as Foxg1 and Tbr2. These gene expression changes 
are rescued by antagonizing Wnt signaling in a critical developmental window,
supporting the hypothesis that DISC1-dependent suppression of basal Wnt signaling
influences the distribution of cell types generated during cortical development.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4558300
PMID: 26299970  [PubMed - in process]


27. Zhong Nan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2015
Jul;40(7):701-9.DOI:10.11817/j.issn.1672-7347.2015.07.001.

[Screening and functional analysis of microRNA expression in HPV16-positive
squamous carcinoma of the cervix <U+2028>in the Uygur of southern Xinjiang].

[Article in Chinese; Abstract available in Chinese from the publisher]

Yuan M(1), Cheng J(2), Liu Y(1), Su W(1), Zhang Y(3), Zhang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Ulumuqi 830011, China. (2)Department of Gynecology, Affiliated Tumor 
Hospital of Xinjiang Medical University, Ulumuqi 830011;Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410008,
China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha 410008, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the differential expression of microRNA (miRNA) in
HPV16-positive squamous carcinoma of the cervix in the Uygur of southern Xinjiang
and to predict the target genes of the miRNAs.<U+2029>
METHODS: Samples of HPV16-positive squamous carcinoma of the cervix from 5 Uygurs
were collected for miRNA microarray assay. The differentially expressed miRNAs
were selected for further verification by real-time quantitative RT-PCR. The
software, including targetscan, miRwalk, miRanda and pictar, were used to predict
the target genes of the verified miRNAs.<U+2029>
RESULTS: Eighteen differentially expressed miRNAs were identified by miRNA
microarray assay. The significantly differentially expressed miRNA-138 and
miRNA-720 were verified by real-time quantitative RT-PCR. According to the
prediction, the target genes for miRNA-138 were EZH2, LYPLA1, ARHGEF3, CLNS1A,
EIF4EBP1, GNAI2, LIMK1, RHOC, ROCK2, SLC20A1, TERT, and H2AFX, while for
miRNA-720 were EZH2, AGAP2, SPOCK2, FGF14, HNRNPA2B1, QKI, FOXG1, ACVR1B, DNMT3A,
EPHB2, LATS2, KRAS, CCND2, NBN, ENAM, AMELX, PRNP, and CALB1.<U+2029>
CONCLUSION: miR-138 and miR-720 are the down-regulated target miRNAs in
HPV16-positive squamous carcinoma of the cervix in the Uygur of southern
Xinjiang. The common target gene for miR-138 and miR-720 is EZH2, which might be 
related to cervical squamous carcinoma invasion and metastasis.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26267680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Rev Chil Pediatr. 2015 May-Jun;86(3):142-51. doi: 10.1016/j.rchipe.2015.07.001.
Epub 2015 Aug 1.

[Molecular basis of Rett syndrome: A current look].

[Article in Spanish]

Pantaleón F G(1), Juvier R T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética Molecular, Hospital Clínico Quirúrgico Hermanos
Ameijeiras, La Habana, Cuba. (2)Instituto de Neurología y Neurocirugía Prof.
Rafael Estrada, La Habana, Cuba. Electronic address: juvier@infomed.sld.cu.

Rett syndrome (RS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that exclusively affects
girls, and occurs along with autism. It is very uncommon, and has five distinct
forms, one classic and the others atypical, which generally compromise manual
skills, language, and mobility, and widely associated with the appearance of
stereotypy and early epilepsy. With the aim of updating the information about RS,
a search was performed in the computer data bases of PubMed, Hinari, SCIELO and
Medline, as well as consulting other web sites including OMIM, ORPHANET, GeneMap,
Genetests, Proteins and Gene, using the descriptors "Síndrome de Rett", "genes y 
Síndrome de Rett", "Rett Syndrome gene", "Rett Syndrome", "Rett Syndrome gene
therapy", and "Rett Syndrome review". Of the 1,348 articles found, 42 articles
were selected, which reported 3 genes causing the syndrome: MECP2, CDKL5 and
FOXG. The MECP2 gene is mutated in 80% of patients with classic RS, as well as in
40% of those affected by any of its atypical forms. RS with early epilepsy and
the congenital variant are mainly due to variations in the CDKL5 and FOXG1 genes,
respectively.CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of RS is based on clinical criteria.
However, the advances in molecular biology and genetics have opened a wide range 
of possibilities for diagnosing the different clinical forms that could not be
classified before. Molecular analysis can help confirm the clinical criteria and 
provided information as regards the prognosis of the patient.

Copyright © 2015. Publicado por Elsevier España, S.L.U.

PMID: 26239053  [PubMed - in process]


29. Front Cell Neurosci. 2015 Jul 14;9:266. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2015.00266.
eCollection 2015.

The Utility of Next-Generation Sequencing in Gene Discovery for Mutation-Negative
Patients with Rett Syndrome.

Gold WA(1), Christodoulou J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Western Sydney Genetics Program, New South Wales Centre for Rett Syndrome
Research, Children's Hospital at Westmead , Sydney, NSW , Australia ; Discipline 
of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Sydney , Sydney, NSW , Australia. 
(2)Western Sydney Genetics Program, New South Wales Centre for Rett Syndrome
Research, Children's Hospital at Westmead , Sydney, NSW , Australia ; Discipline 
of Paediatrics and Child Health, University of Sydney , Sydney, NSW , Australia ;
Discipline of Genetic Medicine, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney ,
Sydney, NSW , Australia.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a rare, severe disorder of neuronal plasticity that
predominantly affects girls. Girls with RTT usually appear asymptomatic in the
first 6-18<U+2009>months of life, but gradually develop severe motor, cognitive, and
behavioral abnormalities that persist for life. A predominance of neuronal and
synaptic dysfunction, with altered excitatory-inhibitory neuronal synaptic
transmission and synaptic plasticity, are overarching features of RTT in children
and in mouse models. Over 90% of patients with classical RTT have mutations in
the X-linked methyl-CpG-binding (MECP2) gene, while other genes, including
cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5), Forkhead box protein G1 (FOXG1),
myocyte-specific enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C), and transcription factor 4 (TCF4),
have been associated with phenotypes overlapping with RTT. However, there remain 
a proportion of patients who carry a clinical diagnosis of RTT, but who are
mutation negative. In recent years, next-generation sequencing technologies have 
revolutionized approaches to genetic studies, making whole-exome and even
whole-genome sequencing possible strategies for the detection of rare and de novo
mutations, aiding the discovery of novel disease genes. Here, we review the
recent progress that is emerging in identifying pathogenic variations,
specifically from exome sequencing in RTT patients, and emphasize the need for
the use of this technology to identify known and new disease genes in RTT
patients.

PMCID: PMC4500929
PMID: 26236194  [PubMed]


30. Cell. 2015 Jul 16;162(2):375-90. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.06.034.

FOXG1-Dependent Dysregulation of GABA/Glutamate Neuron Differentiation in Autism 
Spectrum Disorders.

Mariani J(1), Coppola G(1), Zhang P(2), Abyzov A(3), Provini L(1), Tomasini L(1),
Amenduni M(1), Szekely A(4), Palejev D(1), Wilson M(1), Gerstein M(5), Grigorenko
EL(1), Chawarska K(1), Pelphrey KA(1), Howe JR(2), Vaccarino FM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurodevelopment and Regeneration, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06520, USA; Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
(3)Program in Neurodevelopment and Regeneration, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06520, USA; Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (4)Program in Neurodevelopment and Regeneration, Yale
University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Department of Genetics, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (5)Program in Neurodevelopment and Regeneration, Yale
University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Department of Molecular Biophysics and
Biochemistry, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Program in Computation
Biology and Bioinformatics, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Department
of Computer Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (6)Program in
Neurodevelopment and Regeneration, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA;
Child Study Center, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA; Department of
Neurobiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address:
flora.vaccarino@yale.edu.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a disorder of brain development. Most cases
lack a clear etiology or genetic basis, and the difficulty of re-enacting human
brain development has precluded understanding of ASD pathophysiology. Here we use
three-dimensional neural cultures (organoids) derived from induced pluripotent
stem cells (iPSCs) to investigate neurodevelopmental alterations in individuals
with severe idiopathic ASD. While no known underlying genomic mutation could be
identified, transcriptome and gene network analyses revealed upregulation of
genes involved in cell proliferation, neuronal differentiation, and synaptic
assembly. ASD-derived organoids exhibit an accelerated cell cycle and
overproduction of GABAergic inhibitory neurons. Using RNA interference, we show
that overexpression of the transcription factor FOXG1 is responsible for the
overproduction of GABAergic neurons. Altered expression of gene network modules
and FOXG1 are positively correlated with symptom severity. Our data suggest that 
a shift toward GABAergic neuron fate caused by FOXG1 is a developmental precursor
of ASD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4519016 [Available on 2016-07-16]
PMID: 26186191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 24;10(6):e0129518. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0129518.
eCollection 2015.

Foxg1-Cre Mediated Lrp2 Inactivation in the Developing Mouse Neural Retina,
Ciliary and Retinal Pigment Epithelia Models Congenital High Myopia.

Cases O(1), Joseph A(1), Obry A(2), Santin MD(3), Ben-Yacoub S(1), Pâques M(4),
Amsellem-Levera S(1), Bribian A(5), Simonutti M(1), Augustin S(1), Debeir T(6),
Sahel JA(4), Christ A(7), de Castro F(5), Lehéricy S(3), Cosette P(8), Kozyraki
R(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U968, Paris, F-75012, France; UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S968, Institut
de la Vision, Paris, F-75012, France; CNRS, UMR_7210, Paris, F-75012, France.
(2)CNRS, UMR_6270, PISSARO Proteomics Platform, Institute for Research and
Innovation in Biomedicine, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, F-76821, France;
INSERM, U905, PISSARO Proteomics Platform, Institute for Research and Innovation 
in Biomedicine, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, F-76821, France. (3)Centre de
NeuroImagerie de Recherche, Paris, F-75013, France. (4)INSERM, U968, Paris,
F-75012, France; UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S968, Institut de la Vision, Paris,
F-75012, France; CNRS, UMR_7210, Paris, F-75012, France; Centre Hospitalier
National d'Ophthalmologie des Quinze-Vingts, INSERM-DHOS CIC 503, Paris, F-75012,
France. (5)Grupo de Neurobiologia del Desarollo-GNDe, Hospital Nacional de
Parapléjicos, Toledo, Spain. (6)Sanofi-Ophthalmology, Paris, F-75012, France.
(7)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, D-13125, Germany. (8)CNRS,
UMR_6270, PISSARO Proteomics Platform, Institute for Research and Innovation in
Biomedicine, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, F-76821, France.

Myopia is a common ocular disorder generally due to increased axial length of the
eye-globe. Its extreme form high myopia (HM) is a multifactorial disease leading 
to retinal and scleral damage, visual impairment or loss and is an important
health issue. Mutations in the endocytic receptor LRP2 gene result in
Donnai-Barrow (DBS) and Stickler syndromes, both characterized by HM. To clearly 
establish the link between Lrp2 and congenital HM we inactivated Lrp2 in the
mouse forebrain including the neural retina and the retinal and ciliary pigment
epithelia. High resolution in vivo MRI imaging and ophthalmological analyses
showed that the adult Lrp2-deficient eyes were 40% longer than the control ones
mainly due to an excessive elongation of the vitreal chamber. They had an
apparently normal intraocular pressure and developed chorioretinal atrophy and
posterior scleral staphyloma features reminiscent of human myopic retinopathy.
Immunomorphological and ultrastructural analyses showed that increased eye
lengthening was first observed by post-natal day 5 (P5) and that it was
accompanied by a rapid decrease of the bipolar, photoreceptor and retinal
ganglion cells, and eventually the optic nerve axons. It was followed by scleral 
thinning and collagen fiber disorganization, essentially in the posterior pole.
We conclude that the function of LRP2 in the ocular tissues is necessary for
normal eye growth and that the Lrp2-deficient eyes provide a unique tool to
further study human HM.

PMCID: PMC4480972
PMID: 26107939  [PubMed - in process]


32. Biol Chem. 2015 Nov;396(11):1233-40. doi: 10.1515/hsz-2015-0117.

Red blood cells in Rett syndrome: oxidative stress, morphological changes and
altered membrane organization.

Ciccoli L, De Felice C, Leoncini S, Signorini C, Cortelazzo A, Zollo G, Pecorelli
A, Rossi M, Hayek J.

In this review, we summarize the current evidence on the erythrocyte as a
previously unrecognized target cell in Rett syndrome, a rare (1:10 000 females)
and devastating neurodevelopmental disorder caused by loss-of-function mutations 
in a single gene (i.e. MeCP2, CDKL5, or rarely FOXG1). In particular, we focus on
morphological changes, membrane oxidative damage, altered membrane fatty acid
profile, and aberrant skeletal organization in erythrocytes from patients with
typical Rett syndrome and MeCP2 gene mutations. The beneficial effects of <U+03C9>-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are also summarized for this condition to be 
considered as a 'model' condition for autism spectrum disorders.

PMID: 26040005  [PubMed - in process]


33. Cancer Genomics Proteomics. 2015 May-Jun;12(3):103-12.

Transcriptomic profiling of Forkhead box transcription factors in adult
glioblastoma multiforme.

Robertson E(1), Perry C(2), Doherty R(1), Madhusudan S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Academic Unit of Oncology, Division of Cancer and Stem Cells, School of
Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham University Hospitals, Nottingham, 
U.K. (2)Academic Unit of Oncology, Division of Cancer and Stem Cells, School of
Medicine, University of Nottingham, Nottingham University Hospitals, Nottingham, 
U.K. Department of Oncology, Nottingham University Hospitals, Nottingham, U.K.

BACKGROUND: The Forkhead box transcription factor (FOX) family plays an essential
role in embryogenesis, especially during brain development. Our hypothesis is
that de-regulation of FOX genes may contribute to aggressive tumor biology and
therapy resistance in patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Univariate and multivariate analyses were performed to
evaluate prognostic significance of transcript levels of 31 FOX genes in a test
set of GBM patients (n=191) and validated them in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) 
cohort comprising of 508 adult cases of GBM. The predictive significance of key
FOX genes was investigated in patients who received chemotherapy or radiotherapy.
RESULTS: Low FOXA2 mRNA, low FOXN2 mRNA, low FOXN3 mRNA and high FOXG1 mRNA were 
associated with poor survival in the test and TCGA validation cohorts. In
multivariate analysis, low FOXA2 mRNA, low FOXN2 mRNA, low FOXN3 mRNA and high
FOXG1 mRNA remained independently associated with poor survival in the test and
TCGA validation cohorts. In patients who received chemotherapy or radiotherapy,
low FOXA2 mRNA, low FOXN2 mRNA and high FOXG1 mRNA correlated with adverse
outcomes in the TCGA validation cohort.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, our data provide the first comprehensive clinical
evidence that FOXA2, FOXN2, FOXN3 and FOXG1 are promising biomarkers of GBM and
warrant further investigation.

Copyright© 2015, International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinasios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25977169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2015 Oct;72(20):3983-98. doi: 10.1007/s00018-015-1919-x. Epub 
2015 May 15.

C-Raf deficiency leads to hearing loss and increased noise susceptibility.

de Iriarte Rodríguez R(1,)(2), Magariños M(3,)(4,)(5), Pfeiffer V(6,)(7), Rapp
UR(6,)(8), Varela-Nieto I(1,)(2,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols", CSIC-UAM, Arturo
Duperier 4, 28029, Madrid, Spain. (2)Centre for Biomedical Network Research
(CIBERER), Institute of Health Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain. (3)Instituto
de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols", CSIC-UAM, Arturo Duperier 4, 28029,
Madrid, Spain. mmagarinos@iib.uam.es. (4)Centre for Biomedical Network Research
(CIBERER), Institute of Health Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, Spain.
mmagarinos@iib.uam.es. (5)Departamento de Biología, Universidad Autónoma de
Madrid, Darwin 2, 28049, Madrid, Spain. mmagarinos@iib.uam.es. (6)Institute for
Medical Radiation and Cell Research (MSZ), University of Würzburg, Versbacher
Strasse 5, 97078, Würzburg, Germany. (7)Institute for Anatomy and Cell Biology,
University of Würzburg, Koellikerstraße 6, 97070, Würzburg, Germany. (8)Molecular
Mechanisms of Lung Cancer, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research,
Parkstr. 1, 61231, Bad Nauheim, Germany. (9)Hospital La Paz Institute for Health 
Research (IdiPAZ), Madrid, Spain.

The family of RAF kinases transduces extracellular information to the nucleus,
and their activation is crucial for cellular regulation on many levels, ranging
from embryonic development to carcinogenesis. B-RAF and C-RAF modulate
neurogenesis and neuritogenesis during chicken inner ear development. C-RAF
deficiency in humans is associated with deafness in the rare genetic insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF-1), Noonan and Leopard syndromes. In this study, we show
that RAF kinases are expressed in the developing inner ear and in adult mouse
cochlea. A homozygous C-Raf deletion in mice caused profound deafness with no
evident cellular aberrations except for a remarkable reduction of the K(+)
channel Kir4.1 expression, a trait that suffices as a cause of deafness. To
explore the role of C-Raf in cellular protection and repair, heterozygous C-Raf
(+/-) mice were exposed to noise. A reduced C-RAF level negatively affected
hearing preservation in response to noise through mechanisms involving the
activation of JNK and an exacerbated apoptotic response. Taken together, these
results strongly support a role for C-RAF in hearing protection.

PMCID: PMC4575698
PMID: 25975225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Eur J Hum Genet. 2016 Feb;24(2):252-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.79. Epub 2015 May
13.

Altered expression of neuropeptides in FoxG1-null heterozygous mutant mice.

Frullanti E(1), Amabile S(2), Lolli MG(2), Bartolini A(1), Livide G(1), Landucci 
E(2), Mari F(1,)(2), Vaccarino FM(3), Ariani F(1,)(2), Massimino L(4), Renieri
A(1,)(2), Meloni I(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genetica Medica, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese, Siena, Italy.
(2)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy. (3)Child Study Center and
Department of Neurobiology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. (4)San Raffaele,
Milano, Italy.

Foxg1 gene encodes for a transcription factor essential for telencephalon
development in the embryonic mammalian forebrain. Its complete absence is
embryonic lethal while Foxg1 heterozygous mice are viable but display
microcephaly, altered hippocampal neurogenesis and behavioral and cognitive
deficiencies. In order to evaluate the effects of Foxg1 alteration in adult
brain, we performed expression profiling in total brains from Foxg1+/-
heterozygous mutants and wild-type littermates. We identified statistically
significant differences in expression levels for 466 transcripts (P<0.001), 29 of
which showed a fold change =1.5. Among the differentially expressed genes was
found a group of genes expressed in the basal ganglia and involved in the control
of movements. A relevant (three to sevenfold changes) and statistically
significant increase of expression, confirmed by qRT-PCR, was found in two highly
correlated genes with expression restricted to the hypothalamus: Oxytocin (Oxt)
and Arginine vasopressin (Avp). These neuropeptides have an important role in
maternal and social behavior, and their alteration is associated with impaired
social interaction and autistic behavior. In addition, Neuronatin (Nnat) levels
appear significantly higher both in Foxg1+/- whole brain and in hippocampal
neurons after silencing Foxg1, strongly suggesting that it is directly or
indirectly repressed by Foxg1. During fetal and neonatal brain development, Nnat 
may regulate neuronal excitability, receptor trafficking and calcium-dependent
signaling and, in the adult brain, it is predominantly expressed in
parvalbumin-positive GABAergic interneurons. Overall, these results implicate the
overexpression of a group of neuropeptides in the basal ganglia, hypothalamus,
cortex and hippocampus in the pathogenesis FOXG1 behavioral impairments.

PMCID: PMC4717204 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 25966633  [PubMed - in process]


36. Histopathology. 2015 Dec;67(6):905-13. doi: 10.1111/his.12730. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

Quantification of glypican 3, ß-catenin and claudin-1 protein expression in
hepatoblastoma and paediatric hepatocellular carcinoma by colour deconvolution.

Zhou S(1,)(2), Parham DM(1,)(2), Yung E(1,)(3), Pattengale P(1,)(2), Wang
L(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children's Hospital Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, LAC+USC Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

AIMS: To identify an immunohistochemical panel for paediatric malignant
epithelial liver tumours.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Forty-five hepatoblastomas (HBs), 13 paediatric
hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) and two hepatocellular malignant neoplasms not
otherwise specified (NOS) were chosen for immunohistochemical staining of
glypican 3 (GPC3), ß-catenin, claudin-1, delta-like protein (DLK), and forkhead
box protein G1 (FOXG1). Immunostaining was quantitatively analysed with NIH
imagej software coupled with colour deconvolution. Different subtypes of HB and
HCC showed distinct staining patterns of GPC3, ß-catenin, and claudin-1.
Moreover, GPC3, ß-catenin and claudin-1 all showed higher expression in classic
HCC and embryonal HB than in fetal HB; GPC3 showed complete negativity in
small-cell undifferentiated (SCU) HB and fibrolamellar HCC (FLC); ß-catenin
showed the strongest expression in SCU HB but the weakest expression in FLC. A
panel of these three immunomarkers was useful for the diagnosis of hepatocellular
malignant neoplasms NOS. The expression of DLK and FOXG1 was inconstant among
fetal and embryonal HB and classic HCC.
CONCLUSIONS: A panel of GPC3, ß-catenin and claudin-1 is helpful for
differentiating HB subtypes and distinguishing HB from HCC.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25939253  [PubMed - in process]


37. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2015 Sep;68:103-19. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2015.04.007. Epub 2015 
Apr 30.

The Dlx5 and Foxg1 transcription factors, linked via miRNA-9 and -200, are
required for the development of the olfactory and GnRH system.

Garaffo G(1), Conte D(1), Provero P(1), Tomaiuolo D(1), Luo Z(1), Pinciroli P(2),
Peano C(3), D'Atri I(1), Gitton Y(4), Etzion T(5), Gothilf Y(5), Gays D(1),
Santoro MM(6), Merlo GR(7).

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of Torino,
Italy. (2)Doctorate School in Molecular Medicine, Dept. Medical Biotechnology
Translational Medicine (BIOMETRA), University of Milano, Italy. (3)Inst. of
Biomedical Technology, National Research Council, ITB-CNR Segrate (MI) Italy.
(4)UMR7221 CNRS/MNHN - Evolution des régulations endocriniennes - Paris, France. 
(5)Dept. Neurobiology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel-Aviv
University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel; VIB, Vesalius Research Center, KU Leuven,
Belgium. (6)Dept. Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of
Torino, Italy; Dept. Neurobiology, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences,
Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel; VIB, Vesalius Research Center, KU
Leuven, Belgium. (7)Dept. Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University
of Torino, Italy. Electronic address: giorgioroberto.merlo@unito.it.

During neuronal development and maturation, microRNAs (miRs) play diverse
functions ranging from early patterning, proliferation and commitment to
differentiation, survival, homeostasis, activity and plasticity of more mature
and adult neurons. The role of miRs in the differentiation of olfactory receptor 
neurons (ORNs) is emerging from the conditional inactivation of Dicer in immature
ORN, and the depletion of all mature miRs in this system. Here, we identify
specific miRs involved in olfactory development, by focusing on mice null for
Dlx5, a homeogene essential for both ORN differentiation and axon guidance and
connectivity. Analysis of miR expression in Dlx5(-/-) olfactory epithelium
pointed to reduced levels of miR-9, miR-376a and four miRs of the -200 class in
the absence of Dlx5. To functionally examine the role of these miRs, we depleted 
miR-9 and miR-200 class in reporter zebrafish embryos and observed delayed ORN
differentiation, altered axonal trajectory/targeting, and altered genesis and
position of olfactory-associated GnRH neurons, i.e. a phenotype known as Kallmann
syndrome in humans. miR-9 and miR-200-class negatively control Foxg1 mRNA, a
fork-head transcription factor essential for development of the olfactory
epithelium and of the forebrain, known to maintain progenitors in a stem state.
Increased levels of z-foxg1 mRNA resulted in delayed ORN differentiation and
altered axon trajectory, in zebrafish embryos. This work describes for the first 
time the role of specific miR (-9 and -200) in olfactory/GnRH development, and
uncovers a Dlx5-Foxg1 regulation whose alteration affects receptor neuron
differentiation, axonal targeting, GnRH neuron development, the hallmarks of the 
Kallmann syndrome.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4604252
PMID: 25937343  [PubMed - in process]


38. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Jul;167(7):1593-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36775. Epub 2015
Apr 30.

De novo SHANK3 mutation causes Rett syndrome-like phenotype in a female patient.

Hara M(1), Ohba C(2), Yamashita Y(3), Saitsu H(2), Matsumoto N(2), Matsuishi
T(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neonatology, Medical Center for Maternal and Child Health, St.
Mary's Hospital, Kurume, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Department of Human Genetics,
Graduate School of Medicine, Yokohama City University, Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama,
Japan. (3)Departments of Pediatrics and Child Health, Kurume University School of
Medicine, Kurume, Fukuoka, Japan.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder predominantly affecting
females. Females with the MECP2 mutations exhibit a broad spectrum of clinical
manifestations ranging from classical Rett syndrome to asymptomatic carriers.
Mutations of genes encoding cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) and forkhead
box G1 (FOXG1) are also found in early onset RTT variants. Here, we present the
first report of a female patient with RTT-like phenotype caused by SHANK3 (SH3
and multiple ankylin repeat domain 3) mutation, indicating that the clinical
spectrum of SHANK3 mutations may extend to RTT-like phenotype in addition to
(severe) developmental delay, absence of expressive speech, autistic behaviors
and intellectual disability.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25931020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Sep;167A(9):2017-25. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.37132. Epub 2015 
Apr 25.

Mutations in epilepsy and intellectual disability genes in patients with features
of Rett syndrome.

Olson HE(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Tambunan D(1), LaCoursiere C(1), Goldenberg M(4), Pinsky
R(1), Martin E(1), Ho E(4,)(5), Khwaja O(3,)(4,)(5), Kaufmann WE(2,)(3,)(4,)(5), 
Poduri A(1,)(2,)(3,)(4,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Genetics Program, Division of Epilepsy & Clinical Neurophysiology,
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Neurogenetics Program, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts. (5)Rett Syndrome Program, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts. (6)F. M. Kirby Neurobiology Center, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts.

Rett syndrome and neurodevelopmental disorders with features overlapping this
syndrome frequently remain unexplained in patients without clinically identified 
MECP2 mutations. We recruited a cohort of 11 patients with features of Rett
syndrome and negative initial clinical testing for mutations in MECP2. We
analyzed their phenotypes to determine whether patients met formal criteria for
Rett syndrome, reviewed repeat clinical genetic testing, and performed exome
sequencing of the probands. Using 2010 diagnostic criteria, three patients had
classical Rett syndrome, including two for whom repeat MECP2 gene testing had
identified mutations. In a patient with neonatal onset epilepsy with atypical
Rett syndrome, we identified a frameshift deletion in STXBP1. Among seven
patients with features of Rett syndrome not fulfilling formal diagnostic
criteria, four had suspected pathogenic mutations, one each in MECP2, FOXG1,
SCN8A, and IQSEC2. MECP2 mutations are highly correlated with classical Rett
syndrome. Genes associated with atypical Rett syndrome, epilepsy, or intellectual
disability should be considered in patients with features overlapping with Rett
syndrome and negative MECP2 testing. While most of the identified mutations were 
apparently de novo, the SCN8A variant was inherited from an unaffected parent
mosaic for the mutation, which is important to note for counseling regarding
recurrence risks.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25914188  [PubMed - in process]


40. Mol Cytogenet. 2015 Apr 9;8:24. doi: 10.1186/s13039-015-0129-4. eCollection 2015.

Dysregulation of FOXG1 by ring chromosome 14.

Alosi D(1), Klitten LL(2), Bak M(1), Hjalgrim H(3), Møller RS(3), Tommerup N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for
Functional Genome Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(2)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for
Functional Genome Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark ;
Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund, Denmark. (3)Danish Epilepsy Centre, Dianalund,
Denmark ; Institute of Regional Health Services Research, University of Southern 
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

In this study we performed molecular characterization of a patient with an extra 
ring chromosome derived from chromosome 14, with severe intellectual disability, 
epilepsy, cerebral paresis, tetraplegia, osteoporosis and severe thoraco-lumbal
scoliosis. Array CGH analysis did not show any genomic imbalance but conventional
karyotyping and FISH analysis revealed the presence of an interstitial 14q12q24.3
deletion and an extra ring chromosome derived from the deleted material. The
deletion and ring chromosome breakpoints were identified at base-pair level by
mate-pair and Sanger sequencing. Both breakpoints disrupted putative long
non-coding RNA genes (TCONS00022561;RP11-148E17.1) of unknown function. However, 
the proximal breakpoint was 225 kb downstream of the forkhead box G1 gene
(FOXG1), within the known regulatory landscape of FOXG1. The patient represents
the first case of a r(14) arising from an interstitial excision where the
phenotype is compatible with dysregulation of FOXG1. In turn, the phenotypic
overlap between the present case, the FOXG1 syndrome and the r(14) syndrome
supports that dysregulation of FOXG1 may contribute to the classical
r(14)-syndrome, likely mediated by dynamic mosaicism.

PMCID: PMC4404611
PMID: 25901181  [PubMed]


41. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 23;10(3):e0121657. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121657.
eCollection 2015.

Pituitary androgen receptor signalling regulates prolactin but not gonadotrophins
in the male mouse.

O'Hara L(1), Curley M(1), Tedim Ferreira M(1), Cruickshanks L(1), Milne L(1),
Smith LB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Reproductive Health, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Production of the androgen testosterone is controlled by a negative feedback loop
within the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal (HPG) axis. Stimulation of testicular
Leydig cells by pituitary luteinising hormone (LH) is under the control of
hypothalamic gonadotrophin releasing hormone (GnRH), while suppression of LH
secretion by the pituitary is controlled by circulating testosterone. Exactly how
androgens exert their feedback control of gonadotrophin secretion (and whether
this is at the level of the pituitary), as well as the role of AR in other
pituitary cell types remains unclear. To investigate these questions, we
exploited a transgenic mouse line (Foxg1 Cre/+; AR fl/y) which lacks androgen
receptor in the pituitary gland. Both circulating testosterone and gonadotrophins
are unchanged in adulthood, demonstrating that AR signalling is dispensable in
the male mouse pituitary for testosterone-dependent regulation of LH secretion.
In contrast, Foxg1 Cre/+; AR fl/y males have a significant increase in
circulating prolactin, suggesting that, rather than controlling gonadotrophins,
AR-signalling in the pituitary acts to suppress aberrant prolactin production in 
males.

PMCID: PMC4370825
PMID: 25799562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Neuroreport. 2015 Mar 25;26(5):254-7. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0000000000000337.

A de-novo STXBP1 gene mutation in a patient showing the Rett syndrome phenotype.

Romaniello R(1), Saettini F, Panzeri E, Arrigoni F, Bassi MT, Borgatti R.

Author information: 
(1)aNeuropsychiatry and Neurorehabilitation Unit bLaboratory of Molecular Biology
cNeuroimaging Unit, Scientific Institute, IRCCS Eugenio Medea, Lecco dDepartment 
of Pediatrics, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, University of Milano Bicocca, Milano,
Italy.

This study reports on a 9-year-old girl who developed West syndrome and showed
clinical features fulfilling the main revised diagnostic criteria for typical
Rett syndrome (hand washing, severe cognitive impairment with absence of
language, ataxic gait, progressive scoliosis and autistic features). Mutation
analyses for methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2), cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5
(CDKL5/STK9), ARX and Forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) genes were carried out, with
negative results. A known de-novo c.1217G>A missense mutation in exon 14 leading 
to the substitution of a conserved residue, p.R406H in domain3b of the
syntaxin-binding protein 1 (STXBP1) gene, was detected. The STXBP1 gene encodes
the syntaxin-binding protein 1, a neuron-specific protein involved in synaptic
vesicle release at both glutaminergic and GABAergic synapses. This function is
also affected by MECP2 gene mutations, which are known to lead to a decrease in
glutamate and GABA receptors' density. It is possible to speculate that the
impairment in synaptic plasticity represents the pathogenic link between MECP2
and STXBP1 gene mutations. On reviewing the clinical features of the reported
patients with the same mutation in the STXBP1 gene, it has been observed that
poor eye contact, tremour, dyskinesia, head/hand stereotypies and both cognitive 
and motor progressive deterioration are common symptoms, although never
considered as indicative of a Rett syndrome phenotype. In conclusion, the case
described here suggests a relationship between the Rett syndrome and the STXBP1
gene not described so far, making the search for STXBP1 gene mutations advisable 
in patients with Rett syndrome and early onset of epilepsy.

Copyright © 2015 Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25714420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Feb 8;7(1):10. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0047-7. eCollection
2015.

Identification of novel long non-coding RNAs in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Blondeau JJ(1), Deng M(2), Syring I(3), Schrödter S(1), Schmidt D(1), Perner
S(2), Müller SC(1), Ellinger J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (2)Institute
of Pathology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany ; Department of Prostate
Cancer Research, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany ; Center of Integrated
Oncology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (3)Department of Urology,
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany ; Department of Prostate Cancer Research,
University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) play an important role in
carcinogenesis; knowledge on lncRNA expression in renal cell carcinoma is
rudimental. As a basis for biomarker development, we aimed to explore the lncRNA 
expression profile in clear cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC) tissue.
RESULTS: Microarray experiments were performed to determine the expression of
32,183 lncRNA transcripts belonging to 17,512 lncRNAs in 15 corresponding normal 
and malignant renal tissues. Validation was performed using quantitative
real-time PCR in 55 ccRCC and 52 normal renal specimens. Computational analysis
was performed to determine lncRNA-microRNA (MiRTarget2) and lncRNA-protein
(catRAPID omics) interactions. We identified 1,308 dysregulated transcripts
(expression change >2-fold; upregulated: 568, downregulated: 740) in ccRCC
tissue. Among these, aberrant expression was validated using PCR: lnc-BMP2-2
(mean expression change: 37-fold), lnc-CPN2-1 (13-fold), lnc-FZD1-2 (9-fold),
lnc-ITPR2-3 (15-fold), lnc-SLC30A4-1 (15-fold), and lnc-SPAM1-6 (10-fold) were
highly overexpressed in ccRCC, whereas lnc-ACACA-1 (135-fold), lnc-FOXG1-2
(19-fold), lnc-LCP2-2 (2-fold), lnc-RP3-368B9 (19-fold), and lnc-TTC34-3
(314-fold) were downregulated. There was no correlation between lncRNA expression
with clinical-pathological parameters. Computational analyses revealed that these
lncRNAs are involved in RNA-protein networks related to splicing, binding,
transport, localization, and processing of RNA. Small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-mediated knockdown of lnc-BMP2-2 and lnc-CPN2-1 did not influence cell
proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified many novel lncRNA transcripts dysregulated in ccRCC
which may be useful for novel diagnostic biomarkers.

PMCID: PMC4326488
PMID: 25685243  [PubMed]


44. Neuropediatrics. 2015 Feb;46(1):56-64. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1395345. Epub 2015 Jan
7.

Forkhead box G1 gene haploinsufficiency: an emerging cause of dyskinetic
encephalopathy of infancy.

Bertossi C(1), Cassina M(2), Cappellari A(1), Toldo I(1), Nosadini M(1), Rigon
C(2), Suppiej A(1), Sartori S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Child Neurology Unit, Department of Woman's and Child's Health, University
Hospital of Padua, Padua, Italy. (2)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Woman's
and Child's Health, University Hospital of Padua, Padua, Italy.

BACKGROUND: 14q12 deletions, including the Forkhead Box G1 (FOXG1) gene and point
mutations of this gene, are associated with a complex encephalopathy described as
a congenital variant of Rett syndrome. A mixture of jerks, athetosis, chorea, and
dystonia is observed early in life in many patients. The aim of this article is
to report on the spectrum of movement disorders associated with FOXG1
haploinsufficiency, as described in the literature.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We provide a review of the cases reported in the
literature, adding two new patients. We searched for a comprehensive set of
clinical features, including age at onset and semiology of the movement disorder,
occurrence and type of stereotypies, and neurological outcome.
RESULTS: A total of 51 cases were included in our study. Nonepileptic abnormal
movements occurred in 33 cases, often variably combined and presenting during the
first year of life.
CONCLUSION: The neurological phenotype of FOXG1 haploinsufficiency shows the
features of a dyskinetic encephalopathy of infancy.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 25565401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. BMC Genomics. 2014 Dec 24;15:1177. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-1177.

CAGE-defined promoter regions of the genes implicated in Rett Syndrome.

Vitezic M(1,)(2,)(3), Bertin N(4,)(5,)(6), Andersson R(7), Lipovich L(8,)(9),
Kawaji H(10,)(11,)(12), Lassmann T(13,)(14,)(15), Sandelin A(16), Heutink
P(17,)(18,)(19), Goldowitz D(20), Ha T(21), Zhang P(22), Patrizi A(23), Fagiolini
M(24), Forrest AR(25,)(26), Carninci P(27,)(28), Saxena A(29,)(30); FANTOM
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC),
1-17-22 Suehiro cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama, Japan. mvitezic@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology (CMB), Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. mvitezic@gmail.com. (3)The Bioinformatics Center, Department
of Biology and Biotech Research and Innovation Center, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark. mvitezic@gmail.com. (4)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama 
Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama,
Japan. nicolas.bertin@gmail.com. (5)Division of Genomic Technologies (DGT), RIKEN
Center for Life Science Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. nicolas.bertin@gmail.com. 
(6)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore. nicolas.bertin@gmail.com. (7)The Bioinformatics Center,
Department of Biology and Biotech Research and Innovation Center, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. robin@binf.ku.dk. (8)Center for Molecular
Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, USA.
LLipovich@med.wayne.edu. (9)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Wayne
State University, Detroit, MI, USA. LLipovich@med.wayne.edu. (10)Omics Science
Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro
cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama, Japan. kawaji@gsc.riken.jp. (11)Division of Genomic
Technologies (DGT), RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. 
kawaji@gsc.riken.jp. (12)RIKEN Preventive Medicine and Diagnosis Innovation
Program (PMI), Wako, Japan. kawaji@gsc.riken.jp. (13)Omics Science Center, RIKEN 
Yokohama Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro cho, Tsurumi ku, 
Yokohama, Japan. timo.lassmann@telethonkids.org.au. (14)Division of Genomic
Technologies (DGT), RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. 
timo.lassmann@telethonkids.org.au. (15)Telethon Kids Institute, The University of
Western Australia, Perth, Australia. timo.lassmann@telethonkids.org.au. (16)The
Bioinformatics Center, Department of Biology and Biotech Research and Innovation 
Center, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. albin@binf.ku.dk.
(17)Division of Genomic Technologies (DGT), RIKEN Center for Life Science
Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. peter.heutink@dzne.de. (18)German Center for
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tübingen, Germany. peter.heutink@dzne.de.
(19)Eberhard Karls University, Tübingen, Germany. peter.heutink@dzne.de.
(20)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics, Child and Family Research
Institute, Dept of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
Canada. dang@cmmt.ubc.ca. (21)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics,
Child and Family Research Institute, Dept of Medical Genetics, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. tjha@cmmt.ubc.ca. (22)Centre for Molecular
Medicine and Therapeutics, Child and Family Research Institute, Dept of Medical
Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. pzhang@cmmt.ubc.ca. 
(23)FM Kirby Neurobiology Center, Department of Neurology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
annarita.patrizi@childrens.harvard.edu. (24)FM Kirby Neurobiology Center,
Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. michela.fagiolini@childrens.harvard.edu. (25)Omics Science
Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro
cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama, Japan. forrest@gsc.riken.jp. (26)Division of Genomic
Technologies (DGT), RIKEN Center for Life Science Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. 
forrest@gsc.riken.jp. (27)Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Omics
Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama, Japan.
carninci@riken.jp. (28)Division of Genomic Technologies (DGT), RIKEN Center for
Life Science Technologies, Yokohama, Japan. carninci@riken.jp. (29)Omics Science 
Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute, Omics Science Center (OSC), 1-17-22 Suehiro
cho, Tsurumi ku, Yokohama, Japan. alka.saxena@gstt.nhs.uk. (30)Biomedical
Research Centre at Guy's and St Thomas' Trust, Genomics Core Facility, Guy's
Hospital, London, UK. alka.saxena@gstt.nhs.uk.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in three functionally diverse genes cause Rett Syndrome.
Although the functions of Forkhead box G1 (FOXG1), Methyl CpG binding protein 2
(MECP2) and Cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) have been studied
individually, not much is known about their relation to each other with respect
to expression levels and regulatory regions. Here we analyzed data from hundreds 
of mouse and human samples included in the FANTOM5 project, to identify
transcript initiation sites, expression levels, expression correlations and
regulatory regions of the three genes.
RESULTS: Our investigations reveal the predominantly used transcription start
sites (TSSs) for each gene including novel transcription start sites for FOXG1.
We show that FOXG1 expression is poorly correlated with the expression of MECP2
and CDKL5. We identify promoter shapes for each TSS, the predicted location of
enhancers for each gene and the common transcription factors likely to regulate
the three genes. Our data imply Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) mediated
silencing of Foxg1 in cerebellum.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses provide a comprehensive picture of the regulatory
regions of the three genes involved in Rett Syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4522966
PMID: 25539566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Sep;23(9):1171-5. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.249. Epub 2014 Nov
26.

Deletion of protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 4 (PTPN4) in twins
with a Rett syndrome-like phenotype.

Williamson SL(1), Ellaway CJ(2), Peters GB(3), Pelka GJ(4), Tam PP(5),
Christodoulou J(2).

Author information: 
(1)NSW Centre for Rett Syndrome Research, Western Sydney Genetics Program,
Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. (2)1] NSW
Centre for Rett Syndrome Research, Western Sydney Genetics Program, Children's
Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia [2] Disciplines of
Paediatrics and Child Health and Genetic Medicine, Sydney Medical School,
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. (3)1] Disciplines of
Paediatrics and Child Health and Genetic Medicine, Sydney Medical School,
University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia [2] Sydney Genome
Diagnostics, Western Sydney Genetics Program, Children's Hospital at Westmead,
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. (4)Embryology Unit, Children's Medical
Research Institute, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. (5)1] Embryology Unit,
Children's Medical Research Institute, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia [2]
Discipline of Medicine, Sydney Medical School, University of Sydney, Sydney, New 
South Wales, Australia.

Rett syndrome (RTT), a neurodevelopmental disorder that predominantly affects
females, is primarily caused by variants in MECP2. Variants in other genes such
as CDKL5 and FOXG1 are usually associated with individuals who manifest distinct 
phenotypes that may overlap with RTT. Individuals with phenotypes suggestive of
RTT are typically screened for variants in MECP2 and then subsequently the other 
genes dependent on the specific phenotype. Even with this screening strategy,
there are individuals in whom no causative variant can be identified, suggesting 
that there are other novel genes that contribute to the RTT phenotype. Here we
report a de novo deletion of protein tyrosine phosphatase, non-receptor type 4
(PTPN4) in identical twins with a RTT-like phenotype. We also demonstrate the
reduced expression of Ptpn4 in a Mecp2 null mouse model of RTT, as well as the
activation of the PTPN4 promoter by MeCP2. Our findings suggest that PTPN4 should
be considered for addition to the growing list of genes that warrant screening in
individuals with a RTT-like phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4538211
PMID: 25424712  [PubMed - in process]


47. J Immunol Res. 2014;2014:260973. doi: 10.1155/2014/260973. Epub 2014 Oct 15.

Immune dysfunction in Rett syndrome patients revealed by high levels of serum
anti-N(Glc) IgM antibody fraction.

Papini AM(1), Nuti F(2), Real-Fernandez F(3), Rossi G(4), Tiberi C(4), Sabatino
G(2), Pandey S(2), Leoncini S(5), Signorini C(6), Pecorelli A(5), Guerranti R(7),
Lavielle S(8), Ciccoli L(6), Rovero P(4), De Felice C(9), Hayek J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Peptide and Protein Chemistry and Biology, University of
Florence, Via della Lastruccia 13, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy ; Department of 
Chemistry "Ugo Schiff", University of Florence, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy ;
Laboratory of PeptLab-SOSCO-EA4505, University of Cergy-Pontoise, 5 mail Gay
Lussac, 95031 Cergy-Pontoise CEDEX, France. (2)Laboratory of Peptide and Protein 
Chemistry and Biology, University of Florence, Via della Lastruccia 13, 50019
Sesto Fiorentino, Italy ; Department of Chemistry "Ugo Schiff", University of
Florence, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy. (3)Toscana Biomarkers Srl, 53100 Siena, 
Italy. (4)Laboratory of Peptide and Protein Chemistry and Biology, University of 
Florence, Via della Lastruccia 13, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy ; Section of
Pharmaceutical and Nutraceutical Sciences, Department NeuroFarBa, University of
Florence, 50019 Sesto Fiorentino, Italy. (5)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit,
University Hospital, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria Senese (AOUS), 53100
Siena, Italy ; Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of 
Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy. (6)Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine,
University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy. (7)Department of Medical
Biotechnologies, University of Siena, 53100 Siena, Italy ; Clinical Pathology
Laboratory Unit, University Hospital, AOUS, 53100 Siena, Italy. (8)Laboratory of 
BioMolecules, Sorbonne Université UPMC Paris 06, CNRS-ENS, 75005 Paris, France.
(9)Neonatal Intensive Care Unit, University Hospital, AOUS, 53100 Siena, Italy.
(10)Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, University Hospital, Azienda Ospedaliera
Universitaria Senese (AOUS), 53100 Siena, Italy.

Rett syndrome (RTT), a neurodevelopmental disorder affecting exclusively (99%)
female infants, is associated with loss-of-function mutations in the gene
encoding methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MECP2) and, more rarely, cyclin-dependent 
kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) and forkhead box protein G1 (FOXG1). In this study, we
aimed to evaluate the function of the immune system by measuring serum
immunoglobulins (IgG and IgM) in RTT patients (n = 53) and, by comparison, in
age-matched children affected by non-RTT pervasive developmental disorders
(non-RTT PDD) (n = 82) and healthy age-matched controls (n = 29). To determine
immunoglobulins we used both a conventional agglutination assay and a novel ELISA
based on antibody recognition by a surrogate antigen probe, CSF114(Glc), a
synthetic N-glucosylated peptide. Both assays provided evidence for an increase
in IgM titer, but not in IgG, in RTT patients relative to both healthy controls
and non-RTT PDD patients. The significant difference in IgM titers between RTT
patients and healthy subjects in the CSF114(Glc) assay (P = 0.001) suggests that 
this procedure specifically detects a fraction of IgM antibodies likely to be
relevant for the RTT disease. These findings offer a new insight into the
mechanism underlying the Rett disease as they unveil the possible involvement of 
the immune system in this pathology.

PMCID: PMC4214166
PMID: 25389532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Jul;75(7):738-56. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22245. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Characterization of brain cell nuclei with decondensed chromatin.

Yu P(1), McKinney EC(1), Kandasamy MM(1), Albert AL(2), Meagher RB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Davison Life Sciences Building,
Athens, Georgia, 30602. (2)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta,
Georgia, 30322.

Although multipotent cell types have enlarged nuclei with decondensed chromatin, 
this property has not been exploited to enhance the characterization of neural
progenitor cell (NPC) populations in the brain. We found that mouse brain cell
nuclei that expressed exceptionally high levels of the pan neuronal marker
NeuN/FOX3 (NeuN-High) had decondensed chromatin relative to most NeuN-Low or
NeuN-Neg (negative) nuclei. Purified NeuN-High nuclei expressed significantly
higher levels of transcripts encoding markers of neurogenesis, neuroplasticity,
and learning and memory (ARC, BDNF, ERG1, HOMER1, NFL/NEF1, SYT1), subunits of
chromatin modifying machinery (SIRT1, HDAC1, HDAC2, HDAC11, KAT2B, KAT3A, KAT3B, 
KAT5, DMNT1, DNMT3A, Gadd45a, Gadd45b) and markers of NPC and cell cycle activity
(BRN2, FOXG1, KLF4, c-MYC, OCT4, PCNA, SHH, SOX2) relative to neuronal NeuN-Low
or to mostly non-neuronal NeuN-Neg nuclei. NeuN-High nuclei expressed higher
levels of HDAC1, 2, 4, and 5 proteins. The cortex, hippocampus, hypothalamus,
thalamus, and nucleus accumbens contained high percentages of large decondensed
NeuN-High nuclei, while the cerebellum, and pons contained very few. NeuN-High
nuclei have the properties consistent with their being derived from extremely
active neurons with elevated rates of chromatin modification and/or NPC-like
cells with multilineage developmental potential. The further analysis of
decondensed neural cell nuclei should provide novel insights into neurobiology
and neurodegenerative disease.

© 2014 The Authors Developmental Neurobiology Published by Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

PMID: 25369517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS Genet. 2014 Oct 30;10(10):e1004772. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004772.
eCollection 2014.

De novo mutations in moderate or severe intellectual disability.

Hamdan FF(1), Srour M(2), Capo-Chichi JM(1), Daoud H(3), Nassif C(1), Patry L(1),
Massicotte C(1), Ambalavanan A(3), Spiegelman D(3), Diallo O(3), Henrion E(3),
Dionne-Laporte A(3), Fougerat A(1), Pshezhetsky AV(1), Venkateswaran S(4),
Rouleau GA(3), Michaud JL(5).

Author information: 
(1)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal, Canada. (2)CHU Sainte-Justine
Research Center, Montreal, Canada; Division of Pediatric Neurology, Montreal
Children's Hospital, Montreal, Canada. (3)Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Canada. (4)Division of Neurology, Children's Hospital of
Eastern Ontario, Ottawa, Canada. (5)CHU Sainte-Justine Research Center, Montreal,
Canada; Department of Pediatrics and Department of Neurosciences, University of
Montreal, Montreal, Canada.

Genetics is believed to have an important role in intellectual disability (ID).
Recent studies have emphasized the involvement of de novo mutations (DNMs) in ID 
but the extent to which they contribute to its pathogenesis and the identity of
the corresponding genes remain largely unknown. Here, we report a screen for DNMs
in subjects with moderate or severe ID. We sequenced the exomes of 41 probands
and their parents, and confirmed 81 DNMs affecting the coding sequence or
consensus splice sites (1.98 DNMs/proband). We observed a significant excess of
de novo single nucleotide substitutions and loss-of-function mutations in these
cases compared to control subjects, suggesting that at least a subset of these
variations are pathogenic. A total of 12 likely pathogenic DNMs were identified
in genes previously associated with ID (ARID1B, CHD2, FOXG1, GABRB3, GATAD2B,
GRIN2B, MBD5, MED13L, SETBP1, TBR1, TCF4, WDR45), resulting in a diagnostic yield
of ~29%. We also identified 12 possibly pathogenic DNMs in genes (HNRNPU, WAC,
RYR2, SET, EGR1, MYH10, EIF2C1, COL4A3BP, CHMP2A, PPP1CB, VPS4A, PPP2R2B) that
have not previously been causally linked to ID. Interestingly, no case was
explained by inherited mutations. Protein network analysis indicated that the
products of many of these known and candidate genes interact with each other or
with products of other ID-associated genes further supporting their involvement
in ID. We conclude that DNMs represent a major cause of moderate or severe ID.

PMCID: PMC4214635
PMID: 25356899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Epilepsia. 2014 Nov;55(11):e116-9. doi: 10.1111/epi.12800. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

A case of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome in a patient with FOXG1-related disorder.

Terrone G(1), Bienvenu T, Germanaud D, Barthez-Carpentier MA, Diebold B, Delanoe 
C, Passemard S, Auvin S.

Author information: 
(1)AP-HP, Pediatric Neurology Department, Hospital Robert Debré, Paris, France;
Inserm, U1141, Paris, France; Department of Translational Medicine, Section of
Pediatrics, Federico II University, Naples, Italy.

Lennox-Gastaut syndrome (LGS) is a drug-resistant epileptic encephalopathy of
childhood with a heterogeneous etiology. Recently, genome-wide association
studies have led to the identification of new de novo mutations associated with
this epileptic syndrome. Herein, we report an 8-year-old child with intellectual 
disability, severe postnatal microcephaly, Rett-like features, and LGS, carrying 
a de novo missense mutation in the forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) gene. This gene is
responsible for FOXG1 syndrome, characterized by severe postnatal microcephaly,
moderate postnatal growth deficiency, mental retardation with poor social
interaction, stereotyped behavior and dyskinesias, absent language, sleep
disorders, and epilepsy. Nonspecific epilepsy syndromes have been associated with
this genetic disorder. Thus, we hypothesize that FOXG1 might be a new candidate
gene in the etiology of LGS and suggest screening for this gene in cases of LGS
with concomitant microcephaly and clinical features overlapping with Rett
syndrome.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2014 International League Against Epilepsy.

PMID: 25266269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Neurosci. 2014 Sep 24;34(39):13259-76. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2334-14.2014.

The timing of upper-layer neurogenesis is conferred by sequential derepression
and negative feedback from deep-layer neurons.

Toma K(1), Kumamoto T(2), Hanashima C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Neocortical Development, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, Kobe 650-0047, Japan, and Department of Biology, Graduate School of
Science, Kobe University, Kobe 657-8501, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Neocortical
Development, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology, Kobe 650-0047, Japan, and.
(3)Laboratory for Neocortical Development, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, Kobe 650-0047, Japan, and Department of Biology, Graduate School of
Science, Kobe University, Kobe 657-8501, Japan hanashima@cdb.riken.jp.

The prevailing view of upper-layer (UL) neurogenesis in the cerebral cortex is
that progenitor cells undergo successive rounds of asymmetric cell division that 
restrict the competence and production of UL neurons later in development.
However, the recent discovery of UL fate-committed early progenitors raises an
alternative perspective concerning their ontogeny. To investigate the emergence
of UL progenitors, we manipulated the timing and extent of cortical neurogenesis 
in vivo in mice. We demonstrated that UL competence is tightly linked to
deep-layer (DL) neurogenesis and that this sequence is determined primarily
through derepression of Fezf2 by Foxg1 within a closed transcriptional cascade.
We further demonstrated that the sequential acquisition of UL competence requires
negative feedback, which is propagated from postmitotic DL neurons. Thus,
neocortical progenitors integrate intrinsic and extrinsic cues to generate UL
neurons through a system that controls the sequence of DL and UL neurogenesis and
to scale the production of intracortical projection neurons based on the
availability of their subcortical projection neuron counterparts during cortical 
development and evolution.

Copyright © 2014 the authors 0270-6474/14/3413259-18$15.00/0.

PMID: 25253869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Jan;73:418-27. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.09.005. Epub 2014 Sep 
22.

Timed conditional null of connexin26 in mice reveals temporary requirements of
connexin26 in key cochlear developmental events before the onset of hearing.

Chang Q(1), Tang W(1), Kim Y(1), Lin X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Emory University School of Medicine, 615 Michael
Street, Atlanta, GA 30322-3030, USA. (2)Department of Otolaryngology, Emory
University School of Medicine, 615 Michael Street, Atlanta, GA 30322-3030, USA;
Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, 615 Michael
Street, Atlanta, GA 30322-3030, USA.

Mutations in the Gjb2 gene, which encodes a gap junction protein connexin26
(Cx26), are the most prevalent form of hereditary deafness in humans and
represent about half of non-syndromic congenital deafness cases in many ethnic
populations. Cochlear potassium (K+) recycling in mature cochlea is required for 
normal hearing. It is thought that gap junctions are essential for K+ recycling
and that Gjb2 mutations cause Gjb2-associated deafness by disrupting K+ recycling
in mature cochlea. Here we present evidence showing that Gjb2 is required for
normal development of the neonatal organ of Corti prior to the onset of the
hearing in mice. In the conditional Gjb2 null (cCx26 null) mice, ribbon synapses 
in inner hair cells remained poorly developed, the afferent type I fibers failed 
to finish the refinement process to form convergent innervation to individual
inner hair cells. The spontaneous depolarizing activities in the supporting
cells, which normally diminish in the wild type cochleae after postnatal day 8
(P8), remained strong in the cochlea after P8 in the mutant mice. Furthermore,
the deafness phenotype was readily generated only if the Cx26 expression in the
organ of Corti was significantly reduced before P6. Similar amount of Cx26
reduction in more mature cochleae had a much weaker effect in damaging the
hearing sensitivity. Our findings indicated that Cx26 plays essential roles in
the maturation process of the organ of Corti prior to the establishment of high
K+ in the endolymph and the onset of hearing. These results suggest that
successful treatment of Cx26 deafness requires early intervention before the
cochlea fully matures.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25251605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Hepatology. 2015 Feb;61(2):561-73. doi: 10.1002/hep.27491.

Double-negative feedback loop between microRNA-422a and forkhead box
(FOX)G1/Q1/E1 regulates hepatocellular carcinoma tumor growth and metastasis.

Zhang J(1), Yang Y, Yang T, Yuan S, Wang R, Pan Z, Yang Y, Huang G, Gu F, Jiang
B, Lin C, Zhou W.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Hepatic Surgery, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital,
Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Growing evidence indicates that the aberrant expression of microRNAs (miRNAs)
contributes to tumor development; however, the function of miRNAs in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) remains largely undefined. In this study, we
report that microRNA-422a (miR-422a) is significantly down-regulated in HCC tumor
samples and cell lines compared with normal controls, and its expression level is
negatively correlated with pathological grading, recurrence, and metastasis. The 
restoration of miR-422a expression in HCC tumor cells significantly inhibited
cell proliferation and migration in vitro. At the same time, the overexpression
of miR-422a in HCC tumor cells significantly inhibits tumor growth and liver
metastasis in xenograft tumor models. A mechanistic study identified three genes,
forkhead box G1 (FOXG1), FOXQ1, and FOXE1, as miR-422a targets in the regulation 
of HCC development. We also investigated the function of the three targets
themselves in HCC tumorigenesis using RNAi manipulation and demonstrated that the
knockdown of these targets led to significant inhibition of tumor cell
proliferation and migration both in vitro and in vivo. More interestingly, a
potential miR-422a promoter region was identified. Both the promoter activity and
miR-422a expression were negatively regulated by the three targets, indicating
that a double-negative feedback loop exists between miR-422a and its targets.
Moreover, we explored the therapeutic potential of miR-422a in HCC treatment and 
found that the therapeutic delivery of miR-422a significantly inhibited tumor
development in a xenograft tumor model and a diethylnitrosamine-induced primary
HCC model.CONCLUSION: Our findings show the critical roles of miR-422a and its
targets--FOXG1, FOXQ1, and FOXE1--in the regulation of HCC development and
provide new potential candidates for HCC therapy.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 25251503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Dec 1;23(23):6177-90. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu338. Epub 2014 Jul 
2.

Neural deletion of Tgfbr2 impairs angiogenesis through an altered secretome.

Hellbach N(1), Weise SC(1), Vezzali R(1), Wahane SD(1), Heidrich S(2), Roidl
D(2), Pruszak J(3), Esser JS(4), Vogel T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology,
University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany, Faculty of Biology, University
of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. (2)Department of Molecular Embryology,
Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg,
Germany. (3)Emmy Noether-Group for Stem Cell Biology, Department of Molecular
Embryology, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Freiburg, 79104 
Freiburg, Germany, Center for Biological Signaling Studies (BIOSS), University of
Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany and. (4)Department of Cardiology and Angiology 
I, University Heart Center Freiburg, 79106 Freiburg, Germany. (5)Department of
Molecular Embryology, Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of
Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany, tanja.vogel@anat.uni-freiburg.de.

Simultaneous generation of neural cells and that of the nutrient-supplying
vasculature during brain development is called neurovascular coupling. We report 
on a transgenic mouse with impaired transforming growth factor ß
(TGFß)-signalling in forebrain-derived neural cells using a Foxg1-cre knock-in to
drive the conditional knock-out of the Tgfbr2. Although the expression of FOXG1
is assigned to neural progenitors and neurons of the telencephalon,
Foxg1(cre/+);Tgfbr2(flox/flox) (Tgfbr2-cKO) mutants displayed intracerebral
haemorrhage. Blood vessels exhibited an atypical, clustered appearance were less 
in number and displayed reduced branching. Vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) A, insulin-like growth factor (IGF) 1, IGF2, TGFß, inhibitor of DNA
binding (ID) 1, thrombospondin (THBS) 2, and a disintegrin and metalloproteinase 
with thrombospondin motifs (ADAMTS) 1 were altered in either expression levels or
tissue distribution. Accordingly, human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) 
displayed branching defects after stimulation with conditioned medium (CM) that
was derived from primary neural cultures of the ventral and dorsal telencephalon 
of Tgfbr2-cKO. Supplementing CM of Tgfbr2-cKO with VEGFA rescued these defects,
but application of TGFß aggravated them. HUVEC showed reduced migration towards
CM of mutants compared with controls. Supplementing the CM with growth factors
VEGFA, fibroblast growth factor (FGF) 2 and IGF1 partially restored HUVEC
migration. In contrast, TGFß supplementation further impaired migration of HUVEC.
We observed differences along the dorso-ventral axis of the telencephalon with
regard to the impact of these factors on the phenotype. Together these data
establish a TGFBR2-dependent molecular crosstalk between neural and endothelial
cells during brain vessel development. These findings will be useful to further
elucidate neurovascular interaction in general and to understand pathologies of
the blood vessel system such as intracerebral haemorrhages, hereditary
haemorrhagic telangiectasia, Alzheimers disease, cerebral amyloid angiopathy or
tumour biology.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4222361
PMID: 24990151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dev Dyn. 2014 Sep;243(9):1055-66. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24156. Epub 2014 Jul 10.

The chromatin remodeling protein CHD7, mutated in CHARGE syndrome, is necessary
for proper craniofacial and tracheal development.

Sperry ED(1), Hurd EA, Durham MA, Reamer EN, Stein AB, Martin DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan;
The Medical School, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan; Medical
Scientist Training Program, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

BACKGROUND: Heterozygous mutations in the chromatin remodeling gene CHD7 cause
CHARGE syndrome, a developmental disorder with variable craniofacial dysmorphisms
and respiratory difficulties. The molecular etiologies of these malformations are
not well understood. Homozygous Chd7 null mice die by E11, whereas Chd7(Gt/+)
heterozygous null mice are a viable and excellent model of CHARGE. We explored
skeletal phenotypes in Chd7(Gt/+) and Chd7 conditional knockout mice, using
Foxg1-Cre to delete Chd7 (Foxg1-CKO) in the developing eye, ear, nose, pharyngeal
pouch, forebrain, and gut and Wnt1-Cre (Wnt1-CKO) to delete Chd7 in migrating
neural crest cells.
RESULTS: Foxg1-CKO mice exhibited postnatal respiratory distress and death,
dysplasia of the eye, concha, and frontal bone, hypoplastic maxillary shelves and
nasal epithelia, and reduced tracheal rings. Wnt1-CKO mice exhibited frontal and 
occipital bone dysplasia, hypoplasia of the maxillary shelves and mandible, and
cleft palate. In contrast, heterozygous Chd7(Gt/+) mice had apparently normal
skeletal development.
CONCLUSIONS: Conditional deletion of Chd7 in ectodermal and endodermal
derivatives (Foxg1-Cre) or migrating neural crest cells (Wnt1-Cre) results in
varied and more severe craniofacial defects than in Chd7(Gt/+) mice. These
studies indicate that CHD7 has an important, dosage-dependent role in development
of several different craniofacial tissues.

© 2014 The Authors Developmental Dynamics published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on
behalf of American Association of Anatomists.

PMCID: PMC4160830
PMID: 24975120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Development. 2014 Jun;141(12):2494-505. doi: 10.1242/dev.101790.

The facial neural crest controls fore- and midbrain patterning by regulating
Foxg1 expression through Smad1 activity.

Aguiar DP(1), Sghari S(1), Creuzet S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Neurobiologie, Laboratoire de Neurobiologie et Développement,
Avenue de la Terrasse, Gif-sur-Yvette 91198, France. (2)Institut de
Neurobiologie, Laboratoire de Neurobiologie et Développement, Avenue de la
Terrasse, Gif-sur-Yvette 91198, France sophie.creuzet@inaf.cnrs-gif.fr.

The facial neural crest (FNC), a pluripotent embryonic structure forming
craniofacial structures, controls the activity of brain organisers and stimulates
cerebrum growth. To understand how the FNC conveys its trophic effect, we have
studied the role of Smad1, which encodes an intracellular transducer, to which
multiple signalling pathways converge, in the regulation of Foxg1. Foxg1 is a
transcription factor essential for telencephalic specification, the mutation of
which leads to microcephaly and mental retardation. Smad1 silencing, based on RNA
interference (RNAi), was performed in pre-migratory FNC cells. Soon after
electroporation of RNAi molecules, Smad1 inactivation abolished the expression of
Foxg1 in the chick telencephalon, resulting in dramatic microcephaly and partial 
holoprosencephaly. In addition, the depletion of Foxg1 activity altered the
expression Otx2 and Foxa2 in di/mesencephalic neuroepithelium. However, when
mutated forms of Smad1 mediating Fgf and Wnt signalling were transfected into FNC
cells, these defects were overcome. We also show that, downstream of Smad1
activity, Dkk1, a Wnt antagonist produced by the FNC, initiated the specification
of the telencephalon by regulating Foxg1 activity. Additionally, the activity of 
Cerberus in FNC-derived mesenchyme synergised with Dkk1 to control Foxg1
expression and maintain the balance between Otx2 and Foxa2.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 24917504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Am J Med Genet C Semin Med Genet. 2014 Jun;166C(2):140-55. doi:
10.1002/ajmg.c.31400. Epub 2014 May 16.

Genetic disorders associated with postnatal microcephaly.

Seltzer LE, Paciorkowski AR.

Several genetic disorders are characterized by normal head size at birth,
followed by deceleration in head growth resulting in postnatal microcephaly.
Among these are classic disorders such as Angelman syndrome and MECP2-related
disorder (formerly Rett syndrome), as well as more recently described clinical
entities associated with mutations in CASK, CDKL5, CREBBP, and EP300
(Rubinstein-Taybi syndrome), FOXG1, SLC9A6 (Christianson syndrome), and TCF4
(Pitt-Hopkins syndrome). These disorders can be identified clinically by
phenotyping across multiple neurodevelopmental and neurobehavioral realms, and
enough data are available to recognize these postnatal microcephaly disorders as 
separate diagnostic entities in their own right. A second diagnostic grouping,
comprised of Warburg MICRO syndrome, Cockayne syndrome, and Cerebral-oculo-facial
skeletal syndrome, share similar features of somatic growth failure,
ophthalmologic, and dysmorphologic features. Many postnatal microcephaly
syndromes are caused by mutations in genes important in the regulation of gene
expression in the developing forebrain and hindbrain, although important synaptic
structural genes also play a role. This is an emerging group of disorders with a 
fascinating combination of brain malformations, specific epilepsies, movement
disorders, and other complex neurobehavioral abnormalities.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24839169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Epilepsia. 2014 Aug;55(8):1292-300. doi: 10.1111/epi.12648. Epub 2014 May 16.

Epilepsy and outcome in FOXG1-related disorders.

Seltzer LE(1), Ma M, Ahmed S, Bertrand M, Dobyns WB, Wheless J, Paciorkowski AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester,
New York, U.S.A.

OBJECTIVE: FOXG1-related disorders are associated with severe intellectual
disability, absent speech with autistic features, and epilepsy. Children with
deletions or intragenic mutations of FOXG1 also have postnatal microcephaly,
morphologic abnormalities of the corpus callosum, and choreiform movements.
Duplications of 14q12 often present with infantile spasms, and have subsequent
intellectual disability with autistic features. Long-term epilepsy outcome and
response to treatment have not been studied systematically in a well-described
cohort of subjects with FOXG1-related disorders. We report on the epilepsy
features and developmental outcome of 23 new subjects with deletions or
intragenic mutations of FOXG1, and 7 subjects with duplications.
METHODS: Subjects had either chromosomal microarray or FOXG1 gene sequencing
performed as part of routine clinical care. Development and epilepsy follow-up
data were collected from medical records from treating neurologists and through
telephone parental interviews using standardized questionnaires.
RESULTS: Epilepsy was diagnosed in 87% of the subjects with FOXG1-related
disorders. The mean age of epilepsy diagnosis in FOXG1 duplications was
significantly younger than those with deletions/intragenic mutations (p =
0.0002). All of the duplication FOXG1 children with infantile spasms responded to
hormonal therapy, and only one required long-term antiepileptic therapy. In
contrast, more children with deletions/intragenic mutations required
antiepileptic drugs on follow-up (p < 0.0005). All subjects with FOXG1-related
disorders had neurodevelopmental disabilities after 3 years of age, regardless of
the epilepsy type or intractability of seizures. All had impaired verbal language
and social contact, and three duplication subjects were formally diagnosed with
autism. Subjects with deletion/intragenic mutations, however, had significantly
worse ambulation (p = 0.04) and functional hand use (p < 0.0005).
SIGNIFICANCE: Epilepsy and developmental outcome characteristics allow clinicians
to distinguish among the FOXG1-related disorders. Further genotype-phenotype
studies of FOXG1 may help to elucidate why children develop different forms of
developmental epilepsy.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2014 International League Against Epilepsy.

PMCID: PMC4265461
PMID: 24836831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Apr;164A(4):975-92.

If not Angelman, what is it? A review of Angelman-like syndromes.

Tan WH, Bird LM, Thibert RL, Williams CA.

Angelman syndrome (AS) is caused by a lack of expression of the maternally
inherited UBE3A gene in the brain. However, about 10% of individuals with a
clinical diagnosis of AS do not have an identifiable molecular defect. It is
likely that most of those individuals have an AS-like syndrome that is clinically
and molecularly distinct from AS. These AS-like syndromes can be broadly
classified into chromosomal microdeletion and microduplication syndromes, and
single-gene disorders. The microdeletion/microduplication syndromes are now
easily identified by chromosomal microarray analysis and include PhelanMcDermid 
syndrome (chromosome 22q13.3 deletion), MBD5 haploinsufficiency syndrome
(chromosome 2q23.1 deletion), and KANSL1 haploinsufficiency syndrome (chromosome 
17q21.31 deletion). The single-gene disorders include PittHopkins syndrome
(TCF4), Christianson syndrome (SLC9A6), MowatWilson syndrome (ZEB2), Kleefstra
syndrome (EHMT1), and Rett (MECP2) syndrome. They also include disorders due to
mutations in HERC2, adenylosuccinase lyase (ADSL), CDKL5, FOXG1, MECP2
(duplications), MEF2C, and ATRX. Although many of these single-gene disorders can
be caused by chromosomal microdeletions resulting in haploinsufficiency of the
critical gene, the individual disorders are often caused by intragenic mutations 
that cannot be detected by chromosomal microarray analysis. We provide an
overview of the clinical features of these syndromes, comparing and contrasting
them with AS, in the hope that it will help guide clinicians in the diagnostic
work-up of individuals with AS-like syndromes.

PMID: 24779060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Clin Genet. 2014 Jun;85(6):589-91. doi: 10.1111/cge.12212. Epub 2013 Jun 24.

Somatic mosaicism for a FOXG1 mutation: diagnostic implication.

Diebold B(1), Délepine C, Nectoux J, Bahi-Buisson N, Parent P, Bienvenu T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biochimie et Génétique Moléculaire, GH Cochin-Broca-Hôtel Dieu,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.

PMID: 24766421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. No To Hattatsu. 2014 Mar;46(2):117-20.

[Clinical features in Rett syndrome: MECP2-, CDKL5- and FOXG1- related
disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Takahashi S.

PMID: 24738188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Pediatr Neurol. 2014 May;50(5):530-5. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2014.01.022.
Epub 2014 Jan 11.

Epilepsy in patients with duplications of chromosome 14 harboring FOXG1.

Pontrelli G(1), Cappelletti S(2), Claps D(3), Sirleto P(4), Ciocca L(4),
Petrocchi S(4), Terracciano A(5), Serino D(3), Fusco L(3), Vigevano F(3),
Specchio N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neurology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Istituto di Ricovero 
e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Rome, Italy; "Amaducci" Neurology Unit,
Department of Neuroscience, University of Bari, Bari, Italy. (2)Unit of Clinical 
Psychology, Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a
Carattere Scientifico, Rome, Italy. (3)Division of Neurology, Bambino Gesù
Children's Hospital, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Rome,
Italy. (4)Cytogenetics and Molecular Genetics Unit, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Rome, Italy.
(5)Unit of Molecular Medicine for Neuromuscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases,
Bambino Gesú Children's Hospital, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere
Scientifico, Rome, Italy. (6)Division of Neurology, Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Rome, Italy.
Electronic address: nicola.specchio@opbg.net.

BACKGROUND: Dup(14q12) harboring FOXG1 has been recently reported in individuals 
with developmental delay of variable severity, delayed/absent speech, and
epilepsy/infantile spasms. FOXG1 was described as a dosage-sensitive gene
encoding G1, a forkhead protein that is a brain-specific transcription factor
with a role in brain development.
PATIENTS: We extensively reviewed all published cases with dup(14) harboring
FOXG1 and highlighted those epileptological features that are more commonly found
among such cases. We also describe one new patient, detailing his peculiar
clinical and neurophysiological findings.
RESULTS: To date, 15 patients with dup(14) including FOXG1 have been reported;
within those patients, nine also presented with epilepsy. At onset, the more
frequent seizure type in the report and also in our patient is the epileptic
spasm. Focal seizures might also be present. Outcomes in patients with epilepsy
associated with dup(14) should be considered separately regarding seizures and
cognitive and motor development. In the majority of patients (seven of 10,
including ours), seizures tend to disappear and motor skills improve; however,
instead stagnation of cognitive development is evident in all of them, associated
with severe speech difficulties.
CONCLUSIONS: There are some common features that should be considered: seizures
with onset during the first year of life, particularly clusters of spasms and
focal seizures with hypsarrhythmic electroencephalograph pattern; different
degrees of cognitive impairment possibly associated with behavior disturbances
and severe speech disabilities; and dysmorphic features in the absence of
significant microcephaly.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24731847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 3;9(4):e91742. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091742. eCollection 
2014.

Over-expression of either MECP2_e1 or MECP2_e2 in neuronally differentiated cells
results in different patterns of gene expression.

Orlic-Milacic M(1), Kaufman L(1), Mikhailov A(1), Cheung AY(2), Mahmood H(1),
Ellis J(2), Gianakopoulos PJ(1), Minassian BA(3), Vincent JB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry & Development Lab, Campbell Family Mental Health
Research Institute, The Centre for Addiction & Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (2)Developmental & Stem Cell Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Program in Genetics & Genomic Biology, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Division of Neurology,
Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (4)Molecular Neuropsychiatry & Development Lab, Campbell Family Mental
Health Research Institute, The Centre for Addiction & Mental Health, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Mutations in MECP2 are responsible for the majority of Rett syndrome cases. MECP2
is a regulator of transcription, and has two isoforms, MECP2_e1 and MECP2_e2.
There is accumulating evidence that MECP2_e1 is the etiologically relevant
variant for Rett. In this study we aim to detect genes that are differentially
transcribed in neuronal cells over-expressing either of these two MECP2 isoforms.
The human neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-SH was stably infected by lentiviral
vectors over-expressing MECP2_e1, MECP2_e2, or eGFP, and were then differentiated
into neurons. The same lentiviral constructs were also used to infect mouse Mecp2
knockout (Mecp2(tm1.1Bird)) fibroblasts. RNA from these cells was used for
microarray gene expression analysis. For the human neuronal cells, ~ 800 genes
showed >three-fold change in expression level with the MECP2_e1 construct, and ~ 
230 with MECP2_e2 (unpaired t-test, uncorrected p value <0.05). We used
quantitative RT-PCR to verify microarray results for 41 of these genes. We found 
significant up-regulation of several genes resulting from over-expression of
MECP2_e1 including SRPX2, NAV3, NPY1R, SYN3, and SEMA3D. DOCK8 was shown via
microarray and qRT-PCR to be upregulated in both SK-N-SH cells and mouse
fibroblasts. Both isoforms up-regulated GABRA2, KCNA1, FOXG1 and FOXP2.
Down-regulation of expression in the presence of MECP2_e1 was seen with UNC5C and
RPH3A. Understanding the biology of these differentially transcribed genes and
their role in neurodevelopment may help us to understand the relative functions
of the two MECP2 isoforms, and ultimately develop a better understanding of RTT
etiology and determine the clinical relevance of isoform-specific mutations.

PMCID: PMC3974668
PMID: 24699272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Biol Reprod. 2014 May 8;90(5):94. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.117788. Print 2014 
May.

Estimated diversity of messenger RNAs in each murine spermatozoa and their
potential function during early zygotic development.

Fang P(1), Zeng P, Wang Z, Liu M, Xu W, Dai J, Zhao X, Zhang D, Liang D, Chen X, 
Shi S, Zhang M, Wang L, Qiao Z, Shi H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

To study the diversity of mRNAs in murine spermatozoa and their potential
function during zygotic development, total RNAs in murine spermatozoa were
sequenced via RNA-Seq and analyzed through bioinformatics techniques. The
delivery and translation of sperm-borne mRNA in fertilized oocyte were detected
using RT-PCR (reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction), Western blot, and
immunofluorescence. A total of 35<U+200A>288<U+200A>825 reads matching 33<U+200A>039 transcripts,
including 27<U+200A>310 coding transcripts, were obtained. Based on our analyses, we
hypothesized that the transcripts with RPKM (reads per kilobase of exon model per
million mapped reads) higher than six may exist in each sperm cell as
consistently retained transcripts. There were 4885 consistent transcripts in each
sperm, and the remainder were randomly retained. If the baseline RPKM increased, 
the remaining coding transcripts were more likely related to reproduction and
development. The sperm-borne transcripts Wnt4 and Foxg1 were delivered into
fertilized oocytes on fertilization. Furthermore, Wnt4 was translated into
protein in zygotes, whereas Foxg1 was not translated. In conclusion,
approximately 4885 mRNAs were present in each murine spermatozoon, and the
spermatozoal mRNAs related to reproduction and development were more likely
retained. The sperm-borne mRNA Wnt4 was delivered into the fertilized oocyte and 
translated, evidence of a paternal effect on zygotic development.

PMID: 24671878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Biol Open. 2014 Mar 15;3(3):192-203. doi: 10.1242/bio.20147401.

Ras-dva1 small GTPase regulates telencephalon development in Xenopus laevis
embryos by controlling Fgf8 and Agr signaling at the anterior border of the
neural plate.

Tereshina MB(1), Ermakova GV, Ivanova AS, Zaraisky AG.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow 117997, Russia.

We previously found that the small GTPase Ras-dva1 is essential for the
telencephalic development in Xenopus laevis because Ras-dva1 controls the
Fgf8-mediated induction of FoxG1 expression, a key telencephalic regulator. In
this report, we show, however, that Ras-dva1 and FoxG1 are expressed in different
groups of cells; whereas Ras-dva1 is expressed in the outer layer of the anterior
neural fold, FoxG1 and Fgf8 are activated in the inner layer from which the
telencephalon is derived. We resolve this paradox by demonstrating that Ras-dva1 
is involved in the transduction of Fgf8 signal received by cells in the outer
layer, which in turn send a feedback signal that stimulates FoxG1 expression in
the inner layer. We show that this feedback signal is transmitted by secreted Agr
proteins, the expression of which is activated in the outer layer by mediation of
Ras-dva1 and the homeodomain transcription factor Otx2. In turn, Agrs are
essential for maintaining Fgf8 and FoxG1 expression in cells at the anterior
neural plate border. Our finding reveals a novel feedback loop mechanism based on
the exchange of Fgf8 and Agr signaling between neural and non-neural compartments
at the anterior margin of the neural plate and demonstrates a key role of
Ras-dva1 in this mechanism.

PMCID: PMC4001240
PMID: 24570397  [PubMed]


66. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Feb;31(1):1-5. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1003-9406.2014.01.001.

[Genetic features and mechanism of Rett syndrome in Chinese population].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang X(1), Zhao Y, Bao X, Zhang J, Cao G, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
P.R.China. zwhang@pku.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the genetic characteristics and molecular mechanism of
Chinese patients with Rett syndrome (RTT) and assess the recurrent risk in order 
to provide genetic counseling for the family with RTT patient.
METHODS: Methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2) gene mutation analysis were
performed on 405 Chinese RTT cases and 292 mothers of the patients with MECP2
mutations with polymerase chain reaction (PCR), direct sequencing and multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA). Then cyclin-dependent kinase-like 
5 (CDKL5) and forkhead box protein G1 (FOXG1) genes mutation analysis were
performed on the patients without MECP2 mutation. Parental origin of mutated
MECP2 gene was detected with allele specific PCR analysis. Based on the
difference methylation in CpG island of the first exon of human androgen-receptor
gene on active and inactive X-chromosomes, methylation sensitive restriction
endonuclease digestion was used to analyze the X-chromosome inactive (XCI)
patterns.
RESULTS: MECP2 gene mutation was found in 86.9% RTT cases. CDKL5 gene mutation
was found in only 3 cases with early-onset seizures variant. No FOXG1 mutation
was found. There were 94.4% MECP2 mutations of paternal origin,and point
mutations were common. However, microdeletions were common in maternal origin
mutation. MECP2 gene mutation was found in only 1 (0.34%,1/292) mother with
normal phenotype and non-random XCI pattern. Her daughter was a RTT patient with 
preserved speech variant, and her XCI pattern was random.
CONCLUSION: MECP2 is the main pathogenic gene in RTT. CDKL5 gene should be
screened in patients with early-onset seizures variant without MECP2 gene
mutation. The majority of RTT patients had paternally derived de novo MECP2 gene 
mutation, which may explain the high female to male ratio in RTT. Only 0.34%
mothers carried the pathogenic mutation, indicating a lower recurrent risk for
RTT families. The XCI may modulate the phenotype of RTT, so MECP2 gene mutation
screening in the mothers is important for genetic counseling.

PMID: 24510551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Development. 2014 Feb;141(4):940-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.104901.

An essential role for LPA signalling in telencephalon development.

Geach TJ(1), Faas L, Devader C, Gonzalez-Cordero A, Tabler JM, Brunsdon H, Isaacs
HV, Dale L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London,
Anatomy Building, Gower Street, London, WC1E 6BT, UK.

Erratum in
    Development. 2014 Jun;141(11):2360.

Lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) has wide-ranging effects on many different cell
types, acting through G-protein-coupled receptors such as LPAR6. We show that
Xenopus lpar6 is expressed from late blastulae and is enriched in the mesoderm
and dorsal ectoderm of early gastrulae. Expression in gastrulae is an early
response to FGF signalling. Transcripts for lpar6 are enriched in the neural
plate of Xenopus neurulae and loss of function caused forebrain defects, with
reduced expression of telencephalic markers (foxg1, emx1 and nkx2-1). Midbrain
(en2) and hindbrain (egr2) markers were unaffected. Foxg1 expression requires
LPAR6 within ectoderm and not mesoderm. Head defects caused by LPAR6 loss of
function were enhanced by co-inhibiting FGF signalling, with defects extending
into the hindbrain (en2 and egr2 expression reduced). This is more severe than
expected from simple summation of individual defects, suggesting that LPAR6 and
FGF have overlapping or partially redundant functions in the anterior neural
plate. We observed similar defects in forebrain development in loss-of-function
experiments for ENPP2, an enzyme involved in the synthesis of extracellular LPA. 
Our study demonstrates a role for LPA in early forebrain development.

PMID: 24496630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Gene. 2014 Mar 15;538(1):109-12. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.12.063. Epub 2014 Jan
9.

Novel mutation in forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) gene in an Indian patient with Rett
syndrome.

Das DK(1), Jadhav V(2), Ghattargi VC(2), Udani V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Research Centre, National Institute for Research in Reproductive
Health (ICMR), Jahangir Merwanji Street, Parel, Mumbai 400 012, India. Electronic
address: dasd@nirrh.res.in. (2)Genetic Research Centre, National Institute for
Research in Reproductive Health (ICMR), Jahangir Merwanji Street, Parel, Mumbai
400 012, India. (3)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Hinduja National Hospital
and Research Centre, Mahim, Mumbai 400 016, India.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by the 
progressive loss of intellectual functioning, fine and gross motor skills and
communicative abilities, deceleration of head growth, and the development of
stereotypic hand movements, occurring after a period of normal development. The
classic form of RTT involves mutation in MECP2 while the involvement of CDKL5 and
FOXG1 genes has been identified in atypical RTT phenotype. FOXG1 gene encodes for
a fork-head box protein G1, a transcription factor acting primarily as
transcriptional repressor through DNA binding in the embryonic telencephalon as
well as a number of other neurodevelopmental processes. In this report we have
described the molecular analysis of FOXG1 gene in Indian patients with Rett
syndrome. FOXG1 gene mutation analysis was done in a cohort of 34 MECP2/CDKL5
mutation negative RTT patients. We have identified a novel mutation (p.
D263VfsX190) in FOXG1 gene in a patient with congenital variant of Rett syndrome.
This mutation resulted into a frameshift, thereby causing an alteration in the
reading frames of the entire coding sequence downstream of the mutation. The
start position of the frameshift (Asp263) and amino acid towards the carboxyl
terminal end of the protein was found to be well conserved across species using
multiple sequence alignment. Since the mutation is located at forkhead binding
domain, the resultant mutation disrupts the secondary structure of the protein
making it non-functional. This is the first report from India showing mutation in
FOXG1 gene in Rett syndrome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24412290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Nihon Rinsho. 2013 Nov;71(11):2043-53.

[Rett syndrome: the state of research, and future perspectives].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsuishi T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, Kurume University School of
Medicine.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by normal
early psychomotor development followed by the loss of psychomotor and acquired
purposeful hand skills and the onset of stereotyped movement of the hands and
gait disturbance. The causative gene was discovered, and the disease was found to
be caused by a mutation of methyl-CpG-binding protein 2. However, in many ways
this clinically peculiar condition remains a mystery. I review the current status
of clinical and basic research on RTT including data on the neurophysiology of
the disease, neurotransmitter involvement, neuroimaging and neuropathology
findings, molecular biology, animal models, regenerative medicine including ES
cells and iPS cells, and other interventions and therapeutic trials.

PMID: 24397181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2014 May;18(3):420-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2013.11.010.
Epub 2013 Dec 6.

Thin genu of the corpus callosum points to mutation in FOXG1 in a child with
acquired microcephaly, trigonocephaly, and intellectual developmental disorder: a
case report and review of literature.

De Bruyn C(1), Vanderhasselt T(2), Tanyalçin I(3), Keymolen K(3), Van Rompaey
KL(4), De Meirleir L(5), Jansen AC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: 
caroline.debruyn@uzbrussel.be. (2)Department of Radiology, UZ Brussel, Brussels, 
Belgium. (3)Centre for Medical Genetics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. (5)Paediatric
Neurology Unit, Department of Paediatrics, UZ Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.
(6)Paediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Paediatrics, UZ Brussel, Brussels,
Belgium; Department of Public Health, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels,
Belgium.

The FOXG1 syndrome is emerging as a relative new entity in paediatric neurology. 
We report a boy with acquired microcephaly, mental retardation and a thin genu of
the corpus callosum. The combination of these findings led to mutation analysis
of FOXG1. The patient was found to be heterozygous for a novel mutation in FOXG1,
c.506dup (p.Lys170GInfsX285), which occurred de novo. This frameshift mutation
disturbs the three functional domains of the FOXG1 gene. Hypo- or agenesis of the
anterior corpus callosum in combination with acquired microcephaly and neurologic
impairment can be an important clue for identifying patients with a mutation in
FOXG1.

Copyright © 2013 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24388699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Nov 27;1(6):545-59. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.10.006.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of transcription factors for lineage-specific ESC differentiation.

Yamamizu K(1), Piao Y(1), Sharov AA(1), Zsiros V(2), Yu H(1), Nakazawa K(2),
Schlessinger D(1), Ko MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (2)Unit on Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA ; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Sakaguchi Laboratory, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan ;
Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Tokyo160-8582, Japan.

A network of transcription factors (TFs) determines cell identity, but identity
can be altered by overexpressing a combination of TFs. However, choosing and
verifying combinations of TFs for specific cell differentiation have been
daunting due to the large number of possible combinations of ~2,000 TFs. Here, we
report the identification of individual TFs for lineage-specific cell
differentiation based on the correlation matrix of global gene expression
profiles. The overexpression of identified TFs-Myod1, Mef2c, Esx1, Foxa1, Hnf4a, 
Gata2, Gata3, Myc, Elf5, Irf2, Elf1, Sfpi1, Ets1, Smad7, Nr2f1, Sox11, Dmrt1,
Sox9, Foxg1, Sox2, or Ascl1-can direct efficient, specific, and rapid
differentiation into myocytes, hepatocytes, blood cells, and neurons.
Furthermore, transfection of synthetic mRNAs of TFs generates their appropriate
target cells. These results demonstrate both the utility of this approach to
identify potent TFs for cell differentiation, and the unanticipated capacity of
single TFs directly guides differentiation to specific lineage fates.

PMCID: PMC3871400
PMID: 24371809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Dec 26;7:141. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-141.

Systems biology approach to stage-wise characterization of epigenetic genes in
lung adenocarcinoma.

Pradhan MP, Desai A, Palakal MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics and Computing, Indiana University Purdue University
Indianapolis, Indianapolis IN, USA. mpalakal@iupui.edu.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetics refers to the reversible functional modifications of the 
genome that do not correlate to changes in the DNA sequence. The aim of this
study is to understand DNA methylation patterns across different stages of lung
adenocarcinoma (LUAD).
RESULTS: Our study identified 72, 93 and 170 significant DNA methylated genes in 
Stages I, II and III respectively. A set of common 34 significant DNA methylated 
genes located in the promoter section of the true CpG islands were found across
stages, and these were: HOX genes, FOXG1, GRIK3, HAND2, PRKCB, etc. Of the total 
significant DNA methylated genes, 65 correlated with transcription function. The 
epigenetic analysis identified the following novel genes across all stages:
PTGDR, TLX3, and POU4F2. The stage-wise analysis observed the appearance of
NEUROG1 gene in Stage I and its re-appearance in Stage III. The analysis showed
similar epigenetic pattern across Stage I and Stage III. Pathway analysis
revealed important signaling and metabolic pathways of LUAD to correlate with
epigenetics. Epigenetic subnetwork analysis identified a set of seven conserved
genes across all stages: UBC, KRAS, PIK3CA, PIK3R3, RAF1, BRAF, and RAP1A. A
detailed literature analysis elucidated epigenetic genes like FOXG1, HLA-G, and
NKX6-2 to be known as prognostic targets.
CONCLUSION: Integrating epigenetic information for genes with expression data can
be useful for comprehending in-depth disease mechanism and for the ultimate goal 
of better target identification.

PMCID: PMC3882327
PMID: 24369052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Nat Commun. 2013;4:2956. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3956.

Transcription factors FOXG1 and Groucho/TLE promote glioblastoma growth.

Verginelli F(1), Perin A(2), Dali R(3), Fung KH(3), Lo R(3), Longatti P(4), Guiot
MC(5), Del Maestro RF(6), Rossi S(7), di Porzio U(8), Stechishin O(9), Weiss
S(9), Stifani S(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Centre for Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital,
McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4 [2]. (2)1] Centre for
Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4 [2] [3]. (3)Centre for Neuronal
Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, Treviso
Hospital, University of Padova, Padova 31100, Italy. (5)Department of
Neuropathology, Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, McGill University, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3A 2B4. (6)Brain Tumour Research Centre, Montreal
Neurological Institute and Hospital, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada 
H3A 2B4. (7)Department of Pathology, Treviso Hospital, University of Padova,
Padova 31100, Italy. (8)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics, Adriano Buzzati
Traverso, Napoli 80131, Italy. (9)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy,
Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N
4N1.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is the most common and deadly malignant brain cancer, with a
median survival of <2 years. GBM displays a cellular complexity that includes
brain tumour-initiating cells (BTICs), which are considered as potential key
targets for GBM therapies. Here we show that the transcription factors FOXG1 and 
Groucho/TLE are expressed in poorly differentiated astroglial cells in human GBM 
specimens and in primary cultures of GBM-derived BTICs, where they form a
complex. FOXG1 knockdown in BTICs causes downregulation of neural stem/progenitor
and proliferation markers, increased replicative senescence, upregulation of
astroglial differentiation genes and decreased BTIC-initiated tumour growth after
intracranial transplantation into host mice. These effects are phenocopied by
Groucho/TLE knockdown or dominant inhibition of the FOXG1:Groucho/TLE complex.
These results provide evidence that transcriptional programmes regulated by FOXG1
and Groucho/TLE are important for BTIC-initiated brain tumour growth, implicating
FOXG1 and Groucho/TLE in GBM tumourigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3984242
PMID: 24356439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Eur J Cell Biol. 2013 Dec;92(12):363-73. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2013.10.013. Epub
2013 Nov 14.

Effective myofibroblast dedifferentiation by concomitant inhibition of TGF-ß
signaling and perturbation of MAPK signaling.

Kosla J(1), Dvorakova M(2), Dvorak M(3), Cermak V(4).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of 
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, CZ-14220 Prague 4, Czech Republic.
Electronic address: kosla@img.cas.cz. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Virology,
Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic,
Videnska 1083, CZ-14220 Prague 4, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
marta@img.cas.cz. (3)Laboratory of Molecular Virology, Institute of Molecular
Genetics, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, CZ-14220
Prague 4, Czech Republic. Electronic address: mdvorak@img.cas.cz. (4)Laboratory
of Molecular Virology, Institute of Molecular Genetics, Academy of Sciences of
the Czech Republic, Videnska 1083, CZ-14220 Prague 4, Czech Republic. Electronic 
address: cermak@img.cas.cz.

Fibrotic diseases are a group of pathologies with high incidence and mortality.
Despite extensive research efforts, effective therapies are still not available. 
Understanding the molecular mechanisms driving the onset, progression and
possible resolution of fibrosis is a prerequisite to the development of
successful therapies. The central role of the TGF-ß pathway and myofibroblasts in
the pathogenesis of fibrosis is now generally accepted. The possible mechanisms
of myofibroblast elimination or dedifferentiation, on the other hand, are still
almost uncharted territory. Here we show that sustained expression of some
components of MAPK signaling pathway (PDGFB, Ha-Ras(G12V) or the transcription
factor EGR4) in primary chicken embryo dermal myofibroblasts results in a loss of
autocrine TGF-ß signaling and suppression of the myofibroblastic phenotype,
characterized by the loss of alpha smooth muscle actin fibers and a substantial
reduction in the production of extracellular matrix. Detailed analysis of the
possible molecular mechanisms employed by EGR4 revealed FOXG1, BAMBI, NAB1, NAB2 
and DUSP5 genes forming an EGR4 regulated network counteracting autocrine TGF-ß
signaling. We have also found that a combination of chemical inhibition of TGF-ß 
signaling and perturbation of MAPK signaling with phorbol ester mimics the
anti-fibrotic effects of PDGFB, Ha-Ras(G12V) and EGR4.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24315689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013 Nov 20;7:220. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00220.

miR-9: a versatile regulator of neurogenesis.

Coolen M(1), Katz S, Bally-Cuif L.

Author information: 
(1)Zebrafish Neurogenetics Team, Laboratory of Neurobiology and Development,
Institute of Neurobiology Alfred Fessard, CNRS Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Soon after its discovery, microRNA-9 (miR-9) attracted the attention of
neurobiologists, since it is one of the most highly expressed microRNAs in the
developing and adult vertebrate brain. Functional analyses in different
vertebrate species have revealed a prominent role of this microRNA in balancing
proliferation in embryonic neural progenitor populations. Key transcriptional
regulators such as FoxG1, Hes1 or Tlx, were identified as direct targets of
miR-9, placing it at the core of the gene network controlling the progenitor
state. Recent data also suggest that this function could extend to adult neural
stem cells. Other studies point to a role of miR-9 in differentiated neurons.
Moreover miR-9 has been implicated in human brain pathologies, either displaying 
a protective role, such as in Progeria, or participating in disease progression
in brain cancers. Altogether functional studies highlight a prominent feature of 
this highly conserved microRNA, its functional versatility, both along its
evolutionary history and across cellular contexts.

PMCID: PMC3834235
PMID: 24312010  [PubMed]


76. J Genet Couns. 2014 Jun;23(3):289-98. doi: 10.1007/s10897-013-9671-6. Epub 2013
Dec 4.

Diagnostic exome sequencing identifies two novel IQSEC2 mutations associated with
X-linked intellectual disability with seizures: implications for genetic
counseling and clinical diagnosis.

Gandomi SK(1), Farwell Gonzalez KD, Parra M, Shahmirzadi L, Mancuso J, Pichurin
P, Temme R, Dugan S, Zeng W, Tang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genomics, Ambry Genetics, 15 Argonaut, Aliso Viejo, CA,
92656, USA, sgandomi@ambrygen.com.

Intellectual disability is a heterogeneous disorder with a wide phenotypic
spectrum. Over 1,700 OMIM genes have been associated with this condition, many of
which reside on the X-chromosome. The IQSEC2 gene is located on chromosome
Xp11.22 and is known to play a significant role in the maintenance and
homeostasis of the brain. Mutations in IQSEC2 have been historically associated
with nonsyndromic X-linked intellectual disability. Case reports of affected
probands show phenotypic overlap with conditions associated with pathogenic
MECP2, FOXG1, CDKL5, and MEF2C gene mutations. Affected individuals, however,
have also been identified as presenting with additional clinical features
including seizures, autistic-behavior, psychiatric problems, and delayed language
skills. To our knowledge, only 5 deleterious mutations and 2 intragenic
duplications have been previously reported in IQSEC2. Here we report two novel
IQSEC2 de novo truncating mutations identified through diagnostic exome
sequencing in two severely affected unrelated male probands manifesting
developmental delay, seizures, hypotonia, plagiocephaly, and abnormal MRI
findings. Overall, diagnostic exome sequencing established a molecular diagnosis 
for two patients in whom traditional testing methods were uninformative while
expanding on the mutational and phenotypic spectrum. In addition, our data
suggests that IQSEC2 may be more common than previously appreciated, accounting
for approximately 9 % (2/22) of positive findings among patients with seizures
referred for diagnostic exome sequencing. Further, these data supports recently
published data suggesting that IQSEC2 plays a more significant role in the
development of X-linked intellectual disability with seizures than previously
anticipated.

PMID: 24306141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 23;8(10):e78759. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078759.
eCollection 2013.

DNA-dependent protein kinase is a context dependent regulator of Lmx1a and
midbrain specification.

Hunt CP(1), Fabb SA, Pouton CW, Haynes JM.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Discovery Biology, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash
University (Parkville), Melbourne, Australia.

The identification of small molecules capable of directing pluripotent cell
differentiation towards specific lineages is highly desirable to both reduce
cost, and increase efficiency. Within neural progenitors, LIM homeobox
transcription factor 1 alpha (Lmx1a) is required for proper development of roof
plate and cortical hem structures of the forebrain, as well as the development of
floor plate and midbrain dopaminergic neurons. In this study we generated
homologous recombinant cell lines expressing either luciferase or ß-lactamase
under the control of the Lmx1a promoter, and used these cell lines to investigate
kinase-mediated regulation of Lmx1a activity during neuronal differentiation. A
screen of 143 small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors yielded 16 compounds that
positively or negatively modulated Lmx1a activity. Inhibition of EGF, VEGF and
DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) signaling significantly upregulated Lmx1a
activity whereas MEK inhibition strongly downregulated its activity. Quantitative
FACS analysis revealed that the DNA-PK inhibitor significantly increased the
number of Lmx1a+ progenitors while subsequent qPCR showed an upregulation of
Notch effectors, the basic helix-loop-helix genes, Hes5 and Hey1. FACS further
revealed that DNA-PK-mediated regulation of Lmx1a+ cells is dependent on the
rapamycin-sensitive complex, mTORC1. Interestingly, this DNA-PK inhibitor effect 
was preserved in a co-culture differentiation protocol. Terminal differentiation 
assays showed that DNA-PK inhibition shifted development of neurons from
forebrain toward midbrain character as assessed by Pitx3/TH immunolabeling and
corresponding upregulation of midbrain (En1), but not forebrain (FoxG1)
transcripts. These studies show that Lmx1a signaling in mouse embryonic stem
cells contributes to a molecular cascade establishing neuronal specification. The
data presented here identifies a novel regulatory pathway where signaling from
DNA-PK appears to suppress midbrain-specific Lmx1a expression.

PMCID: PMC3806860
PMID: 24194952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Brain Dev. 2014 Sep;36(8):725-9. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2013.09.006. Epub 2013
Oct 16.

A haploinsufficiency of FOXG1 identified in a boy with congenital variant of Rett
syndrome.

Kumakura A(1), Takahashi S(2), Okajima K(2), Hata D(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kitano Hospital, The Tazuke Kofukai Medical
Institute, Osaka, Japan. Electronic address: a-kumakura@kitano-hp.or.jp.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Kitano Hospital, The Tazuke Kofukai Medical
Institute, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Forkhead box G1 gene (FOXG1) mutations and deletions are associated
with a congenital variant of Rett syndrome (RTT). Nucleotide alterations of the
coding region of FOXG1 have never caused dysmorphic features.
PATIENT: An 8-year-old boy with the congenital variant of RTT who showed severe
psychomotor deterioration, epilepsy, acquired microcephaly, and involuntary
movements including jerky movements of the upper limbs and tongue protrusion. He 
showed dysmorphic features including round face, anteverted nostrils, and tented 
upper lips. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed hypoplasia of the frontal
lobes and the rostral part of the corpus callosum. The molecular cytogenetic
analysis confirmed a de novo deletion of 14q12 including FOXG1 in this patient.
CONCLUSION: We identified the smallest deletion of 14q12 involving FOXG1 among
those previously reported. Dysmorphic facial features are a characteristic for
the patients with chromosomal deletion including FOXG1. In our patient, C14orf23 
is the only transcript other than FOXG1. Therefore, C14orf23 might be responsible
for facial dysmorphism.

Copyright © 2013 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24139857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2013 Nov;57:42-53. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2013.10.004. Epub 2013
Oct 12.

Reprogramming fibroblasts to neural-precursor-like cells by structured
overexpression of pallial patterning genes.

Raciti M(1), Granzotto M, Duc MD, Fimiani C, Cellot G, Cherubini E, Mallamaci A.

Author information: 
(1)SISSA, Neuroscience Area, via Bonomea 265, 34136 Trieste, Italy. Electronic
address: racitim@sissa.it.

In this study, we assayed the capability of four genes implicated in embryonic
specification of the cortico-cerebral field, Foxg1, Pax6, Emx2 and Lhx2, to
reprogramme mouse embryonic fibroblasts towards neural identities.
Lentivirus-mediated, TetON-dependent overexpression of Pax6 and Foxg1 transgenes 
specifically activated the neural stem cell (NSC) reporter Sox1-EGFP in a
substantial fraction of engineered cells. The efficiency of this process was
enhanced up to ten times by simultaneous inactivation of Trp53 and
co-administration of a specific drug mix inhibiting HDACs, H3K27-HMTase and
H3K4m2-demethylase. Remarkably, a fraction of the reprogrammed population
expressed other NSC markers and retained its new identity, even after switching
off the reprogramming transgenes. When transferred into a pro-differentiative
environment, Pax6/Foxg1-overexpressing cells activated the neuronal marker
Tau-EGFP. Frequency of Tau-EGFP positive cells was almost doubled upon delayed
delivery of Emx2 and Lhx2 transgenes. A further improvement of the neuron-like
cell output was achieved by inhibition of the BMP and TGFß pathways. Tau-EGFP
positive cells were able to generate action potentials upon injection of
depolarizing current pulses, further indicating their neuron-like phenotype.

© 2013.

PMID: 24128663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 4;8(9):e67752. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067752. eCollection 
2013.

Post-zygotic and inter-individual structural genetic variation in a presumptive
enhancer element of the locus between the IL10Rß and IFNAR1 genes.

Razzaghian HR(1), Forsberg LA, Prakash KR, Przerada S, Paprocka H, Zywicka A,
Westerman MP, Pedersen NL, O'Hanlon TP, Rider LG, Miller FW, Srutek E, Jankowski 
M, Zegarski W, Piotrowski A, Absher D, Dumanski JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden.

Although historically considered as junk-DNA, tandemly repeated sequence motifs
can affect human phenotype. For example, variable number tandem repeats (VNTR)
with embedded enhancers have been shown to regulate gene transcription. The
post-zygotic variation is the presence of genetically distinct populations of
cells in an individual derived from a single zygote, and this is an understudied 
aspect of genome biology. We report somatically variable VNTR with sequence
properties of an enhancer, located upstream of IFNAR1. Initially, SNP genotyping 
of 63 monozygotic twin pairs and multiple tissues from 21 breast cancer patients 
suggested a frequent post-zygotic mosaicism. The VNTR displayed a repeated 32 bp 
core motif in the center of the repeat, which was flanked by similar variable
motifs. A total of 14 alleles were characterized based on combinations of
segments, which showed post-zygotic and inter-individual variation, with up to 6 
alleles in a single subject. Somatic variation occurred in ~24% of cases. In this
hypervariable region, we found a clustering of transcription factor binding sites
with strongest sequence similarity to mouse Foxg1 transcription factor binding
motif. This study describes a VNTR with sequence properties of an enhancer that
displays post-zygotic and inter-individual genetic variation. This element is
within a locus containing four related cytokine receptors: IFNAR2, IL10Rß, IFNAR1
and IFNGR2, and we hypothesize that it might function in transcriptional
regulation of several genes in this cluster. Our findings add another level of
complexity to the variation among VNTR-based enhancers. Further work may unveil
the normal function of this VNTR in transcriptional control and its possible
involvement in diseases connected with these receptors, such as autoimmune
conditions and cancer.

PMCID: PMC3762855
PMID: 24023707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Gene. 2013 Dec 1;531(2):457-61. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.08.084. Epub 2013 Sep 5.

A new small supernumerary marker chromosome involving 14pter <U+2192> q12 in a child
with severe neurodevelopmental retardation: case report and literature review.

Qi M(1), Zhao Y, Wang Y, Li T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, the Affiliated Shengjing Hospital, China
Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning Province 110004, China. Electronic
address: 2005fyuan@sina.com.

Unstable, gene-rich pericentric regions have been associated with various
structural aberrations including small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMCs). 
We hereby report on a new sSMC derived from chromosome 14, generating trisomy
14pter <U+2192> q12 in a child with severe neurodevelopmental delay. The patient
featured facial dysmorphism, generalized hypotonia, transverse palmar creases,
structural brain abnormality, and severe cognitive and motor impairment.
Literature review indicated this to be a unique case of sSMC 14 which was only
composed of pter <U+2192> q12, and the phenotype secondary to duplications of the
similar region partially overlaps with the phenotype reported in this study. The 
genetic analysis on our case helps to better delineate karyotype-phenotype
correlations between proximal trisomy 14 and associated clinical phenomena, and
we also propose that the involved chromosomal regions may contain
dosage-sensitive genes which are important for the development.

© 2013.

PMID: 24013083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Stem Cell Res. 2013 Nov;11(3):1206-21. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.08.002. Epub 2013 
Aug 9.

Stepwise, non-adherent differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells to
generate basal forebrain cholinergic neurons via hedgehog signaling.

Crompton LA(1), Byrne ML, Taylor H, Kerrigan TL, Bru-Mercier G, Badger JL,
Barbuti PA, Jo J, Tyler SJ, Allen SJ, Kunath T, Cho K, Caldwell MA.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Laboratory for Integrative Neuroscience and Endocrinology,
School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, Dorothy Hodgkin Building,
Whitson Street, Bristol BS1 3NY, UK.

Basal forebrain cholinergic neurons (bfCNs) which provide innervation to the
hippocampus and cortex, are required for memory and learning, and are primarily
affected in Alzheimer's Disease (AD), resulting in related cognitive decline.
Therefore generation of a source of bfCNs from human pluripotent stem cells
(hPSCs) is crucial for in vitro disease modeling and development of novel AD
therapies. In addition, for the advancement of regenerative approaches there is a
requirement for an accurate developmental model to study the neurogenesis and
survival of this population. Here we demonstrate the efficient production of
bfCNs, using a novel embryoid body (EB) based non-adherent differentiation (NAdD)
protocol. We establish a specific basal forebrain neural stem cell (NSC)
phenotype via expression of the basal forebrain transcription factors NKX2.1 and 
LHX8, as well as the general forebrain marker FOXG1. We present evidence that
this lineage is achieved via recapitulation of embryonic events, with induction
of intrinsic hedgehog signaling, through the use of a 3D non-adherent
differentiation system. This is the first example of hPSC-derived basal
forebrain-like NSCs, which are scalable via self-renewal in prolonged culture.
Furthermore upon terminal differentiation these basal forebrain-like NSCs
generate high numbers of cholinergic neurons expressing the specific markers
ChAT, VACht and ISL1. These hPSC-derived bfCNs possess characteristics that are
crucial in a model to study AD related cholinergic neuronal loss in the basal
forebrain. Examples are expression of the therapeutic target p75(NTR), the
release of acetylcholine, and demonstration of a mature, and functional
electrophysiological profile. In conclusion, this work provides a renewable
source of human functional bfCNs applicable for studying AD specifically in the
cholinergic system, and also provides a model of the key embryonic events in
human bfCN development.

© 2013.

PMID: 24013066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Neuroscience. 2013 Dec 3;253:235-44. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.08.057.
Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Spinal cord maturation and locomotion in mice with an isolated cortex.

Han Q(1), Feng J, Qu Y, Ding Y, Wang M, So KF, Wu W, Zhou L.

Author information: 
(1)Guangdong-Hongkong-Macau Institute of CNS Regeneration, Jinan University,
Guangzhou 510632, PR China.

The spinal cord plays a key role in motor behavior. It relays major sensory
information, receives afferents from supraspinal centers and integrates movement 
in the central pattern generators. Spinal motor output is controlled via
corticofugal pathways including corticospinal and cortico-subcortical
projections. Spinal cord injury damages descending supraspinal as well as
ascending sensory pathways. In adult rodent models, plasticity of the spinal cord
is thought to contribute to functional recovery. How much spinal cord function
depends on cortical input is not well known. Here, we address this question using
Celsr3/Foxg1 mice, in which cortico-subcortical connections (including
corticospinal tract (CST) and the terminal sensory pathway, the thalamocortical
tract) are genetically ablated during early development. Although Celsr3/Foxg1
mice are able to eat, walk, climb on grids and swim, open-field tests showed them
to be hyperactive. When compared with normal littermates, mutant animals had
reduced number of spinal motor neurons, with atrophic dendritic trees.
Furthermore, motor axon terminals were decreased in number, and this was
confirmed by electromyography. The number of cholinergic, calbindin, and
calretinin-positive interneurons was moderately increased in the mutant spinal
cord, whereas that of reelin and parvalbumin-positive interneurons was unchanged.
As far as we know, our study provides the first genetic evidence that the spinal 
motor network does not mature fully in the absence of corticofugal connections,
and that some motor function is preserved despite congenital absence of the CST.

Copyright © 2013 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24012835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. BMC Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 23;13:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-33.

Conditional and constitutive expression of a Tbx1-GFP fusion protein in mice.

Freyer L, Nowotschin S, Pirity MK, Baldini A, Morrow BE.

BACKGROUND: Velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome (VCFS/DGS) is caused by
a 1.5-3 Mb microdeletion of chromosome 22q11.2, frequently referred to as 22q11.2
deletion syndrome (22q11DS). This region includes TBX1, a T-box transcription
factor gene that contributes to the etiology of 22q11DS. The requirement for TBX1
in mammalian development is dosage-sensitive, such that loss-of-function (LOF)
and gain-of-function (GOF) of TBX1 in both mice and humans results in disease
relevant congenital malformations.
RESULTS: To further gain insight into the role of Tbx1 in development, we have
targeted the Rosa26 locus to generate a new GOF mouse model in which a Tbx1-GFP
fusion protein is expressed conditionally using the Cre/LoxP system. Tbx1-GFP
expression is driven by the endogenous Rosa26 promoter resulting in ectopic and
persistent expression. Tbx1 is pivotal for proper ear and heart development;
ectopic activation of Tbx1-GFP in the otic vesicle by Pax2-Cre and Foxg1-Cre
represses neurogenesis and produces morphological defects of the inner ear.
Overexpression of a single copy of Tbx1-GFP using Tbx1Cre/+ was viable, while
overexpression of both copies resulted in neonatal lethality with cardiac outflow
tract defects. We have partially rescued inner ear and heart anomalies in
Tbx1Cre/- null embryos by expression of Tbx1-GFP.
CONCLUSIONS: We have generated a new mouse model to conditionally overexpress a
GFP-tagged Tbx1 protein in vivo. This provides a useful tool to investigate in
vivo direct downstream targets and protein binding partners of Tbx1.

PMCID: PMC3765320
PMID: 23971992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Dec;161A(12):3072-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36170. Epub 2013 
Aug 16.

Dysregulation of FOXG1 pathway in a 14q12 microdeletion case.

Perche O(1), Haddad G, Menuet A, Callier P, Marcos M, Briault S, Laudier B.

Author information: 
(1)UMR7355, CNRS, Orleans, France; Experimental and Molecular Immunology and
Neurogenetics, University of Orleans, Orleans, France; Genetic Department,
Regional Hospital, Orleans, France.

"FOXG1 syndrome" includes postnatal microcephaly, severe intellectual disability 
with absence of language and agenesis of the corpus callosum. When the syndrome
is associated with large 14q12q13 deletions, the patients present characteristic 
facial dysmorphism. Although all reports were based on genomic analysis, recently
a FOXG1 regulatory elements deletion, associated with down regulated mRNA,
suggested an implication of FOXG1 pathway. Herein, we report on a young boy with 
a phenotype consistent with a FOXG1 syndrome. He had a de novo translocation
t(6;14)(q22.1;q12) associated with a heterozygous 14q12.2q13 deletion
encompassing FOXG1. Subsequently, we investigated his transcriptomic profile on
lymphoblastoïd cell lines and/or fibroblasts and showed that FOXG1 was commonly
down-regulated. Moreover, several other FOXG1 pathway genes were also disturbed. 
Our data and review of previous reports highlight dysregulation of FOXG1 pathway 
as the cause of the "FOXG1 syndrome" developmental disorder.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23956198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Oct;11(10):1235-47. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0687. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

Downregulation of HOPX controls metastatic behavior in sarcoma cells and
identifies genes associated with metastasis.

Kovárová D(1), Plachy J, Kosla J, Trejbalová K, Cermák V, Hejnar J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Videnska 1083, CZ-14220 Prague 4, Czech
Republic. hejnar@img.cas.cz.

Comparing the gene expression profiles of metastatic and nonmetastatic cells has 
the power to reveal candidate metastasis-associated genes, whose involvement in
metastasis can be experimentally tested. In this study, differentially expressed 
genes were explored in the v-src-transformed metastatic cell line PR9692 and its 
nonmetastatic subclone PR9692-E9. First, the contribution of homeodomain only
protein X (HOPX) in metastasis formation and development was assessed.
HOPX-specific knockdown decreased HOPX expression in the nonmetastatic subclone
and displayed reduced cell motility in vitro. Critically, HOPX knockdown
decreased the in vivo metastatic capacity in a syngeneic animal model system.
Genomic analyses identified a cadre of genes affected by HOPX knockdown that
intersected significantly with genes previously found to be differentially
expressed in metastatic versus nonmetastatic cells. Furthermore, 232 genes were
found in both screens with at least a two-fold change in gene expression, and a
number of high-confidence targets were validated for differential expression.
Importantly, significant changes were demonstrated in the protein expression
level of three metastatic-associated genes (NCAM, FOXG1, and ITGA4), and
knockdown of one of the identified HOPX-regulated metastatic genes, ITGA4, showed
marked inhibition of cell motility and metastasis formation. These data
demonstrate that HOPX is a metastasis-associated gene and that its knockdown
decreases the metastatic activity of v-src-transformed cells through altered gene
expression patterns.IMPLICATIONS: This study provides new mechanistic insight
into a HOPX-regulated metastatic dissemination signature.

PMID: 23938949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Eur J Med Genet. 2013 Sep;56(9):526-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2013.05.012. Epub 2013
Jul 26.

A 2.0 Mb microdeletion in proximal chromosome 14q12, involving regulatory
elements of FOXG1, with the coding region of FOXG1 being unaffected, results in
severe developmental delay, microcephaly, and hypoplasia of the corpus callosum.

Takagi M(1), Sasaki G, Mitsui T, Honda M, Tanaka Y, Hasegawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan;
Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's Medical
Center, Tokyo, Japan.

We identified 2.0 Mb of a novel deletion on chromosome 14q12, involving 8 genes
and putative regulatory elements of FOXG1 by array CGH in a patient with severe
growth and psychomotor retardation, hypotonia, microcephaly, dysmorphic face, and
hypoplasia of the corpus callosum. Case of a submicroscopic 14q12 deletion,
involving regulatory elements of FOXG1, with the coding region of FOXG1 being
unaffected, is extremely rare. Using fibroblast cell line established from the
patient, we showed that the expression level of FOXG1 in our patient was
decreased. Our finding provides additional evidence that not only over-dosage of 
FOXG1 as previously mentioned, under-dosage of FOXG1 is also associated with
phenotype, overlapping between congenital variant of Rett syndrome with FOXG1
mutations and 14q12 microdeletion, not including the coding region of FOXG1.
Though the gene dosage of FOXG1 appears to be critical for the normal development
of brain, the complex mechanism of its regulation of gene expression remains to
be elucidated.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23895774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Brain Dev. 2014 May;36(5):402-7. doi: 10.1016/j.braindev.2013.06.008. Epub 2013
Jul 6.

14q12 duplication including FOXG1: is there a common age-dependent epileptic
phenotype?

Bertossi C(1), Cassina M(2), De Palma L(1), Vecchi M(1), Rossato S(3), Toldo
I(1), Donà M(2), Murgia A(1), Boniver C(1), Sartori S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Women's and Children's Health,
University of Padua, Italy. (2)Clinical Genetics Unit, Department of Women's and 
Children's Health, University of Padua, Italy. (3)Pediatric Unit, City Hospital
of Thiene, Italy. (4)Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Women's and
Children's Health, University of Padua, Italy. Electronic address:
stefano.sartori@unipd.it.

INTRODUCTION: Duplications of 14q12 encompassing FOXG1 gene have been recently
associated with developmental delay, severe speech impairment, epilepsy,
aspecific neuroimaging findings and minor dysmorphisms.
AIM AND METHODS: In order to refine the epileptic phenotype associated with 14q12
duplications, we have performed a review of the electroclinical picture of the
patients reported to date in the literature, adding a new personal case. A
comprehensive set of clinical and instrumental data (with a particular focus on
the electroclinical aspects including seizure type, age of onset, EEG at onset
and after antiepileptic therapy, drug efficacy) has been taken into account.
RESULTS: 9/14 patients carrying 14q12 duplications developed seizures, all in the
first months of life. Most of them developed infantile spasms (8/9 epileptic
patients) and presented hypsarrhythmia or modified hypsarrhythmia on EEG. After
therapy 5/9 patients became seizure free and 3/9 present a good seizure control. 
At last available follow up, 2/3 of the epileptic patients displayed an almost
normal EEG, or a quite organized background activity, with diffuse or focal
(mostly temporal) slowing.
CONCLUSIONS: The review of the available data allowed to recognize a common
epileptic core, characterized by early onset, age dependent epileptic
encephalopathy with infantile spasms and typical, atypical or modified
hypsarrhythmia. Antiepileptic therapy soon led to a good or complete control of
seizures with a nearly normal background activity in most patients.

Copyright © 2013 The Japanese Society of Child Neurology. Published by Elsevier
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23838309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Appl Toxicol. 2014 Aug;34(8):862-9. doi: 10.1002/jat.2901. Epub 2013 Jul 9.

Role of methotrexate exposure in apoptosis and proliferation during early
neurulation.

Wang X(1), Wang J, Guan T, Xiang Q, Wang M, Guan Z, Li G, Zhu Z, Xie Q, Zhang T, 
Niu B.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Municipal Key Laboratory of Child Development and Nutriomics, Capital 
Institute of Pediatrics, Beijing, 100020, China.

Apoptosis and proliferation play important roles in embryonic development and are
required for neural tube closure. The antifolate drug methotrexate (MTX) induces 
folate dysmetabolism by inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase and causes abnormal
apoptosis and proliferation. In this study, we established an animal model of
neural tube defects (NTDs) using MTX to investigate the role of apoptosis and
proliferation in NTDs caused by folate deficiency. Differential gene expressions 
were studied by microarray and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction in
the NTD animal model. Results showed that 30.8% of NTDs were caused by using MTX 
in treatment regimens. Microarray indicated that 166 genes were significantly
different between the control and NTD mice, including four apoptosis-related
genes (Endog, Trp53, Casp3, Bax) and three proliferation-related genes (Ptch1,
Pla2g4a, Foxg1). Levels of Endog, Trp53, Casp3, Bax (fold change>1.5) were
upregulated but Ptch1, Pla2g4a, Foxg1 (fold change<0.67) were downregulated
(P<0.05). These results were confirmed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain 
reaction. TUNEL, immunohistochemical assays and Western blot were further used to
detect apoptosis and proliferation in the NTD animal model. It was found that
apoptosis in neuroepithelial cells was increased as determined by TUNEL (P<0.05).
Expressions of caspase-3 were significantly enhanced (P<0.05) but expressions of 
phosphohistone H3 were greatly decreased (P<0.05). These results concluded that
MTX caused a folate and folate-associated dysmetabolism, and further induced
abnormal apoptosis and proliferation, which may play a critical role in the
occurrence of NTDs caused by folate deficiency.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 23836430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Feb;22(2):289-92. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.113. Epub 2013 May
15.

Expanding the phenotype of IQSEC2 mutations: truncating mutations in severe
intellectual disability.

Tran Mau-Them F(1), Willems M(1), Albrecht B(2), Sanchez E(1), Puechberty J(1),
Endele S(3), Schneider A(4), Ruiz Pallares N(5), Missirian C(6), Rivier F(7),
Girard M(4), Holder M(8), Manouvrier S(8), Touitou I(9), Lefort G(4), Sarda P(1),
Moncla A(7), Drunat S(10), Wieczorek D(2), Genevieve D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departement de Genetique Medicale, Centre de Reference Maladies Rares
Anomalies du Developpement et Syndromes Malformatifs Sud-Languedoc Roussillon,
Hopital Arnaud de Villeneuve CHRU Montpellier, Faculte de Medecine Universite
Montpellier 1, Montpellier, France. (2)Institut fur Humangenetik,
Universitatsklinikum Essen, Universitat Duisburg-Essen Hufelandstr, Essen,
Germany. (3)Humangenetisches Institut Erlangen, Universitat Erlangen-Nurnberg,
Erlangen, Germany. (4)Service de Genetique Chromosomique, Plateforme Puce a ADN, 
Hopital Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHRU Montpellier,Montpellier, France. (5)1] Service
de Genetique Chromosomique, Plateforme Puce a ADN, Hopital Arnaud de Villeneuve, 
CHRU Montpellier,Montpellier, France [2] Laboratoire de Genetique, Unite Medicale
des Maladies Auto-Inflammatoire, Hopital Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHRU Montpellier, 
Faculte de Medecine, Universite Montpellier, Montpellier, France. (6)Département 
de génétique médicale, Unité de génétique clinique, CHU de Marseille, Hôpital de 
la Timone, Marseille, France. (7)Departement de Neuropediatrie, Hopital St Eloi, 
CHRU Montpellier, Montpellier, France. (8)Departement de Genetique, Hopital
Jeanne de Flandre, CHRU Lille, Lille, France. (9)Laboratoire de Genetique, Unite 
Medicale des Maladies Auto-Inflammatoire, Hopital Arnaud de Villeneuve, CHRU
Montpellier, Faculte de Medecine, Universite Montpellier, Montpellier, France.
(10)UF de Genetique Moleculaire et de Biochimie, Pole Biologie et Pharmacie, CHU 
Robert Debre, APHP.

Intellectual disability (ID) is frequent in the general population, with 1 in 50 
individuals directly affected worldwide. The multiple etiologies include X-linked
ID (XLID). Among syndromic XLID, few syndromes present severe ID associated with 
postnatal microcephaly and midline stereotypic hand movements. We report on three
male patients with ID, midline stereotypic hand movements, hypotonia,
hyperkinesia, strabismus, as well as seizures (2/3), and non-inherited and
postnatal onset microcephaly (2/3). Using array CGH and exome sequencing we
characterised two truncating mutations in IQSEC2, namely two de novo intragenic
duplication mapped to the Xp11.22 region and a nonsense mutation in exon 7. We
propose that truncating mutations in IQSEC2 are responsible for syndromic severe 
ID in male patients and should be screened in patients without mutations in
MECP2, FOXG1, CDKL5 and MEF2C.

PMCID: PMC3895633
PMID: 23674175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Jul;27(7):1113-27. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1353. Epub 2013 May 
9.

Transcriptional repression of AIB1 by FoxG1 leads to apoptosis in breast cancer
cells.

Li JV(1), Chien CD, Garee JP, Xu J, Wellstein A, Riegel AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Lombardi Cancer Center, Georgetown University,
Research Building E307, 3970 Reservoir Road Northwest, Washington, DC 20007-2197,
USA.

The oncogene nuclear receptor coactivator amplified in breast cancer 1 (AIB1) is 
a transcriptional coactivator that is overexpressed in various types of human
cancers. However, the molecular mechanisms controlling AIB1 expression in the
majority of cancers remain unclear. In this study, we identified a novel
interacting protein of AIB1, forkhead-box protein G1 (FoxG1), which is an
evolutionarily conserved forkhead-box transcriptional corepressor. We show that
FoxG1 expression is low in breast cancer cell lines and that low levels of FoxG1 
are correlated with a worse prognosis in breast cancer. We also demonstrate that 
transient overexpression of FoxG1 can suppress endogenous levels of AIB1 mRNA and
protein in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Exogenously expressed FoxG1 in MCF-7 cells 
also leads to apoptosis that can be rescued in part by AIB1 overexpression. Using
chromatin immunoprecipitation, we determined that FoxG1 is recruited to a region 
of the AIB1 gene promoter previously characterized to be responsible for
AIB1-induced, positive autoregulation of transcription through the recruitment of
an activating, multiprotein complex, involving AIB1, E2F transcription factor 1, 
and specificity protein 1. Increased FoxG1 expression significantly reduces the
recruitment of AIB1, E2F transcription factor 1 and E1A-binding protein p300 to
this region of the endogenous AIB1 gene promoter. Our data imply that FoxG1 can
function as a pro-apoptotic factor in part through suppression of AIB1
coactivator transcription complex formation, thereby reducing the expression of
the AIB1 oncogene.

PMCID: PMC3706839
PMID: 23660594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 24;8(4):e62274. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062274. Print 2013.

Transcriptomic analysis of murine embryos lacking endogenous retinoic acid
signaling.

Paschaki M(1), Schneider C, Rhinn M, Thibault-Carpentier C, Dembélé D,
Niederreither K, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Stem Cells Department, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (Unité Mixte de Recherche 7104), Institut National de la Santé et de
la Recherche Médicale (Unité 964), Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch-Strasbourg,
France.

Retinoic acid (RA), an active derivative of the liposoluble vitamin A (retinol), 
acts as an important signaling molecule during embryonic development, regulating 
phenomenons as diverse as anterior-posterior axial patterning, forebrain and
optic vesicle development, specification of hindbrain rhombomeres, pharyngeal
arches and second heart field, somitogenesis, and differentiation of spinal cord 
neurons. This small molecule directly triggers gene activation by binding to
nuclear receptors (RARs), switching them from potential repressors to
transcriptional activators. The repertoire of RA-regulated genes in embryonic
tissues is poorly characterized. We performed a comparative analysis of the
transcriptomes of murine wild-type and Retinaldehyde Dehydrogenase 2 null-mutant 
(Raldh2 (-/-)) embryos - unable to synthesize RA from maternally-derived retinol 
- using Affymetrix DNA microarrays. Transcriptomic changes were analyzed in two
embryonic regions: anterior tissues including forebrain and optic vesicle, and
posterior (trunk) tissues, at early stages preceding the appearance of overt
phenotypic abnormalities. Several genes expected to be downregulated under RA
deficiency appeared in the transcriptome data (e.g. Emx2, Foxg1 anteriorly, Cdx1,
Hoxa1, Rarb posteriorly), whereas reverse-transcriptase-PCR and in situ
hybridization performed for additional selected genes validated the changes
identified through microarray analysis. Altogether, the affected genes belonged
to numerous molecular pathways and cellular/organismal functions, demonstrating
the pleiotropic nature of RA-dependent events. In both tissue samples, genes
upregulated were more numerous than those downregulated, probably due to feedback
regulatory loops. Bioinformatic analyses highlighted groups (clusters) of genes
displaying similar behaviors in mutant tissues, and biological functions most
significantly affected (e.g. mTOR, VEGF, ILK signaling in forebrain tissues;
pyrimidine and purine metabolism, calcium signaling, one carbon metabolism in
posterior tissues). Overall, these data give an overview of the gene expression
changes resulting from embryonic RA deficiency, and provide new candidate genes
and pathways that may help understanding retinoid-dependent molecular events.

PMCID: PMC3634737
PMID: 23638021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Dec;21(12):1349-55. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.86. Epub 2013
May 1.

Platelet defects in congenital variant of Rett syndrome patients with FOXG1
mutations or reduced expression due to a position effect at 14q12.

Goubau C(1), Devriendt K, Van der Aa N, Crepel A, Wieczorek D, Kleefstra T,
Willemsen MH, Rauch A, Tzschach A, de Ravel T, Leemans P, Van Geet C, Buyse G,
Freson K.

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of cardiovascular sciences, Centre for Molecular and Vascular
Biology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium [2] Department of Pediatrics, UZ Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.

The Forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) gene encodes a transcriptional repressor essential
for early development of the telencephalon. Intragenic mutations and gene
deletions leading to haploinsufficiency cause the congenital variant of Rett
syndrome. We here describe Rett syndrome-like patients, three of them carrying a 
balanced translocation with breakpoint in the chromosome 14q12 region, and one
patient having a 14q12 microdeletion excluding the FOXG1 gene. The hypothesis of 
long-range FOXG1-regulatory elements in this region was supported by our finding 
of reduced FOXG1 mRNA and protein levels in platelets and skin fibroblasts from
these cases. Given that FOXG1 is not only expressed in brain but also in
platelets, we have studied platelet morphology in these patients and two
additional patients with FOXG1 mutations. Electron microscopy of their platelets 
showed some enlarged, rounder platelets with often abnormal alpha, and fewer
dense granules. Platelet function studies were possible in one 14q12
translocation patient with a prolonged Ivy bleeding time and a patient with a
heterozygous FOXG1 c.1248C>G mutation (p.Tyr416X). Both have a prolonged PFA-100 
occlusion time with collagen and epinephrine and reduced aggregation responses to
low dose of ADP and epinephrine. Dense granule ATP secretion was normal for
strong agonists but absent for epinephrine. In conclusion, our study shows that
by using platelets functional evidence of cis-regulatory elements in the 14q12
region result in reduced FOXG1 levels in patients' platelets having
translocations or deletions in that region. These platelet functional
abnormalities deserve further investigation regarding a non-transcriptional
regulatory role for FOXG1 in these anucleated cells.

PMCID: PMC3831085
PMID: 23632790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Stem Cell Rev. 2013 Aug;9(4):461-74. doi: 10.1007/s12015-013-9441-8.

Human pluripotent stem cell differentiation into authentic striatal projection
neurons.

Delli Carri A(1), Onorati M, Castiglioni V, Faedo A, Camnasio S, Toselli M,
Biella G, Cattaneo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Center for Stem Cell Research, Università degli 
Studi di Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy.

Here we present the principles and steps of a protocol that we have recently
developed for the differentiation of hES/iPS cells into the authentic human
striatal projection medium spiny neurons (MSNs) that die in Huntington's Disease 
(HD). Authenticity is judged by the convergence of multiple features within
individual cells. Our procedure lasts 80 days and couples neural induction via
BMP/TGF-ß inhibition with exposure to the developmental factors sonic hedgehog
(SHH) and dickkopf1 (DKK-1) to drive ventral telencephalic specification,
followed by terminal differentiation [1]. Authenticity of the resulting neuronal 
population is monitored by the appearance of FOXG1(+)/GSX2(+) progenitor cells of
the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) at day 15-25 of differentiation, followed
by appearance of CTIP2-, FOXP1- and FOXP2-positive cells at day 45. These
precursor cells then mature into MAP2(+)/GABA(+) neurons with 20 % of them
ultimately co-expressing the DARPP-32 and CTIP2 diagnostic markers and carrying
electrophysiological properties expected for fully functional MSNs.The protocol
is characterized by its replicability in at least three human pluripotent cell
lines. Altogether this protocol defines a useful platform for in vitro
developmental neurobiology studies, drug screening, and regenerative medicine
approaches.

PMID: 23625190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 15;380(2):299-313. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.04.017. Epub 2013
Apr 24.

Foxg1 is required to limit the formation of ciliary margin tissue and
Wnt/ß-catenin signalling in the developing nasal retina of the mouse.

Fotaki V(1), Smith R, Pratt T, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)University of Edinburgh, Centre for Integrative Physiology, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK. vfotaki@ed.ac.uk

The ciliary margin (CM) develops in the peripheral retina and gives rise to the
iris and the ciliary body. The Wnt/ß-catenin signalling pathway has been
implicated in ciliary margin development. Here, we tested the hypothesis that in 
the developing mouse retina Foxg1 is responsible for suppressing the
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway and restricting CM development. We showed that there is
excess CM tissue in Foxg1(-/-) null embryos and this expansion is more pronounced
in the nasal retina where Foxg1 normally shows its highest expression levels.
Results on expression of a reporter allele for Wnt/ß-catenin signalling and of
Lef1, a target of Wnt/ß-catenin signalling, displayed significant upregulation of
this pathway in Foxg1(-/-) nulls at embryonic days 12.5 and 14.5. Interestingly, 
this upregulation was observed specifically in the nasal retina, where normally
very few Wnt-responsive cells are observed. These results indicate a suppressive 
role of Foxg1 on this signalling pathway. Our results reveal a new role of Foxg1 
in limiting CM development in the nasal peripheral retina and add a new molecular
player in the developmental network involved in CM specification.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3722486
PMID: 23624311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;111:281-6. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-52891-9.00031-2.

Genetically determined encephalopathy: Rett syndrome.

Bahi-Buisson N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology, Université Paris Descartes; Imaging
Institute; INSERM U781, Paris, France. Electronic address:
nadia.bahi-buisson@nck.aphp.fr.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder primarily affecting
females that has an incidence of 1:10000 female births, one of the most common
genetic causes of severe mental retardation in females. Development is apparently
normal for the first 6-18 months until fine and gross motor skills and social
interaction are lost, and stereotypic hand movements develop. Progression and
severity of the classical form of RTT are most variable, and there are a number
of atypical variants, including congenital, early onset seizure, preserved speech
variant, and "forme fruste." Mutations in the X-linked gene methyl-CpG-binding
protein 2 (MECP2) involve most of the classical RTT patients. Mutations in
cyclin-dependent kinase like 5 (CDKL5) and FoxG1 genes have been identified in
the early onset seizure and the congenital variants respectively. Management of
RTT is mainly symptomatic and individualized. It focuses on optimizing each
patient's abilities. A dynamic multidisciplinary approach is most effective, with
specific attention given to epileptic and nonepileptic paroxysmal events, as well
as scoliosis, osteoporosis, and the development of spasticity, which can have a
major impact on mobility, and to the development of effective communication
strategies for these severely disabled individuals.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23622176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 16;8(4):e62046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062046. Print 2013.

Continued expression of GATA3 is necessary for cochlear neurosensory development.

Duncan JS(1), Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, United States of
America. jeremyduncan@jhmi.edu

Hair cells of the developing mammalian inner ear are progressively defined
through cell fate restriction. This process culminates in the expression of the
bHLH transcription factor Atoh1, which is necessary for differentiation of hair
cells, but not for their specification. Loss of several genes will disrupt ear
morphogenesis or arrest of neurosensory epithelia development. We previously
showed in null mutants that the loss of the transcription factor, Gata3, results 
specifically in the loss of all cochlear neurosensory development. Temporal
expression of Gata3 is broad from the otic placode stage through the postnatal
ear. It therefore remains unclear at which stage in development Gata3 exerts its 
effect. To better understand the stage specific effects of Gata3, we investigated
the role of Gata3 in cochlear neurosensory specification and differentiation
utilizing a LoxP targeted Gata3 line and two Cre lines. Foxg1(Cre):Gata3(f/f)
mice show recombination of Gata3 around E8.5 but continue to develop a cochlear
duct without differentiated hair cells and spiral ganglion neurons. qRT-PCR data 
show that Atoh1 was down-regulated but not absent in the duct whereas other hair 
cell specific genes such as Pou4f3 were completely absent. In addition, while
Sox2 levels were lower in the Foxg1(Cre):Gata3(f/f) cochlea, Eya1 levels remained
normal. We conclude that Eya1 is unable to fully upregulate Atoh1 or Pou4f3, and 
drive differentiation of hair cells without Gata3. Pax2-Cre:Gata3(f/f) mice show 
a delayed recombination of Gata3 in the ear relative to Foxg1(Cre):Gata3(f/f) .
These mice exhibited a cochlear duct containing patches of partially
differentiated hair cells and developed only few and incorrectly projecting
spiral ganglion neurons. Our conditional deletion studies reveal a major role of 
Gata3 in the signaling of prosensory genes and in the differentiation of cochlear
neurosenory cells. We suggest that Gata3 may act in combination with Eya1, Six1, 
and Sox2 in cochlear prosensory gene signaling.

PMCID: PMC3628701
PMID: 23614009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Nat Commun. 2013;4:1745. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2753.

Competing signals drive telencephalon diversity.

Sylvester JB(1), Rich CA, Yi C, Peres JN, Houart C, Streelman JT.

Author information: 
(1)Parker H. Petit Institute for Bioengineering and Biosciences, School of
Biology, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia 30332, USA.

The telencephalon is the most complex brain region, controlling communication,
emotion, movement and memory. Its adult derivatives develop from the dorsal
pallium and ventral subpallium. Despite knowledge of genes required in these
territories, we do not understand how evolution has shaped telencephalon
diversity. Here, using rock- and sand-dwelling cichlid fishes from Lake Malawi,
we demonstrate that differences in strength and timing of opposing Hedgehog and
Wingless signals establish evolutionary divergence in dorsal-ventral
telencephalon patterning. Rock dwellers exhibit early, extensive Hedgehog
activity in the ventral forebrain resulting in expression of foxg1 before dorsal 
Wingless signals, and a larger subpallium. Sand dwellers show rapid deployment of
Wingless, later foxg1 expression and a larger pallium. Manipulation of the
Hedgehog and Wingless pathways in cichlid and zebrafish embryos is sufficient to 
mimic differences between rock- versus sand-dweller brains. Our data suggest that
competing ventral Hedgehog and dorsal Wingless signals mediate evolutionary
diversification of the telencephalon.

PMID: 23612286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Syndromol. 2013 Jan;3(6):284-7. doi: 10.1159/000345845. Epub 2012 Dec 12.

Genotyping FOXG1 Mutations in Patients with Clinical Evidence of the FOXG1
Syndrome.

Pratt DW(1), Warner JV, Williams MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mater Pathology, Mater Adult Hospital, South Brisbane, Qld.,
Australia.

Rett syndrome is a well-defined neurodevelopmental disorder comprising
characteristic clinical features of gait abnormalities, loss of purposeful hand
movements, stereotypies, and autistic features. Mutations in the FOXG1 gene have 
been associated with a congenital variant of Rett syndrome. This is a report on
the outcome of routine genetic testing to identify FOXG1 mutations in a patient
population presenting with features of the FOXG1 syndrome, an entity thought to
be distinct, but similar, to the congenital variant of Rett syndrome. We
performed PCR and sequencing analysis of FOXG1 in MECP2-negative patients (n =
12) with phenotypic features of FOXG1 syndrome. FOXG1 MLPA analysis was also
carried out. No mutations in FOXG1 were identified using this approach. We were
unable to identify patients with features of the FOXG1 syndrome as having
aberrant FOXG1 gene loci. Clinical notes are inherently subjective and may lack
sufficient detail to reliably identify those with a syndromal spectrum. The
results call into question the objectivity of outlining a complex syndrome
according to clinical manifestations and highlight the need for a greater
involvement of molecular diagnostic techniques in the diagnosis of Rett-like
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3569103
PMID: 23599699  [PubMed]


100. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 2013;73(1):19-37.

Epigenetic mechanisms of gene expression regulation in neurological diseases.

Gos M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Institute of Mother and Child, Warsaw, Poland.
monika.gos@imid.med.pl

Neurological diseases are a heterogenous group of disorders that are related to
alterations in nervous system function. The genetic background of neurological
diseases is heterogenous and may include chromosomal aberrations, specific gene
mutations and epigenetic defects. This review is aimed at presenting of selected 
diseases that are associated with different epigenetic alterations. The
imprinting defects on chromosome 15 are the cause of Prader-Willi and Angelman
syndromes that both are characterized by intellectual disability, developmental
delay and specific behavioral phenotype. Besides the imprinting defect, these
diseases can also be caused by deletion of chromosome 15 or uniparental disomy.
Aberrant epigenetic regulation is also specific for Fragile X syndrome that is
caused by expansion of CGG repeats in the FMR1 gene that leads to global
methylation of the promoter region and repression of FMR1 transcription. A number
of neurological diseases, mainly associated with intellectual impairment, may be 
caused by mutations in genes encoding proteins involved in epigenetic regulation.
The number of such diseases is rapidly growing thanks to the implementation of
genomic sequencing for the identification of their molecular causes. One of the
best known diseases linked to defects in epigenetic modifiers is Rett syndrome
caused by a mutation in the MECP2 gene or its variant - Rett-like syndrome caused
by a mutation in CDKL5 or FOXG1 genes. As the epigenetic signature is potentially
reversible, much attention is focused on possible therapies with drugs that
influence DNA or histone modifications. This is especially important in the case 
of neurological disorders in which epigenetic changes are observed as the effect 
of the disease.

PMID: 23595281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Stem Cells. 2013 Jul;31(7):1266-77. doi: 10.1002/stem.1401.

FoxG1 interacts with Bmi1 to regulate self-renewal and tumorigenicity of
medulloblastoma stem cells.

Manoranjan B(1), Wang X, Hallett RM, Venugopal C, Mack SC, McFarlane N, Nolte SM,
Scheinemann K, Gunnarsson T, Hassell JA, Taylor MD, Lee C, Triscott J, Foster CM,
Dunham C, Hawkins C, Dunn SE, Singh SK.

Author information: 
(1)McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Brain tumors represent the leading cause of childhood cancer mortality, of which 
medulloblastoma (MB) is the most frequent malignant tumor. Recent studies have
demonstrated the presence of several MB molecular subgroups, each distinct in
terms of prognosis and predicted therapeutic response. Groups 1 and 2 are
characterized by relatively good clinical outcomes and activation of the Wnt and 
Shh pathways, respectively. In contrast, groups 3 and 4 ("non-Shh/Wnt MBs") are
distinguished by metastatic disease, poor patient outcome, and lack a molecular
pathway phenotype. Current gene expression platforms have not detected brain
tumor-initiating cell (BTIC) self-renewal genes in groups 3 and 4 MBs as BTICs
typically comprise a minority of tumor cells and may therefore go undetected on
bulk tumor analyses. Since increasing BTIC frequency has been associated with
increasing tumor aggressiveness and poor patient outcome, we investigated the
subgroup-specific gene expression profile of candidate stem cell genes within 251
primary human MBs from four nonoverlapping MB transcriptional databases
(Amsterdam, Memphis, Toronto, Boston) and 74 NanoString-subgrouped MBs
(Vancouver). We assessed the functional relevance of two genes, FoxG1 and Bmi1,
which were significantly enriched in non-Shh/Wnt MBs and showed these genes to
mediate MB stem cell self-renewal and tumor initiation in mice. We also
identified their transcriptional regulation through reciprocal promoter occupancy
in CD15+ MB stem cells. Our work demonstrates the application of stem cell data
gathered from genomic platforms to guide functional BTIC assays, which may then
be used to develop novel BTIC self-renewal mechanisms amenable to therapeutic
targeting.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23592496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2013;139(4):284-8. doi: 10.1159/000348743. Epub 2013 Mar
23.

First report of a small supernumerary der(8;14) marker chromosome.

Guilherme RS(1), Dutra AR, Perez AB, Takeno SS, Oliveira MM, Kulikowski LD, Klein
E, Hamid AB, Liehr T, Melaragno MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology and Genetics, Universidade Federal de São Paulo, São 
Paulo, Brazil.

Small supernumerary marker chromosomes (sSMC) are structurally abnormal
chromosomes, generally equal in size or smaller than a chromosome 20 of the same 
metaphase spread. Most of them are unexpectedly detected in routine karyotype
analyses, and it is usually not easy to correlate them with a specific clinical
picture. A small group of sSMCs is derived from more than one chromosome, called 
complex sSMCs. Here, we report on a patient with a de novo complex sSMC, derived 
from chromosomes 8 and 14. Banding karyotype analysis, multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA), single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP)-based array, and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) were performed
to investigate its origin. Array and FISH analyses revealed a
der(14)t(8;14)(p23.2;q22.1)dn. The propositus presents some clinical features
commonly found in patients with partial duplication or triplication of 8p and
14q. This is the first report describing a patient with a congenital
der(14)t(8;14)(p23.2;q22.1)dn sSMC.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23548553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Cell Rep. 2013 Mar 28;3(3):931-45. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.02.023. Epub 2013
Mar 21.

Foxg1 coordinates the switch from nonradially to radially migrating glutamatergic
subtypes in the neocortex through spatiotemporal repression.

Kumamoto T(1), Toma K, Gunadi, McKenna WL, Kasukawa T, Katzman S, Chen B,
Hanashima C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Neocortical Development, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

The specification of neuronal subtypes in the cerebral cortex proceeds in a
temporal manner; however, the regulation of the transitions between the
sequentially generated subtypes is poorly understood. Here, we report that the
forkhead box transcription factor Foxg1 coordinates the production of neocortical
projection neurons through the global repression of a default gene program. The
delayed activation of Foxg1 was necessary and sufficient to induce deep-layer
neurogenesis, followed by a sequential wave of upper-layer neurogenesis. A
genome-wide analysis revealed that Foxg1 binds to mammalian-specific noncoding
sequences to repress over 12 transcription factors expressed in early
progenitors, including Ebf2/3, Dmrt3, Dmrta1, and Eya2. These findings reveal an 
unexpected prolonged competence of progenitors to initiate corticogenesis at a
progressed stage during development and identify Foxg1 as a critical initiator of
neocorticogenesis through spatiotemporal repression, a system that balances the
production of nonradially and radially migrating glutamatergic subtypes during
mammalian cortical expansion.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3648982
PMID: 23523356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Oct;31(6):424-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.02.006.
Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Epigenetic regulation of neural stem cell fate during corticogenesis.

MuhChyi C(1), Juliandi B, Matsuda T, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Takayama 8916-5, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, 
Japan.

The cerebral cortex comprises over three quarters of the brain, and serves as
structural basis for the sophisticated perceptual and cognitive functions. It
develops from common multipotent neural stem cells (NSCs) that line the neural
tube. Development of the NSCs encompasses sequential phases of progenitor
expansion, neurogenesis, and gliogenesis along with the progression of
developmental stages. Interestingly, NSCs steadfastly march through all of these 
phases and give rise to specific neural cell types in a temporally defined and
highly predictable manner. Herein, we delineate the intrinsic and extrinsic
factors that dictate the progression and tempo of NSC differentiation during
cerebral cortex development, and how epigenetic modifications contribute to the
dynamic properties of NSCs.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23466416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Gene. 2013 Feb 15;515(1):78-83. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.11.024. Epub 2012 Dec
20.

Spectrum of MECP2 gene mutations in a cohort of Indian patients with Rett
syndrome: report of two novel mutations.

Das DK(1), Raha S, Sanghavi D, Maitra A, Udani V.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Research Centre, National Institute for Research in Reproductive
Health (ICMR), Jahangir Merwanji Street, Parel, Mumbai-400 012, India.
dasd@nirrh.res.in

Rett syndrome (RTT) is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder, primarily
affecting females and characterized by developmental regression, epilepsy,
stereotypical hand movements, and motor abnormalities. Its prevalence is about 1 
in 10,000 female births. Rett syndrome is caused by mutations within methyl
CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2) gene. Over 270 individual nucleotide changes which 
cause pathogenic mutations have been reported. However, eight most commonly
occurring missense and nonsense mutations account for almost 70% of all patients.
We screened 90 individuals with Rett syndrome phenotype. A total of 19 different 
MECP2 mutations and polymorphisms were identified in 27 patients. Of the 19
mutations, we identified 7 (37%) frameshift, 6 (31%) nonsense, 14 (74%) missense 
mutations and one duplication (5%). The most frequent pathogenic changes were:
missense p.T158M (11%), p.R133C (7.4%), and p.R306C (7.4%) and nonsense p.R168X
(11%), p.R255X (7.4%) mutations. We have identified two novel mutations namely
p.385-388delPLPP present in atypical patients and p.Glu290AlafsX38 present in a
classical patient of Rett syndrome. Sequence homology for p.385-388delPLPP
mutation revealed that these 4 amino acids were conserved across mammalian
species. This indicated the importance of these 4 amino acids in structure and
function of the protein. A novel variant p.T479T has also been identified in a
patient with atypical Rett syndrome. A total of 62 (69%) patients remained
without molecular genetics diagnosis that necessitates further search for
mutations in other genes like CDKL5 and FOXG1 that are known to cause Rett
phenotype. The majority of mutations are detected in exon 4 and only one mutation
was present in exon 3. Therefore, our study suggests the need for screening exon 
4 of MECP2 as first line of diagnosis in these patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23262346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 May 15;22(10):1551-63. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0556. Epub 2013
Feb 1.

Coordinated development of voltage-gated Na+ and K+ currents regulates functional
maturation of forebrain neurons derived from human induced pluripotent stem
cells.

Song M(1), Mohamad O, Chen D, Yu SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

Like embryonic stem (ES) cells, human induced pluripotent stem (hiPS) cells can
differentiate into neuronal cells. However, it is unclear how their exquisite
neuronal function is electrophysiologically coordinated during differentiation
and whether they are functionally identical to human ES cell-derived neurons. In 
this study, we differentiated hiPS and ES cells into pyramidal-like neurons and
conducted electrophysiological characterization over the 4-week terminal
differentiation period. The human neuron-like cells express forebrain pyramidal
cell markers NeuN, neurofilament, the microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2),
the paired box protein Pax-6 (PAX6), Tuj1, and the forkhead box protein G1
(FoxG1). The size of developing neurons increased continuously during the 4-week 
culture, and cell-resting membrane potentials (RMPs) underwent a negative shift
from -40 to -70<U+2009>mV. Expression of the muscarinic receptor-modulated K(+) currents
(IM) participated in the development of cell RMPs and controlled excitability.
Immature neurons at week 1 could only fire abortive action potentials (APs) and
the frequency of AP firing progressively increased with neuronal maturation.
Interestingly, the developmental change of voltage-gated Na(+) current (INa) did 
not correlate with the change in the AP firing frequency. On the other hand, the 
transient outward K(+) current (IA), but not the delayed rectifier current (IK)
contributed to the high frequency firing of APs. Synaptic activities were
observed throughout the 4-week development. These morphological and
electrophysiological features were almost identical between iPS and ES
cell-derived neurons. This is the first systematic investigation showing
functional evidence that hiPS cell-derived neurons possess similar neuronal
activities as ES cell-derived neurons. These data support that iPS cell-derived
neural progenitor cells have the potential for replacing lost neurons in
cell-based therapy.

PMCID: PMC3653388
PMID: 23259973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Development. 2013 Jan 15;140(2):301-12. doi: 10.1242/dev.084608.

Developmentally coordinated extrinsic signals drive human pluripotent stem cell
differentiation toward authentic DARPP-32+ medium-sized spiny neurons.

Delli Carri A(1), Onorati M, Lelos MJ, Castiglioni V, Faedo A, Menon R, Camnasio 
S, Vuono R, Spaiardi P, Talpo F, Toselli M, Martino G, Barker RA, Dunnett SB,
Biella G, Cattaneo E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Research, Università degli Studi di Milano, 20133 Milan, 
Italy.

Medium-sized spiny neurons (MSNs) are the only neostriatum projection neurons,
and their degeneration underlies some of the clinical features of Huntington's
disease. Using knowledge of human developmental biology and exposure to key
neurodevelopmental molecules, human pluripotent stem (hPS) cells were induced to 
differentiate into MSNs. In a feeder-free adherent culture, ventral telencephalic
specification is induced by BMP/TGFß inhibition and subsequent SHH/DKK1
treatment. The emerging FOXG1(+)/GSX2(+) telencephalic progenitors are then
terminally differentiated, resulting in the systematic line-independent
generation of FOXP1(+)/FOXP2(+)/CTIP2(+)/calbindin(+)/DARPP-32(+) MSNs. Similar
to mature MSNs, these neurons carry dopamine and A2a receptors, elicit a typical 
firing pattern and show inhibitory postsynaptic currents, as well as dopamine
neuromodulation and synaptic integration ability in vivo. When transplanted into 
the striatum of quinolinic acid-lesioned rats, hPS-derived neurons survive and
differentiate into DARPP-32(+) neurons, leading to a restoration of
apomorphine-induced rotation behavior. In summary, hPS cells can be efficiently
driven to acquire a functional striatal fate using an ontogeny-recapitulating
stepwise method that represents a platform for in vitro human developmental
neurobiology studies and drug screening approaches.

PMID: 23250204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Arch Toxicol. 2013 Apr;87(4):721-33. doi: 10.1007/s00204-012-0984-2. Epub 2012
Dec 2.

A 3-dimensional human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived model to detect
developmental neurotoxicity of nanoparticles.

Hoelting L(1), Scheinhardt B, Bondarenko O, Schildknecht S, Kapitza M, Tanavde V,
Tan B, Lee QY, Mecking S, Leist M, Kadereit S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Universitaetsstrasse 10, 78457 
Konstanz, Germany.

Nanoparticles (NPs) have been shown to accumulate in organs, cross the
blood-brain barrier and placenta, and have the potential to elicit developmental 
neurotoxicity (DNT). Here, we developed a human embryonic stem cell
(hESC)-derived 3-dimensional (3-D) in vitro model that allows for testing of
potential developmental neurotoxicants. Early central nervous system PAX6(+)
precursor cells were generated from hESCs and differentiated further within 3-D
structures. The 3-D model was characterized for neural marker expression
revealing robust differentiation toward neuronal precursor cells, and gene
expression profiling suggested a predominantly forebrain-like development.
Altered neural gene expression due to exposure to non-cytotoxic concentrations of
the known developmental neurotoxicant, methylmercury, indicated that the 3-D
model could detect DNT. To test for specific toxicity of NPs, chemically inert
polyethylene NPs (PE-NPs) were chosen. They penetrated deep into the 3-D
structures and impacted gene expression at non-cytotoxic concentrations. NOTCH
pathway genes such as HES5 and NOTCH1 were reduced in expression, as well as
downstream neuronal precursor genes such as NEUROD1 and ASCL1. FOXG1, a
patterning marker, was also reduced. As loss of function of these genes results
in severe nervous system impairments in mice, our data suggest that the 3-D
hESC-derived model could be used to test for Nano-DNT.

PMCID: PMC3604581
PMID: 23203475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Cancer Cell. 2012 Oct 16;22(4):425-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.08.024.

Hotspot mutations in H3F3A and IDH1 define distinct epigenetic and biological
subgroups of glioblastoma.

Sturm D(1), Witt H, Hovestadt V, Khuong-Quang DA, Jones DT, Konermann C, Pfaff E,
Tönjes M, Sill M, Bender S, Kool M, Zapatka M, Becker N, Zucknick M, Hielscher T,
Liu XY, Fontebasso AM, Ryzhova M, Albrecht S, Jacob K, Wolter M, Ebinger M,
Schuhmann MU, van Meter T, Frühwald MC, Hauch H, Pekrun A, Radlwimmer B, Niehues 
T, von Komorowski G, Dürken M, Kulozik AE, Madden J, Donson A, Foreman NK, Drissi
R, Fouladi M, Scheurlen W, von Deimling A, Monoranu C, Roggendorf W, Herold-Mende
C, Unterberg A, Kramm CM, Felsberg J, Hartmann C, Wiestler B, Wick W, Milde T,
Witt O, Lindroth AM, Schwartzentruber J, Faury D, Fleming A, Zakrzewska M,
Liberski PP, Zakrzewski K, Hauser P, Garami M, Klekner A, Bognar L, Morrissy S,
Cavalli F, Taylor MD, van Sluis P, Koster J, Versteeg R, Volckmann R, Mikkelsen
T, Aldape K, Reifenberger G, Collins VP, Majewski J, Korshunov A, Lichter P,
Plass C, Jabado N, Pfister SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurooncology, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2012 Oct 16;22(4):417-8.

Glioblastoma (GBM) is a brain tumor that carries a dismal prognosis and displays 
considerable heterogeneity. We have recently identified recurrent H3F3A mutations
affecting two critical amino acids (K27 and G34) of histone H3.3 in one-third of 
pediatric GBM. Here, we show that each H3F3A mutation defines an epigenetic
subgroup of GBM with a distinct global methylation pattern, and that they are
mutually exclusive with IDH1 mutations, which characterize a third
mutation-defined subgroup. Three further epigenetic subgroups were enriched for
hallmark genetic events of adult GBM and/or established transcriptomic
signatures. We also demonstrate that the two H3F3A mutations give rise to GBMs in
separate anatomic compartments, with differential regulation of transcription
factors OLIG1, OLIG2, and FOXG1, possibly reflecting different cellular origins.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23079654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Neurosci. 2012 Oct 3;32(40):13729-43. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1965-12.2012.

A role for atypical cadherin Celsr3 in hippocampal maturation and connectivity.

Feng J(1), Xu Y, Wang M, Ruan Y, So KF, Tissir F, Goffinet A, Zhou L.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Laboratory for Brain Function and Health, Jinan University and the
University of Hong Kong, Medical School of Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632,
People's Republic of China.

Atypical cadherin Celsr3, a regulator of planar cell polarity, is critical for
the development of the axonal blueprint. We previously showed that expression of 
Celsr3 is necessary to establish forebrain connections such as the anterior
commissure and thalamocortical and corticospinal tracts. The requirement for
Celsr3 during hippocampal wiring and its action in the hippocampus remain largely
unexplored. Here, we compared the connectivity and maturation of the hippocampal 
formation in Celsr3|Foxg1 and Celsr3|Dlx mice. Celsr3 is inactivated in the whole
telencephalon, including the hippocampal primordium, in Celsr3|Foxg1 mice, and in
the early basal telencephalon, including ganglionic eminences and ventral
diencephalon, in Celsr3|Dlx mice. Behavioral tests showed that both mutants were 
hyperactive and had impaired learning and memory. Abnormal cytoarchitecture of
CA1, CA3, and dentate gyrus was found in the Celsr3|Foxg1 mutant, in which
afferent and efferent hippocampal pathways, as well as intrinsic connections,
were dramatically disrupted. In Celsr3|Dlx mutant mice, hippocampal
cytoarchitecture was mildly affected and extrinsic and intrinsic connectivity
moderately disturbed. In both mutants, pyramidal neurons in CA1 harbored atrophic
dendritic trees, with decreased synapse density and increased proportion of
symmetric versus asymmetric synapses, and long-term potentiation was altered. In 
contrast, mutant hippocampal neurons extended neurites that were normal, even
longer than those of control neurons, indicating that anomalies in vivo are
secondary to defective connections. Postnatal neurogenesis was preserved and
mutant interneurons were able to migrate to the hippocampus. Thus, like in
neocortex, Celsr3 is required for hippocampal development, connectivity and
function, and for pyramidal cell maturation.

PMID: 23035085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Epilepsia. 2012 Dec;53(12):2067-78. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03656.x. Epub
2012 Sep 21.

Epilepsy in Rett syndrome, and CDKL5- and FOXG1-gene-related encephalopathies.

Guerrini R(1), Parrini E.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Neurology Unit and Laboratories, Children's Hospital A.
Meyer-University of Florence, Florence, Italy. r.guerrini@meyer.it

Rett syndrome is an X-linked neurodevelopmental disorder that manifests in early 
childhood with developmental stagnation, and loss of spoken language and hand
use, with the development of distinctive hand stereotypies, severe cognitive
impairment, and autistic features. About 60% of patients have epilepsy. Seizure
onset before the age of 3 years is unlikely, and onset after age 20 is rare.
Diagnosis of Rett syndrome is based on key clinical elements that identify
"typical" Rett syndrome but also "variant" or "atypical" forms. Diagnostic
criteria have been modified only slightly over time, even after discovering that 
MECP2 gene alterations are present in >90% of patients with typical Rett syndrome
but only in 50-70% of atypical cases. Over the last several years, intragenic or 
genomic alterations of the CDKL5 and FOXG1 genes have been associated with severe
cognitive impairment, early onset epilepsy and, often, dyskinetic movement
disorders, which have variably been defined as Rett variants. It is now clearly
emerging that epilepsy has distinctive characteristics in typical Rett syndrome
and in the different syndromes caused by CDKL5 and FOXG1 gene alterations. The
progressive parting of CDKL5- and FOXG1-gene-related encephalopathies from the
core Rett syndrome is reflected by the effort to produce clearer diagnostic
criteria for typical and atypical Rett syndrome. Efforts to characterize the
molecular pathology underlying these developmental encephalopathies are pointing 
to abnormalities of telencephalic development, neuronal morphogenesis, maturation
and maintenance, and dendritic arborization.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. © 2012 International League Against Epilepsy.

PMID: 22998673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Eur J Med Genet. 2012 Dec;55(12):677-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.08.009. Epub
2012 Aug 27.

Molecular characteristics of Chinese patients with Rett syndrome.

Zhang X(1), Bao X, Zhang J, Zhao Y, Cao G, Pan H, Zhang J, Wei L, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Peking University First Hospital, Beijing 100034,
China.

OBJECTIVE: Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder which affects
1/10,000 girls. The aim of this study is to delineate the molecular
characteristics of Rett syndrome in China based on the largest group of Chinese
patients ever studied.
METHODS: In all, 365 Chinese patients with Rett syndrome were recruited. Clinical
information including the family reproductive history was collected through
interviewing patients and their parents as well as questionnaires. MECP2, CDKL5, 
FOXG1 mutational analysis was performed using polymerase chain reaction (PCR),
direct sequencing and multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA).
The parental origin of mutated MECP2 gene, the MECP2 gene mutation rate in the
patients' mothers, and the X-chromosome inactivation pattern of the mothers who
carry the mutation were also analyzed.
RESULTS: Almost all of the patients were sporadic cases except one pair of twins.
The pregnancy loss in probands' mothers and sex ratio of offspring in probands(')
generation were available in 352 families and were comparable to the general
population. Out of the 365 cases, 315 had MECP2 gene mutations and 3 had de novo 
CDKL5 gene mutations. No patients had FOXG1 mutation. Among the 315 cases with
MECP2 mutations, 274 were typical cases and 41 were atypical cases. All the 3
cases with CDKL5 gene mutations were atypical RTT with early-onset seizures. The 
analysis of parental origin of mutated MECP2 gene were performed on 139 cases, 90
(64.7%) cases were informative for the study. The result showed 94.4% cases with 
mutations from paternal origin and 5.6% from maternal origin. Among the cases
with paternal mutation, 90.6% had point mutations. C > T was the most common one,
accounting for 85.7% of the point mutations. Only one normal phenotype mother
(0.41%) carried the same p.R133C mutation of MECP2 gene as her daughter with mild
phenotype. The different patterns of X-chromosome inactivation in the mother and 
the daughter may explain their different phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: The high rate of paternal origin of the mutated MECP2 gene may
explain the high occurrence of RTT in female gender. The family cases of RTT are 
rare and the recurrence risk of RTT is very low in China. Only 0.41% (1/244)
mothers carry the pathogenic gene. FOXG1 mutations were not found in this group
of Chinese patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22982301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 May;21(5):522-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.208. Epub 2012 Sep 
12.

14q12 microdeletions excluding FOXG1 give rise to a congenital variant Rett
syndrome-like phenotype.

Ellaway CJ(1), Ho G, Bettella E, Knapman A, Collins F, Hackett A, McKenzie F,
Darmanian A, Peters GB, Fagan K, Christodoulou J.

Author information: 
(1)Western Sydney Genetics Program, Children's Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, New 
South Wales, Australia. carolyn.ellaway@health.nsw.gov.au

Rett syndrome is a clinically defined neurodevelopmental disorder almost
exclusively affecting females. Usually sporadic, Rett syndrome is caused by
mutations in the X-linked MECP2 gene in ~90-95% of classic cases and 40-60% of
individuals with atypical Rett syndrome. Mutations in the CDKL5 gene have been
associated with the early-onset seizure variant of Rett syndrome and mutations in
FOXG1 have been associated with the congenital Rett syndrome variant. We report
the clinical features and array CGH findings of three atypical Rett syndrome
patients who had severe intellectual impairment, early-onset developmental delay,
postnatal microcephaly and hypotonia. In addition, the females had a seizure
disorder, agenesis of the corpus callosum and subtle dysmorphism. All three were 
found to have an interstitial deletion of 14q12. The deleted region in common
included the PRKD1 gene but not the FOXG1 gene. Gene expression analysis
suggested a decrease in FOXG1 levels in two of the patients. Screening of 32
atypical Rett syndrome patients did not identify any pathogenic mutations in the 
PRKD1 gene, although a previously reported frameshift mutation affecting FOXG1
(c.256dupC, p.Gln86ProfsX35) was identified in a patient with the congenital Rett
syndrome variant. There is phenotypic overlap between congenital Rett syndrome
variants with FOXG1 mutations and the clinical presentation of our three patients
with this 14q12 microdeletion, not encompassing the FOXG1 gene. We propose that
the primary defect in these patients is misregulation of the FOXG1 gene rather
than a primary abnormality of PRKD1.

PMCID: PMC3641384
PMID: 22968132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Stem Cells. 2012 Oct;30(10):2152-63. doi: 10.1002/stem.1187.

TBX3 promotes human embryonic stem cell proliferation and neuroepithelial
differentiation in a differentiation stage-dependent manner.

Esmailpour T(1), Huang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Human Genetics, University of
California, Irvine, California 92697, USA.

T-box 3 (Tbx3) is a member of the T-box family of genes. Mutations that result in
the haploinsufficiency of TBX3 cause ulnar mammary syndrome in humans
characterized by mammary gland hypoplasia as well as other congenital defects. In
mice, homozygous mutations are embryonic lethal, suggesting that Tbx3 is
essential for embryo development. Studies in mice have shown that Tbx3 is
essential in the maintenance of mouse embryonic stem cell (ESC) self-renewal and 
in their differentiation into extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn). The role TBX3 plays
in regulating human ESCs (hESCs) has not been explored. Since mouse and hESCs are
known to represent distinct pluripotent states, it is important to address the
role of TBX3 in hESC self-renewal and differentiation. Using overexpression and
knockdown strategies, we found that TBX3 overexpression promotes hESC
proliferation possibly by repressing the expression of both NF<U+03BA>BIB and p14(ARF) ,
known cell cycle regulators. During differentiation, TBX3 knockdown resulted in
decreased neural rosette formation and in decreased expression of neuroepithelial
and neuroectoderm markers (PAX6, LHX2, FOXG1, and RAX). Taken together, our data 
suggest a role for TBX3 in hESC proliferation and reveal an unrecognized novel
role of TBX3 in promoting neuroepithelial differentiation. Our results suggest
that TBX3 plays distinct roles in regulating self-renewal and differentiation in 
both hESCs and mouse ESCs.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3517731
PMID: 22865636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Apr;21(4):365-6. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.142. Epub 2012 Jul 
4.

Do regulatory regions matter in FOXG1 duplications?

Falace A, Vanni N, Mallamaci A, Striano P, Zara F.

Comment on
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Jun;20(6):595-6; author reply 596-7.

PMCID: PMC3598311
PMID: 22763380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2012 Aug;22(4):323-30. doi: 10.1016/j.gde.2012.05.001. Epub 
2012 Jun 27.

A Fox stops the Wnt: implications for forebrain development and diseases.

Danesin C(1), Houart C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement, CNRS/Université Toulouse 3, UMR5547,
31062 Toulouse Cedex 9, France.

In recent years, much progress has been made in understanding the process by
which the brain is organised into specific regions. Much less is known about the 
way neuronal subtypes are defined inside these areas and how the temporal control
of connectivity between neurons is achieved. Our thought processes and behaviours
depend upon the development of neuronal circuits located in the most anterior
brain area: the telencephalon (forming our cerebral cortex). The transcription
factor Foxg1 is crucial to the development of specific neuronal fates inside this
region and recent findings in zebrafish and mouse unveiled its impact as an
integrator of telencephalic signalling centres. This essential regulatory
activity may be key to understand Foxg1-dependent human disorders.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22742851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Med Chem. 2012 Nov;8(6):1155-62.

In silico prediction of novel inhibitors of the DNA binding activity of FoxG1.

Nair SB(1), Fayaz SM, Krishnamurthy RG.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biotechnology National Institute of Technology Calicut - 673601,
Kerala, India.

Forkhead box (Fox) proteins are a superfamily of evolutionarily conserved
transcriptional regulators, which control a wide spectrum of biological
processes. FoxG1 is a transcriptional repressor, whose function has been
elucidated recently. FoxG1 overexpression was found to be associated with
medulloblastoma and hepatoblastoma. It was suggested that the inhibition of FoxG1
could be a potential target for the development of molecular therapeutics in such
type of cancers. Since, experimentally derived structure for FoxG1 is unavailable
in any of the structural databases, modeling of the DNA binding domain of this
protein was carried out. Potential binding sites on the protein surface were
predicted. Pharmacophoric features were derived from the binding site that lies
near the protein-DNA binding interface and this pharmacophore was employed for
virtual screening of compounds. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
pharmacophore model proposed for screening inhibitors of FoxG1, which may
interfere with its transcriptional repressor functionality. The interactions of
the binding site residues with the top scoring ligand hits were analyzed. These
ligands may be used for the development of potential inhibitors of FoxG1 protein.

PMID: 22741795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Dec;20(12):1216-23. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.127. Epub 2012
Jun 27.

14q12 and severe Rett-like phenotypes: new clinical insights and physical mapping
of FOXG1-regulatory elements.

Allou L(1), Lambert L, Amsallem D, Bieth E, Edery P, Destrée A, Rivier F, Amor D,
Thompson E, Nicholl J, Harbord M, Nemos C, Saunier A, Moustaïne A, Vigouroux A,
Jonveaux P, Philippe C.

Author information: 
(1)EA 4368, Déficiences mentales et anomalies de structure du génome, Faculté de 
Médecine, Université de Lorraine, Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy, France.

The Forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) gene has been implicated in severe Rett-like
phenotypes. It encodes the Forkhead box protein G1, a winged-helix
transcriptional repressor critical for forebrain development. Recently, the core 
FOXG1 syndrome was defined as postnatal microcephaly, severe mental retardation, 
absent language, dyskinesia, and dysgenesis of the corpus callosum. We present
seven additional patients with a severe Rett-like neurodevelopment disorder
associated with de novo FOXG1 point mutations (two cases) or 14q12 deletions
(five cases). We expand the mutational spectrum in patients with FOXG1-related
encephalopathies and precise the core FOXG1 syndrome phenotype. Dysgenesis of the
corpus callosum and dyskinesia are not always present in FOXG1-mutated patients. 
We believe that the FOXG1 gene should be considered in severely mentally retarded
patients (no speech-language) with severe acquired microcephaly (-4 to-6 SD) and 
few clinical features suggestive of Rett syndrome. Interestingly enough, three
14q12 deletions that do not include the FOXG1 gene are associated with phenotypes
very reminiscent to that of FOXG1-mutation-positive patients. We physically
mapped a putative long-range FOXG1-regulatory element in a 0.43 Mb DNA segment
encompassing the PRKD1 locus. In fibroblast cells, a cis-acting regulatory
sequence located more than 0.6 Mb away from FOXG1 acts as a silencer at the
transcriptional level. These data are important for clinicians and for molecular 
biologists involved in the management of patients with severe encephalopathies
compatible with a FOXG1-related phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3499785
PMID: 22739344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Neuron. 2012 Jun 21;74(6):1045-58. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.04.025.

Dynamic FoxG1 expression coordinates the integration of multipolar pyramidal
neuron precursors into the cortical plate.

Miyoshi G(1), Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)NYU Neuroscience Institute, Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, Smilow 
Research Center, New York University School of Medicine, 522 First Avenue, New
York, NY 10016, USA.

Pyramidal cells of the cerebral cortex are born in the ventricular zone and
migrate through the intermediate zone to enter into the cortical plate. In the
intermediate zone, these migrating precursors move tangentially and initiate the 
extension of their axons by transiently adopting a characteristic multipolar
morphology. We observe that expression of the forkhead transcription factor FoxG1
is dynamically regulated during this transitional period. By utilizing
conditional genetic strategies, we show that the downregulation of FoxG1 at the
beginning of the multipolar cell phase induces Unc5D expression, the timing of
which ultimately determines the laminar identity of pyramidal neurons. In
addition, we demonstrate that the re-expression of FoxG1 is required for cells to
transit out of the multipolar cell phase and to enter into the cortical plate.
Thus, the dynamic expression of FoxG1 during migration within the intermediate
zone is essential for the proper assembly of the cerebral cortex.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3653132
PMID: 22726835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Apr;2(3-5):153-163. Epub 2011 Apr 29.

FOXG1-Related Disorders: From Clinical Description to Molecular Genetics.

Florian C(1), Bahi-Buisson N, Bienvenu T.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1016, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disease that affects
approximately 1 in 10,000 live female births and is often caused by mutations in 
the X-linked gene encoding methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MECP2). Mutations in
loci other than MECP2 have also been found in individuals that have been labeled 
as atypical RTT. Among them, a mutation in the gene forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) has
been involved in the molecular aetiology of the congenital variant of RTT. The
FOXG1 gene encodes a winged-helix transcriptional repressor essential for the
development of the ventral telencephalon in embryonic forebrain. Later, FOXG1
continues to be expressed in neurogenetic zones of the postnatal brain. Although 
RTT affects quasi-exclusively girls, FOXG1 mutations have also been identified in
male patients. As far as we know, about 12 point mutations and 13 cases with
FOXG1 molecular abnormalities (including translocation, duplication and large
deletion on the chromosome 14q12) have been described in the literature. Affected
individuals with FOXG1 mutations have shown dysmorphic features and Rett-like
clinical course, including normal perinatal period, postnatal microcephaly,
seizures and severe mental retardation. Interestingly, the existing animal models
of FOXG1 deficiency showed similar phenotype, suggesting that animal models may
be a fascinating model to understand this human disease. Here, we describe the
impacts of FOXG1 mutations and their associated phenotypes in human and mouse
models.

PMCID: PMC3366704
PMID: 22670136  [PubMed]


121. Genes Nutr. 2013 Jan;8(1):99-104. doi: 10.1007/s12263-012-0299-1. Epub 2012 May
26.

Gene expression profile in bone of diabetes-prone BB/OK rats fed a high-fat diet.

Lange J(1), Barz T, Ekkernkamp A, Klöting I, Follak N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Trauma and Reconstructive Surgery, Medical Faculty, University
of Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.

A high-fat diet (HFD) has been recognized as a risk factor for diseases such as
dyslipidemia, atherosclerosis, obesity, and osteoporosis. However, studies
analyzing gene expression after HFD in bone are rare. That prompted us to analyze
the expression of selected genes in bone of 4-week-old diabetes-prone
B(io)B(reeding) rats. Two breeding pairs were fed a HFD (+10 % tallow) or were
fed a normal diet (ND; Ssniff R-Z) before mating and afterward during pregnancy. 
After the birth of progeny, parents continued to be given HFD or ND until the
progeny was weaned (3 weeks). Thereafter, offspring were weaned and were fed the 
same food as their parents up to an age of 4 weeks. Body weight was measured at
an age of 4 weeks, and subsequently 13 HFD rats and 13 ND rats were killed and
the tibial bone was harvested to analyze the expression of 53 genes in bone. All 
rats fed HFD were significantly heavier than rats fed ND after 3 and 4 weeks. The
diet also influenced the expression of genes in bone. There were significant
differences in 20 out of 53 genes studied between rats fed HFD compared with rats
fed ND. Four out of 20 had a lower and 17 out of 20 genes a higher expression in 
HFD rats, but differences in gene expression showed obvious differences between
males and females. There were only two genes that were similarly different
between males and females: Bmp4 and Atf4. Two genes, Foxg1 and Npy, were
inversely expressed in males and females. It seems that the gene expression is
differently regulated by diet during pregnancy and later in life between males
and females. Nevertheless, it cannot be excluded that HFD also acts as an
epigenetic factor in the development of offspring in utero.

PMCID: PMC3535003
PMID: 22639302  [PubMed]


122. J Med Genet. 2012 Jun;49(6):366-72. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2011-100721. Epub 2012
May 25.

Further delineation of the phenotype of chromosome 14q13 deletions: (positional) 
involvement of FOXG1 appears the main determinant of phenotype severity, with no 
evidence for a holoprosencephaly locus.

Santen GW(1), Sun Y, Gijsbers AC, Carré A, Holvoet M, Haeringen Av, Lesnik
Oberstein SA, Tomoda A, Mabe H, Polak M, Devriendt K, Ruivenkamp CA, Bijlsma EK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Albinusdreef 2, Postbus 9600, Leiden 2300 RC, The Netherlands. santen@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Deletions including chromosome 14 band q13 have been linked to
variable phenotypes. With current molecular methods the authors aim to elucidate 
a genotype-phenotype correlation by accurately determining the size and location 
of the deletions and the associated phenotype.
METHODS: Here the authors report the molecular karyotyping and phenotypic
description of seven patients with overlapping deletions including chromosome
14q13.
RESULTS: The authors show that deletions including 14q13 result in a recognisable
phenotype mainly due to haploinsufficiency of two genes (NKX2-1, PAX9). FOXG1 (on
chromosome band 14q12) involvement seems to be the main determinant of phenotype 
severity. The patients in this study without FOXG1 involvement and deletions of
up to 10 Mb have a relatively mild phenotype. The authors cannot explain why some
patients in literature with overlapping but smaller deletions appear to have a
more severe phenotype. A previously presumed association with holoprosencephaly
could not be confirmed as none of the patients in this series had
holoprosencephaly.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXG1 appears the main determinant of the severity of phenotypes
resulting from deletions including 14q13. The collected data show no evidence for
a locus for holoprosencephaly in the 14q13 region, but a locus for agenesis of
the corpus callosum cannot be excluded.

PMID: 22636604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Brain Res. 2012 Jun 12;1459:52-60. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.03.049. Epub 2012
Mar 28.

Functional recovery of the murine brain ischemia model using human induced
pluripotent stem cell-derived telencephalic progenitors.

Gomi M(1), Takagi Y, Morizane A, Doi D, Nishimura M, Miyamoto S, Takahashi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University,
Japan.

Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells possess the properties of self-renewal and
pluripotency, similar to embryonic stem cells. They are a good candidate as a
source of suitable cells for cell replacement therapy. In this study, we
transplanted human iPS cell-derived neural progenitors into an ischemic mouse
brain. Human iPS cells were differentiated into neuronal progenitors by
serum-free culture of embryoid body-like aggregates (SFEBs). Focal cerebral
ischemia was induced by occluding the middle cerebral artery using the
intraluminal filament technique. Donor cells were transplanted into the ischemic 
lateral striatum 1 week after ischemia induction. Cells survived at the
transplantation site, with migration of a proportion of cells along the external 
capsule and corpus callosum. Cells that were positive for the basal telencephalon
marker, Nkx2.1, migrated into the basal part of the telencephalon. The pallial
telencephalon marker, Emx1, was detected in cells that had migrated into the
pallial part of the telencephalon. SFEBs differentiated into various types of
neurons, and a retrograde tracer labeling study showed that differentiated cells 
integrated into host neural circuitry. Behavioral recovery was significantly
enhanced in the transplanted group. Our results suggest that human iPS
cell-derived neuronal progenitors survive and migrate in the ischemic brain, and 
contribute toward functional recovery via neural circuit reconstitution.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22572083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Dev Cell. 2012 Apr 17;22(4):871-8. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.01.020.

Snf2l regulates Foxg1-dependent progenitor cell expansion in the developing
brain.

Yip DJ(1), Corcoran CP, Alvarez-Saavedra M, DeMaria A, Rennick S, Mears AJ,
Rudnicki MA, Messier C, Picketts DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine Program, Ottawa Hospital Research Institute, and
Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa,
Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Balancing progenitor cell self-renewal and differentiation is essential for brain
development and is regulated by the activity of chromatin remodeling complexes.
Nevertheless, linking chromatin changes to specific pathways that control
cortical histogenesis remains a challenge. Here we identify a genetic interaction
between the chromatin remodeler Snf2l and Foxg1, a key regulator of neurogenesis.
Snf2l mutant mice exhibit forebrain hypercellularity arising from increased Foxg1
expression, increased progenitor cell expansion, and delayed differentiation. We 
demonstrate that Snf2l binds to the Foxg1 locus at midneurogenesis and that the
phenotype is rescued by reducing Foxg1 dosage, thus revealing that Snf2l and
Foxg1 function antagonistically to regulate brain size.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4580287
PMID: 22516202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Clin Genet. 2012 Nov;82(5):499-501. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01861.x. Epub
2012 Mar 26.

MEF2C mutations are a rare cause of Rett or severe Rett-like encephalopathies.

Lambert L, Bienvenu T, Allou L, Valduga M, Echenne B, Diebold B, Mignot C, Héron 
D, Roth V, Saunier A, Moustaïne A, Jonveaux P, Philippe C.

PMID: 22449245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Epigenetics. 2012 Mar;7(3):230-8. doi: 10.4161/epi.7.3.19265.

Neonatal MeCP2 is important for the organization of sex differences in
vasopressin expression.

Forbes-Lorman RM(1), Rautio JJ, Kurian JR, Auger AP, Auger CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Psychology Department, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA.

Several neurodevelopmental disorders are marked by atypical Methyl-CpG-binding
protein 2 (MeCP2) expression or function; however, the role of MeCP2 is complex
and not entirely clear. Interestingly, there are sex differences in some of these
disorders, and it appears that MeCP2 has sex-specific roles during development.
Specifically, recent data indicate that a transient reduction in MeCP2 within
developing amygdala reduces juvenile social play behavior in males to
female-typical levels. These data suggest that MeCP2 within the amygdala is
involved in programming lasting sex differences in social behavior. In the
present study, we infused MeCP2 or control siRNA into the amygdala of male and
female rats during the first three days of postnatal life in order to assess the 
impact of a transient reduction in MeCP2 on arginine vasopressin (AVP), a neural 
marker that is expressed differentially between males and females and is linked
to a number of social behaviors. The expression of AVP, as well as several other 
genes, was measured in two-week old and adult animals. Two-week old males
expressed more AVP and galanin mRNA in the amygdala than females, and a transient
reduction in MeCP2 eliminated this sex difference by reducing the expression of
both gene products in males. A transient reduction in MeCP2 also decreased
androgen receptor (AR) mRNA in two-week old males. In adulthood, control males
had more AVP-immunoreactive (AVP-ir) cells than females in the centromedial
amygdala (CMA), bed nucleus of the stria terminalis (BST) and in the fibers that 
project from these cells to the lateral septum (LS). A transient reduction in
MeCP2 eliminated this sex difference. Interestingly, there were no lasting
differences in galanin or AR levels in adulthood. Reducing MeCP2 levels during
development did not alter estrogen receptora, neurofilament or Foxg1. We conclude
that a transient reduction in MeCP2 expression in the developing male amygdala
has a transient impact on galanin and AR expression but a lasting impact on AVP
expression, highlighting the importance of MeCP2 in organizing sex differences in
the amygdala.

PMCID: PMC3335947
PMID: 22430799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Hum Mutat. 2012 Jul;33(7):1031-6. doi: 10.1002/humu.22072. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Rett networked database: an integrated clinical and genetic network of Rett
syndrome databases.

Grillo E(1), Villard L, Clarke A, Ben Zeev B, Pineda M, Bahi-Buisson N,
Hryniewiecka-Jaworska A, Bienvenu T, Armstrong J, Roche-Martinez A, Mari F,
Veneselli E, Russo S, Vignoli A, Pini G, Djuric M, Bisgaard AM, Mejaki Bonjak
V, Polgár N, Cogliati F, Ravn K, Pintaudi M, Melegh B, Craiu D, Djukic A, Renieri
A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Biotechnology, University of Siena, Viale
Bracci 2, Siena, Italy.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurodevelopmental disorder with one principal phenotype
and several distinct, atypical variants (Zappella, early seizure onset and
congenital variants). Mutations in MECP2 are found in most cases of classic RTT
but at least two additional genes, CDKL5 and FOXG1, can underlie some (usually
variant) cases. There is only limited correlation between genotype and phenotype.
The Rett Networked Database (http://www.rettdatabasenetwork.org/) has been
established to share clinical and genetic information. Through an "adaptor"
process of data harmonization, a set of 293 clinical items and 16 genetic items
was generated; 62 clinical and 7 genetic items constitute the core dataset; 23
clinical items contain longitudinal information. The database contains
information on 1838 patients from 11 countries (December 2011), with or without
mutations in known genes. These numbers can expand indefinitely. Data are entered
by a clinician in each center who supervises accuracy. This network was
constructed to make available pooled international data for the study of RTT
natural history and genotype-phenotype correlation and to indicate the proportion
of patients with specific clinical features and mutations. We expect that the
network will serve for the recruitment of patients into clinical trials and for
developing quality measures to drive up standards of medical management.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22415763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Apr;158A(4):713-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34206. Epub 2012
Mar 1.

Transcription factor 4 and myocyte enhancer factor 2C mutations are not common
causes of Rett syndrome.

Armani R(1), Archer H, Clarke A, Vasudevan P, Zweier C, Ho G, Williamson S,
Cloosterman D, Yang N, Christodoulou J.

Author information: 
(1)NSW Centre for Rett Syndrome Research, Kids Research Institute, The Children's
Hospital at Westmead, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

The systematic screening of Rett syndrome (RTT) patients for pathogenetic
sequence variations has focused on three genes that have been associated with RTT
or related clinical phenotypes, namely MECP2, CDKL5, and FOXG1. More recently, it
has been suggested that phenotypes associated with TCF4 and MEF2C mutations may
represent a form of RTT. Here we report on the screening of the TCF4 and MEF2C
genes in a cohort of 81 classical, atypical, and incomplete atypical RTT patients
harboring no known mutations in MECP2, CDKL5, and FOXG1 genes. No pathogenetic
sequence variations were identified in the MEF2C gene in our cohort. However, a
frameshift mutation in TCF4 was identified in a patient with a clinical diagnosis
of "variant" RTT, in whom the clinical evolution later raised the possibility of 
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome. Although our results suggest that these genes are not
commonly associated with RTT, we note the clinical similarity between RTT and
Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, and suggest that RTT patients with no mutation identified 
in MECP2 be considered for molecular screening of the TCF4 gene.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22383159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Neurosci. 2012 Feb 29;32(9):2931-49. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5240-11.2012.

Foxg1 has an essential role in postnatal development of the dentate gyrus.

Tian C(1), Gong Y, Yang Y, Shen W, Wang K, Liu J, Xu B, Zhao J, Zhao C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, Ministry of
Education, Institute of Life Science, Southeast University, Nanjing 210009,
China.

Foxg1, formerly BF-1, is expressed continuously in the postnatal and adult
hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG). This transcription factor (TF) is thought to be
involved in Rett syndrome, which is characterized by reduced hippocampus size,
indicating its important role in hippocampal development. Due to the perinatal
death of Foxg1(-/-) mice, the function of Foxg1 in postnatal DG neurogenesis
remains to be explored. Here, we describe the generation of a Foxg1(fl/fl) mouse 
line. Foxg1 was conditionally ablated from the DG during prenatal and postnatal
development by crossing this line with a Frizzled9-CreER(TM) line and inducing
recombination with tamoxifen. In this study, we first show that disruption of
Foxg1 results in the loss of the subgranular zone and a severely disrupted
secondary radial glial scaffold, leading to the impaired migration of granule
cells. Moreover, detailed analysis reveals that Foxg1 may be necessary for the
maintenance of the DG progenitor pool and that the lack of Foxg1 promotes both
gliogenesis and neurogenesis. We additionally show that Foxg1 may be required for
the survival and maturation of postmitotic neurons and that Foxg1 may be involved
in Reelin signaling in regulating postnatal DG development. Last, prenatal
deletion of Foxg1 suggests that it is rarely involved in the migration of
primordial granule cells. In summary, we report that Foxg1 is critical for DG
formation, especially during early postnatal stage.

PMID: 22378868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Neurosci. 2012 Feb 22;32(8):2846-55. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5841-11.2012.

Isoform-specific toxicity of Mecp2 in postmitotic neurons: suppression of
neurotoxicity by FoxG1.

Dastidar SG(1), Bardai FH, Ma C, Price V, Rawat V, Verma P, Narayanan V, D'Mello 
SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas, Richardson, TX 
75080, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurosci. 2012 Jul 11;32(28):9451-3.

The methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2) is a widely expressed protein, the
mutations of which cause Rett syndrome. The level of MeCP2 is highest in the
brain where it is expressed selectively in mature neurons. Its functions in
postmitotic neurons are not known. The MeCP2 gene is alternatively spliced to
generate two proteins with different N termini, designated as MeCP2-e1 and
MeCP2-e2. The physiological significance of these two isoforms has not been
elucidated, and it is generally assumed they are functionally equivalent. We
report that in cultured cerebellar granule neurons induced to die by low
potassium treatment and in Aß-treated cortical neurons, Mecp2-e2 expression is
upregulated whereas expression of the Mecp2-e1 isoform is downregulated.
Knockdown of Mecp2-e2 protects neurons from death, whereas knockdown of the e1
isoform has no effect. Forced expression of MeCP2-e2, but not MeCP2-e1, promotes 
apoptosis in otherwise healthy neurons. We find that MeCP2-e2 interacts with the 
forkhead protein FoxG1, mutations of which also cause Rett syndrome. FoxG1 has
been shown to promote neuronal survival and its downregulation leads to neuronal 
death. We find that elevated FoxG1 expression inhibits MeCP2-e2 neurotoxicity.
MeCP2-e2 neurotoxicity is also inhibited by IGF-1, which prevents the neuronal
death-associated downregulation of FoxG1 expression, and by Akt, the activation
of which is necessary for FoxG1-mediated neuroprotection. Finally, MeCP2-e2
neurotoxicity is enhanced if FoxG1 expression is suppressed or in neurons
cultured from FoxG1-haplodeficient mice. Our results indicate that Mecp2-e2
promotes neuronal death and that this activity is normally inhibited by FoxG1.
Reduced FoxG1 expression frees MecP2-e2 to promote neuronal death.

PMCID: PMC3403752
PMID: 22357867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2012 Apr 27;287(18):14749-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.328336. Epub
2012 Feb 21.

Transducin-like enhancer of Split-1 (TLE1) combines with Forkhead box protein G1 
(FoxG1) to promote neuronal survival.

Dastidar SG(1), Narayanan S, Stifani S, D'Mello SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas, Richardson,
Texas 75080, USA.

Transducin-like enhancer of split-1 (TLE1) plays a critical role in the
regulation of neurogenesis by inhibiting the differentiation of neural progenitor
cells into neurons. Although TLE1 is also expressed highly in the postnatal brain
and through adulthood, its role in postmitotic neurons is not clear. Using
cultures of cerebellar granule neurons, we show that expression of TLE1 is
reduced in neurons primed to die. Reestablishment of elevated TLE1 levels by
ectopic expression protects neurons from death, whereas suppression of TLE1
expression in otherwise healthy neurons induces cell death. These results show
that TLE1 is necessary for the maintenance of neuronal survival. Experiments
using pharmacological inhibitors as well as expression of point mutants indicate 
that phosphorylation of TLE1 by casein kinase-2 (CK2) at Ser-239 and Ser-253 is
necessary for its survival-promoting activity. TLE1-mediated survival is also
inhibited by pharmacological inhibition of PI3K-Akt signaling but not by
inhibitors of Raf-MEK-ERK signaling or other molecules, including histone
deacetylases, calcium calmodulin kinase, or CK1. The survival-promoting activity 
of TLE1 depends critically on interaction with FoxG1, another protein involved in
the regulation of neurogenesis and shown previously to promote survival of
postmitotic neurons. Likewise, the ability of FoxG1 to promote neuronal survival 
depends on TLE1. Taken together, our study demonstrates that TLE1 cooperates with
FoxG1 to promote neuronal survival in a CK2- and PI3K-Akt-dependent manner.

PMCID: PMC3340250
PMID: 22354967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2011;12(10):2721-6.

Antitumor activity of NF-kB decoy oligodeoxynucleotides in a prostate cancer cell
line.

Fang Y(1), Sun H, Zhai J, Zhang Y, Yi S, Hao G, Wang T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Taishan Medical University, China.

BACKGROUND: Nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kB), a transcription factor, is abundantly 
expressed in prostate cancer and regulates many tumor-related genes. Given the
important roles of these genes in tumor control, the present study was conducted 
to test the hypothesis that there was different expression of NF-kB in androgen- 
dependent or androgen-independent prostate cancer cells. In addition NF-kB decoy 
oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) were transfected into two prostate cancer cells to
determine affects on growth and apoptosis.
METHODS: First, NF-kB decoy ODNs were designed according to the NF-<U+03BA>B elements in
the promoter region of c-myc gene. Then, NF-kB and control decoy ODNs were
transfected with lipofectamine. Their influence on prostate cancer cell line
proliferative activity was detected by MTT assay. Cell apoptosis was determined
by flow cytometric(FCM) analysis and AO/EB study. Thirdly, nuclear extracts were 
prepared from PC-3M cells and DNA-protein interactions were examined by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Lastly, to confirm mechanisms of
action, a pGL3-C-MYC luciferase expression vector containing a fragment of the
c-myc promoter was constructed and co-transfected with NF-kB decoy ODNs into
PC-3M cells with lipofectamineTM2000. Expression levels of related endogenous
genes were assessed by western blotting.
RESULTS: We found overexpression of NF-kB in the androgen-independent prostate
cancer cell line PC-3M compared to the androgen-independent LNCaP. Treatment with
NF-kB decoy ODNs resulted in strong suppression of proliferation, especially in
the PC-3M case. Induction of apoptosis of PC-3M was observed in FCM and AO/EB
studies. Activity of luciferase was significantly reduced in the NF-kB
decoy-transfected cells, but not in cells transfected with a control decoy.
Furthermore, we found that expression of some endogenous genes was reduced, while
other genes transcripts were induced. EMSA demonstrated specific binding of the
NF-kB decoy to NF-kB protein.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that NF-kB activation plays an important
role in evolution of androgen-independent prostate cancer via manipulating
expression of target genes. Inhibitors of NF-kB may thus offer promise as a
therapeutic approach for the treatment of androgen-independent prostate cancer.
NF-kB decoy ODNs may allow development of therapeutic and investigative tools for
human malignancies.

PMID: 22320981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 14;109(7):2527-32. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1121003109. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Direct conversion of mouse fibroblasts to self-renewing, tripotent neural
precursor cells.

Lujan E(1), Chanda S, Ahlenius H, Südhof TC, Wernig M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Apr 6;10(4):347-8.

We recently showed that defined sets of transcription factors are sufficient to
convert mouse and human fibroblasts directly into cells resembling functional
neurons, referred to as "induced neuronal" (iN) cells. For some applications
however, it would be desirable to convert fibroblasts into proliferative neural
precursor cells (NPCs) instead of neurons. We hypothesized that NPC-like cells
may be induced using the same principal approach used for generating iN cells.
Toward this goal, we infected mouse embryonic fibroblasts derived from Sox2-EGFP 
mice with a set of 11 transcription factors highly expressed in NPCs. Twenty-four
days after transgene induction, Sox2-EGFP(+) colonies emerged that expressed
NPC-specific genes and differentiated into neuronal and astrocytic cells. Using
stepwise elimination, we found that Sox2 and FoxG1 are capable of generating
clonal self-renewing, bipotent induced NPCs that gave rise to astrocytes and
functional neurons. When we added the Pou and Homeobox domain-containing
transcription factor Brn2 to Sox2 and FoxG1, we were able to induce tripotent
NPCs that could be differentiated not only into neurons and astrocytes but also
into oligodendrocytes. The transcription factors FoxG1 and Brn2 alone also were
capable of inducing NPC-like cells; however, these cells generated less mature
neurons, although they did produce astrocytes and even oligodendrocytes capable
of integration into dysmyelinated Shiverer brain. Our data demonstrate that
direct lineage reprogramming using target cell-type-specific transcription
factors can be used to induce NPC-like cells that potentially could be used for
autologous cell transplantation-based therapies in the brain or spinal cord.

PMCID: PMC3289376
PMID: 22308465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Jun;20(6):595-6; author reply 596-7. doi:
10.1038/ejhg.2011.267. Epub 2012 Jan 18.

Questionable pathogenicity of FOXG1 duplication.

Amor DJ, Burgess T, Tan TY, Pertile MD.

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Apr;21(4):365-6.

Comment on
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan;19(1):102-7.

PMCID: PMC3355262
PMID: 22258524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Epileptic Disord. 2011 Dec;13(4):389-93. doi: 10.1684/epd.2011.0475.

Reflex seizures in Rett syndrome.

Roche Martínez A(1), Alonso Colmenero MI, Gomes Pereira A, Sanmartí Vilaplana FX,
Armstrong Morón J, Pineda Marfa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Neurology, Sant Joan de Deu Children's Hospital of
Barcelona, Spain. aroche@hsjdbcn.org

Reflex seizures are a rare phenomenon among epileptic patients, in which an
epileptic discharge is triggered by various kinds of stimuli (visual, auditory,
tactile or gustatory). Epilepsy is common in Rett syndrome patients (up to 70%), 
but to the authors' knowledge, no pressure or eating-triggered seizures have yet 
been reported in Rett children. We describe three epileptic Rett patients with
reflex seizures, triggered by food intake or proprioception. One patient with
congenital Rett Sd. developed infantile epileptic spasms at around seven months
and two patients with classic Rett Sd. presented with generalised tonic-clonic
seizures at around five years. Reflex seizures appeared when the patients were
teenagers. The congenital-Rett patient presented eating-triggered seizures at the
beginning of almost every meal, demonstrated by EEG recording. Both classic Rett 
patients showed self-provoked pressure -triggered attacks, influenced by stress
or excitement. Non-triggered seizures were controlled with carbamazepine or
valproate, but reflex seizures did not respond to antiepileptic drugs.
Risperidone partially improved self-provoked seizures. When reflex seizures are
suspected, reproducing the trigger during EEG recording is fundamental; however, 
self-provoked seizures depend largely on the patient's will. Optimal therapy
(though not always possible) consists of avoiding the trigger. Stress modifiers
such as risperidone may help control self-provoked seizures.

PMID: 22258043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Syndromol. 2011 Sep;1(6):290-293. Epub 2011 Aug 9.

Analysis of FOXG1 Is Highly Recommended in Male and Female Patients with Rett
Syndrome.

Van der Aa N(1), Van den Bergh M, Ponomarenko N, Verstraete L, Ceulemans B, Storm
K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University and University Hospital Antwerp,
Antwerp.

We screened a cohort of 5 male and 20 female patients with a Rett spectrum
disorder for mutations in the coding region of FOXG1, previously shown to cause
the congenital variant of Rett syndrome. Two de novo mutations were identified.
The first was a novel missense mutation, p.Ala193Thr (c.577G>A), in a male
patient with congenital Rett syndrome, and the second was the p.Glu154GlyfsX301
(c.460dupG) truncating mutation in a female with classical Rett syndrome, a
mutation that was previously reported in an independent patient. The overall rate
of FOXG1 mutations in our cohort is 8%. Our findings stress the importance of
FOXG1 analysis in male patients with Rett syndrome and in female patients when
mutations in the MECP2 and CDKL5 genes have been excluded.

PMCID: PMC3214958
PMID: 22190898  [PubMed]


137. Clin Genet. 2012 Dec;82(6):569-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01819.x. Epub
2011 Dec 16.

FOXG1 mutations in Japanese patients with the congenital variant of Rett
syndrome.

Takahashi S(1), Matsumoto N, Okayama A, Suzuki N, Araki A, Okajima K, Tanaka H,
Miyamoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, Japan.
satoru5p@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by
microcephaly, psychomotor regression, seizures and stereotypical hand movements. 
Recently, deletions and inactivating mutations in FOXG1, encoding a
brain-specific transcription factor that is critical for forebrain development,
have been found to be associated with the congenital variant of RTT. Here we
report the clinical features and molecular characteristics of two cases of the
congenital variant of RTT. We conducted mutation screenings of FOXG1 in a cohort 
of 15 Japanese patients with a clinical diagnosis of atypical RTT but without
MECP2 and CDKL5 mutations. Two unrelated female patients had heterozygous
mutations (c.256dupC, p.Gln86ProfsX35 and c.689G>A, pArg230His). Both showed
neurological symptoms from the neonatal period, including hypotonia, irritability
and severe microcephaly. Further, their psychomotor development was severely
impaired, as indicated by their inability to sit unaided or acquire speech
sounds, and they had a hyperkinetic movement disorder, because both displayed
hand stereotypies and jerky movements of the upper limbs. Brain magnetic
resonance imaging scans revealed delayed myelination with hypoplasia of the
corpus callosum and frontal lobe. These cases confirm the involvement of FOXG1 in
the molecular etiology of the congenital variant of RTT and show the
characteristic features of FOXG1-related disorder.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22129046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Development. 2012 Jan;139(1):151-64. doi: 10.1242/dev.067660. Epub 2011 Nov 17.

Sox2-mediated differential activation of Six3.2 contributes to forebrain
patterning.

Beccari L(1), Conte I, Cisneros E, Bovolenta P.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, CSIC-UAM, c/Nicolas Cabrera 1,
Madrid 28049, Spain.

The vertebrate forebrain is patterned during gastrulation into telencephalic,
retinal, hypothalamic and diencephalic primordia. Specification of each of these 
domains requires the concerted activity of combinations of transcription factors 
(TFs). Paradoxically, some of these factors are widely expressed in the
forebrain, which raises the question of how they can mediate regional
differences. To address this issue, we focused on the homeobox TF Six3.2. With
genomic and functional approaches we demonstrate that, in medaka fish, Six3.2
regulates, in a concentration-dependent manner, telencephalic and retinal
specification under the direct control of Sox2. Six3.2 and Sox2 have antagonistic
functions in hypothalamic development. These activities are, in part, executed by
Foxg1 and Rx3, which seem to be differentially and directly regulated by Six3.2
and Sox2. Together, these data delineate the mechanisms by which Six3.2
diversifies its activity in the forebrain and highlight a novel function for Sox2
as one of the main regulators of anterior forebrain development. They also
demonstrate that graded levels of the same TF, probably operating in partially
independent transcriptional networks, pattern the vertebrate forebrain along the 
anterior-posterior axis.

PMID: 22096077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Clin Genet. 2012 Oct;82(4):395-403. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2011.01810.x. Epub
2011 Dec 13.

Expanding the phenotype associated with FOXG1 mutations and in vivo FoxG1
chromatin-binding dynamics.

De Filippis R(1), Pancrazi L, Bjørgo K, Rosseto A, Kleefstra T, Grillo E,
Panighini A, Cardarelli F, Meloni I, Ariani F, Mencarelli MA, Hayek J, Renieri A,
Costa M, Mari F.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Biotechnology, University of Siena, Siena,
Italy.

Mutations in the Forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) gene, a brain specific transcriptional
factor, are responsible for the congenital variant of Rett syndrome. Until now
FOXG1 point mutations have been reported in 12 Rett patients. Recently seven
additional patients have been reported with a quite homogeneous severe phenotype 
designated as the FOXG1 syndrome. Here we describe two unrelated patients with a 
de novo FOXG1 point mutation, p.Gln46X and p.Tyr400X, respectively, having a
milder phenotype and sharing a distinctive facial appearance. Although FoxG1
action depends critically on its binding to chromatin, very little is known about
the dynamics of this process. Using fluorescence recovery after photobleaching,
we showed that most of the GFP-FoxG1 fusion protein associates reversibly to
chromatin whereas the remaining fraction is bound irreversibly. Furthermore, we
showed that the two pathologic derivatives of FoxG1 described in this paper
present a dramatic alteration in chromatin affinity and irreversibly bound
fraction in comparison with Ser323fsX325 mutant (associated with a severe
phenotype) and wild type Foxg1 protein. Our observations suggest that alterations
in the kinetics of FoxG1 binding to chromatin might contribute to the
pathological effects of FOXG1 mutations.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22091895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. J Neurosci. 2011 Nov 16;31(46):16814-25. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3064-11.2011.

HCN channels expressed in the inner ear are necessary for normal balance
function.

Horwitz GC(1), Risner-Janiczek JR, Jones SM, Holt JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Department of Otolaryngology, University of
Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

HCN1-4 subunits form Na+/K+-permeable ion channels that are activated by
hyperpolarization and carry the current known as I(h). I(h) has been
characterized in vestibular hair cells of the inner ear, but its molecular
correlates and functional contributions have not been elucidated. We examined Hcn
mRNA expression and immunolocalization of HCN protein in the mouse utricle, a
mechanosensitive organ that contributes to the sense of balance. We found that
HCN1 is the most highly expressed subunit, localized to the basolateral membranes
of type I and type II hair cells. We characterized I(h) using the whole-cell,
voltage-clamp technique and found the current expressed in 84% of the cells with 
a mean maximum conductance of 4.4 nS. I(h) was inhibited by ZD7288, cilobradine, 
and by adenoviral expression of a dominant-negative form of HCN2. To determine
which HCN subunits carried I(h), we examined hair cells from mice deficient in
Hcn1, 2, or both. I(h) was completely abolished in hair cells of Hcn1<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice and
Hcn1/2<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice but was similar to wild-type in Hcn2<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice. To examine the
functional contributions of I(h), we recorded hair cell membrane responses to
small hyperpolarizing current steps and found that activation of I(h) evoked a
5-10 mV sag depolarization and a subsequent 15-20 mV rebound upon termination.
The sag and rebound were nearly abolished in Hcn1-deficient hair cells. We also
found that Hcn1-deficient mice had deficits in vestibular-evoked potentials and
balance assays. We conclude that HCN1 contributes to vestibular hair cell
function and the sense of balance.

PMCID: PMC3477615
PMID: 22090507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e26795. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026795. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

A focused in situ hybridization screen identifies candidate transcriptional
regulators of thymic epithelial cell development and function.

Wei Q(1), Condie BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia, United States 
of America.

BACKGROUND: Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) are necessary for normal T cell
development. Currently, one transcription factor, Foxn1 is known to be necessary 
for the progression of fetal TEC differentiation. However, some aspects of fetal 
TEC differentiation occur in Foxn1 mutants, suggesting the existence of
additional transcriptional regulators of TEC differentiation. The goal of this
study was to identify some of the additional candidate transcription factors that
may be involved in the specification and/or differentiation of TECs during fetal 
development.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We identified candidate fetal TEC transcriptional
regulators via data and text mining. From our data mining we selected the
transcription factors Foxg1, Isl1, Gata3, Nkx2-5, Nkx2-6 and Sox2 for further
studies. Whole mount in situ hybridizations confirmed the expression of these
transcription factors within subdomains of the third pharyngeal pouch from
E9.5-E10.5. By E11.5 days Foxg1 and Isl1 transcripts were the only mRNAs from
this group of genes detected exclusively within the thymus domain of the third
pouch. Based on this initial in situ hybridization analysis, we focused on
defining the expression of Foxg1 and Isl1 during multiple stages of thymus
development and TEC differentiation. We found that Foxg1 and Isl1 are
specifically expressed in differentiating TECs during fetal and postnatal stages 
of thymus development. In addition, we found differential expression of Islet1
and Foxn1 within the fetal and postnatal TEC population.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our studies have identified two developmental
transcription factors that are excellent candidate regulators of thymic
epithelial cell specification and differentiation during fetal development. Our
results suggest that Foxg1 and Isl1 may play a role in the regulation of TEC
differentiation during fetal and postnatal stages. Our results also demonstrate
heterogeneity of TECs marked by the differential expression of transcription
factors, potentially providing new insights into the regulation of TEC
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3210126
PMID: 22087235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Genes Cells. 2011 Nov;16(11):1097-109. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2011.01555.x.

Zebrafish Dmrta2 regulates neurogenesis in the telencephalon.

Yoshizawa A(1), Nakahara Y, Izawa T, Ishitani T, Tsutsumi M, Kuroiwa A, Itoh M,
Kikuchi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Hiroshima
University, Kagamiyama 1-3-1, Higashi-Hiroshima, Hiroshima 739-8526 Japan.

Although recent findings showed that some Drosophila doublesex and Caenorhabditis
elegans mab-3 related genes are expressed in neural tissues during development,
their functions have not been fully elucidated. Here, we isolated a zebrafish
mutant, ha2, that shows defects in telencephalic neurogenesis and found that ha2 
encodes Doublesex and MAB-3 related transcription factor like family A2 (Dmrta2).
dmrta2 expression is restricted to the telencephalon, diencephalon and olfactory 
placode during somitogenesis. We found that the expression of the proneural gene,
neurogenin1, in the posterior and dorsal region of telencephalon
(posterior-dorsal telencephalon) is markedly reduced in this mutant at the
14-somite stage without any defects in cell proliferation or cell death. In
contrast, the telencephalic expression of her6, a Hes-related gene that is known 
to encode a negative regulator of neurogenin1, expands dramatically in the ha2
mutant. Based on over-expression experiments and epistatic analyses, we propose
that zebrafish Dmrta2 controls neurogenin1 expression by repressing her6 in the
posterior-dorsal telencephalon. Furthermore, the expression domains of the
telencephalic marker genes, foxg1 and emx3, and the neuronal differentiation
gene, neurod, are downregulated in the ha2 posterior-dorsal telencephalon during 
somitogenesis. These results suggest that Dmrta2 plays important roles in the
specification of the posterior-dorsal telencephalic cell fate during
somitogenesis.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal compilation © 2011 by the Molecular Biology Society
of Japan/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22023386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25788. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025788. Epub 2011 Sep 30.

Anti-Aß drug screening platform using human iPS cell-derived neurons for the
treatment of Alzheimer's disease.

Yahata N(1), Asai M, Kitaoka S, Takahashi K, Asaka I, Hioki H, Kaneko T, Maruyama
K, Saido TC, Nakahata T, Asada T, Yamanaka S, Iwata N, Inoue H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for iPS Cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that causes 
progressive memory and cognitive decline during middle to late adult life. The AD
brain is characterized by deposition of amyloid ß peptide (Aß), which is produced
from amyloid precursor protein by ß- and <U+03B3>-secretase (presenilin
complex)-mediated sequential cleavage. Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells
potentially provide an opportunity to generate a human cell-based model of AD
that would be crucial for drug discovery as well as for investigating mechanisms 
of the disease.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We differentiated human iPS (hiPS) cells into
neuronal cells expressing the forebrain marker, Foxg1, and the neocortical
markers, Cux1, Satb2, Ctip2, and Tbr1. The iPS cell-derived neuronal cells also
expressed amyloid precursor protein, ß-secretase, and <U+03B3>-secretase components, and
were capable of secreting Aß into the conditioned media. Aß production was
inhibited by ß-secretase inhibitor, <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor (GSI), and an NSAID;
however, there were different susceptibilities to all three drugs between early
and late differentiation stages. At the early differentiation stage, GSI
treatment caused a fast increase at lower dose (Aß surge) and drastic decline of 
Aß production.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These results indicate that the hiPS cell-derived
neuronal cells express functional ß- and <U+03B3>-secretases involved in Aß production; 
however, anti-Aß drug screening using these hiPS cell-derived neuronal cells
requires sufficient neuronal differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3184175
PMID: 21984949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mov Disord. 2012 Jan;27(1):160-1. doi: 10.1002/mds.23956. Epub 2011 Sep 23.

Generalized dystonia, athetosis, and parkinsonism associated with FOXG1 mutation.

Méneret A, Mignot C, An I, Habert MO, Jacquette A, Vidailhet M, Bienvenu T, Roze 
E.

PMID: 21953941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Dev Biol. 2011 Nov 15;359(2):242-50. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.08.026. Epub 2011 
Sep 7.

Shh and Gli3 regulate formation of the telencephalic-diencephalic junction and
suppress an isthmus-like signaling source in the forebrain.

Rash BG(1), Grove EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Committees on Neurobiology and Developmental
Biology, The University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA. brian.rash@yale.edu

In human holoprosencephaly (HPE), the forebrain does not separate fully into two 
hemispheres. Further, the border between the telencephalon and diencephalon, the 
telencephalic/diencephalic junction (TDJ), is often indistinct, and the
ventricular system can be blocked at the third ventricle, creating a forebrain
'holosphere'. Mice deficient in Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) have previously been
described to show HPE and associated cyclopia. Here we report that the third
ventricle is blocked in Shh null mutants, similar to human HPE, and that
characteristic telencephalic and diencephalic signaling centers, the cortical hem
and zona limitans intrathalamica (ZLI), are merged, obliterating the TDJ. The
resulting forebrain holosphere comprises Foxg1-positive telencephalic- and
Foxg1-negative diencephalic territories. Loss of one functional copy of Gli3 in
Shh nulls rescues ventricular collapse and substantially restores the TDJ.
Characteristic regional gene expression patterns are rescued on the telencephalic
side of the TDJ but not in the diencephalon. Further analysis of compound
Shh;Gli3 mutants revealed an unexpected type of signaling center deregulation. In
Shh;Gli3 mutants, adjacent rings of Fgf8 and Wnt3a expression are induced in the 
diencephalon at the ZLI, reminiscent of the Fgf8/Wnt1-expressing isthmic
organizer. Neither Shh nor Gli3 single mutants show this forebrain double ring of
Fgf/Wnt expression; thus both Shh and Gli3 are independently required to suppress
it. Adjacent tissue is not respecified to a midbrain/hindbrain fate, but shows
overgrowth, consistent with ectopic mitogen expression. Our observations indicate
that the separation of the telencephalon and diencephalon depends on interactions
between Shh and Gli3, and, moreover, demonstrate that both Shh and Gli3 suppress 
a potential Fgf/Wnt signaling source in the forebrain. That optional signaling
centers are actively repressed in normal development is a striking new insight
into the processes of vertebrate brain development.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3213684
PMID: 21925158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Oct;155A(10):2584-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34224. Epub 2011 
Sep 9.

West syndrome associated with mosaic duplication of FOXG1 in a patient with
maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 14.

Tohyama J(1), Yamamoto T, Hosoki K, Nagasaki K, Akasaka N, Ohashi T, Kobayashi Y,
Saitoh S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Epilepsy Center, Nishi-Niigata Chuo National
Hospital, Japan. jtohyama@masa.go.jp

FOXG1 on chromosome 14 has recently been suggested as a dosage-sensitive gene.
Duplication of this gene could cause severe epilepsy and developmental delay,
including infantile spasms. Here, we report on a female patient diagnosed with
maternal uniparental disomy of chromosome 14 and West syndrome who carried a
small supernumerary marker chromosome. A chromosomal analysis revealed mosaicism 
of 47,XX, + mar[8]/46,XX[18]. Spectral karyotyping multicolor fluorescence in
situ hybridization analysis confirmed that the marker chromosome was derived from
chromosome 14. A DNA methylation test at MEG3 in 14q32.2 and microsatellite
analysis using polymorphic markers on chromosome 14 confirmed that the patient
had maternal uniparental disomy 14 as well as a mosaic small marker chromosome of
paternal origin containing the proximal long arm of chromosome 14.
Microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization analysis conclusively defined 
the region of the gain of genomic copy numbers at 14q11.2-q12, encompassing
FOXG1. The results of the analyses of our patient provide further evidence that
not only duplication but also a small increase in the dosage of FOXG1 could cause
infantile spasms.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21910242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Dec;19(12):1246-55. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.131. Epub 2011
Jul 13.

iPS cells to model CDKL5-related disorders.

Amenduni M(1), De Filippis R, Cheung AY, Disciglio V, Epistolato MC, Ariani F,
Mari F, Mencarelli MA, Hayek Y, Renieri A, Ellis J, Meloni I.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Biotechnology, University of Siena,
Policlinico S. Maria alle Scotte, viale Bracci 2, Siena, Italy.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is a progressive neurologic disorder representing one of the 
most common causes of mental retardation in females. To date mutations in three
genes have been associated with this condition. Classic RTT is caused by
mutations in the MECP2 gene, whereas variants can be due to mutations in either
MECP2 or FOXG1 or CDKL5. Mutations in CDKL5 have been identified both in females 
with the early onset seizure variant of RTT and in males with X-linked epileptic 
encephalopathy. CDKL5 is a kinase protein highly expressed in neurons, but its
exact function inside the cell is unknown. To address this issue we established a
human cellular model for CDKL5-related disease using the recently developed
technology of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). iPSCs can be expanded
indefinitely and differentiated in vitro into many different cell types,
including neurons. These features make them the ideal tool to study disease
mechanisms directly on the primarily affected neuronal cells. We derived iPSCs
from fibroblasts of one female with p.Q347X and one male with p.T288I mutation,
affected by early onset seizure variant and X-linked epileptic encephalopathy,
respectively. We demonstrated that female CDKL5-mutated iPSCs maintain
X-chromosome inactivation and clones express either the mutant CDKL5 allele or
the wild-type allele that serve as an ideal experimental control. Array CGH
indicates normal isogenic molecular karyotypes without detection of de novo CNVs 
in the CDKL5-mutated iPSCs. Furthermore, the iPS cells can be differentiated into
neurons and are thus suitable to model disease pathogenesis in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3218106
PMID: 21750574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nat Rev Neurol. 2011 May 17;7(6):312-4. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2011.64.

Neurodevelopmental disorders: Clinical criteria for Rett syndrome.

Naidu S(1), Johnston MV.

Author information: 
(1)Hugo W. Moser Research Institute, Kennedy Krieger Institute, 707 North
Broadway, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. naidu@kennedykrieger.org

Advances in the clinical and genetic understanding of Rett syndrome have meant
that existing diagnostic guidelines for this neurodevelopmental disorder need to 
be revisited. New clinical criteria for the diagnosis of Rett syndrome by Neul
and colleagues are welcome, but should more prominence be given to molecular
diagnosis?

PMID: 21587242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Neurology. 2011 May 3;76(18):1600-2. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182194bbf.

West syndrome associated with 14q12 duplications harboring FOXG1.

Striano P(1), Paravidino R, Sicca F, Chiurazzi P, Gimelli S, Coppola A, Robbiano 
A, Traverso M, Pintaudi M, Giovannini S, Operto F, Vigliano P, Granata T, Coppola
G, Romeo A, Specchio N, Giordano L, Osborne LR, Gimelli G, Minetti C, Zara F.

Author information: 
(1)Muscular and Neurodegenerative Diseases Unit, Institute G. Gaslini, University
of Genova, Genova, Italy. pstriano@e-mail.it

PMID: 21536641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 3;108(18):7607-12. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1101347108. Epub 2011 Apr 18.

Loss of RhoA in neural progenitor cells causes the disruption of adherens
junctions and hyperproliferation.

Katayama K(1), Melendez J, Baumann JM, Leslie JR, Chauhan BK, Nemkul N, Lang RA, 
Kuan CY, Zheng Y, Yoshida Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The organization of neural progenitors in the developing mammalian
neuroepithelium is marked by cadherin-based adherens junctions. Whereas RhoA, a
founding member of the small Rho GTPase family, has been shown to play important 
roles in epithelial adherens junctions, its physiological roles in neural
development remain uncertain due to the lack of specific loss-of-function
studies. Here, we show that RhoA protein accumulates at adherens junctions in the
developing mouse brain and colocalizes to the cadherin-catenin complex.
Conditional deletion of RhoA in midbrain and forebrain neural progenitors using
Wnt1-Cre and Foxg1-Cre mice, respectively, disrupts apical adherens junctions and
causes massive dysplasia of the brain. Furthermore, RhoA-deficient neural
progenitor cells exhibit accelerated proliferation, reduction of cell- cycle
exit, and increased expression of downstream target genes of the hedgehog
pathway. Consequently, both lines of conditional RhoA-deficient embryos exhibit
expansion of neural progenitor cells and exencephaly-like protrusions. These
results demonstrate a critical role of RhoA in the maintenance of apical adherens
junctions and the regulation of neural progenitor proliferation in the developing
mammalian brain.

PMCID: PMC3088619
PMID: 21502507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Rev Neurol. 2011 May 16;52(10):597-602.

[FOXG1, a new gene responsible for the congenital form of Rett syndrome].

[Article in Spanish]

Roche-Martinez A(1), Gerotina E, Armstrong-Moron J, Sans-Capdevila O, Pineda M.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Sant Joan de Deu, 08950 Esplugues de Llobregat, Espana.
aroche@hsjdbcn.org

INTRODUCTION: Rett syndrome (RS) is a neurodevelopmental disorder that affects
girls almost exclusively. The identification of mutations in the MECP2 and CDKL5 
genes offers genetic confirmation of the clinical diagnosis. The FOXG1 gene
appears to be a novel cause of the congenital variant of RS.
CASE REPORT: We describe the first Spanish patient with the atypical (congenital)
variant of RS with mutation of the FOXG1 gene and the case is compared with 12
patients previously reported in the literature; clinical criteria that suggest
alterations in FOXG1 are proposed. The patient was referred at the age of 6
months due to overall retardation, axial hypotonia, microcephaly and a peculiar
phenotype. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain revealed hypoplasia of the
corpus callosum, frontal atrophy and ventriculomegaly. The appearance of
hand-to-mouth stereotypic movements at 12 months pointed the clinical diagnosis
towards an atypical variant of RS, the congenital form; there was progressive
improvement of visual contact and interest in her surroundings. Frequent
respiratory infections and obstructive sleep apnoea syndrome. At the age of 5
years there was partial control over the axial tone, grasping with the hands,
good contact and babbling, without epilepsy or behavioural disorders. The MECP2
and subtelomeric deletion study did not reveal any alterations; two polymorphisms
were identified in the CDKL5 gene and a pathogenic mutation was found in FOXG1
(c.624C>G p.Tyr203X).
CONCLUSIONS: It has been shown that 92% of patients with mutations in the FOXG1
gene present the congenital form of RS with severe generalised hypotonia, early
acquired microcephaly (-3 to -6 standard deviations) and peculiar phenotype. When
faced with a diagnosis of RS with no alterations in the MECP2 and CDKL5 genes,
especially in the case of the congenital variant, the FOXG1 gene must be
investigated. The molecular diagnosis confirms the clinical diagnosis and
provides the family with genetic counselling.

PMID: 21488007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Dyn. 2011 Jun;240(6):1373-90. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22620. Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Conditional deletion of N-Myc disrupts neurosensory and non-sensory development
of the ear.

Kopecky B(1), Santi P, Johnson S, Schmitz H, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Ear development requires interactions of transcription factors for proliferation 
and differentiation. The proto-oncogene N-Myc is a member of the Myc family that 
regulates proliferation. To investigate the function of N-Myc, we conditionally
knocked out N-Myc in the ear using Tg(Pax2-Cre) and Foxg1(KiCre). N-Myc CKOs had 
reduced growth of the ear, abnormal morphology including fused sensory epithelia,
disrupted histology, and disorganized neuronal innervation. Using Thin-Sheet
Laser Imaging Microscopy (TSLIM), 3D reconstruction and quantification of the
cochlea revealed a greater than 50% size reduction. Immunochemistry and in situ
hybridization showed a gravistatic organ-cochlear fusion and a "circularized"
apex with no clear inner and outer hair cells. Furthermore, the abnormally
developed cochlea had cross innervation from the vestibular ganglion near the
basal tip. These findings are put in the context of the possible functional
relationship of N-Myc with a number of other cell proliferative and fate
determining genes during ear development.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3092837
PMID: 21448975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Med Genet. 2011 Jun;48(6):396-406. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.087528. Epub 2011 Mar 
25.

The core FOXG1 syndrome phenotype consists of postnatal microcephaly, severe
mental retardation, absent language, dyskinesia, and corpus callosum hypogenesis.

Kortüm F(1), Das S, Flindt M, Morris-Rosendahl DJ, Stefanova I, Goldstein A, Horn
D, Klopocki E, Kluger G, Martin P, Rauch A, Roumer A, Saitta S, Walsh LE,
Wieczorek D, Uyanik G, Kutsche K, Dobyns WB.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Campus
Forschung, Martinistraße 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Submicroscopic deletions in 14q12 spanning FOXG1 or intragenic
mutations have been reported in patients with a developmental disorder described 
as a congenital variant of Rett syndrome. This study aimed to further
characterise and delineate the phenotype of FOXG1 mutation positive patients.
METHOD: The study mapped the breakpoints of a 2;14 translocation by fluorescence 
in situ hybridisation and analysed three chromosome rearrangements in 14q12 by
cytogenetic analysis and/or array comparative genomic hybridisation. The FOXG1
gene was sequenced in 210 patients, including 129 patients with unexplained
developmental disorders and 81 MECP2 mutation negative individuals.
RESULTS: One known mutation, seen in two patients, and nine novel mutations of
FOXG1 including two deletions, two chromosome rearrangements disrupting or
displacing putative cis-regulatory elements from FOXG1, and seven sequence
changes, are reported. Analysis of 11 patients in this study, and a further 15
patients reported in the literature, demonstrates a complex constellation of
features including mild postnatal growth deficiency, severe postnatal
microcephaly, severe mental retardation with absent language development,
deficient social reciprocity resembling autism, combined stereotypies and frank
dyskinesias, epilepsy, poor sleep patterns, irritability in infancy, unexplained 
episodes of crying, recurrent aspiration, and gastro-oesophageal reflux. Brain
imaging studies reveal simplified gyral pattern and reduced white matter volume
in the frontal lobes, corpus callosum hypogenesis, and variable mild frontal
pachgyria.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings have significantly expanded the number of FOXG1
mutations and identified two affecting possible cis-regulatory elements. While
the phenotype of the patients overlaps both classic and congenital Rett syndrome,
extensive clinical evaluation demonstrates a distinctive and clinically
recognisable phenotype which the authors suggest designating as the FOXG1
syndrome.

PMID: 21441262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Stem Cells. 2011 Mar;29(3):462-73. doi: 10.1002/stem.587.

A targeted NKX2.1 human embryonic stem cell reporter line enables identification 
of human basal forebrain derivatives.

Goulburn AL(1), Alden D, Davis RP, Micallef SJ, Ng ES, Yu QC, Lim SM, Soh CL,
Elliott DA, Hatzistavrou T, Bourke J, Watmuff B, Lang RJ, Haynes JM, Pouton CW,
Giudice A, Trounson AO, Anderson SA, Stanley EG, Elefanty AG.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Immunology and Stem Cell Laboratories, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia.

We have used homologous recombination in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) to
insert sequences encoding green fluorescent protein (GFP) into the NKX2.1 locus, 
a gene required for normal development of the basal forebrain. Generation of
NKX2.1-GFP(+) cells was dependent on the concentration, timing, and duration of
retinoic acid treatment during differentiation. NKX2.1-GFP(+) progenitors
expressed genes characteristic of the basal forebrain, including SHH, DLX1, LHX6,
and OLIG2. Time course analysis revealed that NKX2.1-GFP(+) cells could
upregulate FOXG1 expression, implying the existence of a novel pathway for the
generation of telencephalic neural derivatives. Further maturation of
NKX2.1-GFP(+) cells gave rise to <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid-, tyrosine hydroxylase-, and
somatostatin-expressing neurons as well as to platelet-derived growth factor
receptor a-positive oligodendrocyte precursors. These studies highlight the
diversity of cell types that can be generated from human NKX2.1(+) progenitors
and demonstrate the utility of NKX2.1(GFP/w) hESCs for investigating human
forebrain development and neuronal differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21425409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Dev Biol. 2011 May 15;353(2):367-79. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.03.016. Epub 2011 
Mar 21.

Rbpj regulates development of prosensory cells in the mammalian inner ear.

Yamamoto N(1), Chang W, Kelley MW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cochlear Development, National Institute on Deafness and other
Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health, NIDCD, NIH, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. yamamoto@ent.kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The vertebrate inner ear contains multiple sensory patches comprised of hair
cells and supporting cells. During development these sensory patches arise from
prosensory cells that are specified and maintained through the expression of
specific molecular factors. Disruption of Jagged1-mediated notch signaling causes
a loss of some sensory patches and disruptions in others, indicating a role in
some aspect of prosensory development. However, the presence of some sensory
patches suggests that some level of notch activity persists in the absence of
Jagged1. Therefore, the transcription factor Rbpj, which is required for nearly
all notch function, was deleted in the developing otocyst. Results indicate a
nearly complete absence of all prosensory patches in the inner ear with remaining
hair cells located predominantly in the extreme apex of the cochlea. However,
early markers of prosensory cells are still present in Rbpj-mutants, suggesting
that maintenance, rather than induction, of prosensory development is dependent
on notch signaling. Moreover, analysis of developing cochleae in Rbpj-mutants
indicates changes in the spatiotemporal patterns of expression for p27(kip1),
Atoh1 and hair cell differentiation markers implicating notch signaling in the
regulation of the timing of cellular differentiation and/or in the maintenance of
a stem/progenitor cell stage. Finally, the absence of Rbpj caused increased cell 
death in the cochlea beginning at E12. These results suggest important roles for 
Rbpj and notch signaling in multiple aspects of inner ear development including
prosensory cell maturation, cellular differentiation and survival.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21420948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Neural Dev. 2011 Mar 18;6:9. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-6-9.

The transcription factor Foxg1 regulates telencephalic progenitor proliferation
cell autonomously, in part by controlling Pax6 expression levels.

Manuel MN(1), Martynoga B, Molinek MD, Quinn JC, Kroemmer C, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson Building,
George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK. Martine.Manuel@ed.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor Foxg1 is an important regulator of
telencephalic cell cycles. Its inactivation causes premature lengthening of
telencephalic progenitor cell cycles and increased neurogenic divisions, leading 
to severe hypoplasia of the telencephalon. These proliferation defects could be a
secondary consequence of the loss of Foxg1 caused by the abnormal expression of
several morphogens (Fibroblast growth factor 8, bone morphogenetic proteins) in
the telencephalon of Foxg1 null mutants. Here we investigated whether Foxg1 has a
cell autonomous role in the regulation of telencephalic progenitor proliferation.
We analysed Foxg1+/+<U+2194>Foxg1-/- chimeras, in which mutant telencephalic cells have 
the potential to interact with, and to have any cell non-autonomous defects
rescued by, normal wild-type cells.
RESULTS: Our analysis showed that the Foxg1-/- cells are under-represented in the
chimeric telencephalon and the proportion of them in S-phase is significantly
smaller than that of their wild-type neighbours, indicating that their
under-representation is caused by a cell autonomous reduction in their
proliferation. We then analysed the expression of the cell-cycle regulator Pax6
and found that it is cell-autonomously downregulated in Foxg1-/- dorsal
telencephalic cells. We went on to show that the introduction into Foxg1-/-
embryos of a transgene designed to reverse Pax6 expression defects resulted in a 
partial rescue of the telencephalic progenitor proliferation defects.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that Foxg1 exerts control over telencephalic progenitor 
proliferation by cell autonomous mechanisms that include the regulation of Pax6, 
which itself is known to regulate proliferation cell autonomously in a regional
manner.

PMCID: PMC3068069
PMID: 21418559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Neurosci. 2011 Mar 2;31(9):3407-22. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5085-10.2011.

MicroRNA-9 regulates neurogenesis in mouse telencephalon by targeting multiple
transcription factors.

Shibata M(1), Nakao H, Kiyonari H, Abe T, Aizawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories for Vertebrate Body Plan and Animal Resources and Genetic
Engineering, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN Kobe, Chuo-ku, Kobe
650-0047, Japan.

microRNA-9-2 and microRNA-9-3 double-mutant mice demonstrate that microRNA-9
(miR-9) controls neural progenitor proliferation and differentiation in the
developing telencephalon by regulating the expression of multiple transcription
factors. As suggested by our previous study, the Foxg1 expression was elevated,
and the production of Cajal-Retzius cells and early-born neurons was suppressed
in the miR-9-2/3 double-mutant pallium. At embryonic day 16.5 (E16.5), however,
the Foxg1 expression was no longer elevated. The expression of an AU-rich
RNA-binding protein Elavl2 increased at E16.5, Elav2 associated with Foxg1 3'
untranslated region (UTR), and it countered the Foxg1 suppression by miR-9.
Later, progenitor proliferation was reduced in the miR-9-2/3 double-mutant
pallium with the decrease in Nr2e1 and Pax6 expression and the increase in Meis2 
expression. The analyses suggest that microRNA-9 indirectly inhibits Pax6
expression by suppressing Meis2 expression. In contrast, together with Elavl1 and
Msi1, microRNA-9 targets Nr2e1 mRNA 3' UTR to enhance the expression.
Concomitantly, cortical layers were reduced, each cortical projection was
malformed, and the tangential migration of interneurons into the pallium was
impaired in the miR-9-2/3 double mutants. miR-9 also targets Gsh2 3' UTR, and
Gsh2, as well as Foxg1, expression was elevated in the miR-9-2/3 double-mutant
subpallium. The subpallium progenitor proliferation was enhanced, and the
development of basal ganglia including striatum and globus pallidus was
suppressed. Pallial/subpallial boundary shifted dorsally, and the ventral pallium
was lost. Corridor was malformed, and thalamocortical and corticofugal axons were
misrouted in the miR-9-2/3 double mutants.

PMID: 21368052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Cereb Cortex. 2011 Sep;21(9):2177-86. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr006. Epub 2011 Feb
17.

Fezf2 regulates telencephalic precursor differentiation from mouse embryonic stem
cells.

Wang ZB(1), Boisvert E, Zhang X, Guo M, Fashoyin A, Du ZW, Zhang SC, Li XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT 06030, USA.

The mechanisms by which transcription factors control stepwise lineage
restriction during the specification of cortical neurons remain largely unknown. 
Here, we investigated the role of forebrain embryonic zinc finger like (Fezf2) in
this process by generating Fezf2 knockdown and tetracycline-inducible Fezf2
overexpression mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) lines. The overexpression of
Fezf2 at early time points significantly increased the generation of rostral
forebrain progenitors (Foxg1(+), Six3(+)) and inhibited the expression of
transcription factors which are expressed by the midbrain and caudal diencephalon
(En1(+), Irx(+)). This effect was partially achieved by the regulation of Wnt
signaling during this critical early time window. The role of Fezf2 in regulating
the rostrocaudal patterning was further confirmed by the significant decrease in 
the expression of Foxg1 and Six3 and the increase in the expression of En1 when
Fezf2 was knocked down. In addition, Fezf2 overexpression at later time points
had little effect on the expression of Foxg1 and Six3. Instead, Fezf2 promotes
the generation of dorsal telencephalic progenitors and deep-layer cortical
neurons at later stages. Collectively, our data suggest that Fezf2 controls the
specification of telencephalic progenitors from mESCs through differentially
regulating the expression of rostrocaudal and dorsoventral patterning genes.

PMCID: PMC3155607
PMID: 21330470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Stem Cells. 2011 Apr;29(4):700-12. doi: 10.1002/stem.614.

Conditional activation of Bmi1 expression regulates self-renewal, apoptosis, and 
differentiation of neural stem/progenitor cells in vitro and in vivo.

Yadirgi G(1), Leinster V, Acquati S, Bhagat H, Shakhova O, Marino S.

Author information: 
(1)Blizard Institute of Cell and Molecular Science, Barts and the London School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, United
Kingdom.

The Polycomb group protein Bmi1 is a key regulator of self-renewal of embryonic
and adult central nervous system stem cells, and its overexpression has been
shown to occur in several types of brain tumors. In a Cre/LoxP-based conditional 
transgenic mouse model, we show that fine-tuning of Bmi1 expression in embryonic 
neural stem cell (NSC) is sufficient to increase their proliferation and
self-renewal potential both in vitro and in vivo. This is linked to
downregulation of both the ink4a/ARF and the p21/Foxg1 axes. However, increased
and ectopic proliferation induced by overexpression of Bmi1 in progenitors
committed toward a neuronal lineage during embryonic cortical development,
triggers apoptosis through a survivin-mediated mechanism and leads to reduced
brain size. Postnatally, however, increased self-renewal capacity of neural
stem/progenitor cells (NSPC) is independent of Foxg1 and resistance to apoptosis 
is observed in neural progenitors derived from NSC-overexpressing Bmi1.
Neoplastic transformation is absent in mice-overexpressing Bmi1 aged up to 20
months. These studies provide strong evidence that fine tuning of Bmi1 expression
is a viable tool to increase self-renewal capacity of NSCs both in vitro and in
vivo without eliciting neoplastic transformation of these cells.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21305672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Amino Acids. 2012 Apr;42(4):1397-404. doi: 10.1007/s00726-011-0836-z. Epub 2011
Feb 4.

Somatostatin is involved in anorexia in mice fed a valine-deficient diet.

Nakahara K(1), Takata S, Ishii A, Nagao K, Bannai M, Takahashi M, Murakami N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, Faculty of Agriculture, University of
Miyazaki, Miyazaki, 889-2192, Japan.

The ingestion of a valine (Val)-deficient diet results in a significant reduction
of food intake and body weight within 24 h, and this phenomenon continues
throughout the period over which such a diet is supplied. Both microarray and
real-time PCR analyses revealed that the expression of somatostatin mRNA was
increased in the hypothalamus in anorectic mice that received a Val-deficient
diet. On the other hand, when somatostatin was administered
intracerebroventricularly to intact animals that were fed a control diet, their
24-h food intake decreased significantly. In addition, Val-deficient but not
pair-fed mice or those fasted for 24 h showed a less than 0.5-fold decrease in
the hypothalamic mRNA expression levels of Crym, Foxg1, Itpka and two unknown EST
clone genes and a more than twofold increase in those of Slc6a3, Bdh1, Ptgr2 and 
one unknown EST clone gene. These results suggest that hypothalamic somatostatin 
and genes responsive to Val deficiency may be involved in the central mechanism
of anorexia induced by a Val-deficient diet.

PMID: 21293891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Neurosci. 2011 Feb 2;31(5):1919-33. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5128-10.2011.

Subregional specification of embryonic stem cell-derived ventral telencephalic
tissues by timed and combinatory treatment with extrinsic signals.

Danjo T(1), Eiraku M, Muguruma K, Watanabe K, Kawada M, Yanagawa Y, Rubenstein
JL, Sasai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Organogenesis and Neurogenesis Group, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN,
Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

During early telencephalic development, the major portion of the ventral
telencephalic (subpallial) region becomes subdivided into three regions, the
lateral (LGE), medial (MGE), and caudal (CGE) ganglionic eminences. In this
study, we systematically recapitulated subpallial patterning in mouse embryonic
stem cell (ESC) cultures and investigated temporal and combinatory actions of
patterning signals. In serum-free floating culture, the dorsal-ventral
specification of ESC-derived telencephalic neuroectoderm is dose-dependently
directed by Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling. Early Shh treatment, even before the 
expression onset of Foxg1 (also Bf1; earliest marker of the telencephalic
lineage), is critical for efficiently generating LGE progenitors, and continuous 
Shh signaling until day 9 is necessary to commit these cells to the LGE lineage. 
When induced under these conditions and purified by fluorescence-activated cell
sorter, telencephalic cells efficiently differentiated into Nolz1(+)/Ctip2(+) LGE
neuronal precursors and subsequently, both in culture and after in vivo grafting,
into DARPP32(+) medium-sized spiny neurons. Purified telencephalic progenitors
treated with high doses of the Hedgehog (Hh) agonist SAG (Smoothened agonist)
differentiated into MGE- and CGE-like tissues. Interestingly, in addition to
strong Hh signaling, the efficient specification of MGE cells requires Fgf8
signaling but is inhibited by treatment with Fgf15/19. In contrast, CGE
differentiation is promoted by Fgf15/19 but suppressed by Fgf8, suggesting that
specific Fgf signals play different, critical roles in the positional
specification of ESC-derived ventral subpallial tissues. We discuss a model of
the antagonistic Fgf8 and Fgf15/19 signaling in rostral-caudal subpallial
patterning and compare it with the roles of these molecules in cortical
patterning.

PMID: 21289201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Hum Mutat. 2011 Feb;32(2):E2026-35. doi: 10.1002/humu.21422. Epub 2010 Dec 7.

A missense mutation within the fork-head domain of the forkhead box G1 Gene
(FOXG1) affects its nuclear localization.

Le Guen T(1), Fichou Y, Nectoux J, Bahi-Buisson N, Rivier F, Boddaert N, Diebold 
B, Héron D, Chelly J, Bienvenu T.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U1016, Paris, France.

The forkhead box G1 (FOXG1)gene has recently been associated with the congenital 
variant of Rett syndrome, and so far 17 mutations have been reported. We screened
the coding region in 150 patients affected by postnatal microcephaly, and
identified two mutations: the c.326C>T (p.P109L) substitution inherited from the 
healthy father; and the de novo c.730C>T transition, which induces the p.R244C
mutation within the DNA-binding forkhead domain. This latter mutation is carried 
by an 8-year-old girl, who presented a phenotype reminiscent of the congenital
variant of Rett syndrome. Immunofluorescence analysis of the wild-type protein
revealed a homogeneous nuclear staining excluding the nucleoli, while the p.R244C
mutant showed abnormal nuclear foci in a large proportion of cells, suggesting
that its mislocalization may reduce and/or impair target recognition.
Interestingly, this missense mutation results in a mislocalization of FoxG1 to
specific nuclear foci referred to as nuclear speckles, and affects the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 CDKN1A expression. Because CDKL5, which is 
involved in the early-onset variant of Rett syndrome, is also located in these
speckles, we suggest that disregulation of the dynamic behaviour of nuclear
speckles may functionally link these two proteins, which are both involved in
atypical forms of Rett syndrome.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21280142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Clin Biochem. 2011 Apr;44(5-6):368-71. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2011.01.007.
Epub 2011 Jan 26.

Increased levels of 4HNE-protein plasma adducts in Rett syndrome.

Pecorelli A(1), Ciccoli L, Signorini C, Leoncini S, Giardini A, D'Esposito M,
Filosa S, Hayek J, De Felice C, Valacchi G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Experimental Medicine and Public Health,
University of Siena, Siena, Via Aldo Moro 2, 53100 Siena, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: Rett syndrome (RTT) is a neurological disorder and a leading cause of 
mental retardation in females. It is caused by mutations in methyl-CpG-binding
protein 2 (MeCP2) gene and more rarely in cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) 
and forkhead box protein G1 (FOXG1) genes. Increased oxidative stress (OS) has
been documented in MeCP2-RTT patients. Here, we evaluated the levels of
4-hydroxynonenal plasma protein adducts (4HNE-PAs) in MeCP2-, CDKL5-, and
FOXG1-RTT and in their clinical variants.
DESIGN AND METHODS: 4HNE-PAs were determined by Western blot in plasma from
healthy subjects and RTT patients.
RESULTS: 4HNE-PAs levels were increased in MeCP2- and CDKL5-related RTT but not
in FOXG1-related RTT.
CONCLUSION: These results showed that OS is present in RTT clinical variants and 
could play a key role in RTT pathogenesis. Under the OS point of view
FOXG1-related RTT appears to be distinct from the MeCP2/CDKL5, suggesting a
distinct mechanism involved in its pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21276437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Hear Res. 2011 Jun;276(1-2):16-26. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2011.01.007. Epub 2011
Jan 21.

Dissecting the molecular basis of organ of Corti development: Where are we now?

Fritzsch B(1), Jahan I, Pan N, Kersigo J, Duncan J, Kopecky B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, 143 BB,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. bernd-fritzsch@uiowa.edu

This review summarizes recent progress in our understanding of the molecular
basis of cochlear duct growth, specification of the organ of Corti, and
differentiation of the different types of hair cells. Studies of multiple
mutations suggest that developing hair cells are involved in stretching the organ
of Corti through convergent extension movements. However, Atoh1 null mutants have
only undifferentiated and dying organ of Corti precursors but show a near normal 
extension of the cochlear duct, implying that organ of Corti precursor cells can 
equally drive this process. Some factors influence cochlear duct growth by
regulating the cell cycle and proliferation. Shortened cell cycle and premature
cell cycle exit can lead to a shorter organ of Corti with multiple rows of hair
cells (e.g., Foxg1 null mice). Other genes affect the initial formation of a
cochlear duct with or without affecting the organ of Corti. Such observations are
consistent with evolutionary data that suggest some developmental uncoupling of
cochlear duct from organ of Corti formation. Positioning the organ of Corti
requires multiple genes expressed in the organ of Corti and the flanking region. 
Several candidate factors have emerged but how they cooperate to specify the
organ of Corti and the topology of hair cells remains unclear. Atoh1 is required 
for differentiation of all hair cells, but regulation of inner versus outer hair 
cell differentiation is still unidentified. In summary, the emerging molecular
complexity of organ of Corti development demands further study before a rational 
approach towards regeneration of unique types of hair cells in specific positions
is possible.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3097286
PMID: 21256948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Neurosci. 2011 Jan 12;31(2):402-13. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2897-10.2011.

FoxG1 promotes the survival of postmitotic neurons.

Dastidar SG(1), Landrieu PM, D'Mello SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, Texas 75080, USA.

The transcription factor FoxG1 regulates neurogenesis in the embryonic
telencephalon as well as a number of other neurodevelopmental processes. While
FoxG1 continues to be expressed in neurons postnatally and through adulthood, its
role in fully differentiated neurons is not known. The current study demonstrates
that FoxG1 promotes the survival of postmitotic neurons. In cerebellar granule
neurons primed to undergo apoptosis, FoxG1 expression is reduced. Ectopic
expression of FoxG1 blocks neuronal death, whereas suppression of its expression 
induces death in otherwise healthy neurons. The first 36 residues of FoxG1 are
necessary for its survival-promoting effect, while the C-terminal half of the
protein is dispensable. Mutation of Asp219, a residue necessary for DNA binding, 
abrogates survival promotion by FoxG1. Survival promotion is also eliminated by
mutation of Thr271, a residue phosphorylated by Akt. Pharmacological inhibition
of Akt blocks the survival effects of wild-type FoxG1 but not forms in which
Thr271 is replaced with phosphomimetic residues. Treatment of neurons with IGF-1,
a neurotrophic factor that promotes neuronal survival by activating Akt, prevents
the apoptosis-associated downregulation of FoxG1 expression. Moreover, the
overexpression of dominant-negative forms of FoxG1 blocks the ability of IGF-1 to
maintain neuronal survival suggesting that FoxG1 is a downstream mediator of
IGF-1/Akt signaling. Our study identifies a new and important function for FoxG1 
in differentiated neurons.

PMCID: PMC4640444
PMID: 21228151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Genesis. 2011 Apr;49(4):326-41. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20714. Epub 2011 Apr 1.

The role of sensory organs and the forebrain for the development of the
craniofacial shape as revealed by Foxg1-cre-mediated microRNA loss.

Kersigo J(1), D'Angelo A, Gray BD, Soukup GA, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Cranial development is critically influenced by the relative growth of distinct
elements. Previous studies have shown that the transcription factor Foxg1 is
essential the for development of the telencephalon, olfactory epithelium, parts
of the eye and the ear. Here we investigate the effects of a Foxg1-cre-mediated
conditional deletion of Dicer1 and microRNA (miRNA) depletion on mouse embryos.
We report the rapid and complete loss of the telencephalon and cerebellum as well
as the severe reduction in the ears and loss of the anterior half of the eyes.
These losses result in unexpectedly limited malformations of anterodorsal aspects
of the skull. We investigated the progressive disappearance of these initially
developing structures and found a specific miRNA of nervous tissue, miR-124, to
disappear before reduction in growth of the specific neurosensory areas.
Correlated with the absence of miR-124, these areas showed numerous apoptotic
cells that stained positive for anticleaved caspase 3 and the phosphatidylserine 
stain PSVue® before the near or complete loss of those brain and sensory areas
(forebrain, cerebellum, anterior retina, and ear). We conclude that
Foxg1-cre-mediated conditional deletion of Dicer1 leads to the absence of
functional miRNA followed by complete or nearly complete loss of neurons.
Embryonic neurosensory development therefore depends critically on miRNA. Our
data further suggest that loss of a given neuronal compartment can be triggered
using early deletion of Dicer1 and thus provides a novel means to genetically
remove specific neurosensory areas to investigate loss of their function on
morphology (this study) or signal processing within the brain.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3079063
PMID: 21225654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Hum Genet. 2011 Mar;56(3):183-7. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2010.156. Epub 2010 Dec 16.

Analysis of Hungarian patients with Rett syndrome phenotype for MECP2, CDKL5 and 
FOXG1 gene mutations.

Hadzsiev K(1), Polgar N, Bene J, Komlosi K, Karteszi J, Hollody K, Kosztolanyi G,
Renieri A, Melegh B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Pécs, Pecs,
Hungary.

Rett syndrome (RTT) is characterized by a relatively specific clinical phenotype.
We screened 152 individuals with RTT phenotype. A total of 22 different known
MECP2 mutations were identified in 42 subjects (27.6%). Of the 22 mutations, we
identified 7 (31.8%) frameshift-causing deletions, 4 (18.2%) nonsense, 10 (45.5%)
missense mutations and one insertion (4.5%). The most frequent pathologic changes
were: p.Thr158Met (14.2%) and p.Arg133Cys (11.9%) missense, and p.Arg255Stop
(9.5%) and p.Arg294Stop (9.5%) nonsense mutations. We also detected the c.925C >T
(p.Arg309Trp) mutation in an affected patient, whose role in RTT pathogenesis is 
still unknown. Patients without detectable MECP2 defects were screened for
mutations of cyclin-dependent kinase-like 5 (CDKL5) gene, responsible for the
early-onset variant of RTT. We discovered two novel mutations: c.607G >T
resulting in a termination codon at aa203, disrupting the catalytic domain, and
c.1708G >T leading to a stop at aa570 of the C terminus. Both patients with CDKL5
mutation presented therapy-resistant epilepsy and a phenotype fitting with the
diagnosis of early-onset variant of RTT. No FOXG1 mutation was detected in any of
the remaining patients. A total of 110 (72.5%) patients remained without
molecular genetic diagnosis that necessitates further search for novel gene
mutations in this phenotype. Our results also suggest the need of screening for
CDKL5 mutations in patients with Rett phenotype tested negative for MECP2
mutations.

PMID: 21160487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Dev Biol. 2011 Jan 15;349(2):250-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.11.004. Epub 2010 
Nov 9.

The canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway regulates Fgf signaling for early
facial development.

Wang Y(1), Song L, Zhou CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Human Anatomy, University of California, Davis,
Sacramento, CA 95817, USA.

The canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway has implications in early facial
development; yet, its function and signaling mechanism remain poorly understood. 
We report here that the frontonasal and upper jaw primordia cannot be formed
after conditional ablation of ß-catenin with Foxg1-Cre mice in the facial
ectoderm and the adjacent telencephalic neuroepithelium. Gene expression of
several cell-survival and patterning factors, including Fgf8, Fgf3, and Fgf17, is
dramatically diminished in the anterior neural ridge (ANR, a rostral signaling
center) and/or the adjacent frontonasal ectoderm of the ß-catenin conditional
mutant mice. In addition, Shh expression is diminished in the ventral
telencephalon of the mutants, while Tcfap2a expression is less affected in the
facial primordia. Apoptosis occurs robustly in the rostral head tissues following
inactivation of Fgf signaling in the conditional mutants. Consequently, the upper
jaw, nasal, ocular and telencephalic structures are absent, but the tongue and
mandible are relatively developed in the conditional mutants at birth. Using
molecular biological approaches, we demonstrate that the Fgf8 gene is
transcriptionally targeted by Wnt/ß-catenin signaling during early facial and
forebrain development. Furthermore, we show that conditional gain-of-function of 
ß-catenin signaling causes drastic upregulation of Fgf8 mRNA in the ANR and the
entire facial ectoderm, which also arrests facial and forebrain development.
Taken together, our results suggest that canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is
required for early development of the mammalian face and related head structures,
which mainly or partly acts through the initiation and modulation of balanced Fgf
signaling activity.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21070765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Dev Biol. 2011 Jan 15;349(2):192-203. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.11.003. Epub 2010
Nov 9.

Telencephalic neural precursor cells show transient competence to interpret the
dopaminergic niche of the embryonic midbrain.

Baizabal JM(1), Valencia C, Guerrero-Flores G, Covarrubias L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics and Molecular Physiology, Instituto de
Biotecnología, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, AP 510-3, Cuernavaca,
Mor. 62250, Mexico.

Neural Precursor Cells (NPCs) generate complex stereotypic arrays of neuronal
subtypes in the brain. This process involves the integration of patterning cues
that progressively restrict the fate of specific NPCs. Yet the capacity of NPCs
to interpret foreign microenvironments during development remains poorly defined.
The aim of this work was to test the competence of mouse telencephalic NPCs to
respond to the dopaminergic niche of the mesencephalon. Telencephalic NPCs
isolated from midgestation mouse embryos (E10.5) and transplanted to age-matched 
mesencephalic explants efficiently differentiated into neurons but were largely
unable to produce midbrain dopaminergic (mDA) neurons. Instead, E10.5
telencephalic NPCs behaved as restricted gabaergic progenitors that maintained
ectopic expression of Foxg1 and Pax6. In contrast, E8.5 telencephalic NPCs were
able to differentiate into Lmx1a(+)/Foxa2(+)/TH(+) neurons in the dopaminergic
niche of the mesencephalic explants. In addition, these early telencephalic NPCs 
showed region-dependent expression of Nkx6.1, Nkx2.2 and site-specific
differentiation into gabaergic neurons within the mesencephalic tissue.
Significant dopaminergic differentiation of E8.5 telencephalic NPCs was not
observed after transplantation to E12.5 mesencephalic explants, suggesting that
inductive signals in the dopaminergic niche rapidly decay after midgestation.
Moreover, we employed transplantation of embryonic stem cells-derived precursors 
to demonstrate that extinction of inductive signals within the telencephalon lags
behind the commitment of residing NPCs. Our data indicate that the plasticity to 
interpret multiple instructive niches is an early and ephemeral feature of the
telencephalic neural lineage.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21070763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Glia. 2011 Jan;59(1):68-81. doi: 10.1002/glia.21077.

Prospectively isolated CD133/CD24-positive ependymal cells from the adult spinal 
cord and lateral ventricle wall differ in their long-term in vitro self-renewal
and in vivo gene expression.

Pfenninger CV(1), Steinhoff C, Hertwig F, Nuber UA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund University,
Lund, Sweden.

In contrast to ependymal cells located above the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the
adult lateral ventricle wall (LVW), adult spinal cord (SC) ependymal cells
possess certain neural stem cell characteristics. The molecular basis of this
difference is unknown. In this study, antibodies against multiple cell surface
markers were applied to isolate pure populations of SC and LVW ependymal cells,
which allowed a direct comparison of their in vitro behavior and in vivo gene
expression profile. Isolated CD133(+)/CD24(+)/CD45(-)/CD34(-) ependymal cells
from the SC displayed in vitro self-renewal and differentiation capacity, whereas
those from the LVW did not. SC ependymal cells showed a higher expression of
several genes involved in cell division, cell cycle regulation, and chromosome
stability, which is consistent with a long-term self-renewal capacity, and shared
certain transcripts with neural stem cells of the embryonic forebrain. They also 
expressed several retinoic acid (RA)-regulated genes and responded to RA
exposure. LVW ependymal cells showed higher transcript levels of many genes
regulated by transforming growth factor-ß family members. Among them were Dlx2,
Id2, Hey1, which together with Foxg1 could explain their potential to turn into
neuroblasts under certain environmental conditions.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21046556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2011 May;68(10):1769-83. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0548-7. Epub 
2010 Oct 28.

Preservation of positional identity in fetus-derived neural stem (NS) cells from 
different mouse central nervous system compartments.

Onorati M(1), Binetti M, Conti L, Camnasio S, Calabrese G, Albieri I, Di Febo F, 
Toselli M, Biella G, Martynoga B, Guillemot F, Consalez GG, Cattaneo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacological Sciences and Center for Stem Cell Research,
Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Balzaretti 9, 20133, Milan, Italy.

Neural stem (NS) cells are a self-renewing population of symmetrically dividing
multipotent radial glia-like stem cells, characterized by homogeneous expansion
in monolayer. Here we report that fetal NS cells isolated from different regions 
of the developing mouse nervous system behave in a similar manner with respect to
self-renewal and neuropotency, but exhibit distinct positional identities. For
example, NS cells from the neocortex maintain the expression of anterior
transcription factors, including Otx2 and Foxg1, while Hoxb4 and Hoxb9 are
uniquely found in spinal cord-derived NS cells. This molecular signature was
stable for over 20 passages and was strictly linked to the developmental stage of
the donor, because only NS cells derived from E14.5 cortex, and not those derived
from E12.5 cortex, carried a consistent transcription factor profile. We also
showed that traits of this positional code are maintained during neuronal
differentiation, leading to the generation of electrophysiologically active
neurons, even if they do not acquire a complete neurochemical identity.

PMID: 20981563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Reprod Toxicol. 2010 Dec;30(4):591-9. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2010.08.009. Epub
2010 Oct 27.

No effect of sustained systemic growth retardation on the distribution of
Reelin-expressing interneurons in the neuron-producing hippocampal dentate gyrus 
in rats.

Ohishi T(1), Wang L, Ogawa B, Fujisawa K, Taniai E, Hayashi H, Mitsumori K,
Shibutani M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and
Technology, 3-5-8 Saiwai-cho, Fuchu-shi, Tokyo, Japan.

Reelin signaling plays a role in neuronal migration and positioning during brain 
development. To clarify the effect of systemic growth retardation on the
distribution of Reelin-expressing interneurons in the hilus of the hippocampal
dentate gyrus, pregnant rats were fed a synthetic diet with either a normal (20% 
casein) or low (10% casein) protein concentration from gestational day 10 to
postnatal day (PND) 21 at weaning. Male offspring were immunohistochemically
examined at PND 21 and on PND 77. Protein-restricted offspring displayed systemic
growth retardation through PND 77 and had decreased absolute brain weights and an
increased number of external granular cells in the cerebellar cortex, suggestive 
of retarded brain growth at weaning. However, maternal protein restriction did
not change the cellular distribution of immunoreactivity for Reelin,
Calbindin-D-28K, or glutamic acid decarboxylase 67 or of NeuN-positive
postmitotic neurons in the dentate hilus either at PND 21 or PND 77, which
suggests that the population of <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid-ergic interneurons involving 
synthesis of Reelin was not affected. Furthermore, as well as the distribution of
hilar neurons expressing neurogenesis-related FoxG1, cell proliferation and
apoptosis in the subgranular zone were unaffected through PND 77. These results
suggest that systemic growth retardation caused by maternal protein restriction
does not affect neuronal migration and postnatal neurogenesis of the dentate
gyrus resulting in unaltered distribution of Reelin-synthesizing interneurons.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20920577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Exp Neurobiol. 2010 Sep;19(2):75-82. doi: 10.5607/en.2010.19.2.75. Epub 2010 Sep 
30.

A winged-helix transcription factor foxg1 induces expression of mss4 gene in rat 
hippocampal progenitor cells.

Nam JS(1), Yang H, Kim NH, Sun Y, Choi BS, Huh SO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Natural Medicine, College of
Medicine, Hallym University, Chunchon 200-702, Korea.

Foxg1 (previously named BF1) is a winged-helix transcription factor with
restricted expression pattern in the telencephalic neuroepithelium of the neural 
tube and in the anterior half of the developing optic vesicle. Previous studies
have shown that the targeted disruption of the Foxg1 gene leads to hypoplasia of 
the cerebral hemispheres with severe defect in the structures of the ventral
telencephalon. To further investigate the molecular mechanisms by which Foxg1
plays essential roles during brain development, we have adopted a strategy to
isolate genes whose expression changes immediately after introduction of Foxg1 in
cultured neural precursor cell line, HiB5. Here, we report that seventeen genes
were isolated by ordered differential displays that are up-regulated by
over-expression of Foxg1, in cultured neuronal precursor cells. By nucleotide
sequence comparison to known genes in the GeneBank database, we find that nine of
these clones represent novel genes whose DNA sequences have not been reported.
The results suggest that these genes are closely related to developmental
regulation of Foxg1.

PMCID: PMC3214778
PMID: 22110345  [PubMed]


174. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan;19(1):102-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.142. Epub 2010 Aug 
25.

Duplications of FOXG1 in 14q12 are associated with developmental epilepsy, mental
retardation, and severe speech impairment.

Brunetti-Pierri N(1), Paciorkowski AR, Ciccone R, Della Mina E, Bonaglia MC,
Borgatti R, Schaaf CP, Sutton VR, Xia Z, Jelluma N, Ruivenkamp C, Bertrand M, de 
Ravel TJ, Jayakar P, Belli S, Rocchetti K, Pantaleoni C, D'Arrigo S, Hughes J,
Cheung SW, Zuffardi O, Stankiewicz P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. brunetti@tigem.it

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Jun;20(6):595-6; author reply 596-7.

Genome-wide high-resolution array analysis is rapidly becoming a reliable method 
of diagnostic investigation in individuals with mental retardation and congenital
anomalies, leading to the identification of several novel microdeletion and
microduplication syndromes. We have identified seven individuals with duplication
on chromosome 14q11.2q13.1, who exhibited idiopathic developmental delay and
cognitive impairment, severe speech delay, and developmental epilepsy. Among
these cases, the minimal common duplicated region on chromosome 14q11.2q13.1
includes only three genes, FOXG1, C14orf23, and PRKD1. We propose that increased 
dosage of Forkhead Box G1 (FOXG1) is the best candidate to explain the abnormal
neurodevelopmental phenotypes observed in our patients. Deletions and
inactivating mutations of FOXG1 have been associated with a Rett-like syndrome
characterized by hypotonia, irritability, developmental delay, hand stereotypies,
and deceleration of head growth. FOXG1, encoding a brain-specific transcription
factor, has an important role in the developing brain. In fact, in vivo studies
in chicken brain demonstrated that overexpression of FOXG1 results in thickening 
of the neuroepithelium and outgrowth of the telencephalon and mesencephalum,
secondary to a reduction in neuroepithelial cell apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3039509
PMID: 20736978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Development. 2010 Sep;137(18):3139-50. doi: 10.1242/dev.047894.

The ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling enzyme CHD7 regulates pro-neural gene
expression and neurogenesis in the inner ear.

Hurd EA(1), Poucher HK, Cheng K, Raphael Y, Martin DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA.

Inner ear neurogenesis is positively regulated by the pro-neural bHLH
transcription factors Ngn1 and NeuroD, but the factors that act upstream of this 
regulation are not well understood. Recent evidence in mouse and Drosophila
suggests that neural development depends on proper chromatin remodeling, both for
maintenance of neural stem cells and for proper neuronal differentiation. Here,
we show that CHD7, an ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling enzyme mutated in human 
CHARGE syndrome, is necessary for proliferation of inner ear neuroblasts and
inner ear morphogenesis. Conditional deletion of Chd7 in the developing otocyst
using Foxg1-Cre resulted in cochlear hypoplasia and complete absence of the
semicircular canals and cristae. Conditional knockout and null otocysts also had 
reductions in vestibulo-cochlear ganglion size and neuron number in combination
with reduced expression of Ngn1, Otx2 and Fgf10, concurrent with expansion of the
neural fate suppressor Tbx1 and reduced cellular proliferation. Heterozygosity
for Chd7 mutations had no major effects on expression of otic patterning genes or
on cell survival, but resulted in decreased proliferation within the neurogenic
domain. These data indicate that epigenetic regulation of gene expression by CHD7
must be tightly coordinated for proper development of inner ear neuroblasts.

PMCID: PMC2926962
PMID: 20736290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Neurogenetics. 2011 Feb;12(1):1-8. doi: 10.1007/s10048-010-0255-4. Epub 2010 Aug 
24.

A FOXG1 mutation in a boy with congenital variant of Rett syndrome.

Le Guen T(1), Bahi-Buisson N, Nectoux J, Boddaert N, Fichou Y, Diebold B,
Desguerre I, Raqbi F, Daire VC, Chelly J, Bienvenu T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Inserm U1016, UMR8104, Université Paris Descartes, 24 rue du 
Faubourg St Jacques, 75014, Paris, France.

Mutations in the FOXG1 gene have been shown to cause congenital variant of Rett
syndrome. To date, point mutations have been reported only in female patients. We
screened the entire coding region of the gene for mutations in 50 boys with
congenital encephalopathy, postnatal microcephaly, and complex movement
disorders, a clinical picture very similar to that described in girls with FOXG1 
mutations. We found one boy carrying the de novo c.256_257dupC frameshift
mutation. He presented the association of postnatal microcephaly, severe axial
dystonia with severe feeding difficulties with protruding tongue movements during
the first year of life that subsequently evolved into dyskinetic movement
disorders with hand stereotypies. In contrast to his severe motor impairment, he 
developed nonverbal communication skills and relative good eye contact. Brain MRI
showed frontal gyral simplification with dramatic myelination delay most
prominent in both frontal lobes. Altogether the presentation in this male patient
is highly reminiscent of that observed in FOXG1-mutated females with the
congenital variant of Rett syndrome. This new case confirms the prediction that
congenital variant of Rett syndrome should be found also in males, with the
characteristic hallmarks consisting of postnatal microcephaly, dyskinetic
movement disorder with Rett-like features, i.e., hand stereotypies, and frontal
gyral simplification with myelination delay. FOXG1 screening should be considered
in individuals with these clinical features.

PMID: 20734096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Epilepsy Behav. 2010 Nov;19(3):296-300. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2010.06.051. Epub
2010 Aug 21.

Epilepsy in Rett syndrome: clinical and genetic features.

Pintaudi M(1), Calevo MG, Vignoli A, Parodi E, Aiello F, Baglietto MG, Hayek Y,
Buoni S, Renieri A, Russo S, Cogliati F, Giordano L, Canevini M, Veneselli E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Child Neuropsychiatry, Epilepsy Centre, G. Gaslini Institute,
University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy. mariapintaudi@hotmail.com

Epilepsy often occurs in Rett syndrome and is considered a major problem. The aim
of this study was to define the clinical features of epilepsy and the correlation
between seizures and both genotype and clinical phenotype in the Rett population.
One hundred sixty-five patients with Rett syndrome referred to four Italian
centers were recruited. All patients underwent video/EEG monitoring and molecular
analysis of the MECP2 gene or, in negative cases, of the CDKL5 and FOXG1 genes.
The frequency of epilepsy was 79%. Drug-resistant epilepsy occurred in 30% of all
our patients with Rett syndrome and in 38% of those with epilepsy. Our findings
demonstrate that epilepsy differs among the various phenotypes and genotypes with
respect to age at onset, drug responsiveness, and seizure semiology. The Hanefeld
and preserved speech variants represent the extremes of the range of severity of 
epilepsy: the preserved speech variant is characterized by the mildest epileptic 
phenotype as epilepsy is much less frequent, starts later, and is less drug
resistant than what is observed in the other phenotypes. Another important
finding is that seizure onset before 1 year of age and daily frequency are risk
factors for drug resistance. Thus, this study should help clinicians provide
better clinical counseling to the families of patients with Rett syndrome.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20728410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Front Neuroanat. 2010 Jul 21;4. pii: 28. doi: 10.3389/fnana.2010.00028.
eCollection 2010.

Ontogenetic expression of sonic hedgehog in the chicken subpallium.

Bardet SM(1), Ferran JL, Sanchez-Arrones L, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Moléculaire Animale-INRA UMR 1061, University of Limoges
Limoges, France.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH) is a secreted signaling factor that is implicated in the
molecular patterning of the central nervous system (CNS), somites, and limbs in
vertebrates. SHH has a crucial role in the generation of ventral cell types along
the entire rostrocaudal axis of the neural tube. It is secreted early in
development by the axial mesoderm (prechordal plate and notochord) and the
overlying ventral neural tube. Recent studies clarified the impact of SHH
signaling mechanisms on dorsoventral patterning of the spinal cord, but the
corresponding phenomena in the rostral forebrain are slightly different and more 
complex. This notably involves separate Shh expression in the preoptic part of
the forebrain alar plate, as well as in the hypothalamic floor and basal plates. 
The present work includes a detailed spatiotemporal description of the singular
alar Shh expression pattern in the rostral preoptic forebrain of chick embryos,
comparing it with FoxG1, Dlx5, Nkx2.1, and Nkx2.2 mRNA expression at diverse
stages of development. As a result of this mapping, we report a subdivision of
the preoptic region in dorsal and ventral zones; only the dorsal part shows Shh
expression. The positive area impinges as well upon a median septocommissural
preoptic domain. Our study strongly suggests tangential migration of Shh-positive
cells from the preoptic region into other subpallial domains, particularly into
the pallidal mantle and the intermediate septum.

PMCID: PMC2917215
PMID: 20700498  [PubMed]


179. Dev Dyn. 2010 Sep;239(9):2452-69. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22373.

Gata2 is required for the development of inner ear semicircular ducts and the
surrounding perilymphatic space.

Haugas M(1), Lilleväli K, Hakanen J, Salminen M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Gata2 has essential roles in the development of many organs. During mouse inner
ear morphogenesis, it is expressed in otic vesicle and the surrounding periotic
mesenchyme from early on, but no defects in the ear development of Gata2 null
mice have been observed before lethality at embryonic day (E) 10.5. Here, we used
conditional gene targeting to reveal the role of Gata2 at later stages of inner
ear development. We show that Gata2 is critically required from E14.5-E15.5
onward for vestibular morphogenesis. Without Gata2 the semicircular ducts fail to
grow to their normal size and the surrounding mesenchymal cells are not removed
properly to generate the perilymphatic space. Gata2 is the first factor known to 
control the clearing of the vestibular perilymphatic mesenchyme, but
interestingly, it is not required for the formation of the cochlear perilymphatic
areas, suggesting distinct molecular control for these processes.

Developmental Dynamics 239:2452-2469, 2010. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20652952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Neuro Oncol. 2010 Nov;12(11):1126-34. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noq074. Epub 2010 Jul
8.

Neuronal differentiation distinguishes supratentorial and infratentorial
childhood ependymomas.

Andreiuolo F(1), Puget S, Peyre M, Dantas-Barbosa C, Boddaert N, Philippe C,
Mauguen A, Grill J, Varlet P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM UMR 8203 "Vectorology and Anticancer Therapies," Institut Gustave
Roussy, 39 Rue Camille Desmoulins, Villejuif 94805, France.
felipe.andreiuolo@igr.fr

Ependymomas are glial neoplasms occurring in any location throughout the central 
nervous system and supposedly are derived from radial glia cells. Recent data
suggest that these tumors may have different biological and clinical behaviors
according to their location. Pediatric supratentorial and infratentorial
ependymoma (SE and IE) were compared with respect to clinical and radiological
parameters and immunohistochemistry (IHC). Neuronal markers were specifically
assessed by IHC and quantitative PCR (qPCR). No single morphological or
radiological characteristic was associated with location or any neuronal marker. 
However, there was a significant overexpression of neuronal markers in SE
compared with IE: neurofilament light polypeptide 70 (NEFL)-positive tumor cells 
were found in 23 of 34 SE and in only 4 of 32 IE (P < .001). Among SE, 10 of 34
exhibited high expression of NEFL, defined as more than 5% positive cells. qPCR
confirmed the upregulation of neuronal markers (NEFL, LHX2, FOXG1, TLX1, and
NPTXR) in SE compared with IE. In addition, strong NEFL expression in SE was
correlated with better progression-free survival (P = .007). Our results support 
the distinction of SE and IE. SEs are characterized by neuronal differentiation, 
which seems to be associated with better prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3098029
PMID: 20615923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2010 Aug;69(8):850-63. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181eac1f5.

Early progenitor cell marker expression distinguishes type II from type I focal
cortical dysplasias.

Orlova KA(1), Tsai V, Baybis M, Heuer GG, Sisodiya S, Thom M, Strauss K, Aronica 
E, Storm PB, Crino PB.

Author information: 
(1)PENN Epilepsy Center and Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania
Medical Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Type I and type II focal cortical dysplasias (FCDs) exhibit distinct
histopathologic features that suggest different pathogenic mechanisms. Type I
FCDs are characterized by mild laminar disorganization and hypertrophic neurons, 
whereas type II FCDs exhibit dramatic laminar disorganization and cytomegalic
cells (balloon cells). Both FCD types are associated with intractable epilepsy;
therefore, identifying cellular or molecular differences between these lesion
types that explains the histologic differences could provide new diagnostic and
therapeutic insights. Type II FCDs express nestin, a neuroglial progenitor
protein that is modulated in vitro by the stem cell proteins c-Myc,
sex-determining region Y-box 2 (SOX2), and Octamer-4 (Oct-4) after activation of 
mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1). Because mTORC1 activation has
been demonstrated in type II FCDs, we hypothesized that c-Myc, SOX2, and Oct-4
expression would distinguish type II from type I FCDs. In addition, we assayed
the expression of progenitor cell proteins forkhead box G1 (FOXG1), Kruppel-like 
factor 4 (KLF4), Nanog, and SOX3. Differential expression of 7 stem cellproteins 
and aberrant phosphorylation of2mTORC1 substrates, S6 andS6 kinase 1 proteins,
clearly distinguished type II from type I FCDs(n = 10 each). Our results
demonstrate new potential pathogenic pathways in type II FCDs and suggest
biomarkers for diagnostic pathology in resected epilepsy specimens.

PMCID: PMC3474261
PMID: 20613634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Stem Cells. 2010 Jul;28(7):1206-18. doi: 10.1002/stem.443.

Emx2 and Foxg1 inhibit gliogenesis and promote neuronogenesis.

Brancaccio M(1), Pivetta C, Granzotto M, Filippis C, Mallamaci A.

Author information: 
(1)SISSA, Neurobiology Sector, Laboratory of Cerebral Cortex Development,
Trieste, Italy.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) give rise to all cell types forming the cortex: neurons,
astrocytes, and oligodendrocytes. The transition from the former to the latter
ones takes place via lineage-restricted progenitors in a highly regulated way.
This process is mastered by large sets of genes, among which some implicated in
central nervous system pattern formation. The aim of this study was to
disentangle the kinetic and histogenetic roles exerted by two of these genes,
Emx2 and Foxg1, in cortico-cerebral precursors. For this purpose, we set up a new
integrated in vitro assay design. Embryonic cortical progenitors were transduced 
with lentiviral vectors driving overexpression of Emx2 and Foxg1 in NSCs and
neuronal progenitors. Cells belonging to different neuronogenic and gliogenic
compartments were labeled by spectrally distinguishable fluoroproteins driven by 
cell type-specific promoters and by cell type-specific antibodies and were scored
via multiplex cytofluorometry and immunocytofluorescence. A detailed picture of
Emx2 and Foxg1 activities in cortico-cerebral histogenesis resulted from this
study. Unexpectedly, we found that both genes inhibit gliogenesis and promote
neuronogenesis, through distinct mechanisms, and Foxg1 also dramatically
stimulates neurite outgrowth. Remarkably, such activities, alone or combined, may
be exploited to ameliorate the neuronal output obtainable from neural cultures,
for purposes of cell-based brain repair.

PMID: 20506244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Apr 2;6(4):336-47. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2010.03.001.

Efficient derivation of functional floor plate tissue from human embryonic stem
cells.

Fasano CA(1), Chambers SM, Lee G, Tomishima MJ, Studer L.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Ave., New 
York, NY 10065, USA. chrisfasano@nynsci.org

The floor plate (FP) is a critical signaling center during neural development
located along the ventral midline of the embryo. Little is known about human FP
development because of the lack of tissue accessibility. Here we report the
efficient derivation of human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-derived FP tissue
capable of secreting Netrin-1 and SHH and patterning primary and hESC derived
tissues. FP induction in hESCs is dependent on early SHH exposure and occurs at
the expense of anterior neurectoderm (AN). Global gene expression and functional 
studies identify SHH-mediated inhibition of Dkk-1 as key factor in FP versus AN
specification. hESC-derived FP tissue is shown to be of anterior SIX6+ character 
but is responsive to caudalizing factors suppressing SIX6 expression and inducing
a shift in usage of region-specific SHH enhancers. These data define the early
signals that drive human FP versus AN specification and determine regional
identity in hESC-derived FP.

Copyright c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4336800
PMID: 20362538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Development. 2010 May;137(9):1553-62. doi: 10.1242/dev.044909. Epub 2010 Mar 31.

FoxG1 and TLE2 act cooperatively to regulate ventral telencephalon formation.

Roth M(1), Bonev B, Lindsay J, Lea R, Panagiotaki N, Houart C, Papalopulu N.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, Michael Smith Building, University of Manchester,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

FoxG1 is a conserved transcriptional repressor that plays a key role in the
specification, proliferation and differentiation of the telencephalon, and is
expressed from the earliest stages of telencephalic development through to the
adult. How the interaction with co-factors might influence the multiplicity and
diversity of FoxG1 function is not known. Here, we show that interaction of FoxG1
with TLE2, a Xenopus tropicalis co-repressor of the Groucho/TLE family, is
crucial for regulating the early activity of FoxG1. We show that TLE2 is
co-expressed with FoxG1 in the ventral telencephalon from the early neural plate 
stage and functionally cooperates with FoxG1 in an ectopic neurogenesis assay.
FoxG1 has two potential TLE binding sites: an N-terminal eh1 motif and a
C-terminal YWPMSPF motif. Although direct binding seems to be mediated by the
N-terminal motif, both motifs appear important for functional synergism. In the
neurogenesis assay, mutation of either motif abolishes functional cooperation of 
TLE2 with FoxG1, whereas in the forebrain deletion of both motifs renders FoxG1
unable to induce the ventral telencephalic marker Nkx2.1. Knocking down either
FoxG1 or TLE2 disrupts the development of the ventral telencephalon, supporting
the idea that endogenous TLE2 and FoxG1 work together to specify the ventral
telencephalon.

PMCID: PMC2853852
PMID: 20356955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Dev Biol. 2010 Apr 15;340(2):595-604. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.016. Epub 2010
Feb 18.

FGF signaling regulates otic placode induction and refinement by controlling both
ectodermal target genes and hindbrain Wnt8a.

Urness LD(1), Paxton CN, Wang X, Schoenwolf GC, Mansour SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, 15 N 2030 E, RM 2100, Salt
Lake City, UT 84112-5330, USA.

The inner ear epithelium, with its complex array of sensory, non-sensory, and
neuronal cell types necessary for hearing and balance, is derived from a
thickened patch of head ectoderm called the otic placode. Mouse embryos lacking
both Fgf3 and Fgf10 fail to initiate inner ear development because appropriate
patterns of gene expression fail to be specified within the pre-otic field. To
understand the transcriptional "blueprint" initiating inner ear development, we
used microarray analysis to identify prospective placode genes that were
differentially expressed in control and Fgf3(-)(/)(-);Fgf10(-)(/)(-) embryos.
Several genes in the down-regulated class, including Hmx3, Hmx2, Foxg1, Sox9,
Has2, and Slc26a9 were validated by in situ hybridization. We also assayed
candidate target genes suggested by other studies of otic induction. Two placode 
markers, Fgf4 and Foxi3, were down-regulated in Fgf3(-)(/)(-);Fgf10(-)(/)(-)
embryos, whereas Foxi2, a cranial epidermis marker, was expanded in double
mutants, similar to its behavior when WNT responses are blocked in the otic
placode. Assays of hindbrain Wnt genes revealed that only Wnt8a was reduced or
absent in FGF-deficient embryos, and that even some Fgf3(-)(/)(-);Fgf10(-)(/+)
and Fgf3(-)(/)(-) embryos failed to express Wnt8a, suggesting a key role for
Fgf3, and a secondary role for Fgf10, in Wnt8a expression. Chick explant assays
showed that FGF3 or FGF4, but not FGF10, were sufficient to induce Wnt8a.
Collectively, our results suggest that Wnt8a provides the link between
FGF-induced formation of the pre-otic field and restriction of the otic placode
to ectoderm adjacent to the hindbrain.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2854211
PMID: 20171206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cancer Cell Int. 2010 Jan 21;10:2. doi: 10.1186/1475-2867-10-2.

Comparison of lung cancer cell lines representing four histopathological subtypes
with gene expression profiling using quantitative real-time PCR.

Watanabe T(1), Miura T, Degawa Y, Fujita Y, Inoue M, Kawaguchi M, Furihata C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biological Science, School of Science and
Engineering, Aoyama Gakuin University, Kanagawa 229-8558, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancers are the most common type of human malignancy and are
intractable. Lung cancers are generally classified into four histopathological
subtypes: adenocarcinoma (AD), squamous cell carcinoma (SQ), large cell carcinoma
(LC), and small cell carcinoma (SC). Molecular biological characterization of
these subtypes has been performed mainly using DNA microarrays. In this study, we
compared the gene expression profiles of these four subtypes using twelve human
lung cancer cell lines and the more reliable quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR).
RESULTS: We selected 100 genes from public DNA microarray data and examined them 
by DNA microarray analysis in eight test cell lines (A549, ABC-1, EBC-1, LK-2,
LU65, LU99, STC 1, RERF-LC-MA) and a normal control lung cell line (MRC-9). From 
this, we extracted 19 candidate genes. We quantified the expression of the 19
genes and a housekeeping gene, GAPDH, with qPCR, using the same eight cell lines 
plus four additional validation lung cancer cell lines (RERF-LC-MS, LC-1/sq,
86-2, and MS-1-L). Finally, we characterized the four subtypes of lung cancer
cell lines using principal component analysis (PCA) of gene expression profiling 
for 12 of the 19 genes (AMY2A, CDH1, FOXG1, IGSF3, ISL1, MALL, PLAU, RAB25,
S100P, SLCO4A1, STMN1, and TGM2). The combined PCA and gene pathway analyses
suggested that these genes were related to cell adhesion, growth, and invasion.
S100P in AD cells and CDH1 in AD and SQ cells were identified as candidate
markers of these lung cancer subtypes based on their upregulation and the results
of PCA analysis. Immunohistochemistry for S100P and RAB25 was closely correlated 
to gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show that the four subtypes, represented by 12 lung
cancer cell lines, were well characterized using qPCR and PCA for the 12 genes
examined. Certain genes, in particular S100P and CDH1, may be especially
important for distinguishing the different subtypes. Our results confirm that
qPCR and PCA analysis provide a useful tool for characterizing cancer cell
subtypes, and we discuss the possible clinical applications of this approach.

PMCID: PMC2817686
PMID: 20142997  [PubMed]


187. Development. 2010 Feb;137(3):487-97. doi: 10.1242/dev.039800.

The transcription factor Foxg1 regulates the competence of telencephalic cells to
adopt subpallial fates in mice.

Manuel M(1), Martynoga B, Yu T, West JD, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson Building,
George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK. martine.manuel@ed.ac.uk

Foxg1 is required for development of the ventral telencephalon in the embryonic
mammalian forebrain. Although one existing hypothesis suggests that failed
ventral telencephalic development in the absence of Foxg1 is due to reduced
production of the morphogens sonic hedgehog (Shh) and fibroblast growth factor 8 
(Fgf8), the possibility that telencephalic cells lacking Foxg1 are intrinsically 
incompetent to generate the ventral telencephalon has remained untested. We
examined the ability of Foxg1(-/-) telencephalic cells to respond to Shh and Fgf8
by examining the expression of genes whose activation requires Shh or Fgf8 in
vivo and by testing their responses to Shh and Fgf8 in culture. We found that
many elements of the Shh and Fgf8 signalling pathways continue to function in the
absence of Foxg1 but, nevertheless, we were unable to elicit normal responses of 
key ventral telencephalic marker genes in Foxg1(-/-) telencephalic tissue
following a range of in vivo and in vitro manipulations. We explored the
development of Foxg1(-/-) cells in Foxg1(-/-) Foxg1(+/+) chimeric embryos that
contained ventral telencephalon created by normally patterned wild-type cells. We
found that Foxg1(-/-) cells contributed to the chimeric ventral telencephalon,
but that they retained abnormal specification, expressing dorsal rather than
ventral telencephalic markers. These findings indicate that, in addition to
regulating the production of ventralising signals, Foxg1 acts cell-autonomously
in the telencephalon to ensure that cells develop the competence to adopt ventral
identities.

PMCID: PMC2858907
PMID: 20081193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Arch Insect Biochem Physiol. 2010 Mar;73(3):148-62. doi: 10.1002/arch.20347.

Expression profiling of novel bacteria-induced genes from the silkworm, Bombyx
mori.

Tanaka H(1), Suzuki N, Nakajima Y, Sato M, Sagisaka A, Fujita K, Ishibashi J,
Imanishi S, Mita K, Yamakawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Innate Immunity Research Unit, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, 
1-2 Owashi, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. htanaka1@nias.affrc.go.jp

In this study, we have newly identified three bacteria-induced genes from the
silkworm Bombyx mori by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction. One of these, eukaryotic initiation factor 4E-1 (eIF4E-1), is assumed
to encode an eIF4E family, which plays a role in the initiation of translation as
a mRNA cap-binding protein. The second gene is BmFOXG1, belonging to a family of 
forkhead transcription factors, FOXG1. The third gene is MBF2-related (MBF2-R)
whose product has high homology to a co-activator protein MBF2 from B. mori.
Although BmFOXG1 was up-regulated in the fat body in response to three kinds of
bacteria, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and Bacillus subtilis, eIF4E-1
and MBF2-R were up-regulated by E. coli and B. subtilis, but not S. aureus,
suggesting that bacteria possessing meso-diaminopimelic acid-containing
peptidoglycan but not lysine-containing peptidoglycan activate eIF4E-1 and
MBF2-R, probably through a conserved immune deficiency pathway. We further
profiled the expression of three genes in different tissues and a silkworm cell
line, NIAS-Bm-aff3, in response to bacteria, and at different times after
bacterial challenge in the fat body.

(c) 2010 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 20077574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Dev Dyn. 2010 Feb;239(2):505-13. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22200.

Role of bone morphogenetic proteins on cochlear hair cell formation: analyses of 
Noggin and Bmp2 mutant mice.

Hwang CH(1), Guo D, Harris MA, Howard O, Mishina Y, Gan L, Harris SE, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, Rockville, Maryland, USA.

The mammalian organ of Corti of the inner ear is a highly sophisticated sensory
end organ responsible for detecting sound. Noggin is a secreted glycoprotein,
which antagonizes bone morphogenetic proteins 2 and 4 (Bmp2 and Bmp4). The lack
of this antagonist causes increased rows of inner and outer hair cells in the
organ of Corti. In mice, Bmp2 is expressed transiently in nascent cochlear hair
cells. To investigate whether Noggin normally modulates the levels of Bmp2 for
hair cell formation, we deleted Bmp2 in the cochlear hair cells using two cre
strains, Foxg1(cre/+) and Gfi1(cre/+). Bmp2 conditional knockout cochleae
generated using these two cre strains show normal hair cells. Furthermore,
Gfi1(cre/+);Bmp2(lox/-) mice are viable and have largely normal hearing. The
combined results of Noggin and Bmp2 mutants suggest that Noggin is likely to
regulate other Bmps in the cochlea such as Bmp4.

PMID: 20063299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Dev Biol. 2010 Mar 1;339(1):141-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.12.026. Epub 2010
Jan 4.

Evidence for an early role for BMP4 signaling in thymus and parathyroid
morphogenesis.

Gordon J(1), Patel SR, Mishina Y, Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

The thymus and parathyroids are pharyngeal endoderm-derived organs that develop
from common organ primordia, which undergo a series of morphological events
resulting in separate organs in distinct locations in the embryo. Previous gene
expression and functional analyses have suggested a role for BMP4 signaling in
early thymus organogenesis. We have used conditional deletion of Bmp4 or Alk3
from the pharyngeal endoderm and/or the surrounding mesenchyme using Foxg1-Cre,
Wnt1-Cre or Foxn1-Cre. Deleting Bmp4 from both neural crest cells (NCC) and early
endoderm-derived epithelial cells in Foxg1-Cre;Bmp4 conditional mutants resulted 
in defects in thymus-parathyroid morphogenesis. Defects included reduced
condensation of mesenchymal cells around the epithelium, partial absence of the
thymic capsule, a delay in thymus and parathyroid separation, and failed or
dramatically reduced organ migration. Patterning of the primordia and initial
organ differentiation were not affected in any of the mutants. Deleting Bmp4 from
NCC-derived mesenchyme or differentiating thymic epithelial cells (TECs) had no
effects on thymus-parathyroid development, while loss of Alk3 from either neural 
crest cells or TECs resulted in only a mild thymic hypoplasia. these results show
that the processes of cell specification and morphogenesis during
thymus-parathyroid development are independently controlled, and suggest a
specific temporal and spatial role for BMP4-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal
interactions during early thymus and parathyroid morphogenesis.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2823926
PMID: 20043899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Synapse. 2010 Feb;64(2):169-71. doi: 10.1002/syn.20737.

Altered response to antidepressant treatment in FoxG1 heterozygous knockout mice.

Kinsler R(1), Taylor MM, Flores NM, Leffert JJ, Beech RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06511, USA.

Evidence from a variety of sources suggests that structural alterations in the
brain, including neurogenesis, may play a role in both the pathogenesis of mood
disorders and the mechanism of action of antidepressants. Previous studies have
implicated both the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), and the
phosphatidyl inositol-3 kinase (PI3K)-Akt pathways in the neurogenesis-promoting 
and behavioral properties of antidepressants. Forkhead box protein G1 (FoxG1) is 
a major regulator of both of these pathways, and FoxG1 heterozygous null mice
(FoxG1+/-) have previously been reported to have deficits in adult hippocampal
neurogenesis and behavioral abnormalities including deficits in contextual fear
learning. However the role of FoxG1, if any, in the response to antidepressants
has not been previously investigated.To investigate the role of the FoxG1 gene in
the behavioral and neurogenic properties of antidepressants, we tested FoxG1+/-
mice and littermate controls in two different rodent models of antidepressant
action: the tail suspension test and the forced swim test. FoxG1+/- mice showed
no response to antidepressants in either of these tests. These results suggest
that normal levels of FoxG1 may be required for the behavioral response to
antidepressants.

PMCID: PMC2789865
PMID: 19852072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Dev Dyn. 2009 Nov;238(11):2725-34. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22111.

Foxg1 is required for proper separation and formation of sensory cristae during
inner ear development.

Hwang CH(1), Simeone A, Lai E, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)Lab of Molecular Biology, National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.

The vestibular portion of the inner ear, the three semicircular canals and their 
sensory cristae, is responsible for detecting angular head movements. It was
proposed that sensory cristae induce formation of their non-sensory components,
the semicircular canals. Here, we analyzed the inner ears of Foxg1(-/-) mouse
mutants, which display vestibular defects that are in conflict with the above
model. In Foxg1(-/-) ears, the lateral canal is present without the lateral
ampulla, which houses the lateral crista. Our gene expression analyses indicate
that at the time when canal specification is thought to occur, the prospective
lateral crista is present, which could have induced lateral canal formation prior
to its demise. Our genetic fate-mapping analyses indicate an improper separation 
between anterior and lateral cristae in Foxg1(-/-) mutants. Our data further
suggest that a function of Foxg1 in the inner ear is to restrict sensory fate.

Copyright 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19842177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. PLoS Biol. 2009 Oct;7(10):e1000214. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000214. Epub 2009 
Oct 13.

Dynamic coupling of pattern formation and morphogenesis in the developing
vertebrate retina.

Picker A(1), Cavodeassi F, Machate A, Bernauer S, Hans S, Abe G, Kawakami K,
Wilson SW, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Regenerative Therapies Dresden, Biotechnology Center, Dresden
University of Technology, Dresden, Germany. alexander.picker@biotec.tu-dresden.de

During embryonic development, pattern formation must be tightly synchronized with
tissue morphogenesis to coordinate the establishment of the spatial identities of
cells with their movements. In the vertebrate retina, patterning along the
dorsal-ventral and nasal-temporal (anterior-posterior) axes is required for
correct spatial representation in the retinotectal map. However, it is unknown
how specification of axial cell positions in the retina occurs during the complex
process of early eye morphogenesis. Studying zebrafish embryos, we show that
morphogenetic tissue rearrangements during eye evagination result in progenitor
cells in the nasal half of the retina primordium being brought into proximity to 
the sources of three fibroblast growth factors, Fgf8/3/24, outside the eye.
Triple-mutant analysis shows that this combined Fgf signal fully controls nasal
retina identity by regulating the nasal transcription factor Foxg1. Surprisingly,
nasal-temporal axis specification occurs very early along the dorsal-ventral axis
of the evaginating eye. By in vivo imaging GFP-tagged retinal progenitor cells,
we find that subsequent eye morphogenesis requires gradual tissue compaction in
the nasal half and directed cell movements into the temporal half of the retina. 
Balancing these processes drives the progressive alignment of the nasal-temporal 
retina axis with the anterior-posterior body axis and is controlled by a
feed-forward effect of Fgf signaling on Foxg1-mediated cell cohesion. Thus, the
mechanistic coupling and dynamic synchronization of tissue patterning with
morphogenetic cell behavior through Fgf signaling leads to the graded allocation 
of cell positional identity in the eye, underlying retinotectal map formation.

PMCID: PMC2751823
PMID: 19823566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Neurogenetics. 2010 May;11(2):241-9. doi: 10.1007/s10048-009-0220-2. Epub 2009
Oct 6.

Revisiting the phenotype associated with FOXG1 mutations: two novel cases of
congenital Rett variant.

Bahi-Buisson N(1), Nectoux J, Girard B, Van Esch H, De Ravel T, Boddaert N,
Plouin P, Rio M, Fichou Y, Chelly J, Bienvenu T.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris Descartes, Institut Cochin, CNRS (UMR8104), Paris, France.

The Forkhead box G1 (FOXG1) is a transcription factor that is critical for
forebrain development, where it promotes progenitor proliferation and suppresses 
premature neurogenesis. Recently, the FOXG1 gene was implicated in the molecular 
aetiology of the congenital variant of Rett syndrome. So far, 15 FOXG1 molecular 
alterations, including only eight point mutations, have been reported. We
screened the FOXG1 gene in a cohort of 206 MECP2 and CDKL5 mutation negative
patients (136 females and 70 males) with severe encephalopathy and microcephaly. 
The screening was negative in all males, but two de novo mutations (c.1248C>G,
p.Y416X and c.460_461dupG, p.E154GfsX300) were identified in two unrelated girls.
Both patients showed neurological symptoms from the neonatal period with poor
reactivity, hypotonia, and severe microcephaly. During the first year of life,
both patients had feeding difficulties and made slow developmental progress. At 5
years old, the girls were significantly neurologically impaired with gross
hypotonia, no language, convergent strabismus, and no voluntary hand use.
Moreover, they presented a combination of jerky movements, hand-mouthing, and
hand-washing stereotypies. Hence, FOXG1 mutation patients demonstrate severe
encephalopathy compatible with the congenital variant, as well as additional
features such as absent eye contact, inconsolable crying during the perinatal
period, and delayed myelination with thin to hypoplastic corpus callosum.
Although the overall frequency of mutations in FOXG1 in females with severe
mental retardation and microcephaly appears to be low (1.5%), our findings
suggest the requirement to investigate both point mutations and gene dosage in
the FOXG1 gene in patients with severe encephalopathy with microcephaly and some 
Rett-like features.

PMID: 19806373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Eur J Med Genet. 2009 Nov-Dec;52(6):440-2. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.09.004. Epub 
2009 Sep 20.

4.45 Mb microduplication in chromosome band 14q12 including FOXG1 in a girl with 
refractory epilepsy and intellectual impairment.

Yeung A(1), Bruno D, Scheffer IE, Carranza D, Burgess T, Slater HR, Amor DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne,
Australia.

Microdeletions at 14q12 that include FOXG1, or loss of function mutations in
FOXG1, are associated with the congenital variant of Rett syndrome. By SNP
microarray analysis we identified a corresponding microduplication at 14q12 in a 
nine year old girl with symptomatic generalised epilepsy, severe intellectual
impairment, and minor dysmorphisms, but without microcephaly. The 14q12
microduplication comprised 4.45 Mb of DNA and included FOXG1. This is the first
report of duplication involving FOXG1 and suggests a dosage sensitive role for
FOXG1 in brain development.

PMID: 19772934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Br J Cancer. 2009 Oct 20;101(8):1433-43. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605316. Epub 2009
Sep 15.

Overexpression of FOXG1 contributes to TGF-beta resistance through inhibition of 
p21WAF1/CIP1 expression in ovarian cancer.

Chan DW(1), Liu VW, To RM, Chiu PM, Lee WY, Yao KM, Cheung AN, Ngan HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China.

BACKGROUND: Loss of growth inhibitory response to transforming growth factor-beta
(TGF-beta) is a common feature of epithelial cancers. Recent studies have
reported that genetic lesions and overexpression of oncoproteins in
TGF-beta/Smads signalling cascade contribute to the TGF-beta resistance. Here, we
showed that the overexpressed FOXG1 was involved in attenuating the
anti-proliferative control of TGF-beta/Smads signalling in ovarian cancer.
METHODS: FOXG1 and p21(WAF1/CIP1) expressions were evaluated by real-time
quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), western
blot and immunohistochemical analyses. The effect of FOXG1 on p21(WAF1/CIP1)
transcriptional activity was examined by luciferase reporter assays. Cell lines
stably expressing or short hairpin RNA interference-mediated knockdown FOXG1 were
established for studying the gain-or-loss functional effects of FOXG1. XTT cell
proliferation assay was used to measure cell growth of ovarian cancer cells.
RESULTS: Quantitative RT-PCR and western blot analyses showed that FOXG1 was
upregulated and inversely associated with the expression levels of p21(WAF1/CIP1)
in ovarian cancer. The overexpression of FOXG1 was significantly correlated with 
high-grade ovarian cancer (P=0.025). Immunohistochemical analysis on ovarian
cancer tissue array was further evidenced that FOXG1 was highly expressed and
significantly correlated with high-grade ovarian cancer (P=0.048). Functionally, 
enforced expression of FOXG1 selectively blocked the TGF-beta-induced
p21(WAF1/CIP1) expressions and increased cell proliferation in ovarian cancer
cells. Conversely, FOXG1 knockdown resulted in a 20-26% decrease in cell
proliferation together with 16-33% increase in p21(WAF1/CIP1) expression.
Notably, FOXG1 was able to inhibit the p21(WAF1/CIP1) promoter activity in a
p53-independent manner by transient reporter assays.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that FOXG1 acts as an oncoprotein inhibiting
TGF-beta-mediated anti-proliferative responses in ovarian cancer cells through
suppressing p21(WAF1/CIP1) transcription.

PMCID: PMC2768441
PMID: 19755996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Jul;1170:21-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04372.x.

The role of foxg1 in the development of neural stem cells of the olfactory
epithelium.

Kawauchi S(1), Santos R, Kim J, Hollenbeck PL, Murray RC, Calof AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy & Neurobiology and Center for Complex Biological
Systems, University of California, Irvine, California 92697-1275, USA.

The olfactory epithelium (OE) of the mouse is an excellent model system for
studying principles of neural stem cell biology because of its well-defined
neuronal lineage and its ability to regenerate throughout life. To approach the
molecular mechanisms of stem cell regulation in the OE, we have focused on Foxg1,
also known as brain factor 1, which is a member of the Forkhead transcription
factor family. Foxg1(-/-) mice show major defects in the OE at birth, suggesting 
that Foxg1 plays an important role in OE development. We find that Foxg1 is
expressed in cells within the basal compartment of the OE, the location where OE 
stem and progenitor cells are known to reside. Since FoxG1 is known to regulate
proliferation of neuronal progenitor cells during telencephalon development, we
performed bromodeoxyuridine pulse-chase labeling of Sox2-expressing neural stem
cells during primary OE neurogenesis. We found the percentage of Sox2-expressing 
cells that retained bromodeoxyuridine was twice as high in Foxg1(-/-) OE cells as
in the wild type, suggesting that these cells are delayed and/or halted in their 
development in the absence of Foxg1. Our findings suggest that the proliferation 
and/or subsequent differentiation of Sox2-expressing neural stem cells in the OE 
is regulated by Foxg1.

PMCID: PMC2878634
PMID: 19686101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Dec;17(12):1577-81. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.95. Epub 2009
Jul 22.

Atypical Rett syndrome with selective FOXG1 deletion detected by comparative
genomic hybridization: case report and review of literature.

Jacob FD(1), Ramaswamy V, Andersen J, Bolduc FV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta,
Canada.

Rett syndrome is a severe neurodegenerative disorder characterized by acquired
microcephaly, communication dysfunction, psychomotor regression, seizures and
stereotypical hand movements. Mutations in methyl CpG binding protein 2 (MECP2)
are identified in most patients with classic Rett syndrome. Genetic studies in
patients with a Rett variant have expanded the spectrum of underlying genetic
etiologies. Recently, a deletion encompassing several genes in the long arm of
chromosome 14 has been associated with the congenital Rett-syndrome phenotype.
Using array-based comparative genomic hybridization, we identified a 3-year-old
female with a Rett-like syndrome carrying a de novo single-gene deletion of
FOXG1. Her presentation included intellectual disability, epilepsy and a
Rett-like phenotype. The variant features included microcephaly at birth and
prominent synophrys. Our results confirm that congenital Rett syndrome can be
caused by copy-number variation in FOXG1 and expand the clinical phenotypic
spectrum of FOXG1 defect in humans.

PMCID: PMC2987032
PMID: 19623215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Med Genet. 2010 Jan;47(1):49-53. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.067884. Epub 2009 Jul 2.

Novel FOXG1 mutations associated with the congenital variant of Rett syndrome.

Mencarelli MA(1), Spanhol-Rosseto A, Artuso R, Rondinella D, De Filippis R,
Bahi-Buisson N, Nectoux J, Rubinsztajn R, Bienvenu T, Moncla A, Chabrol B,
Villard L, Krumina Z, Armstrong J, Roche A, Pineda M, Gak E, Mari F, Ariani F,
Renieri A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Molecular Biology Department, University of Siena, 53100
Siena, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Rett syndrome is a severe neurodevelopmental disorder representing
one of the most common genetic causes of mental retardation in girls. The classic
form is caused by MECP2 mutations. In two patients affected by the congenital
variant of Rett we have recently identified mutations in the FOXG1 gene encoding 
a brain specific transcriptional repressor, essential for early development of
the telencephalon.
METHODS: 60 MECP2/CDKL5 mutation negative European Rett patients (classic and
variants), 43 patients with encephalopathy with early onset seizures, and four
atypical Rett patients were analysed for mutations in FOXG1.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Mutations have been identified in four patients,
independently classified as congenital Rett variants from France, Spain and
Latvia. Clinical data have been compared with the two previously reported
patients with mutations in FOXG1. In all cases hypotonia, irresponsiveness and
irritability were present in the neonatal period. At birth, head circumference
was normal while a deceleration of growth was recognised soon afterwards, leading
to severe microcephaly. Motor development was severely impaired and voluntary
hand use was absent. In contrast with classic Rett, patients showed poor eye
contact. Typical stereotypic hand movements with hand washing and hand mouthing
activities were present continuously. Some patients showed abnormal movements of 
the tongue and jerky movements of the limbs. Brain magnetic resonance imaging
showed corpus callosum hypoplasia in most cases, while epilepsy was a variable
sign. Scoliosis was present and severe in the older patients. Neurovegetative
symptoms typical of Rett were frequently present.

PMID: 19578037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Med Genet. 2010 Jan;47(1):59-65. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2009.067355. Epub 2009 Jun
29.

Phenotypic variability in Rett syndrome associated with FOXG1 mutations in
females.

Philippe C(1), Amsallem D, Francannet C, Lambert L, Saunier A, Verneau F,
Jonveaux P.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale, Nancy Université, EA 4002, Centre
Hospitalier Régional et Universitaire, 54511 cedex 1, Vandoeuvre-les-Nancy,
France. c.philippe@chu-nancy.fr

BACKGROUND: The FOXG1 gene has been recently implicated in the congenital form of
Rett syndrome (RTT). It encodes the fork-head box protein G1, a winged-helix
transcriptional repressor with expression restricted to testis and brain, where
it is critical for forebrain development. So far, only two point mutations in
FOXG1 have been reported in females affected by the congenital form of RTT. Aim
To assess the involvement of FOXG1 in the molecular aetiology of classical RTT
and related disorders.
METHODS: The entire multi-exon coding sequence of FOXG1 was screened for point
mutations and large rearrangements in a cohort of 35 MECP2/CDKL5
mutation-negative female patients including 31 classical and four congenital
forms of RTT.
RESULTS: Two different de novo heterozygous FOXG1-truncating mutations were
identified. The subject with the p.Trp308X mutation presented with a severe
RTT-like neurodevelopmental disorder, whereas the p.Tyr400X allele was associated
with a classical clinical RTT presentation.
CONCLUSIONS: These new cases give additional support to the genetic heterogeneity
in RTT and help to delineate the clinical spectrum of the FOXG1-related
phenotypes. FOXG1 screening should be considered in the molecular diagnosis of
RTT.

PMID: 19564653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Korean Med Sci. 2009 Jun;24(3):468-73. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2009.24.3.468. Epub
2009 Jun 12.

Forkhead box O-class 1 and forkhead box G1 as prognostic markers for bladder
cancer.

Kim TH(1), Jo SW, Lee YS, Kim YJ, Lee SC, Kim WJ, Yun SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Korea.

Forkhead box O-class 1 (FOXO1) is a key regulator of glucose homeostasis,
cell-cycle progression, and apoptosis. Its functions are modulated by forkhead
box G1 (FOXG1), which acts as a transcriptional repressor with oncogenic
potential. Real-time PCR and immunohistochemical staining were performed in 174
primary bladder cancer specimens and 21 normal bladder mucosae to evaluate these 
genes. FOXO1 and FOXG1 mRNA expression in cancer tissues were higher than in
normal mucosae (each P<0.001). FOXO1 mRNA levels were significantly higher in
samples of non-progressed patients (P<0.001), but FOXG1 were enhanced in those of
progressed patients (P=0.019). On univariate analysis, FOXO1 mRNA expression was 
significantly associated with grade, stage, recurrence, progression and survival 
(each P<0.05). On multivariate analysis, increased FOXO1 mRNA expression was
associated with both reduced disease progression (odds ratio [OR], 0.367; 95%
confidence interval [CI], 0.163-0.826, P=0.015) and enhanced disease-free
survival (OR, 3.262; 95% CI, 1.361-7.820, P=0.008). At a median follow-up of 33
months (range 2 to 156), the patients with a high FOXO1 mRNA expression had a
significantly prolonged survival (P=0.001). Immunohistochemical findings of FOXO1
were generally concordant with mRNA expression levels. In conclusion, FOXO1 may
be a promising marker for predicting progression in human bladder cancers.

PMCID: PMC2698194
PMID: 19543511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Development. 2009 Jul;136(14):2457-65. doi: 10.1242/dev.032656.

FGF signaling is strictly required to maintain early telencephalic precursor cell
survival.

Paek H(1), Gutin G, Hébert JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience and Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The FGF family of extracellular signaling factors has been proposed to play
multiple roles in patterning the telencephalon, the precursor to the cerebrum. In
this study, unlike previous ones, we effectively abolish FGF signaling in the
anterior neural plate via deletion of three FGF receptor (FGFR) genes. Triple
FGFR mutant mice exhibit a complete loss of the telencephalon, except the dorsal 
midline. Disruption of FGF signaling prior to and coincident with telencephalic
induction reveals that FGFs promote telencephalic character and are strictly
required to keep telencephalic cells alive. Moreover, progressively more severe
truncations of the telencephalon are observed in FGFR single, double and triple
mutants. Together with previous gain-of-function studies showing induction of
Foxg1 expression and mirror-image duplications of the cortex by exogenous FGF8,
our loss-of-function results suggest that, rather than independently patterning
different areas, FGF ligands and receptors act in concert to mediate organizer
activity for the whole telencephalon.

PMCID: PMC2729352
PMID: 19542358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Dev Biol. 2009 Jul 15;331(2):300-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.05.549. Epub 2009 
May 18.

Functional mode of FoxD1/CBF2 for the establishment of temporal retinal
specificity in the developing chick retina.

Takahashi H(1), Sakuta H, Shintani T, Noda M.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Basic Biology, Higashiyama, Myodaiji-cho, Okazaki,
Japan.

Two winged-helix transcription factors, FoxG1 (previously called chick brain
factor1, CBF1) and FoxD1 (chick brain factor2, CBF2), are expressed specifically 
in the nasal and temporal regions of the developing chick retina, respectively.
We previously demonstrated that FoxG1 controls the expression of topographic
molecules including FoxD1, and determines the regional specificity of the nasal
retina. FoxD1 is known to prescribe temporal specificity, however, molecular
mechanisms and downstream targets have not been elucidated. Here we addressed the
genetic mechanisms for establishing temporal specificity in the developing retina
using an in ovo electroporation technique. Fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) and Wnt
first play pivotal roles in inducing the region-specific expression of FoxG1 and 
FoxD1 in the optic vesicle. Misexpression of FoxD1 represses the expression of
FoxG1, GH6, SOHo1, and ephrin-A5, and induces that of EphA3 in the retina. GH6
and SOHo1 repress the expression of FoxD1. In contrast to the inhibitory effect
of FoxG1 on bone morphogenic protein (BMP) signaling, FoxD1 does not alter the
expression of BMP4 or BMP2. Studies with chimeric mutants of FoxD1 showed that
FoxD1 acts as a transcription repressor in controlling its downstream targets in 
the retina. Taken together with previous findings, our data suggest that FoxG1
and FoxD1 are located at the top of the gene cascade for regional specification
along the nasotemporal (anteroposterior) axis in the retina, and FoxD1 determines
temporal specificity.

PMID: 19450575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Dev Cell. 2009 Apr;16(4):576-87. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2009.03.007.

Integration of telencephalic Wnt and hedgehog signaling center activities by
Foxg1.

Danesin C(1), Peres JN, Johansson M, Snowden V, Cording A, Papalopulu N, Houart
C.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College
London, London, UK.

The forebrain is patterned along the dorsoventral (DV) axis by Sonic Hedgehog
(Shh). However, previous studies have suggested the presence of an
Shh-independent mechanism. Our study identifies Wnt/beta-catenin-activated from
the telencephalic roof-as an Shh-independent pathway that is essential for
telencephalic pallial (dorsal) specification during neurulation. We demonstrate
that the transcription factor Foxg1 coordinates the activity of two signaling
centers: Foxg1 is a key downstream effector of the Shh pathway during induction
of subpallial (ventral) identity, and it inhibits Wnt/beta-catenin signaling
through direct transcriptional repression of Wnt ligands. This inhibition
restricts the dorsal Wnt signaling center to the roof plate and consequently
limits pallial identities. Concomitantly to these roles, Foxg1 controls the
formation of the compartment boundary between telencephalon and basal
diencephalon. Altogether, these findings identify a key direct target of Foxg1,
and uncover a simple molecular mechanism by which Foxg1 integrates two opposing
signaling centers.

PMID: 19386266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Jun;9(5):266-72. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.04.001. Epub
2009 Apr 18.

Distinct expression of two foxg1 paralogues in zebrafish.

Zhao XF(1), Suh CS, Prat CR, Ellingsen S, Fjose A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Bergen, P.O. Box 7803, N-5020
Bergen, Norway.

The forkhead proteins (Fox) act as transcription factors in many biological
processes in a wide range of species. One member of this superfamily, Foxg1, has 
essential roles in the development of eyes, telencephalon, ears and olfactory
system. Zebrafish foxg1 has been reported to have similar roles as the mouse
orthologue Foxg1. However, no data has been reported about possible zebrafish
foxg1 paralogues. In this study we identified one zebrafish foxg1 paralogue by
enhancer trapping, which we designate foxg1b. A more diverged paralogue, foxg1c, 
was identified by homology searches. Sequence comparisons indicate that both
foxg1b and foxg1c are less related to mouse than the previously characterized
foxg1. We report that foxg1b is expressed in a regionally restricted pattern
within the developing eye, mainly in the dorsal-nasal retina, which is similar to
the retinal expression of mouse Foxg1. By contrast, foxg1c is only expressed
transiently in the eyes and forebrain between 14 and 20h post-fertilization,
while expression was detected exclusively in the developing inner ear at later
stages. Our results suggest that foxg1b and foxg1c have undergone expression
pattern divergence during evolution that has resulted in functional
specialization.

PMID: 19379839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Eur J Med Genet. 2009 Mar-Jun;52(2-3):148-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.03.004.
Epub 2009 Mar 19.

14q12 Microdeletion syndrome and congenital variant of Rett syndrome.

Mencarelli MA(1), Kleefstra T, Katzaki E, Papa FT, Cohen M, Pfundt R, Ariani F,
Meloni I, Mari F, Renieri A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, University of Siena, Siena, Italy.

Only two patients with 14q12 deletion have been reported to date. Here, we
describe an additional patient with a similar deletion in order to improve the
clinical delineation of this new microdeletion syndrome. The emerging phenotype
is characterized by a Rett-like clinical course with an almost normal development
during the first months of life followed by a period of regression. A peculiar
facial phenotype is also present and it is characterized by mild dysmorphisms
such as downslanting palpebral fissures, bilateral epicanthic folds, depressed
nasal bridge, bulbous nasal tip, tented upper lip, everted lower lip and large
ears. The relationship between this microdeletion syndrome and the congenital
variant of Rett syndrome due to point mutations in one of the genes included in
the deleted region, FOXG1, is discussed.

PMID: 19303466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Development. 2009 May;136(9):1453-64. doi: 10.1242/dev.034967. Epub 2009 Mar 18.

Foxg1 promotes olfactory neurogenesis by antagonizing Gdf11.

Kawauchi S(1), Kim J, Santos R, Wu HH, Lander AD, Calof AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, University of California, Irvine, CA
92697, USA.

Foxg1, a winged-helix transcription factor, promotes the development of anterior 
neural structures; in mice lacking Foxg1, development of the cerebral hemispheres
and olfactory epithelium (OE) is severely reduced. It has been suggested that
Foxg1 acts by positively regulating the expression of growth factors, such as
Fgf8, which support neurogenesis. However, Foxg1 also binds Smad transcriptional 
complexes, allowing it to negatively regulate the effects of TGFbeta family
ligands. Here, we provide evidence that this latter effect explains much of the
ability of Foxg1 to drive neurogenesis in the OE. We show that Foxg1 is expressed
in developing OE at the same time as the gene encoding growth differentiation
factor 11 (Gdf11), a TGFbeta family member that mediates negative-feedback
control of OE neurogenesis. Mutations in Gdf11 rescue, to a considerable degree, 
the major defects in Foxg1(-/-) OE, including the early, severe loss of neural
precursors and olfactory receptor neurons, and the subsequent collapse of both
neurogenesis and nasal cavity formation. Rescue is gene-dosage dependent, with
loss of even one allele of Gdf11 restoring substantial neurogenesis. Notably, we 
find no evidence for a disruption of Fgf8 expression in Foxg1(-/-) OE. However,
we do observe both a failure of expression of follistatin (Fst), which encodes a 
secreted Gdf11 antagonist normally expressed in and around OE, and an increase in
the expression of Gdf11 itself within the remaining OE in these mutants. Fst
expression is rescued in Foxg1(-/-);Gdf11(-/-) and Foxg1(-/-);Gdf11(+/-) mice.
These data suggest that the influence of Foxg1 on Gdf11-mediated negative
feedback of neurogenesis may be both direct and indirect. In addition, defects in
development of the cerebral hemispheres in Foxg1(-/-) mice are not rescued by
mutations in Gdf11, nor is Gdf11 expressed at high levels within these
structures. Thus, the pro-neurogenic effects of Foxg1 are likely to be mediated
through different signaling pathways in different parts of the nervous system.

PMCID: PMC2674256
PMID: 19297409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Genes Dev. 2009 Mar 1;23(5):561-74. doi: 10.1101/gad.1743709.

Bmi-1 cooperates with Foxg1 to maintain neural stem cell self-renewal in the
forebrain.

Fasano CA(1), Phoenix TN, Kokovay E, Lowry N, Elkabetz Y, Dimos JT, Lemischka IR,
Studer L, Temple S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuropharmacology and Neuroscience, Albany Medical College, Albany,
New York 12208 USA. fasanoc@mskcc.org

Neural stem cells (NSCs) persist throughout life in two forebrain areas: the
subventricular zone (SVZ) and the hippocampus. Why forebrain NSCs self-renew more
extensively than those from other regions remains unclear. Prior studies have
shown that the polycomb factor Bmi-1 is necessary for NSC self-renewal and that
it represses the cell cycle inhibitors p16, p19, and p21. Here we show that
overexpression of Bmi-1 enhances self-renewal of forebrain NSCs significantly
more than those derived from spinal cord, demonstrating a regional difference in 
responsiveness. We show that forebrain NSCs require the forebrain-specific
transcription factor Foxg1 for Bmi-1-dependent self-renewal, and that repression 
of p21 is a focus of this interaction. Bmi-1 enhancement of NSC self-renewal is
significantly greater with increasing age and passage. Importantly, when Bmi-1 is
overexpressed in cultured adult forebrain NSCs, they expand dramatically and
continue to make neurons even after multiple passages, when control NSCs have
become restricted to glial differentiation. Together these findings demonstrate
the importance of Bmi-1 and Foxg1 cooperation to maintenance of NSC multipotency 
and self-renewal, and establish a useful method for generating abundant forebrain
neurons ex vivo, outside the neurogenic niche.

PMCID: PMC2658524
PMID: 19270157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Neurotrauma. 2009 Jul;26(7):979-93. doi: 10.1089/neu.2008-0762.

Rapid induction of genes associated with tissue protection and neural development
in contused adult spinal cord after radial glial cell transplantation.

Chang YW(1), Goff LA, Li H, Kane-Goldsmith N, Tzatzalos E, Hart RP, Young W,
Grumet M.

Author information: 
(1)W.M. Keck Center for Collaborative Neuroscience, Department of Cell Biology
and Neuroscience, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854-8082, USA.

Cell-based therapy has been widely evaluated in spinal cord injury (SCI) animal
models and shown to improve functional recovery. However, host response to cell
transplants at gene expression level is rarely discussed. We reported previously 
that acute transplantation of radial glial cells RG3.6 following SCI promoted
early locomotion improvement within 1 week post-injury. To identify rapid
molecular changes induced by RG3.6 transplantation in the host tissue, distal
spinal cord segments were subjected to microarray analysis. Although RG3.6
transplantation, reduced activity of macrophages as early as 1-2 weeks
post-injury, the expression levels of inflammatory genes (e.g., IL-6, MIP-2,
MCP-1) were not decreased by RG3.6 treatment as compared to medium or other cell 
controls at 6-12 h post-injury. However, genes associated with tissue protection 
(Hsp70 and Hsp32) and neural cell development (Foxg1, Top2a, Sox11, Nkx2.2,
Vimentin) were found to be significantly up-regulated by RG3.6 transplants. Foxg1
was the most highly induced gene in the RG3.6-treated spinal cords, and its
expression by immunocytochemistry was confirmed in the host tissue. Moreover,
RG3.6 treatment boosted the number of Nkx2.2 cells in the spinal cord, and these 
cells frequently co-expressed NG2, which marks progenitor cells. Taken together, 
these results demonstrate that radial glial transplants induced rapid and
specific gene expression in the injured host tissue, and suggest that these early
responses are associated with mechanisms of tissue protection and activation of
endogenous neural progenitor cells.

PMCID: PMC2848950
PMID: 19257808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Apr 1;513(4):375-84. doi: 10.1002/cne.21973.

Regional differences in olfactory epithelial homeostasis in the adult mouse.

Vedin V(1), Molander M, Bohm S, Berghard A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Umeå University, Sweden.

The olfactory sensory neurons in the nasal cavity of the adult mouse are
organized into a few regions that differ in their molecular properties, as
several classes of genes show regional expression. Most renowned is the fact that
expression of each of hundreds of different odorant receptor genes is limited to 
one such region, or zone, of the olfactory neuroepithelial sheet. Zone
differences are in place at birth, as exemplified here by the expression of
neuronal progenitor marker Foxg1. We herein describe that an adult pattern
showing regional differences in neurogenesis develops during the first few weeks 
of postnatal life which, e.g., is reflected in the temporal and regional
regulation of the neuronal progenitor marker Ascl1. The most dorsomedial zone
shows significantly fewer cells in S-phase in the adult but not in newborn mice
by two different measures. Moreover, we show that there are regional differences 
in the relative differentiation, cell survival, and thickness of the olfactory
epithelium. These findings are compatible with the view that zones are inherently
distinct and that such differences contribute to generate regional differences in
cellular homeostasis that in turn may modulate the capacity of a region to adjust
to extrinsic influence.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19177519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Neural Dev. 2009 Jan 16;4:3. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-4-3.

Adenomatous polyposis coli is required for early events in the normal growth and 
differentiation of the developing cerebral cortex.

Ivaniutsin U(1), Chen Y, Mason JO, Price DJ, Pratt T.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Centre for Integrative Physiology, School of
Biomedical Sciences, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.
u.ivaniutsin@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Adenomatous polyposis coli (Apc) is a large multifunctional protein
known to be important for Wnt/beta-catenin signalling, cytoskeletal dynamics, and
cell polarity. In the developing cerebral cortex, Apc is expressed in
proliferating cells and its expression increases as cells migrate to the cortical
plate. We examined the consequences of loss of Apc function for the early
development of the cerebral cortex.
RESULTS: We used Emx1(Cre) to inactivate Apc specifically in proliferating
cerebral cortical cells and their descendents starting from embryonic day 9.5. We
observed reduction in the size of the mutant cerebral cortex, disruption to its
organisation, and changes in the molecular identity of its cells. Loss of Apc
leads to a decrease in the size of the proliferative pool, disrupted interkinetic
nuclear migration, and increased apoptosis. beta-Catenin, pericentrin, and
N-cadherin proteins no longer adopt their normal high concentration at the apical
surface of the cerebral cortical ventricular zone, indicating that cell polarity 
is disrupted. Consistent with enhanced Wnt/beta-catenin signalling resulting from
loss of Apc we found increased levels of TCF/LEF-dependent transcription and
expression of endogenous Wnt/beta-catenin target genes (Axin2 (conductin), Lef1, 
and c-myc) in the mutant cerebral cortex. In the Apc mutant cerebral cortex the
expression of transcription factors Foxg1, Pax6, Tbr1, and Tbr2 is drastically
reduced compared to normal and many cells ectopically express Pax3, Wnt1, and Wt1
(but not Wnt2b, Wnt8b, Ptc, Gli1, Mash1, Olig2, or Islet1). This indicates that
loss of Apc function causes cerebral cortical cells to lose their normal identity
and redirect to fates normally found in more posterior-dorsal regions of the
central nervous system.
CONCLUSION: Apc is required for multiple aspects of early cerebral cortical
development, including the regulation of cell number, interkinetic nuclear
migration, cell polarity, and cell type specification.

PMCID: PMC2649069
PMID: 19149881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008 Sep;9(9):678-85. doi: 10.1038/nrn2463.

The genetics of early telencephalon patterning: some assembly required.

Hébert JM(1), Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1410 Pelham
Parkway South, Bronx, New York 10461, USA. jhebert@aecom.yu.edu

The immense range of human behaviours is rooted in the complex neural networks of
the cerebrum. The creation of these networks depends on the precise integration
of specific neuronal subtypes that are born in different regions of the
telencephalon. Here, using the mouse as a model system, we review how these
proliferative zones are established. Moreover, we discuss how these regions can
be traced back in development to the function of a few key genes, including those
that encode fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), sonic hedgehog (SHH), bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs), forkhead box G1 (FOXG1), paired box 6 (PAX6) and
LIM homeobox protein 2 (LHX2), that pattern the early telencephalon.

PMCID: PMC2669317
PMID: 19143049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Dec;24(12):1025-7. doi: 10.1051/medsci/200824121025.

[Role of the cadherin Celsr3 in the connectivity of the cerebral cortex].

[Article in French]

Zhou L, Goffinet AM, Tissir F.

PMID: 19116108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Feb 10;512(5):613-27. doi: 10.1002/cne.21918.

Analysis of early ventral telencephalic defects in mice lacking functional Gli3
protein.

Yu T(1), Fotaki V, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centres for Integrative Physiology and Neuroscience Research, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

The transcription factor Gli3 is expressed throughout developing telencephalon.
Previous studies have focused on Gli3's role in dorsal telencephalon, which is
greatly reduced in size in Gli3(Xt/Xt) mutants. We examined the effects of loss
of Gli3 on early development of ventral telencephalon. Ventral telencephalon was 
defined in both wildtypes and Gli3(Xt/Xt) mutants on the basis of its expression 
of Olig2, Nkx2.1, Mash1, and Foxg1 and its lack of expression of Pax6. We found
that at embryonic day (E)10.5 the volume of the ventral telencephalon is about
50% greater in Gli3(Xt/Xt) mutants than in wildtypes. By E12.5, however, the
volume of the ventral telencephalon is about 20% lower in Gli3(Xt/Xt) mutants
than in wildtypes. We observed a significant increase in the number of both
apoptotic cells and newly differentiated neurons in the E10.5 Gli3(Xt/Xt) ventral
telencephalon, suggesting that increased cell death and withdrawal of cells from 
the cell cycle might account for the failure of the Gli3(Xt/Xt) ventral
telencephalon to grow normally by E12.5. We found no changes in the lengths of
the cell cycles of proliferating ventral telencephalic cells at E10.5. We used
marker analysis and optical projection tomography to assess the Gli3(Xt/Xt)
forebrain in three dimensions and found that the Gli3(Xt/Xt) diencephalon is
shifted relatively rostrally. We conclude that in the absence of Gli3 an
abnormally large portion of the newly formed telencephalon is specified to a
ventral fate but this then suffers impaired growth, due to defects of cell
differentiation and death, contributing to severe distortion of the forebrain.

PMID: 19048639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Dev Biol. 2009 Jan 1;325(1):162-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.10.023. Epub 2008
Oct 31.

Rac1 deficiency in the forebrain results in neural progenitor reduction and
microcephaly.

Chen L(1), Melendez J, Campbell K, Kuan CY, Zheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Divisios of Experimental Hematology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 
45229, USA.

The Rho family of small GTPases has been implicated in many neurological
disorders including mental retardation, but whether they are involved in primary 
microcephaly (microcephalia vera) is unknown. Here, we examine the role of Rac1
in mammalian neural progenitors and forebrain development by a conditional
gene-targeting strategy using the Foxg1-Cre line to delete floxed-Rac1 alleles in
the telencephalic ventricular zone (VZ) of mouse embryos. We found that Rac1
deletion in the telencephalic VZ progenitors resulted in reduced sizes of both
the striatum and cerebral cortex. Analyses further indicated that this
abnormality was caused by accelerated cell-cycle exit and increased apoptosis
during early corticogenesis (approximately E14.5), leading to a decrease of the
neural progenitor pool in mid-to-late telencephalic development (E16.5 to E18.5).
Moreover, the formation of patch-matrix compartments in the striatum was impaired
by Rac1-deficiency. Together, these results suggest that Rac1 regulates
self-renewal, survival, and differentiation of telencephalic neural progenitors, 
and that dysfunctions of Rac1 may lead to primary microcephaly.

PMCID: PMC2653853
PMID: 19007770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Development. 2008 Dec;135(24):4081-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.023572. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Foxg1 regulates retinal axon pathfinding by repressing an ipsilateral program in 
nasal retina and by causing optic chiasm cells to exert a net axonal
growth-promoting activity.

Tian NM(1), Pratt T, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Integrative Physiology, The University of Edinburgh, Hugh Robson
Building, George Square, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK.

Mammalian binocular vision relies on the divergence of retinal ganglion cell
axons at the optic chiasm, with strictly controlled numbers projecting
contralaterally and ipsilaterally. In mouse, contralateral projections arise from
the entire retina, whereas ipsilateral projections arise from ventrotemporal
retina. We investigate how development of these patterns of projection is
regulated by the contralateral determinant Foxg1, a forkhead box transcription
factor expressed in nasal retina and at the chiasm. In nasal retina, loss of
Foxg1 causes increased numbers of ipsilateral projections and ectopic expression 
of the ipsilateral determinants Zic2, Ephb1 and Foxd1, indicating that nasal
retina is competent to express an ipsilateral program that is normally suppressed
by Foxg1. Using co-cultures that combine Foxg1-expressing with Foxg1-null retinal
explants and chiasm cells, we provide functional evidence that Foxg1 promotes
contralateral projections through actions in nasal retina, and that in chiasm
cells, Foxg1 is required for the generation of a hitherto unrecognized activity
supporting RGC axon growth.

PMID: 19004857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Nov 6;3(5):472-4. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.10.013.

Cortex shatters the glass ceiling.

Au E(1), Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Smilow Neuroscience Program, Department of Cell Biology, NYU Langone Medical
Center, 522 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Nov 6;3(5):519-32.

Recreating developmental structures in vitro has been a primary challenge for
stem cell biologists. Recent studies in Cell Stem Cell (Eiraku et al., 2008) and 
Nature (Gaspard et al., 2008) demonstrate that embryonic stem cells can
recapitulate early cortical development, enabling them to generate specific
cortical subtypes.

PMID: 18983961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Neurosci. 2008 Oct 8;28(41):10415-21. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3219-08.2008.

MicroRNA-9 modulates Cajal-Retzius cell differentiation by suppressing Foxg1
expression in mouse medial pallium.

Shibata M(1), Kurokawa D, Nakao H, Ohmura T, Aizawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Vertebrate Body Plan, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN
Kobe, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0046, Japan.

Vertebrate brain hosts a diverse collection of microRNAs, but little is known
about their functions in vivo. Here we propose that mouse microRNA-9 (miR-9)
targets Foxg1 mRNAs for proper generation of Cajal-Retzius cells in the medial
pallium. miR-9 expression is mediolaterally graded, being most intense in the
cortical hem; it contrasts with the Foxg1 expression in a reciprocal gradient.
The 3' untranslated regions of tetrapod, but not of teleost, Foxg1 mRNAs conserve
miR-9 target sequences and are regulated by miR-9. Gain- and loss-of-function
analyses of miR-9 showed that miR-9 negatively regulates endogenous Foxg1 protein
level. Moreover, miR-9 overexpression in developing telencephalon at E11.5 by
electroporation resulted in ectopic Reelin-positive cells over the cortex beyond 
the marginal zone. In addition, inhibition of endogenous miR-9 function by
antisense oligonucleotides caused the regression of Wnt3a-positive cortical hem
and reduction of reelin-, p73-, and NeuroD1-positive cells.

PMID: 18842901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 1;322(1):145-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.07.021. Epub 2008
Jul 26.

Bmp4 is required for tracheal formation: a novel mouse model for tracheal
agenesis.

Li Y(1), Gordon J, Manley NR, Litingtung Y, Chiang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, 4114 MRB3, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Tracheal agenesis/atresia (TA) is a rare but fatal congenital disease in which
the breathing tube fails to grow. The etiology of this serious condition remains 
largely unknown. We found that Bmp signaling is prominently present in the
anterior foregut where the tracheal primordium originates and targeted ablation
of Bmp4 (Bmp4(cko)) resulted in a loss-of-trachea phenotype that closely
resembles the Floyd type II pathology, the most common form of TA in humans. In
Bmp4(cko) embryos, tracheal specification was not affected; however, its
outgrowth was severely impaired due to reduced epithelial and mesenchymal
proliferation. In agreement, we also observed significant reduction in the
expression of Cyclin D1, a key cell cycle regulator associated with cellular
proliferation. However, the proliferative effect of Bmp signaling appears to be
independent of Wnt signaling. Interestingly, we found significantly reduced
expression of activated extracellular signal-regulated kinase (Erk) in the
Bmp4(cko) ventral foregut, suggesting that Bmp signaling promotes Erk
phosphorylation which has been associated with cellular proliferation. This study
provides the first evidence linking Bmp signaling to tracheal formation by
regulating the proliferative response of the anterior ventral foregut. Our
finding sheds light on human tracheal malformations by providing a novel mouse
model implicating Bmp signaling, non-canonical Erk activation and cellular
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3780977
PMID: 18692041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Neoplasia. 2008 Aug;10(8):757-72.

Genomic deletions correlate with underexpression of novel candidate genes at six 
loci in pediatric pilocytic astrocytoma.

Potter N(1), Karakoula A, Phipps KP, Harkness W, Hayward R, Thompson DN, Jacques 
TS, Harding B, Thomas DG, Palmer RW, Rees J, Darling J, Warr TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University
College London, National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK.
n.potter@ion.ucl.ac.uk

The molecular pathogenesis of pediatric pilocytic astrocytoma (PA) is not well
defined. Previous cytogenetic and molecular studies have not identified nonrandom
genetic aberrations. To correlate differential gene expression and genomic copy
number aberrations (CNAs) in PA, we have used Affymetrix GeneChip HG_U133A to
generate gene expression profiles of 19 pediatric patients and the SpectralChip
2600 to investigate CNAs in 11 of these tumors. Hierarchical clustering according
to expression profile similarity grouped tumors and controls separately. We
identified 1844 genes that showed significant differential expression between
tumor and normal controls, with a large number clearly influencing
phosphatidylinositol and mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling in PA. Most
CNAs identified in this study were single-clone alterations. However, a small
region of loss involving up to seven adjacent clones at 7q11.23 was observed in
seven tumors and correlated with the underexpression of BCL7B. Loss of four
individual clones was also associated with reduced gene expression including
SH3GL2 at 9p21.2-p23, BCL7A (which shares 90% sequence homology with BCL7B) at
12q24.33, DRD1IP at 10q26.3, and TUBG2 and CNTNAP1 at 17q21.31. Moreover, the
down-regulation of FOXG1B at 14q12 correlated with loss within the gene promoter 
region in most tumors. This is the first study to correlate differential gene
expression with CNAs in PA.

PMCID: PMC2481566
PMID: 18670637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Aug 1;146A(15):1994-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32413.

A 3 Mb deletion in 14q12 causes severe mental retardation, mild facial
dysmorphisms and Rett-like features.

Papa FT(1), Mencarelli MA, Caselli R, Katzaki E, Sampieri K, Meloni I, Ariani F, 
Longo I, Maggio A, Balestri P, Grosso S, Farnetani MA, Berardi R, Mari F, Renieri
A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Molecular Biology Department, University of Siena, Siena,
Italy.

The present report describes a 7-year-old girl with a de novo 3 Mb interstitial
deletion of chromosome 14q12, identified by oligo array-CGH. The region is gene
poor and contains only five genes two of them, FOXG1B and PRKD1 being deleted
also in a previously reported case with a very similar phenotype. Both patients
present prominent metopic suture, epicanthic folds, bulbous nasal tip, tented
upper lip, everted lower lip and large ears and a clinical course like Rett
syndrome, including normal perinatal period, postnatal microcephaly, seizures,
and severe mental retardation. FOXG1B (forkhead box G1B) is a very intriguing
candidate gene since it is known to promote neuronal progenitor proliferation and
to suppress premature neurogenesis and its disruption is reported in a patient
with postnatal microcephaly, corpus callosum agenesis, seizures, and severe
mental retardation.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18627055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 2008 Sep 5;283(36):24881-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800722200. Epub 2008
Jul 8.

Inhibition of cortical neuron differentiation by Groucho/TLE1 requires
interaction with WRPW, but not Eh1, repressor peptides.

Buscarlet M(1), Perin A, Laing A, Brickman JM, Stifani S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec H3A 2B4, Canada.

In both invertebrates and vertebrates, transcriptional co-repressors of the
Groucho/transducin-like Enhancer of split (Gro/TLE) family regulate a number of
developmental mechanisms, including neuronal differentiation. The pleiotropic
activity of Gro/TLE depends on context-specific interactions with a variety of
DNA-binding proteins. Most of those factors engage Gro/TLE through two different 
types of short peptide motifs, the WRP(W/Y) tetrapeptide and the Engrailed
homology 1 (Eh1) sequence (FXIXXIL). The aim of this study was to elucidate the
contribution of WRP(W/Y) and Eh1 motifs to mammalian Gro/TLE anti-neurogenic
activity. Here we describe point mutations within the C-terminal WD40 repeat
domain of Gro/TLE1 that do not perturb protein folding but disrupt the ability of
Gro/TLE1 to inhibit the differentiation of cerebral cortex neural progenitor
cells into neurons. One of those mutations, L743F, selectively blocks binding to 
Hes1, an anti-neurogenic basic helix-loop-helix protein that harbors a WRPW
motif. In contrast, the L743F mutation does not disrupt binding to Engrailed1 and
FoxG1, which both contain Eh1 motifs, nor to Tcf3, which binds to the Gro/TLE N
terminus. These results demonstrate that the recruitment of transcription factors
harboring WRP(W/Y) tetrapeptides is essential to the anti-neurogenic function of 
Gro/TLE1.

PMCID: PMC3259812
PMID: 18611861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jul;83(1):89-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.05.015. Epub 2008 
Jun 19.

FOXG1 is responsible for the congenital variant of Rett syndrome.

Ariani F(1), Hayek G, Rondinella D, Artuso R, Mencarelli MA, Spanhol-Rosseto A,
Pollazzon M, Buoni S, Spiga O, Ricciardi S, Meloni I, Longo I, Mari F, Broccoli
V, Zappella M, Renieri A.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Molecular Biology Department, University of Siena, 53100
Siena, Italy.

Rett syndrome is a severe neurodevelopmental disease caused by mutations in the
X-linked gene encoding for the methyl-CpG-binding protein MeCP2. Here, we report 
the identification of FOXG1-truncating mutations in two patients affected by the 
congenital variant of Rett syndrome. FOXG1 encodes a brain-specific
transcriptional repressor that is essential for early development of the
telencephalon. Molecular analysis revealed that Foxg1 might also share common
molecular mechanisms with MeCP2 during neuronal development, exhibiting partially
overlapping expression domain in postnatal cortex and neuronal subnuclear
localization.

PMCID: PMC2443837
PMID: 18571142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Novartis Found Symp. 2007;288:130-4; discussion 134-40, 276-81.

The atypical cadherin Celsr3 regulates the development of the axonal blueprint.

Zhou L(1), Tissir F, Goffinet AM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Louvain, Developmental Neurobiology Unit, 73, Avenue Mourier,
Bte DENE7382, B1200 Brussels, Belgium.

Celsr3, the murine orthologue of Drosophila Flamingo/Starry night, is a
brain-specific, atypical sevenpass cadherin that plays a key role during brain
development. Celsr3 mutant mice die at birth of central hypoventilation. They
have major anomalies of major tracts, particularly absence of anterior commissure
and of all components of the internal capsule. In addition, the medial lemniscus 
and several longitudinal bundles in the brainstem and spinal cord are defective. 
This phenotype is similar to that generated by inactivation of Frizzled3 (Fzd3). 
As both Flamingo and Frizzled are two core planar cell polarity (PCP) genes in
flies, our results indicate that Celsr3 and Fzd3 are part of a genetic network
with similarity to the PCP network. We studied by in situ hybridization the
expression patterns of other murine PCP genes Dyl1-3, Vangl1,2 and Prickle1,2.
Together with data from the literature, results suggest a mechanism whereby
Celsr1-3, Fzd3 and 6, and Vangl2 may interact to control neural tube closure and 
axonal development. In order to study this mechanism further, we generated a
conditional Celsr3 mutant mouse that allows inactivation of Celsr3 in the
forebrain and cerebral cortex, by crossing with mice that express Cre under the
Foxg1 and Emx1 promoters, respectively.

PMID: 18494256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Neurosci. 2008 May 14;28(20):5229-39. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1134-08.2008.

Foxg1 is required for development of the vertebrate olfactory system.

Duggan CD(1), DeMaria S, Baudhuin A, Stafford D, Ngai J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, 
and Functional Genomics Laboratory, University of California, Berkeley,
California 94720-3200, USA.

Erratum in
    J Neurosci. 2008 Oct 29;28(44):following 11431..

Illuminating the molecular identity and regulation of early progenitor cells in
the olfactory sensory epithelium represents an important challenge in the field
of neural development. We show in both mouse and zebrafish that the winged helix 
transcription factor Foxg1 is expressed in an early progenitor population of the 
olfactory placode. In the mouse, Foxg1 is first expressed throughout the
olfactory placode but later becomes restricted to the ventrolateral olfactory
epithelium. The essential role of Foxg1 in olfactory development is demonstrated 
by the strikingly severe phenotype of Foxg1 knock-out mice: older embryos have no
recognizable olfactory structures, including epithelium, bulb, or vomeronasal
organs. Initially, a small number of olfactory progenitors are specified but show
defects in both proliferation and differentiation. Similarly, antisense RNA
knockdown of Foxg1 expression in the zebrafish shows a reduction in the number of
neurons and mitotic cells in olfactory rosettes, mirroring the phenotype seen in 
the mouse Foxg1 null mutant. Using mosaic analysis in the zebrafish, we show that
Foxg1 is required cell-autonomously for the production of mature olfactory
receptor neurons. Therefore, we identified an evolutionarily conserved
requirement for Foxg1 in the development of the vertebrate olfactory system.

PMCID: PMC2706027
PMID: 18480279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Jul 10;509(2):144-55. doi: 10.1002/cne.21709.

Frontal cortex subdivision patterning is coordinately regulated by Fgf8, Fgf17,
and Emx2.

Cholfin JA(1), Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Scientist Training Program, University of California, San Francisco,
San Francisco, California 94143-2611, USA.

Comment in
    J Comp Neurol. 2008 Jul 10;509(2):141-3.

The frontal cortex (FC) plays a major role in cognition, movement and behavior.
However, little is known about the genetic mechanisms that govern its
development. We recently described a panel of gene expression markers that
delineate neonatal FC subdivisions and identified FC regionalization defects in
Fgf17-/- mutant mice (Cholfin and Rubenstein [2007] Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. 
A. [in press]). In the present study, we applied this FC gene expression panel to
examine regionalization phenotypes in Fgf8(neo/neo), Emx2-/-, and
Emx2-/-;Fgf17-/- newborn mice. We report that Fgf8, Fgf17 and Emx2 play distinct 
roles in the molecular regionalization of FC subdivisions. The changes in
regionalization are presaged by differential effects of rostral patterning center
Fgf8 and Fgf17 signaling on the rostral cortical neuroepithelium, revealed by
altered expression of Spry1, Spry2, and "rostral" transcription factors Er81,
Erm, Pea3, and Sp8. We used Emx2-/-;Fgf17-/- double mutants to provide direct
evidence that Emx2 and Fgf17 antagonistically regulate the expression of Erm,
Pea3, and Er81 in the rostral cortical neuroepithelium and FC regionalization. We
have integrated our results to propose a model for how fibroblast growth factors 
regulate FC patterning through regulation of regional transcription factor
expression within the FC anlage.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4399554
PMID: 18459137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Jul 10;509(2):141-3. doi: 10.1002/cne.21748.

Neuroanatomy of the FGF system.

Dominguez MH(1), Rakic P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Kavli Institute for Neuroscience, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

Comment on
    J Comp Neurol. 2008 Jul 10;509(2):144-55.

PMID: 18459136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. PLoS Genet. 2008 Apr 11;4(4):e1000050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000050.

Bmp4 is essential for the formation of the vestibular apparatus that detects
angular head movements.

Chang W(1), Lin Z, Kulessa H, Hebert J, Hogan BL, Wu DK.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, NIH,
Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.

Angular head movements in vertebrates are detected by the three semicircular
canals of the inner ear and their associated sensory tissues, the cristae. Bone
morphogenetic protein 4 (Bmp4), a member of the Transforming growth factor family
(TGF-beta), is conservatively expressed in the developing cristae in several
species, including zebrafish, frog, chicken, and mouse. Using mouse models in
which Bmp4 is conditionally deleted within the inner ear, as well as chicken
models in which Bmp signaling is knocked down specifically in the cristae, we
show that Bmp4 is essential for the formation of all three cristae and their
associated canals. Our results indicate that Bmp4 does not mediate the formation 
of sensory hair and supporting cells within the cristae by directly regulating
genes required for prosensory development in the inner ear such as Serrate1
(Jagged1 in mouse), Fgf10, and Sox2. Instead, Bmp4 most likely mediates crista
formation by regulating Lmo4 and Msx1 in the sensory region and Gata3, p75Ngfr,
and Lmo4 in the non-sensory region of the crista, the septum cruciatum. In the
canals, Bmp2 and Dlx5 are regulated by Bmp4, either directly or indirectly.
Mechanisms involved in the formation of sensory organs of the vertebrate inner
ear are thought to be analogous to those regulating sensory bristle formation in 
Drosophila. Our results suggest that, in comparison to sensory bristles, crista
formation within the inner ear requires an additional step of sensory and
non-sensory fate specification.

PMCID: PMC2274953
PMID: 18404215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Dev Biol. 2008 May 1;317(1):213-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.02.011. Epub 2008
Feb 21.

Sox9 is required for invagination of the otic placode in mice.

Barrionuevo F(1), Naumann A, Bagheri-Fam S, Speth V, Taketo MM, Scherer G,
Neubüser A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, University of Freiburg,
Breisacherstr. 33, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany.
francisco.barrionuevo@uniklinik-freiburg.de

The HMG-domain-containing transcription factor Sox9 is an important regulator of 
chondrogenesis, testis formation and development of several other organs. Sox9 is
expressed in the otic placodes, the primordia of the inner ear, and studies in
Xenopus have provided evidence that Sox9 is required for otic specification. Here
we report novel and different functions of Sox9 during mouse inner ear
development. We show that in mice with a Foxg1(Cre)-mediated conditional
inactivation of Sox9 in the otic ectoderm, otic placodes form and express markers
of otic specification. However, mutant placodes do not attach to the neural tube,
fail to invaginate, and subsequently degenerate by apoptosis, resulting in a
complete loss of otic structures. Transmission-electron microscopic analysis
suggests that cell-cell contacts in the Sox9 mutant placodes are abnormal,
although E-cadherin, N-cadherin, and beta-catenin protein expression are
unchanged. In contrast, expression of Epha4 was downregulated in mutant placodes.
In embryos with a Keratin-19(Cre)-mediated mosaic inactivation of Sox9,
Sox9-negative and Sox9-positive cells in the otic ectoderm sort out from one
another. In these embryos only Sox9-positive cells invaginate and form one or
several micro-vesicles, whereas Sox9-negative cells stay behind and die. Our
findings demonstrate that, in contrast to Xenopus, Sox9 is not required for the
initial specification of the otic placode in the mouse, but instead controls
adhesive properties and invagination of placodal cells in a cell-autonomous
manner.

PMID: 18377888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Dev Neurosci. 2008;30(5):306-18. Epub 2007 Dec 12.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 plays an essential role in telencephalic
progenitors.

Ever L(1), Zhao RJ, Eswarakumar VP, Gaiano N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

We used loss-of-function analysis to determine the role of fibroblast growth
factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) in telencephalic progenitors, and also to examine
interactions between FGFR and Notch signaling. While the telencephalon of FGFR2
mutants appears grossly normal, mutant telencephalic progenitors exhibit altered 
proliferative behavior in vivo and in vitro. Based upon our prior finding that
Notch1 activation increased neurosphere frequency in FGF2, we tested whether this
effect is mediated by FGFR1 or FGFR2. We found that Notch1 activation increased
neurosphere frequency in cells mutant for either FGFR1 or FGFR2, but had no
effect on the reduced size of neurospheres mutant for those receptors. Additional
analyses revealed biochemical changes in the adult neocortex mutant for the IIIc 
isoform of FGFR2, and essential roles for FGFR2 in nasopharynx, eyelid, and
cornea development.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18073459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Cereb Cortex. 2008 Aug;18(8):1865-75. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

Foxg1 haploinsufficiency reduces the population of cortical intermediate
progenitor cells: effect of increased p21 expression.

Siegenthaler JA(1), Tremper-Wells BA, Miller MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, State University of New
York-Upstate Medical University, 750 East Adams Street, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

Foxg1 is a transcription factor that is critical for forebrain development.
Foxg1(+/Cre) mice were used to test the hypotheses 1) that the subventricular
zone (SZ) generates supragranular neurons, 2) that Foxg1-regulated activities
define the output from the SZ, and 3) that Foxg1 is involved in the suppression
of p21-initiated cell-cycle exit. Foxg1(+/Cre) mice have thinner neocortices than
wild-type controls, specifically in the supragranular layers, as detected by Brn2
immunostaining. Cell proliferation in the ventricular zone (VZ) and SZ was
examined to investigate the reduction in upper layer neurons. The number of
cycling VZ cells was similar in Foxg1(+/+) and Foxg1(+/Cre) brains.
Interestingly, cell proliferation in the SZ and intermediate progenitor cell
(IPC) production (noted by Tbr2-immunostaining) was reduced in Foxg1(+/Cre)
brains. These decreases coincided with increased expression of the cell-cycle
inhibitor p21 in the VZ and SZ. Furthermore, colocalization of p21 with markers
of cell proliferation and IPCs indicated that p21 was temporally expressed to
influence the proliferative fate of IPCs. Thus, the present data are consistent
with the above hypotheses, particularly, that during corticogenesis,
Foxg1-regulated activities enable the expansion of the IPC population likely
through suppression of p21-dependent cell-cycle exit.

PMCID: PMC2790389
PMID: 18065723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Dev Biol. 2008 Jan 1;313(1):35-46. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

Generation of Cajal-Retzius neurons in mouse forebrain is regulated by
transforming growth factor beta-Fox signaling pathways.

Siegenthaler JA(1), Miller MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, State University of New
York-Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.

The generation of Cajal-Retzius (CR) neurons is restricted to discrete sites in
the telencephalon. Most of these sites do not express Foxg1, a transcription
factor that inhibits transforming growth factor (TGF)beta-dependent upregulation 
of p21. We tested the hypothesis that TGFbeta signaling triggers CR neurogenesis 
in Foxg1-deficient zones through p21 induction. In Foxg1(+/+) mice, p21 (a) was
expressed in select cycling cells in CR neuron-producing areas and (b) was
co-localized in newly generated CR neurons. Zones of CR neuronal production and
p21 expression were expanded in the forebrains of Foxg1(Cre/Cre) mice.
Manipulation of TGFbeta signaling in explants from cortical hems of wild-type
mice altered p21 expression and the production of CR neurons. Furthermore,
despite continued TGFbeta activity, p21 immunoreactivity diminished in CR neurons
with distance from their generation site. This implicated a second pathway
controlling p21 expression. We provide evidence that Foxo3a, which has been shown
to translocate into the nucleus to act as a transcriptional co-activator of
TGFbeta-dependent upregulation of p21, is strategically expressed to be involved 
in controlling p21 expression in CR neurons. Specifically, Foxo3a was nuclear in 
p21+/reelin+ cells in sites of CR neuronal generation, however, nuclear Foxo3a
immunoreactivity was absent in p21-/reelin+ cells distal from sites of CR
neurogenesis. Thus, TGFbeta and Foxo3a may work in concert to regulate expression
of p21 during CR neuronal generation.

PMCID: PMC2278013
PMID: 18005957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Int J Cancer. 2008 Mar 1;122(5):1047-57.

RBP2-H1/JARID1B is a transcriptional regulator with a tumor suppressive potential
in melanoma cells.

Roesch A(1), Mueller AM, Stempfl T, Moehle C, Landthaler M, Vogt T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Regensburg University Medical Center, D-93053
Regensburg, Germany. alexander.roesch@klinik.uni-regensburg.de

The RBP2-H1/JARID1B nuclear protein belongs to the ARID family of DNA-binding
proteins and is a potential tumor suppressor that is lost during melanoma
development. As we have recently shown, one physiological function of
RBP2-H1/JARID1B is to exert cell cycle control via maintenance of active
retinoblastoma protein. We now add new evidence that RBP2-H1/JARID1B can also
directly regulate gene transcription in a reporter assay system, either alone or 
as part of a multimolecular complex together with the developmental transcription
factors FOXG1b and PAX9. In melanoma cells, chromatin immunoprecipitation
combined with promoter chip analysis (ChIP-on-chip) suggests a direct binding of 
re-expressed RBP2-H1/JARID1B to a multitude of human regulatory chromosomal
elements (promoters, enhancers and introns). Among those, a set of 23 genes,
including the melanoma relevant genes CDK6 and JAG-1 could be confirmed by cDNA
microarray analyses to be differentially expressed after RBP2-H1/JARID1B
re-expression. In contrast, in nonmelanoma HEK 293 cells, RBP2-H1/JARID1B
overexpression only evokes a minor transcriptional response in cDNA microarray
analyses. Because the transcriptional regulation in melanoma cells is accompanied
by an inhibition of proliferation, an increase in caspase activity and a partial 
cell cycle arrest in G1/0, our data support an anti-tumorigenic role of
RBP2-H1/JARID1B in melanocytic cells.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17973255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Neurosci. 2007 Oct 10;27(41):11103-11.

The role of Foxg1 and dorsal midline signaling in the generation of Cajal-Retzius
subtypes.

Hanashima C(1), Fernandes M, Hebert JM, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Smilow Neuroscience Program and Department of Cell Biology, Smilow Research
Center, New York University, New York, New York 10016, USA.

Cajal-Retzius (CR) cells, the earliest-born neurons in the neocortex, arise from 
discrete sources within the telencephalon, including the dorsal midline and the
pallial-subpallial boundary (PSB). In particular, the cortical hem, a region of
high bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and Wnt (wingless-type MMTV integration
site family) expression but lacking in Foxg1 (forkhead box G1) is a major source 
of CR neurons. Whether CR cells from distinct origins arise from disparate
developmental processes or share a common mechanism is unclear. To elucidate the 
molecular basis of CR cell development, we assessed the role of both Foxg1 and
dorsal midline signaling in the production of cortical hem- and PSB-derived CR
cells. We demonstrate that the loss of Foxg1 results in the overproduction of
both of these CR populations. However, removal of Foxg1 at embryonic day 13,
although expanding the number of CR cells with a PSB phenotype, does not result
in an expansion of BMPs or Wnts in the dorsomedial signaling center. Conversely, 
loss of the dorsal midline ligands as observed in Gli3 (glioma-associated
oncogene homolog 3) mutants results in the loss of the cortical hem-derived CR
character but does not affect the specification of PSB-derived CR cells. Hence,
our findings demonstrate that, although the specification of cortical hem-derived
CR cells is dependent on signaling from the dorsal midline, Foxg1 functions to
repress the generation of both cortical hem- and PSB-derived CR cells.

PMID: 17928452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Neuroscience. 2007 Aug 24;148(2):385-99. Epub 2007 Jul 19.

Disruption of Foxg1 expression by knock-in of cre recombinase: effects on the
development of the mouse telencephalon.

Eagleson KL(1), Schlueter McFadyen-Ketchum LJ, Ahrens ET, Mills PH, Does MD,
Nickols J, Levitt P.

Author information: 
(1)Vanderbilt Kennedy Center for Research on Human Development and Department of 
Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 8110B Medical Research
Building III, 465 21st Avenue South, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
kathie.eagleson@vanderbilt.edu

The cre/loxP system is used routinely to manipulate gene expression in the mouse 
nervous system. In order to delete genes specifically from the telencephalon, the
Foxg1-cre line was created previously by replacing the intron-less Foxg1 coding
region with cre, resulting in a Foxg1 heterozygous mouse. As the telencephalon of
heterozygous Foxg1 mice was reported to be normal, this genotype often has been
used as the control in subsequent analyses. Here we describe substantial
disruption of forebrain development of heterozygous mice in the Foxg1-cre line,
maintained on the C57BL/6J background. High resolution magnetic resonance
microscopy reveals a significant reduction in the volume of the neocortex,
hippocampus and striatum. The alteration in the neocortex results, in part, from 
a decrease in its tangential dimension, although gross patterning of the cortical
sheet appears normal. This decrease is observed in three different Foxg1
heterozygous mouse lines, independent of the method of achieving deletion of the 
Foxg1 gene. Although Foxg1 is not expressed in the diencephalon,
three-dimensional magnetic resonance microscopy revealed that thalamic volume in 
the adult is reduced. In contrast, at postnatal day 4, thalamic volume is normal,
suggesting that interactions between cortex and dorsal thalamus postnatally
produce the final adult thalamic phenotype. In the Foxg1-cre line maintained on
the C57BL/6J background, the radial domain of the cerebral cortex also is
disrupted substantially, particularly in supragranular layers. However, neither
Foxg1 heterozygous mice of the Foxg1-tet (tetracycline transactivator) line, nor 
those of the Foxg1-lacZ and Foxg1-cre lines maintained on a mixed background,
displayed a reduced cortical thickness. Thus Cre recombinase contributes to the
radial phenotype, although only in the context of the congenic C57BL/6J
background. These observations highlight an important role for Foxg1 in cortical 
development, reveal noteworthy complexity in the invocation of specific
mechanisms underlying phenotypes expressed following genetic manipulations and
stress the importance of including appropriate controls of all genotypes.

PMCID: PMC2194757
PMID: 17640820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Neurooncol. 2007 Nov;85(2):111-22. Epub 2007 May 24.

FOXG1 dysregulation is a frequent event in medulloblastoma.

Adesina AM(1), Nguyen Y, Mehta V, Takei H, Stangeby P, Crabtree S, Chintagumpala 
M, Gumerlock MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Cancer Center, Baylor College of
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, Rm. 286A, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
aadesina@bcm.tmc.edu

Medulloblastomas represent 20% of malignant brain tumors of childhood. Although, 
they show multiple, non-random genomic alterations, no common, early genetic
event involving all histologic types of medulloblastomas have been described.
Nineteen medulloblastomas were analyzed using chromosomal comparative genomic
hybridization (cCGH). Nine tumors with the most frequent number of genetic
changes were further analyzed using bacterial artificial chromosome array CGH
(aCGH). With aCGH, the frequency of gains and losses were higher than with cCGH. 
Chromosome 2p gains spanning 2p11-2p25 including N-myc locus, 2p24.1 were
detected in 5/9 (55%) tumors while 14q12 gains were detected in 6/9 (67%) tumors.
The 14q12 locus overlapped with the FOXGI gene locus. Quantitative real time PCR 
showed a 2-7-fold copy gain for FOXG1 in all the nine tumors. Protein expression 
was demonstrated by immunohistochemistry in all histologic types. The expression 
of FOXG1 and p21cip1 showed an inverse relationship. FOXG1 copy gain (>2 to 21
folds) was seen in 93% (55/59) of a validating set of tumors and showed a
positive correlation with protein expression (Spearman's rank order correlation
coefficient = 0.276; P = 0.038) representing the first report of FOXG1
dysregulation in medulloblastoma. Modulation of FOXG1 expression in DAOY cell
line using siRNA showed a modest decrease in proliferation with a 2-fold
upregulation of p21cip1. Current reports indicate that FOXG1 represses TGF-beta
induced expression of p21cip1 and cytostasis, and forms a transcriptional
repressor complex with Notch signaling induced hes1. Our findings are consistent 
with a role for FOXG1 in the inhibition of TGF-beta induced cytostasis in
medulloblastoma.

PMID: 17522785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2007 May;104(3-5):195-207. Epub 2007 Mar 23.

FoxG1, a member of the forkhead family, is a corepressor of the androgen
receptor.

Obendorf M(1), Meyer R, Henning K, Mitev YA, Schröder J, Patchev VK, Wolf SS.

Author information: 
(1)Schering AG/Jenapharm GmbH&Co.KG, CRBA G&A, Otto-Schott-Str. 15, D-07745 Jena,
Germany. Maik.Obendorf@bayerhealthcare.com

The androgen receptor (AR) is a ligand-dependent transcriptional regulator which 
belongs to the nuclear receptor superfamily. The basal transcriptional activity
of the androgen receptor is regulated by interaction with coactivator or
corepressor proteins. The exact mechanism whereby comodulators influence target
gene transcription is only partially understood, especially for corepressors.
Whereas several coactivators are described for the AR, only a few corepressors
are known. Here, we describe the discovery of a new androgen receptor
corepressor, FoxG1, which belongs to the forkhead family. By using a fragment of 
the AR (aa 325-919) as bait in a yeast two hybrid screen, the C-terminal region
(aa 175-489) of FoxG1 (also known as BF1), was identified as AR-interacting
protein. Binding of AR to the FoxG1 fragment was verified by one- and two-hybrid 
assays, and pull-down experiments. In addition, we show that the full-length form
of FoxG1 functions as a strong corepressor in the AR-mediated transactivation.
The FoxG1 expression profile in adult individuals is restricted to brain and
testis in human and decreases during aging in the rodent brain. Both AR and FoxG1
expression are developmentally regulated. Besides its reported role in
neurogenesis, the strong expression of FoxG1 in AR-abundant areas of the adult
brain suggests possible involvement in neuroendocrine regulation. Taken together,
the data presented suggest that, in addition to repression of transcription by
direct binding to DNA, FoxG1 may interact with AR in vivo, thereby targeting its 
repressor function specifically to sex hormone signaling.

PMID: 17482455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 May;9(5):531-40. Epub 2007 Apr 15.

The neural progenitor-specifying activity of FoxG1 is antagonistically regulated 
by CKI and FGF.

Regad T(1), Roth M, Bredenkamp N, Illing N, Papalopulu N.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, Tennis Court Road,
Cambridge, CB2 1QR, UK.

FoxG1 is an evolutionarily conserved, winged-helix transcriptional repressor that
maintains progenitor cells in the vertebrate forebrain. How the activity of FoxG1
is regulated is not known. Here, we report that in the developing Xenopus and
mouse forebrain, FoxG1 is nuclear in progenitor cells but cytoplasmic in
differentiating cells. The subcellular localisation of FoxG1 is regulated at the 
post-translational level by casein kinase I (CKI) and fibroblast growth factor
(FGF) signalling. CKI phosphorylation of Ser 19 of FoxG1 promotes nuclear import,
whereas FGF-induced phosphorylation of Thr 226 promotes nuclear export.
Interestingly, FGF-induced phosphorylation of FoxG1 is mediated Akt kinase (also 
known as protein B kinase, PKB) kinase, rather than the MAPK pathway.
Phosphorylation of endogenous FoxG1 is blocked by CKI and Akt inhibitors. In the 
mouse olfactory placode cell line OP27, and in cortical progenitors, increased
FGF signalling causes FoxG1 to exit the nucleus and promotes neuronal
differentiation, whereas FGF and Akt inhibitors block this effect. Thus, CKI and 
FGF signalling converge on an antagonistic regulation of FoxG1, which in turn
controls neurogenesis in the forebrain.

PMID: 17435750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Neurosci. 2007 Apr 4;27(14):3884-93.

Rac1 controls the formation of midline commissures and the competency of
tangential migration in ventral telencephalic neurons.

Chen L(1), Liao G, Waclaw RR, Burns KA, Linquist D, Campbell K, Zheng Y, Kuan CY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Previous studies using dominant-mutant constructs have implicated Rac1 GTPase in 
neuritogenesis and neuronal migration. However, overexpression of dominant
mutants generally blocks Rho-GTPase activity; thus, it may not reveal the
specific or physiological functions of Rac1. To address this issue, we have
applied a conditional gene-targeting strategy, using Foxg1-Cre mice to delete
Rac1 in the ventricular zone (VZ) of telencephalon and Dlx5/6-Cre-IRES (internal 
ribosomal entry site)-EGFP (enhanced green fluorescent protein) (Dlx5/6-CIE) in
the subventricular zone (SVZ) of ventral telencephalon, respectively.
Surprisingly, the deletion of Rac1 in VZ progenitors did not prevent axonal
outgrowth of telencephalic neurons. However, the anterior commissure was absent, 
and the corpus callosal as well as hippocampal commissural axons failed to cross 
the midline in Rac1/Foxg1-Cre knock-out embryos. The thalamocortical and
corticothalamic axons also showed defasciculation or projection defects. These
results suggest that Rac1 controls axon guidance rather than neuritogenesis. In
addition, although Rac1/Foxg1-Cre knock-out embryos showed delayed radial
migration of cortical projection neurons and severe impairment of tangential
migration by the ventral telencephalon-derived interneurons, deletion of Rac1 in 
the SVZ by Dlx5/6-CIE mice produced no discernible defects in tangential
migration. These contrasting effects of Rac1 deletion on tangential migration
suggest that Rac1 is dispensable for cellular motility per se during neuronal
migration. Together, these results underscore the challenge of deciphering the
biological functions of Rac1, and Rho-GTPases in general, during mammalian brain 
development. Moreover, they indicate that Rac1 has a critical role in axon
guidance and in acquisition of migratory competency during differentiation of the
progenitors for the ventral telencephalon-derived interneurons.

PMID: 17409253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Dev Genes Evol. 2007 Mar;217(3):227-33. Epub 2007 Jan 27.

Comparative evolutionary analysis of the FoxG1 transcription factor from diverse 
vertebrates identifies conserved recognition sites for microRNA regulation.

Bredenkamp N(1), Seoighe C, Illing N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Cape Town, Private
Bag, Rondebosch, Cape Town, 7701, South Africa.

Comparative analysis of orthologues from diverse vertebrates can be used to
identify molecular signatures that are important for gene function and which may 
predict novel regulatory mechanisms or explain morphological diversity. The
forkhead box G1 (FoxG1) transcription factor is potentially a strong candidate
gene for determining forebrain size in vertebrates due to its role in the
development of the telencephalon, where it promotes progenitor proliferation and 
suppresses premature neurogenesis. To investigate the role of FoxG1 in forebrain 
evolution, we cloned and analyzed the cDNA sequences for nine new FoxG1
orthologues, including six mammals and three reptiles, and show that there is an 
extended proline and glutamine region in the N-terminal domain that is specific
to mammals. In contrast to some previous studies of other potential determinants 
of brain size, we find no evidence that the coding sequence of FoxG1 has evolved 
under positive selection in vertebrates. Previously published work has indicated 
that FOXG1 was duplicated in humans, and two forms, FOXG1A and FOXG1B, are
present in the Entrez Gene database. We report that FOXG1 has not been duplicated
in humans and that FOXG1A is likely to be an artifact. Our comparative analysis
of FOXG1B and its orthologues has revealed a very high level of conservation in
the 3' untranslated region (UTR). Using available computational tools, we find
evidence for conserved recognition sites for the miR-9 and miR-33 microRNAs in
the FoxG1 3' UTR and hypothesize that these brain-expressed microRNAs may
regulate FoxG1 post-transcriptionally during forebrain development.

PMID: 17260156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Hum Pathol. 2007 Mar;38(3):400-9. Epub 2007 Jan 10.

FOXG1 is overexpressed in hepatoblastoma.

Adesina AM(1), Nguyen Y, Guanaratne P, Pulliam J, Lopez-Terrada D, Margolin J,
Finegold M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. aadesina@bcm.tmc.edu

Bacterial artificial chromosome array comparative genomic hybridization analysis 
of hepatoblastomas reveals a deletion in the 14q12 locus in 12 of 16 cases. A
high frequency of copy gain is seen on chromosomes 1q, 2, 5p, 8, and 20. Frequent
deletions are also seen at 6q, 17q, and 1p with less frequent gains on 4p, 6p,
and 19p. 14q12 deletion locus analyses using quantitative real-time polymerase
chain reaction reveals copy number gain/amplification in the region immediately
telomeric to the deleted locus, including copy number gain (2- to 4-fold) of
FOXG1 in 13 out of 16 tumors. This is associated with up-regulation
(approximately 87-fold) of FOXG1 gene transcripts and increased protein
expression. Immunostaining reveals an inverse relationship between FOXG1
expression and p21cip1 expression in all histologic subtypes. However, FOXG1
transcript levels were significantly higher (approximately 75-fold) in tumors
with embryonal and small cell components when compared with pure fetal
hepatoblastomas. FOXG1 has been implicated in the repression of transforming
growth factor beta-induced expression of p21cip1 and cytostasis. Our findings are
consistent with such a role for FOXG1. We propose that FOXG1 overexpression may
contribute to the maintenance of the undifferentiated state in hepatoblastomas
and could be a potential target for molecular therapeutics. This is the first
report of a possible role for FOXG1 in hepatoblastoma and pediatric neoplasia.

PMID: 17217994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Glia. 2007 Feb;55(3):282-93.

Sloppy paired 1/2 regulate glial cell fates by inhibiting Gcm function.

Mondal S(1), Ivanchuk SM, Rutka JT, Boulianne GL.

Author information: 
(1)The Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumour Research Center, Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Organization of the central nervous system during embryonic development is an
intricate process involving a host of molecular players. The Drosophila
segmentation genes, sloppy paired (slp) 1/2 have been shown to be necessary for
development of a neuronal precursor cell subtype, the NB4-2 cells. Here, we show 
that slp1/2 also have roles in regulating glial cell fates. Using slp1/2
loss-of-function mutants, we show an increase in glial cell markers, glial cells 
missing (gcm) and reversed polarity. In contrast, misexpression of either slp1 or
slp2 causes downregulation of glial cell-specific genes and alters the fate of
glial and neuronal cells. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Slp1 and its mammalian
ortholog, Foxg1, inhibit Gcm transcriptional activity as well as bind Gcm. Taken 
together, these data show that Slp1/Foxg1 regulate glial cell fates by inhibiting
Gcm function.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17091489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Eur J Neurosci. 2006 Oct;24(7):1885-96.

Transplanted dopamine neurons derived from primate ES cells preferentially
innervate DARPP-32 striatal progenitors within the graft.

Ferrari D(1), Sanchez-Pernaute R, Lee H, Studer L, Isacson O.

Author information: 
(1)McLean Hospital/Harvard University Udall Parkinson's Disease Research Center
of Excellence, 115 Mill St, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.

The correct identity and functional capacity of transplanted dopamine (DA)
neurons derived in vitro from embryonic stem (ES) cells is a critical factor for 
the development of an ES cell-based replacement therapy for Parkinson's disease. 
We transplanted primate Cyno-1 ES cells differentiated in vitro for 4 (progenitor
ES cells) or 6 (differentiated ES cells) weeks, or control fetal primate cells
into the striatum of hemi-parkinsonian rats. Partial behavioral recovery in
amphetamine-induced rotation was correlated with the number of ES-derived
tyrosine hydroxylase-positive (TH+) neurons in the grafts (r=0.5, P<0.05). Post
mortem analysis of ES-derived grafts revealed TH+neurons with mature morphology, 
similar to fetal DA neurons, and expression of midbrain transcription factors,
such as Engrailed (En) and Nurr-1. While the total number of TH+neurons was not
different between the two groups, TH/En co-expression was significantly higher
(>90%) in grafts from differentiated ES cells than in grafts derived from
progenitor cells (<50%), reflecting a more heterogeneous cellular composition.
Within the grafts there was an overlap between ES-derived TH+axonal arbors and
clusters of primate ES-derived striatal neurons expressing brain factor 1 (Bf-1, 
Foxg1) and DA and cAMP-regulated phosphoprotein (DARPP-32). Such overlap was
never observed for other regional transcription factors that define neighboring
forebrain domains in the developing brain, such as Nkx2.1 (medial ganglionic
eminence), Nkx2.2 (pallidal and diencephalic progenitors) or Pax6 (dorsal
telencephalic progenitors). Despite the heterogeneity of ES-derived graft cell
composition, these results demonstrate normal phenotypic specification, conserved
natural axonal target selectivity and functionality of DA neurons derived from
primate ES cells.

PMCID: PMC2602801
PMID: 17067292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Oct 31;103(44):16520-5. Epub 2006 Oct 18.

Cdc42 deficiency causes Sonic hedgehog-independent holoprosencephaly.

Chen L(1), Liao G, Yang L, Campbell K, Nakafuku M, Kuan CY, Zheng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Hematology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 3333 Burnet Avenue,
Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The telencephalic neuroepithelium (NE) of mammalian brain has an apical-basal
polarity that is marked by the positioning of neural progenitors and adherens
junctions on the apical/ventricular surface and the ascending of radial
glia/progenitor fibers toward the pial/basal surface. The signaling pathway that 
establishes this apical-basal polarity of NE is not completely understood, but
the Rho-family GTPase Cdc42 may play a critical role because it controls
cadherin-based intercellular junctions and cell polarity in many species. Here,
we tested this hypothesis by a conditional gene-targeting strategy by using the
Foxg1-Cre line to delete Cdc42 in the telencephalic neural progenitors in mouse
embryos. We found that Cdc42-deletion abolishes the apical localization of PAR6, 
aPKC, E-cadherin, beta-catenin, and Numb proteins in the NE, and severely impairs
the extension of nestin-positive radial fibers. Consequently, neural progenitors 
were scattered throughout the entire depth of the NE, and the Cdc42-deficient
telencephalon failed to bulge or separate into two cerebral hemispheres,
resulting in holoprosencephaly. However, neither the midline expression of Sonic 
hedgehog nor the dorso-ventral patterning of the telencephalon was affected by
Cdc42-deletion. Taken together, these results indicate that Cdc42 has an
essential role in establishing the apical-basal polarity of the telencephalic NE,
which is needed for the expansion and bifurcation of cerebral hemispheres.

PMCID: PMC1637614
PMID: 17050694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Neurosci. 2006 Sep 6;26(36):9282-92.

Abnormal positioning of diencephalic cell types in neocortical tissue in the
dorsal telencephalon of mice lacking functional Gli3.

Fotaki V(1), Yu T, Zaki PA, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Biomedical Sciences, The University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh EH8 9XD, United Kingdom. vfotaki@ed.ac.uk

The transcription factor Gli3 (glioma-associated oncogene homolog) is essential
for normal development of the mammalian forebrain. One extreme requirement for
Gli3 is at the dorsomedial telencephalon, which does not form in Gli3(Xt/Xt)
mutant mice lacking functional Gli3. In this study, we analyzed expression of
Gli3 in the wild-type telencephalon and observed a (high)dorsal-to-(low)ventral
gradient of Gli3 expression and predominance of the cleaved form of the Gli3
protein dorsally. This graded expression correlates with the
(severe)dorsal-to-(mild)ventral telencephalic phenotype observed in Gli3(Xt/Xt)
mice. We characterized the abnormal joining of the telencephalon to the
diencephalon and defined the medial limit of the dorsal telencephalon in
Gli3(Xt/Xt) mice early in corticogenesis. Based on this analysis, we concluded
that some of the abnormal expression of ventral telencephalic markers previously 
described as being in the dorsal telencephalon is, in fact, expression in
adjacent diencephalic tissue, which expresses many of the same genes that mark
the ventral telencephalon. We observed occasional cells with diencephalic
character in the Foxg1 (forkhead box)-expressing Gli3(Xt/Xt) telencephalon at
embryonic day 10.5, a day after the anatomical subdivision of the forebrain
vesicle. Large clusters of such cells appear in the Gli3(Xt/Xt) neocortical
region at later ages, when the neocortex becomes highly disorganized, forming
rosettes comprising mainly neural progenitors. We propose that Gli3 is
indispensable for formation of an intact telencephalic-diencephalic boundary and 
for preventing the abnormal positioning of diencephalic cells in the dorsal
telencephalon.

PMCID: PMC2386580
PMID: 16957084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Hippocampus. 2006;16(10):875-90.

FoxG1 haploinsufficiency results in impaired neurogenesis in the postnatal
hippocampus and contextual memory deficits.

Shen L(1), Nam HS, Song P, Moore H, Anderson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

FoxG1 (formerly BF-1) encodes a transcription factor that regulates neurogenesis 
in the embryonic telencephalon. The current study suggests that FoxG1 also
regulates neurogenesis in the postnatal hippocampus. FoxG1 continues to be
strongly expressed in areas of known postnatal neurogenesis, including the
subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle and the dentate gyrus (DG) of the
hippocampus. Remarkably, FoxG1+/- mice have a 60% decrease in the total number of
hippocampal dentate granule cells that is related to a loss of DG neurogenesis.
Comparison of acute and chronic BrdU labeling, and PSA-NCAM staining suggests
that the stage at which this loss of neurogenesis occurs progresses with age.
Juvenile mice FoxG1+/- primarily show failed apparent survival of postnatally
born DG neurons, whereas adult FoxG1+/- mice also show impairment of
proliferation and initial DG neuron differentiation. Consistent with this process
predominantly affecting postnatal hippocampal neurogenesis, BrdU pulses at
embryonic days 16, 17, and 18 labels a higher percentage of DG cells in
6-week-old FoxG1+/- mice than in littermate controls. In contrast to the marked
effect of FoxG1 haploinsufficiency on postnatal hippocampal neurogenesis,
postnatal neurogenesis of olfactory bulb interneurons is grossly unaffected.
Behaviorally, FoxG1+/- mice show hyperlocomotion and impaired habituation in the 
open field, and a severe deficit in contextual fear conditioning that are
suggestive of impaired hippocampal function. Although mechanistic connections
between FoxG1 haploinsufficiency and either failed postnatal DG neurogenesis or
the behavioral deficits remain to be elucidated, these results present a new
model system for impaired postnatal neurogenesis in the DG of adult mice.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16941454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Development. 2006 Aug;133(15):2925-35. Epub 2006 Jul 3.

Segregation of telencephalic and eye-field identities inside the zebrafish
forebrain territory is controlled by Rx3.

Stigloher C(1), Ninkovic J, Laplante M, Geling A, Tannhäuser B, Topp S, Kikuta H,
Becker TS, Houart C, Bally-Cuif L.

Author information: 
(1)Zebrafish Neurogenetics Junior Research Group, Institute of Virology,
Technical University-Munich, Trogerstrasse 4b, D-81675, Munich, Germany.

Anteroposterior patterning of the vertebrate forebrain during gastrulation
involves graded Wnt signaling, which segregates anterior fields (telencephalon
and eye) from the diencephalon. How the telencephalic and retinal primordia are
subsequently subdivided remains largely unknown. We demonstrate that at late
gastrulation the Paired-like homeodomain transcription factor Rx3 biases cell
specification choices towards the retinal fate within a population of bipotential
precursors of the anterior forebrain: direct cell tracing demonstrates that
retinal precursors acquire a telencephalic fate in embryos homozygous for the
rx3-null allele ckh(ne2611), characterized by an enlarged telencephalon and a
lack of eyes. Chimera analyses further indicate that this function of Rx3 is cell
autonomous. Transfating of the eye field in the absence of Rx3 function
correlates with a substantial posterior expansion of expression of the Wnt
antagonist Tlc and the winged-helix transcription factor Foxg1. These results
suggest that the process segregating the telencephalic and eye fields is isolated
from diencephalic patterning, and is mediated by Rx3.

PMID: 16818451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Nat Neurosci. 2006 Jun;9(6):717-8.

Chalk one up for 'nature' during neocortical neurogenesis.

Mizutani K, Gaiano N.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2006 Jun;9(6):743-51.

PMID: 16732198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Dev Dyn. 2006 Sep;235(9):2470-82.

Foxg1 is required for morphogenesis and histogenesis of the mammalian inner ear.

Pauley S(1), Lai E, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Creighton University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Omaha, Nebraska
68178, USA.

The forkhead genes are involved in patterning, morphogenesis, cell fate
determination, and proliferation. Several Fox genes (Foxi1, Foxg1) are expressed 
in the developing otocyst of both zebrafish and mammals. We show that Foxg1 is
expressed in most cell types of the inner ear of the adult mouse and that Foxg1
mutants have both morphological and histological defects in the inner ear. These 
mice have a shortened cochlea with multiple rows of hair cells and supporting
cells. Additionally, they demonstrate striking abnormalities in cochlear and
vestibular innervation, including loss of all crista neurons and numerous fibers 
that overshoot the organ of Corti. Closer examination shows that some anterior
crista fibers exist in late embryos. Tracing these fibers shows that they do not 
project to the brain but, instead, to the cochlea. Finally, these mice completely
lack a horizontal crista, although a horizontal canal forms but comes off the
anterior ampulla. Anterior and posterior cristae, ampullae, and canals are
reduced to varying degrees, particularly in combination with Fgf10
heterozygosity. Compounding Fgf10 heterozygotic effects suggest an additive
effect of Fgf10 on Foxg1, possibly mediated through bone morphogenetic protein
regulation. We show that sensory epithelia formation and canal development are
linked in the anterior and posterior canal systems. Much of the Foxg1 phenotype
can be explained by the participation of the protein binding domain in the
delta/notch/hes signaling pathway. Additional Foxg1 effects may be mediated by
the forkhead DNA binding domain.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3901532
PMID: 16691564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Nat Neurosci. 2006 Jun;9(6):743-51. Epub 2006 May 7.

The timing of cortical neurogenesis is encoded within lineages of individual
progenitor cells.

Shen Q(1), Wang Y, Dimos JT, Fasano CA, Phoenix TN, Lemischka IR, Ivanova NB,
Stifani S, Morrisey EE, Temple S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuropharmacology and Neuroscience, Albany Medical College, Albany,
New York 12208, USA. shenq@mail.amc.edu

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2006 Jun;9(6):717-8.

In the developing cerebral cortex, neurons are born on a predictable schedule.
Here we show in mice that the essential timing mechanism is programmed within
individual progenitor cells, and its expression depends solely on cell-intrinsic 
and environmental factors generated within the clonal lineage. Multipotent
progenitor cells undergo repeated asymmetric divisions, sequentially generating
neurons in their normal in vivo order: first preplate cells, including
Cajal-Retzius neurons, then deep and finally superficial cortical plate neurons. 
As each cortical layer arises, stem cells and neuroblasts become restricted from 
generating earlier-born neuron types. Growth as neurospheres or in co-culture
with younger cells did not restore their plasticity. Using short-hairpin RNA
(shRNA) to reduce Foxg1 expression reset the timing of mid- but not
late-gestation progenitors, allowing them to remake preplate neurons and then
cortical-plate neurons. Our data demonstrate that neural stem cells change
neuropotency during development and have a window of plasticity when restrictions
can be reversed.

PMID: 16680166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Dev Biol. 2006 Jul 1;295(1):116-27. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

CNBP regulates forebrain formation at organogenesis stage in chick embryos.

Abe Y(1), Chen W, Huang W, Nishino M, Li YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytokine Biology, The Forsyth Institute, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

We recently demonstrated that Cellular Nucleic acid Binding Protein (CNBP)(-/-)
mouse embryos exhibit forebrain truncation due to a lack of proper morphogenetic 
movements of the anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) during pre-gastrulation stage
(Chen, W., Liang, Y., Deng, W., Shimizu, K., Ashique, A.M., Li, E., Li, Y.P.,
2003. The zinc-finger protein CNBP is required for forebrain formation in the
mouse, Development 130, 1367-1379). However, CNBP expression pattern in the mouse
forebrain suggests that CNBP may have more direct effects during forebrain
development. Our data show that CNBP is expressed in tissues of early chick
embryo that are the equivalent to the mouse embryo. Using a combination of
RNAi-silencing and Retrovirus-misexpression approaches, we investigated the
temporal function of CNBP in the specification/development of the chick forebrain
during organogenesis. The silencing of CNBP expression resulted in forebrain
truncation and the absence of BF-1, Six3 and Hesx1 expression, but not Otx2 in
chick embryos. Misexpression of CNBP induced the expression of BF-1, Six3 and
Hesx1 in the hindbrain, but not the expression of Otx2. These results offer novel
insights into the function of CNBP during organogenesis as the regulator of
forebrain formation and a number of rostral head transcription factors. Moreover,
CNBP and Otx2 may play roles as regulators of forebrain formation in two parallel
pathways. These new insights into CNBP functions underscore the essential role of
CNBP in forebrain formation during chick embryo organogenesis.

PMID: 16626683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Development. 2006 May;133(9):1831-44.

Dose-dependent functions of Fgf8 in regulating telencephalic patterning centers.

Storm EE(1), Garel S, Borello U, Hebert JM, Martinez S, McConnell SK, Martin GR, 
Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143-2711,
USA.

Mouse embryos bearing hypomorphic and conditional null Fgf8 mutations have small 
and abnormally patterned telencephalons. We provide evidence that the hypoplasia 
results from decreased Foxg1 expression, reduced cell proliferation and increased
cell death. In addition, alterations in the expression of Bmp4, Wnt8b, Nkx2.1 and
Shh are associated with abnormal development of dorsal and ventral structures.
Furthermore, nonlinear effects of Fgf8 gene dose on the expression of a subset of
genes, including Bmp4 and Msx1, correlate with a holoprosencephaly phenotype and 
with the nonlinear expression of transcription factors that regulate neocortical 
patterning. These data suggest that Fgf8 functions to coordinate multiple
patterning centers, and that modifications in the relative strength of FGF
signaling can have profound effects on the relative size and nature of
telencephalic subdivisions.

PMID: 16613831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 May 15;15(10):1629-39. Epub 2006 Apr 6.

Tissue-specific roles of Tbx1 in the development of the outer, middle and inner
ear, defective in 22q11DS patients.

Arnold JS(1), Braunstein EM, Ohyama T, Groves AK, Adams JC, Brown MC, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Most 22q11.2 deletion syndrome (22q11DS) patients have middle and outer ear
anomalies, whereas some have inner ear malformations. Tbx1, a gene hemizygously
deleted in 22q11DS patients and required for ear development, is expressed in
multiple tissues during embryogenesis. To determine the role of Tbx1 in the first
pharyngeal pouch (PPI) in forming outer and middle ears, we tissue-specifically
inactivated the gene using Foxg1-Cre. In the conditional mutants, PPI failed to
outgrow, preventing the middle ear bone condensations from forming. Tbx1 was also
inactivated in the otic vesicle (OV), resulting in the failure of inner ear
sensory organ formation, and in duplication of the cochleovestibular ganglion
(CVG). Consistent with the anatomical defects, the sensory genes, Otx1 and Bmp4
were downregulated, whereas the CVG genes, Fgf3 and NeuroD, were upregulated. To 
delineate Tbx1 cell-autonomous roles, a more selective ablation, exclusively in
the OV, was performed using Pax2-Cre. In contrast to the Foxg1-Cre mutants,
Pax2-Cre conditional mutant mice survived to adulthood and had normal outer and
middle ears but had the same inner ear defects as the Tbx1 null mice, with the
same gene expression changes. These results demonstrate that Tbx1 has non-cell
autonomous roles in PPI in the formation of outer and middle ears and
cell-autonomous roles in the OV. Periotic mesenchymal markers, Prx2 and Brn4 were
normal in both conditional mutants, whereas they were diminished in Tbx1-/-
embryos. Thus, Tbx1 in the surrounding mesenchyme in both sets of conditional
mutants cannot suppress the defects in the OV that occur in the null mutants.

PMCID: PMC2563157
PMID: 16600992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Brain Res. 2006 Mar 10;1077(1):48-53. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

A transgenic marker mouse line labels Cajal-Retzius cells from the cortical hem
and thalamocortical axons.

Zhao C(1), Guan W, Pleasure SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Programs in Neuroscience and Developmental Biology,
University of California, UCSF Mission Bay, Box 2722, Rock Hall, 1550 Fourth
Street, Room RH-348D, San Francisco, CA 94143-2722, USA.

Cajal-Retzius (CR) cells are among the earliest born cortical neurons and are
required for normal cortical development in rodents and humans; however, their
embryonic origin has been controversial. Recent genetic lineage studies and
direct visualization of migration of CR cells have demonstrated multiple
germinative sources for CR cells on the edges of the developing pallium. We
generated transgenic mice using 5' untranslated regions of the Frizzled10 gene in
order to mark the cortical hem (the most caudomedial edge of the telencephalic
neuroepithelium) and found that these mice faithfully reproduce the previously
described expression pattern of Frizzled10 mRNA in the cortical hem, dorsal
thalamus and dorsal neural tube. In the cortical hem, expression of LacZ mRNA was
confined to the ventricular zone and perdurance of LacZ protein served as lineage
marker for CR cells derived from the hem during embryonic life. When these marker
mice were crossed with FoxG1 (BF1) mutants, they confirmed the previous finding
that in these mice the cortical hem is expanded leading to increased production
of CR cells from the medial wall of the cortex.

PMID: 16490185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Development. 2006 Mar;133(5):977-87. Epub 2006 Feb 1.

Inactivation of Tbx1 in the pharyngeal endoderm results in 22q11DS malformations.

Arnold JS(1), Werling U, Braunstein EM, Liao J, Nowotschin S, Edelmann W, Hebert 
JM, Morrow BE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300
Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The 22q11 deletion (22q11DS; velo-cardio-facial syndrome/DiGeorge syndrome) is
characterized by defects in the derivatives of the pharyngeal apparatus. Mouse
genetic studies have identified Tbx1, a member of the T-box family of
transcription factors, as being responsible for the physical malformations of the
syndrome. Mice heterozygous for a null mutation in Tbx1 have mild anomalies,
whereas homozygous Tbx1 mutants die at birth with severe defects in the
derivatives of the pharyngeal apparatus, including cleft palate, thymus gland
aplasia and cardiac outflow tract malformations. Tbx1 is expressed in the
splanchnic mesenchyme, the pharyngeal endoderm (PE) and in the core mesoderm of
the pharyngeal apparatus. Tissue interactions between the epithelia and
mesenchyme of the arches are required for development of the pharyngeal
apparatus; the precise role of Tbx1 in each tissue is not known. To assess the
role of Tbx1 in the PE, a conditional allele of Tbx1 was generated using the
Cre/loxP system. Foxg1-Cre was used to drive PE-specific ablation of Tbx1.
Conditional null mutants survived embryogenesis, but died in the neonatal period 
with malformations identical to the defects observed in Tbx1 homozygous null
mutants. The abnormalities appear to be secondary to failed outgrowth of the
pharyngeal pouches. These results show that Tbx1 in the PE is required for the
patterning and development of the pharyngeal apparatus, thereby disrupting the
formation of its derivative structures.

PMID: 16452092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Development. 2006 Feb;133(3):485-94.

Ras-dva, a member of novel family of small GTPases, is required for the anterior 
ectoderm patterning in the Xenopus laevis embryo.

Tereshina MB(1), Zaraisky AG, Novoselov VV.

Author information: 
(1)Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow, Russia.

Ras-like small GTPases are involved in the regulation of many processes essential
for the specification of the vertebrate body plan. Recently, we identified the
gene of novel small GTPase Ras-dva, which is specifically expressed at the
anterior margin of the neural plate of the Xenopus laevis embryo. Now, we
demonstrate that Ras-dva and its homologs in other species constitute a novel
protein family, distinct from the previously known families of small GTPases. We 
show that the expression of Ras-dva begins during gastrulation throughout the
anterior ectoderm and is activated by the homeodomain transcription factor Otx2; 
however, later on, Ras-dva expression is inhibited in the anterior neural plate
by another homeodomain factor Xanf1. Downregulation of Ras-dva functioning by the
dominant-negative mutant or by the antisense morpholino oligonucleotides results 
in severe malformations of the forebrain and derivatives of the cranial placodes.
Importantly, although the observed abnormalities can be rescued by co-injection
of the Ras-dva mRNA, they cannot be rescued by the mRNA of the closest Ras-dva
homolog from another family of small GTPases, Ras. This fact indicates functional
specificity of the Ras-dva signaling pathway. At the molecular level,
downregulation of Ras-dva inhibits the expression of several regulators of the
anterior neural plate and folds patterning, such as Otx2, BF-1 (also known as
Foxg1), Xag2, Pax6, Slug and Sox9, and interferes with FGF8 signaling within the 
anterior ectoderm. By contrast, expression of the epidermal regulator BMP4 and
its target genes, Vent1, Vent2b and Msx1, is upregulated. Together, the data
obtained indicate that Ras-dva is an essential component of the signaling network
that patterns the early anterior neural plate and the adjacent ectoderm in the
Xenopus laevis embryos.

PMID: 16410411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(24):10916-29.

Antagonistic effects of Grg6 and Groucho/TLE on the transcription repression
activity of brain factor 1/FoxG1 and cortical neuron differentiation.

Marçal N(1), Patel H, Dong Z, Belanger-Jasmin S, Hoffman B, Helgason CD, Dang J, 
Stifani S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuronal Survival, Montreal Neurological Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Groucho (Gro)/TLE transcriptional corepressors are involved in a variety of
developmental mechanisms, including neuronal differentiation. They contain a
conserved C-terminal WD40 repeat domain that mediates interactions with several
DNA-binding proteins. In particular, Gro/TLE1 interacts with forkhead
transcription factor brain factor 1 (BF-1; also termed FoxG1). BF-1 is an
essential regulator of neuronal differentiation during cerebral cortex
development and represses transcription together with Gro/TLE1. Gro/TLE-related
gene product 6 (Grg6) shares with Gro/TLEs a conserved WD40 repeat domain but is 
more distantly related at its N-terminal half. We demonstrate that Grg6 is
expressed in cortical neural progenitor cells and interacts with BF-1. In
contrast to Gro/TLE1, however, Grg6 does not promote, but rather suppresses,
BF-1-mediated transcriptional repression. Consistent with these observations,
Grg6 interferes with the binding of Gro/TLE1 to BF-1 and does not repress
transcription when targeted to DNA. Moreover, coexpression of Grg6 and BF-1 in
cortical progenitor cells leads to a decrease in the number of proliferating
cells and increased neuronal differentiation. Conversely, Grg6 knockdown by RNA
interference causes decreased neurogenesis. These results identify a new role for
Grg6 in cortical neuron development and establish a functional link between Grg6 
and BF-1.

PMCID: PMC1316978
PMID: 16314515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Hum Genet. 2005 Oct;117(6):536-44. Epub 2005 Aug 17.

Haploinsufficiency of novel FOXG1B variants in a patient with severe mental
retardation, brain malformations and microcephaly.

Shoichet SA(1), Kunde SA, Viertel P, Schell-Apacik C, von Voss H, Tommerup N,
Ropers HH, Kalscheuer VM.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 73, 14195 Berlin,
Germany.

We have investigated the chromosome abnormalities in a female patient exhibiting 
a severe cognitive disability associated with complete agenesis of the corpus
callosum and microcephaly. The patient carries a balanced de novo translocation
t(2;14)(p22;q12), together with a neighbouring 720 kb inversion in chromosome
14q12. By combined fluorescence in situ hybridisation and Southern hybridisation,
the distal inversion breakpoint on chromosome 14 was mapped to a region
harbouring genes and ESTs derived predominantly from brain tissue. RT-PCR studies
indicated that these transcripts comprise the 3' ends of novel splice variants of
the winged helix transcription factor FOXG1B (also referred to in previous
studies as FOXG1A and FOXG1C, as well as Brain Factor 1), the mouse orthologue of
which is essential for normal development of the telencephalon. Analysis of these
novel FOXG1B transcripts indicated that they are all disrupted by the breakpoint 
in the patient. Moreover, we have identified novel orthologous Foxg1 transcripts 
in the mouse and other vertebrates, which validates the functional importance of 
these variants and provides a direct genetic link between the patient phenotype
and that of the heterozygous Foxg1 knockout mice. These results, together with
previously published studies on patients with similar disorders and proximal 14q 
deletions, strongly suggest that several disorders associated with malformations 
of the human brain may be directly caused by mutations or alterations in the
FOXG1B gene.

PMID: 16133170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Dev Biol. 2005 Jul 1;283(1):113-27.

Foxg1 is required for specification of ventral telencephalon and region-specific 
regulation of dorsal telencephalic precursor proliferation and apoptosis.

Martynoga B(1), Morrison H, Price DJ, Mason JO.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Biomedical Sciences, George Square, The
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK.

Null mutation of the Foxg1 gene causes hypoplasia of the mouse telencephalon and 
loss of ventral telencephalic structures. We show that a crucial early
requirement for Foxg1 is in the induction of ventral cell fate in the
telencephalon. To study later proliferative defects, we have adapted an
iododeoxyuridine and bromodeoxyuridine double labeling protocol for use in the
developing embryo, which allows estimation of cell cycle kinetics in a single
specimen. This technique is used to demonstrate that the cell cycle is
prematurely lengthened in the Foxg1-null telencephalon. These defects are first
apparent at embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5) and are most severe in the rostral
telencephalon. We show that apoptosis is also reduced in the same rostral domain.
These defects correspond temporally and spatially with a dramatic reduction in
expression of the potent signaling molecule Fgf8. We also show that in the
absence of Foxg1 an excess of neurons is produced from E11.5, depleting the
progenitor pool and limiting the growth of the Foxg1(-/-) telencephalon. The
increase in neurogenic division coincides with an increase in BMP signaling, as
detected by immunohistochemistry for phosphorylated smad-1, -5, and -8. This
study reinforces Foxg1's position as a major regulator of telencephalic
neurogenesis and supports the idea that Foxg1 controls precursor proliferation
via regulation of Fgf signaling and differentiation via regulation of Bmp
signaling.

PMID: 15893304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Neurosci. 2005 Apr 27;25(17):4435-41.

Foxg1 confines Cajal-Retzius neuronogenesis and hippocampal morphogenesis to the 
dorsomedial pallium.

Muzio L(1), Mallamaci A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Technological Research, San Raffaele Scientific
Institute, 20132 Milan, Italy.

It has been suggested that cerebral cortex arealization relies on positional
values imparted to early cortical neuroblasts by transcription factor genes
expressed within the pallial field in graded ways. Foxg1, encoding for one of
these factors, previously was reported to be necessary for basal ganglia
morphogenesis, proper tuning of cortical neuronal differentiation rates, and the 
switching of cortical neuroblasts from early generation of primordial plexiform
layer to late production of cortical plate. Being expressed along a
rostral/lateral(high)- to-caudal/medial(low) gradient, Foxg1, moreover, could
contribute to shaping the cortical areal profile as a repressor of caudomedial
fates. We tested this prediction by a variety of approaches and found that it was
correct. We found that overproduction of Cajal-Retzius neurons characterizing
Foxg1-/- mutants does not arise specifically from blockage of laminar
histogenetic progression of neocortical neuroblasts, as reported previously, but 
rather reflects lateral-to-medial repatterning of their cortical primordium. Even
if lacking a neocortical plate, Foxg1-/- embryos give rise to structures, which, 
for molecular properties and birthdating profile, are highly reminiscent of
hippocampal plate and dentate blade. Remarkably, in the absence of Foxg1,
additional inactivation of the medial fates promoter Emx2, although not
suppressing cortical specification, conversely rescues overproduction of
Reelin(on) neurons.

PMID: 15858069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. J Neurosci. 2005 Mar 16;25(11):2823-31.

The rod photoreceptor pattern is set at the optic vesicle stage and requires
spatially restricted cVax expression.

Schulte D(1), Peters MA, Sen J, Cepko CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. schulte@mpih-frankfurt.mpg.de

How and when positional identities in the neural retina are established have been
addressed primarily with respect to the topographic projections of retinal
ganglion cells onto their targets in the brain. Although retinotectal map
formation is a prominent manifestation of retinal patterning, it is not the only 
one. Photoreceptor subtypes are arranged in distinct, species-specific patterns. 
The mechanisms used to establish photoreceptor patterns have been relatively
unexplored at the mechanistic level. We performed ablations of the eye anlage in 
chickens and found that removal of the anterior or dorsal optic vesicle caused
loss of the area centralis, which is a rod-free central area of the retina, and
severely disorganized other aspects of the rod pattern. These observations
indicate that the anteroposterior and dorsoventral distribution of rods is
determined by the optic vesicle stage. To investigate the molecular mechanisms
involved, the rod distribution was analyzed after viral misexpression of several 
patterning genes that were previously shown to be important in positional
specification of retinal ganglion cells. Ectopic expression of FoxG1, SOHo1,or
GH6 transcription factors expressed in the anterior optic vesicle and/or optic
cup, respectively, did not affect the rod pattern. This pattern therefore appears
to be specified by an activity acting before, or in parallel with, these factors.
In contrast, misexpression of the ventrally restricted transcription factor,
cVax, severely disturbed the rod pattern.

PMID: 15772342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Nat Neurosci. 2005 Mar;8(3):288-96. Epub 2005 Feb 6.

Directed differentiation of telencephalic precursors from embryonic stem cells.

Watanabe K(1), Kamiya D, Nishiyama A, Katayama T, Nozaki S, Kawasaki H, Watanabe 
Y, Mizuseki K, Sasai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Organogenesis and Neurogenesis Group, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN,
Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

We demonstrate directed differentiation of telencephalic precursors from mouse
embryonic stem (ES) cells using optimized serum-free suspension culture (SFEB
culture). Treatment with Wnt and Nodal antagonists (Dkk1 and LeftyA) during the
first 5 d of SFEB culture causes nearly selective neural differentiation in ES
cells ( approximately 90%). In the presence of Dkk1, with or without LeftyA, SFEB
induces efficient generation ( approximately 35%) of cells expressing
telencephalic marker Bf1. Wnt3a treatment during the late culture period
increases the pallial telencephalic population (Pax6(+) cells yield up to 75% of 
Bf1(+) cells), whereas Shh promotes basal telencephalic differentiation (into
Nkx2.1(+) and/or Islet1/2(+) cells) at the cost of pallial telencephalic
differentiation. Thus, in the absence of caudalizing signals, floating aggregates
of ES cells generate naive telencephalic precursors that acquire subregional
identities by responding to extracellular patterning signals.

PMID: 15696161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2005 Jan 1;154(1):63-70.

Distinct effects of caudalizing factors on regional specification of embryonic
stem cell-derived neural precursors.

Irioka T(1), Watanabe K, Mizusawa H, Mizuseki K, Sasai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Organogenesis and Neurogenesis Group, Center for Developmental Biology, RIKEN,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

Recent embryological studies have implicated several "caudalizing factors" in the
caudal specification of the central nervous system (CNS). In this study, we have 
examined the effects of three candidate caudalizing factors on neural precursors 
induced from embryonic stem (ES) cells by the stromal cell-derived inducing
activity (SDIA) method. Among retinoic acid (RA), Wnt and FGF signals, RA causes 
the strongest level of caudalization: inducing suppression of forebrain
differentiation and promotion of caudal CNS specification. Obvious suppression of
the telencephalic marker Bf1 and that of the forebrain marker Otx2 occur at
2x10(-8) and 2x10(-7) M, respectively. Activation of the caudal marker genes such
as Hoxb9 is observed in a dose-dependent manner over the range of
2x10(-9)-2x10(-6) M. Suppression of the forebrain genes has a narrow critical
period of RA response during the early culture phase. In contrast, significant
induction of the caudal genes is evoked by a 1-day exposure to RA at any time
between days 3 and 8. RA treatment not only induces caudal specification but also
inhibits differentiation of ventral CNS tissues, particularly of floor plate
cells. FGF4 induces partial caudalization while Wnt-3A exhibits weak caudalizing 
activities only in the presence of RA. These findings provide useful information 
on the proper selection of combination of signaling molecules, doses and timing
for steering ES cell differentiation by caudalizing factors into caudal neural
fates.

PMID: 15617756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Development. 2004 Nov;131(22):5727-39.

Foxd1 is required for proper formation of the optic chiasm.

Herrera E(1), Marcus R, Li S, Williams SE, Erskine L, Lai E, Mason C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology and Center for Neurobiology
and Behavior, Columbia University, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 630 West
168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

In animals with binocular vision, retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons from each eye
sort in the developing ventral diencephalon to project to ipsi- or contralateral 
targets, thereby forming the optic chiasm. Ipsilaterally projecting axons arise
from the ventrotemporal (VT) retina and contralaterally projecting axons
primarily from the other retinal quadrants. The winged helix transcription factor
Foxd1 (previously known as BF-2, Brain Factor 2) is expressed in VT retina, as
well as in the ventral diencephalon during the formation of the optic chiasm. We 
report here that in embryos lacking Foxd1, both retinal development and chiasm
morphogenesis are disrupted. In the Foxd1 deficient retina, proteins designating 
the ipsilateral projection, such as Zic2 and EphB1, are missing, and the domain
of Foxg1 (BF-1) expands from nasal retina into the VT crescent. In retina-chiasm 
co-cultures, VT RGCs from Foxd1 deficient retina are not repulsed by chiasm
cells, and in vivo many VT RGCs aberrantly project contralaterally. However, even
though the ipsilateral program is lost in the retina, a larger than normal
uncrossed component develops in Foxd1 deficient embryos. Chiasm defects include
axon stalling in the chiasm and a reduction in the total number of RGCs
projecting to the optic tract. In addition, in the Foxd1 deficient ventral
diencephalon, Foxg1 invades the Foxd1 domain, Zic2 and Islet1 expression are
minimized, and Slit2 prematurely expands, changes that could contribute to axon
projection errors. Thus, Foxd1 plays a dual role in the establishment of the
binocular visual pathways: first, in specification of the VT retina, acting
upstream of proteins directing the ipsilateral pathway; and second, in the
patterning of the developing ventral diencephalon where the optic chiasm forms.

PMID: 15509772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Development. 2004 Oct;131(20):5031-40. Epub 2004 Sep 15.

Temporal requirement for hedgehog signaling in ventral telencephalic patterning.

Fuccillo M(1), Rallu M, McMahon AP, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and the Department of Cell Biology, The
Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University Medical Center, 
540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Hedgehog signaling is required for multiple aspects of brain development,
including growth, the establishment of both dorsal and ventral midline patterning
and the generation of specific cell types such as oligodendrocytes and
interneurons. To identify more precisely when during development hedgehog
signaling mediates these events, we directed the removal of hedgehog signaling
within the brain by embryonic day 9 of development, using a FoxG1(Cre) driver
line to mediate the removal of a conditional smoothened null allele. We observed 
a loss of ventral telencephalic patterning that appears to result from an initial
lack of specification of these structures rather than by changes in proliferation
or cell death. A further consequence of the removal of smoothened in these mice
is the near absence of both oligodendrocytes and interneurons. Surprisingly, the 
dorsal midline appears to be patterned normally in these mutants. Together with
previous analyses, the present results demonstrate that hedgehog signaling in the
period between E9.0 and E12 is essential for the patterning of ventral regions
and the generation of cell types that are thought to largely arise from them.

PMID: 15371303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Leuk Lymphoma. 2004 Jun;45(6):1181-4.

Constitutive NF-kappab/Rel activation in philadelphia chromosome positive (Ph+)
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).

Munzert G(1), Kirchner D, Ottmann O, Bergmann L, Schmid RM.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Innere Medizin III, Universität Ulm, Germany.
Gerd.Munzert@bc.boehringer-ingelheim.com

The Bcr-Abl translocation t(9;22)(q34;q11 ) defines a subgroup of ALL patients
with a dismal prognosis despite the introduction of intensified induction and
consolidation regimen. Although Bcr-Abl induced NF-kappaB/Rel activation has
previously been shown, the role of NF-kappaB/Rel in Ph+ leukemia is unclear.
Using DNA binding assays, we demonstrate constitutive NF-kappaB/Rel activity in
nuclear extracts from Ph+ ALL blasts, whereas Ph- primary blast cells and
B-precursor cell lines lack NF-kappaB/Rel activity. NF-kappaB/Rel activity was
shown in the ela2 and the b2a2 subtypes. Constitutive NF-kappaB/Rel activity in
Ph+ blasts is not due to elevated endogenous IkappaB kinase (IKK) activity as
shown by immune complex kinase assays. Since NF-kappaB/Rel is a transcriptional
regulator of inhibitors of apoptosis we examined the expression of anti-apoptotic
genes known to be induced by NF-kappaB/Rel by real time PCR analysis. We found no
induction of TRAFI, TRAF2, cIAPI, cIAP2, XIAP, A20 or Bfl/Al in Ph+ ALL samples
as compared to Ph-negative ALL controls. In summary, constitutive NF-kappaB/Rel
activation independent of endogenous IKK activation may be a common finding in
Ph+ ALL. However, targets of NF-kappaB/Rel mediated transcriptional regulation in
this disease remain to be identified.

PMID: 15359998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Sep 14;101(37):13613-7. Epub 2004 Sep 1.

Proteasomal degradation of the FoxO1 transcriptional regulator in cells
transformed by the P3k and Akt oncoproteins.

Aoki M(1), Jiang H, Vogt PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The Scripps Research
Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
maoki@mfour.med.kyoto-u.ac.jp

The P3k oncoprotein [homolog of the catalytic subunit p110alpha of class 1A
phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)] and its downstream effector Akt induce
oncogenic transformation in cultures of chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEF). The
winged helix transcription factor FoxO1 is a growth-attenuating and proapoptotic 
protein and serves as a substrate of Akt. Here we show that FoxO1 expression is
constitutively suppressed in CEF transformed by P3k or Akt. The FoxO1 protein
level is high in serum-starved normal CEF, but platelet-derived growth factor
treatment induces rapid phosphorylation and disappearance of FoxO1. PI3K
inhibitors or the proteasome inhibitor lactacystin interfere with this process.
These data suggest that phosphorylation-dependent degradation of FoxO1 by means
of proteasomes plays a role in oncogenic transformation by P3k and Akt. A
dominant negative mutant of FoxO1 containing the repressor domain of the
Drosophila Engrailed protein induces partial oncogenic transformation of CEF and 
interferes with FoxO1-dependent transcriptional activation. The FoxG1 oncoprotein
also inhibits transcriptional activation by FoxO1. Inhibition of FoxO1, albeit by
different mechanisms, appears to be a common denominator of the PI3K and FoxG1
oncogenic pathways.

PMCID: PMC518802
PMID: 15342912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Development. 2004 Aug;131(15):3773-84. Epub 2004 Jul 7.

The winged helix transcription factor Foxg1 facilitates retinal ganglion cell
axon crossing of the ventral midline in the mouse.

Pratt T(1), Tian NM, Simpson TI, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Genes and Development Group, Biomedical Sciences, George Square, The
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK. t.pratt@ed.ac.uk

During normal development, retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) project axons along the 
optic nerve to the optic chiasm on the ventral surface of the hypothalamus. In
rodents, most RGC growth cones then cross the ventral midline to join the
contralateral optic tract; those that do not cross join the ipsilateral optic
tract. Contralaterally projecting RGCs are distributed across the retina whereas 
ipsilaterally projecting RGCs are concentrated in temporal retina. The
transcription factor Foxg1 (also known as BF1) is expressed at several key
locations along this pathway. Analysis of Foxg1 expression using lacZ reporter
transgenes shows that Foxg1 is normally expressed in most, if not all, nasal RGCs
but not in most temporal RGCs, neither at the time they project nor earlier in
their lineage. Foxg1 is also expressed at the optic chiasm. Mice that lack Foxg1 
die at birth and, although the shape of their eyes is abnormal, their retinas
still project axons to the brain via the optic chiasm. Using anterograde and
retrograde tract tracing, we show that there is an eightfold increase in the
ipsilateral projection in Foxg1-/- embryos. The distributions of cells expressing
the transcription factors Foxg1 and Nkx2.2, and cell-surface molecules Ephb2,
ephrin B2 and SSEA-1 (Fut4) have been correlated to the normally developing
retinothalamic projection and we show they are not much altered in the developing
Foxg1-/- retina and optic chiasm. As much of the increased ipsilateral projection
in Foxg1-/- embryos arises from temporal RGCs that are unlikely to have an
autonomous requirement for Foxg1, we propose that the phenotype reflects at least
in part a requirement for Foxg1 outwith the RGCs themselves, most likely at the
optic chiasm.

PMID: 15240555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Mol Cell. 2004 May 21;14(4):416-8.

FoxO: linking new signaling pathways.

Arden KC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research and University of California San Diego
School of Medicine, San Diego, CA, USA.

Two recent reports reveal new roles for FoxO proteins in cell proliferation and
tumorigenesis. Seoane and colleagues show that FoxO proteins play key roles in
the TGFbeta-dependent activation of p21Cip1 by partnering with Smad3 and Smad4.
FoxG1, a protein from a distinct Fox subfamily, binds FoxO/Smad complexes and
blocks p21Cip1 expression. These interactions establish a relationship between
the PI3K pathway, FoxG1, and the TGFbeta/Smad pathways. The second report
identifies IkappaB kinase as a negative regulator of FoxO proteins, suggesting a 
mechanism for relieving negative regulation of cell cycle and promoting tumor
cell proliferation.

PMID: 15149589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Cell. 2004 Apr 16;117(2):211-23.

Integration of Smad and forkhead pathways in the control of neuroepithelial and
glioblastoma cell proliferation.

Seoane J(1), Le HV, Shen L, Anderson SA, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology and Genetics Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, 1300 York Avenue, New
York, NY 1002, USA.

FoxO Forkhead transcription factors are shown here to act as signal transducers
at the confluence of Smad, PI3K, and FoxG1 pathways. Smad proteins activated by
TGF-beta form a complex with FoxO proteins to turn on the growth inhibitory gene 
p21Cip1. This process is negatively controlled by the PI3K pathway, a known
inhibitor of FoxO localization in the nucleus, and by the telencephalic
development factor FoxG1, which we show binds to FoxO-Smad complexes and blocks
p21Cip1 expression. We suggest that the activity of this network confers
resistance to TGF-beta-mediated cytostasis during the development of the
telencephalic neuroepithelium and in glioblastoma brain tumor cells.

PMID: 15084259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Science. 2004 Jan 2;303(5654):56-9.

Foxg1 suppresses early cortical cell fate.

Hanashima C(1), Li SC, Shen L, Lai E, Fishell G.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program and the Department of Cell Biology, The
Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York University Medical Center, 
540 First Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2004 Jan 2;303(5654):48-9.

During mammalian cerebral corticogenesis, progenitor cells become progressively
restricted in the types of neurons they can produce. The molecular mechanism that
determines earlier versus later born neuron fate is unknown. We demonstrate here 
that the generation of the earliest born neurons, the Cajal-Retzius cells, is
suppressed by the telencephalic transcription factor Foxg1. In Foxg1 null
mutants, we observed an excess of Cajal-Retzius neuron production in the cortex. 
By conditionally inactivating Foxg1 in cortical progenitors that normally produce
deep-layer cortical neurons, we demonstrate that Foxg1 is constitutively required
to suppress Cajal-Retzius cell fate. Hence, the competence to generate the
earliest born neurons during later cortical development is actively suppressed
but not lost.

PMID: 14704420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Neurobiol. 2003 Dec;57(3):337-49.

Excess FoxG1 causes overgrowth of the neural tube.

Ahlgren S(1), Vogt P, Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology 139-74, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena,
California 91125, USA. s_ahlgren@northwestern.edu

The winged helix transcription factor FoxG1 (Bf-1, qin) plays multiple roles in
the development of the telencephalon, with different parts of the protein
affecting either proliferation or differentiation. We examined the consequences
of over-expression, via retroviral expression, of FoxG1 on the growth of
different regions of the chicken brain. Excess expression of FoxG1 caused a
thickening of the neuroepithelium, and ultimately large outgrowths of the
telencephalon and mesencephalon. In contrast, the myelencephalon appeared
unaffected, exhibiting normal apoptosis and growth characteristics. A DNA binding
defective form of FoxG1 did not exhibit these abnormalities, suggesting that
these effects are due to FoxG1's function as a transcriptional repressor. To
examine the means by which excess FoxG1 caused overgrowth of the brain, we
examined alterations in cell proliferation and death. No increase in
proliferation was noted in any portion of the neural tube, rather a significant
decrease in neuroepithelial apoptosis was seen. These results demonstrate a
previously unrecognized role for winged helix factors in the regulation of neural
cell apoptosis.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Neurobiol 57: 337-349, 2003

PMID: 14608667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Chin Med J (Engl). 2003 Sep;116(9):1329-32.

Identification of genes expressed during myocardial development.

Chan SY(1), Chan AK, Cheung BP, Liang Y, Leung MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Laboratory Block, Faculty
of Medicine Building, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China.
sychan@hkucc.hku.hk

OBJECTIVE: To identify genes expressed in the fetal heart that are potentially
important for myocardial development and cardiomyocyte proliferation.
METHODS: mRNAs from fetal (29 weeks) and adult cardiomyocytes were use for
suppression subtractive hybridization (SSH). Both forward (fetal as tester) and
reverse (adult as driver) subtractions were performed. Clones confirmed by
dot-blot analysis to be differentially expressed were sequenced and analyzed.
RESULTS: Differential expressions were detected for 39 out of 96 (41%) clones on 
forward subtraction and 24 out of 80 (30%) clones on reverse. For fetal
dominating genes, 28 clones matched to 10 known genes (COL1A2, COL3A1, endomucin,
HBG1, HBG2, PCBP2, LOC51144, TGFBI, vinculin and PND), 9 clones to 5 cDNAs of
unknown functions (accession AK021715, AF085867, AB040948, AB051460 and AB051512)
and 2 clones had homology to hEST sequences. For the reverse subtraction, all
clones showed homology to mitochondrial transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: We successfully applied SSH to detect those genes differentially
expressed in fetal cardiac myocytes, some of which have not been shown relative
to myocardial development.

PMID: 14527359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 Mar;3(1):21-7.

The expression of planarian brain factor homologs, DjFoxG and DjFoxD.

Koinuma S(1), Umesono Y, Watanabe K, Agata K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Regeneration Biology, Department of Life Science, Faculty of
Science, Himeji Institute of Technology, 3-2-1 Kouto, Kamigori-cho, Ako-gun,
Hyogo 678-1297, Japan.

Recent accumulating evidence revealed that planarian central nervous system (CNS)
has numerous functional domains distinguished by a large number of neural
markers, suggesting that primitive animals which developed CNS already had the
framework of the brain development. It is of interest to investigate genes which 
have been acquired at an early stage of evolution for brain pattern formation.
One such candidate is FoxG1 (BF-1), specifically expressed in the telencephalon
and implicated in brain development. We identified a FoxG1 (BF-1) homolog gene in
planarians (DjFoxG). We also identified a FoxD class gene, DjFoxD. DjFoxG is
expressed in the body and brain, with strong expression in the mesenchyme
surrounding the gut. During regeneration, an intense anterior signal is detected,
but this is not restricted to the head. DjFoxD is expressed in the mid-apex of
the head, between the two lobes of the brain. Strong expression was detected in
the mid-anterior blastema. Thus, FoxG and FoxD homologs do exist in planarians,
but are regulated differently than those in vertebrates.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science B.V.

PMID: 12609597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Mol Cancer Ther. 2002 Nov;1(13):1237-41.

Molecular modeling of mutations in the DNA-binding domain of the oncoprotein Qin.

Banerjee-Basu S(1), Baxevanis AD.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-4470, USA.

The retroviral oncogene qin, homologue of mammalian brain factor 1 (FOXG1 B),
belongs to the family of winged helix transcription factors. Oncogenic
transformation by Qin requires sequence-specific DNA binding. Missense mutations 
in the forkhead domain of Qin modulate its oncogenic transforming ability in
chicken embryonic fibroblasts. We used homology model building (threading)
techniques to generate atomic structures of wild-type c-Qin and c-Qin mutants,
using the solution structure of the forkhead domain of the adipocyte
transcription factor as a template (M. J. van Dongen et al., J. Mol. Biol., 296: 
351-359, 2000). Energy calculations indicate that the Qin forkhead structure is
stabilized primarily by hydrophobic interactions between residues at the helical 
interface. None of the missense mutations analyzed here were responsible for
maintaining the most critical pairwise interactions holding the forkhead domain
together. The mutated proteins form the overall structure of the forkhead domain,
but the mutations do interfere with DNA binding.

PMID: 12479705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Neurosci. 2002 Oct 1;22(19):8523-31.

Disruption of early events in thalamocortical tract formation in mice lacking the
transcription factors Pax6 or Foxg1.

Pratt T(1), Quinn JC, Simpson TI, West JD, Mason JO, Price DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, United
Kingdom.

Early events in the formation of the thalamocortical tract remain poorly
understood. Recent work has suggested that thalamocortical axons follow a path
pioneered by transient thalamic afferents originating from the medial part of the
ventral telencephalon. We studied the development of these transient afferents
and the thalamocortical tract in mutant mice lacking transcription factors
normally expressed in the dorsal thalamus or ventral telencephalon. Pax6 is
expressed in the dorsal thalamus, but not in the medial part of the ventral
telencephalon, and the thalamocortical tract fails to form in Pax6(-/-) embryos. 
We found that transient thalamic afferents from the ventral telencephalon do not 
form in Pax6(-/-) embryos; this may contribute to the failure of their
thalamocortical development. The distribution of Pax6(-/-) cells in Pax6(-/-)<-->
Pax6(+/+) chimeras supports conclusions drawn from forebrain marker gene
expression that Pax6 is not required for the normal development of the medial
part of the ventral telencephalon but is required in the dorsal thalamus. Failure
of the transient afferent pathway to develop is therefore likely a cell
nonautonomous defect reflecting primary defects in the thalamus. We then examined
the formation of thalamic afferents and efferents in Foxg1(-/-) embryos, which
lack recognizable ventral telencephalic structures. In these embryos thalamic
efferents navigate correctly through the thalamus but fail to turn laterally into
the telencephalon, whereas other axons are able to cross the
diencephalic/telencephalic boundary. Our results support a role for the ventral
telencephalon in guiding the early development of the thalamocortical tract and
identify a new role for the transcription factor Pax6 in regulating the ability
of the thalamus to attract ventral telencephalic afferents.

PMID: 12351726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Neuron. 2002 Aug 15;35(4):671-80.

FGFR1 is required for the development of the auditory sensory epithelium.

Pirvola U(1), Ylikoski J, Trokovic R, Hébert JM, McConnell SK, Partanen J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, 00014 University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
ulla.pirvola@helsinki.fi

The mammalian auditory sensory epithelium, the organ of Corti, comprises the hair
cells and supporting cells that are pivotal for hearing function. The origin and 
development of their precursors are poorly understood. Here we show that
loss-of-function mutations in mouse fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 (Fgfr1)
cause a dose-dependent disruption of the organ of Corti. Full inactivation of
Fgfr1 in the inner ear epithelium by Foxg1-Cre-mediated deletion leads to an 85% 
reduction in the number of auditory hair cells. The primary cause appears to be
reduced precursor cell proliferation in the early cochlear duct. Thus, during
development, FGFR1 is required for the generation of the precursor pool, which
gives rise to the auditory sensory epithelium. Our data also suggest that FGFR1
might have a distinct later role in intercellular signaling within the
differentiating auditory sensory epithelium.

PMID: 12194867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. EMBO J. 2002 Jul 1;21(13):3337-46.

Telencephalon-specific Rb knockouts reveal enhanced neurogenesis, survival and
abnormal cortical development.

Ferguson KL(1), Vanderluit JL, Hébert JM, McIntosh WC, Tibbo E, MacLaurin JG,
Park DS, Wallace VA, Vooijs M, McConnell SK, Slack RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ottawa Health Research Institute, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road,
Ottawa, ON, Canada K1H 8M5.

Correct cell cycle regulation and terminal mitosis are critical for nervous
system development. The retinoblastoma (Rb) protein is a key regulator of these
processes, as Rb-/- embryos die by E15.5, exhibiting gross hematopoietic and
neurological defects. The extensive apoptosis in Rb-/- embryos has been
attributed to aberrant S phase entry resulting in conflicting growth control
signals in differentiating cells. To assess the role of Rb in cortical
development in the absence of other embryonic defects, we examined mice with
telencephalon-specific Rb deletions. Animals carrying a floxed Rb allele were
interbred with mice in which cre was knocked into the Foxg1 locus. Unlike
germline knockouts, mice specifically deleted for Rb in the developing
telencephalon survived until birth. In these mutants, Rb-/- progenitor cells
divided ectopically, but were able to survive and differentiate. Mutant brains
exhibited enhanced cellularity due to increased proliferation of neuroblasts.
These studies demonstrate that: (i) cell cycle deregulation during
differentiation does not necessitate apoptosis; (ii) Rb-deficient mutants exhibit
enhanced neuroblast proliferation; and (iii) terminal mitosis may not be required
to initiate differentiation.

PMCID: PMC126087
PMID: 12093735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Am J Pathol. 2002 Jun;160(6):2181-90.

Gene expression in Wilms' tumor mimics the earliest committed stage in the
metanephric mesenchymal-epithelial transition.

Li CM(1), Guo M, Borczuk A, Powell CA, Wei M, Thaker HM, Friedman R, Klein U,
Tycko B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

Wilms' tumor (WT) has been considered a prototype for arrested cellular
differentiation in cancer, but previous studies have relied on selected markers. 
We have now performed an unbiased survey of gene expression in WTs using
oligonucleotide microarrays. Statistical criteria identified 357 genes as
differentially expressed between WTs and fetal kidneys. This set contained 124
matches to genes on a microarray used by Stuart and colleagues (Stuart RO, Bush
KT, Nigam SK: Changes in global gene expression patterns during development and
maturation of the rat kidney. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:5649-5654) to
establish genes with stage-specific expression in the developing rat kidney.
Mapping between the two data sets showed that WTs systematically overexpressed
genes corresponding to the earliest stage of metanephric development, and
underexpressed genes corresponding to later stages. Automated clustering
identified a smaller group of 27 genes that were highly expressed in WTs compared
to fetal kidney and heterologous tumor and normal tissues. This signature set was
enriched in genes encoding transcription factors. Four of these, PAX2, EYA1,
HBF2, and HOXA11, are essential for cell survival and proliferation in early
metanephric development, whereas others, including SIX1, MOX1, and SALL2, are
predicted to act at this stage. SIX1 and SALL2 proteins were expressed in the
condensing mesenchyme in normal human fetal kidneys, but were absent (SIX1) or
reduced (SALL2) in cells at other developmental stages. These data imply that the
blastema in WTs has progressed to the committed stage in the
mesenchymal-epithelial transition, where it is partially arrested in
differentiation. The WT-signature set also contained the Wnt receptor FZD7, the
tumor antigen PRAME, the imprinted gene NNAT and the metastasis-associated
transcription factor E1AF.

PMCID: PMC1850829
PMID: 12057921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6201-11.

BF-1 interferes with transforming growth factor beta signaling by associating
with Smad partners.

Dou C(1), Lee J, Liu B, Liu F, Massague J, Xuan S, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The winged-helix (WH) BF-1 gene, which encodes brain factor 1 (BF-1) (also known 
as foxg1), is essential for the proliferation of the progenitor cells of the
cerebral cortex. Here we show that BF-1-deficient telencephalic progenitor cells 
are more apt to leave the cell cycle in response to transforming growth factor
beta (TGF-beta) and activin. We found that ectopic expression of BF-1 in vitro
inhibits TGF-beta mediated growth inhibition and transcriptional activation.
Surprisingly, we found that the ability of BF-1 to function as a TGF-beta
antagonist does not require its DNA binding activity. Therefore, we investigated 
whether BF-1 can inhibit Smad-dependent transcriptional responses by interacting 
with Smads or Smad binding partners. We found that BF-1 does not interact with
Smads. Because the identities of the Smad partners mediating growth inhibition by
TGF-beta are not clearly established, we examined a model reporter system which
is known to be activated by activin and TGF-beta through Smads and the WH factor 
FAST-2. We demonstrate that BF-1 associates with FAST-2. This interaction is
dependent on the same region of protein which mediates its ability to interfere
with the antiproliferative activity of TGF-beta and with TGF-beta-dependent
transcriptional activation. Furthermore, the interaction of FAST-2 with BF-1 is
mediated by the same domain which is required for FAST-2 to interact with Smad2. 
We propose a model in which BF-1 interferes with transcriptional responses to
TGF-beta by interacting with FAST-2 or with other DNA binding proteins which
function as Smad2 partners and which have a common mode of interaction with
Smad2.

PMCID: PMC86095
PMID: 10938097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Dev Biol. 2000 Jun 15;222(2):296-306.

Targeting of cre to the Foxg1 (BF-1) locus mediates loxP recombination in the
telencephalon and other developing head structures.

Hébert JM(1), McConnell SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 
94305-5020, USA.

The use of genetics to study the development of the telencephalon and derivatives
such as the cerebral cortex has been limited. The telencephalon begins to form
midway through gestation, and targeted mutations in genes suspected of playing
roles in its development often lead to early phenotypes that preclude analysis of
their role at later stages. This problem can be circumvented using a Cre/loxP
recombination system. A mouse line was produced in which cre was targeted to the 
Foxg1 (BF-1) locus, a gene expressed specifically in the telencephalon and
discrete head structures. Crosses between Foxg1-Cre mice and three separate loxP 
reporter mice generated embryos with recombination patterns matching that
expected from the normal pattern of Foxg1 expression. Recombination occurs
invariably in the telencephalon, anterior optic vesicle, otic vesicle, facial and
head ectoderm, olfactory epithelium, mid-hindbrain junction, and pharyngeal
pouches. Recombination in some animals also occurs less efficiently in tissues
not known to express Foxg1. We show that the genetic background of the parental
mice and the loxP target allele can each contribute to differences in the exact
pattern of recombination. Collectively, these data show that Foxg1-Cre mice
should be useful in the deletion or ectopic expression of any floxed target gene 
in a Foxg1-like pattern.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10837119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1995 Jun 9;1262(2-3):105-12.

The genes for human brain factor 1 and 2, members of the fork head gene family,
are clustered on chromosome 14q.

Wiese S(1), Murphy DB, Schlung A, Burfeind P, Schmundt D, Schnülle V, Mattei MG, 
Thies U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Göttingen, Germany.

Brain factor-1 (BF-1) is a member of the fork head gene family which shows
expression restricted to the neurons of the developing telencephalon in rodents
and man. We have isolated a second human gene (HBF-2), which is also strongly
expressed in embryonic brain and has very high homology to both the rat and human
brain factor-1 genes and the retroviral oncogene qin. The HBF-2 cDNA was isolated
from a human fetal brain expression library and contains a putative open reading 
frame of 479 amino acids. The HBF-2 gene is strongly expressed in fetal brain and
also with lower levels of expression in several adult tissues. At the genomic
level the gene for HBF-1 contains an 500 bp intron situated between the DNA
binding domain II and the fork head domain while that of HBF-2 is intronless. The
two genes are clustered on human chromosome 14q11-13.

PMID: 7599184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Genomics. 1994 Jun;21(3):551-7.

Human brain factor 1, a new member of the fork head gene family.

Murphy DB(1), Wiese S, Burfeind P, Schmundt D, Mattei MG, Schulz-Schaeffer W,
Thies U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Göttingen, Germany.

Analysis of cDNA clones that cross-hybridized with the fork head domain of the
rat HNF-3 gene family revealed 10 cDNAs from human fetal brain and human testis
cDNA libraries containing this highly conserved DNA-binding domain. Three of
these cDNAs (HFK1, HFK2, and HFK3) were further analyzed. The cDNA HFK1 has a
length of 2557 nucleotides and shows strong homology at the nucleotide level
(91.2%) to brain factor 1 (BF-1) from rat. The HFK1 cDNA codes for a putative 476
amino acid protein. The homology to BF-1 from rat in the coding region at the
amino acid level is 87.5%. The fork head homologous region includes 111 amino
acids starting at amino acid 160 and has a 97.5% homology to BF-1. Southern
hybridization revealed that HFK1 is highly conserved among mammalian species and 
possibly birds. Northern analysis with total RNA from human tissues and
poly(A)-rich RNA from mouse revealed a 3.2-kb transcript that is present in human
and mouse fetal brain and in adult mouse brain. In situ hybridization with
sections of mouse embryo and human fetal brain reveals that HFK1 expression is
restricted to the neuronal cells in the telencephalon, with strong expression
being observed in the developing dentate gyrus and hippocampus. HFK1 was
chromosomally localized by in situ hybridization to 14q12. The cDNA clones HFK2
and HFK3 were analyzed by restriction analysis and sequencing. HFK2 and HFK3 were
found to be closely related but different from HFK1. Therefore, it would appear
that HFK1, HFK2, HFK3, and BF-1 form a new fork head related subfamily.

PMID: 7959731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


