
1. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Oct 15;8(10):17601-11. eCollection 2015.

Benzyl isothiocyanate inhibits breast cancer cell tumorigenesis via repression of
the FoxH1-Mediated Wnt/ß-catenin pathway.

Liu Y(1), Zhang L(1), Meng Y(2), Huang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan
UniversityChengdu 610041, Sichuan, China; Evidence-Based Pharmacy Center, West
China Second University Hospital, Sichuan UniversityChengdu 610041, Sichuan,
China; Key Laboratory of Birth Defects and Related Diseases of Women and Children
(Sichuan University), Ministry of EducationChengdu 610041, Sichuan, China.
(2)School of Medical Laboratory Science, Chengdu Medical College Chengdu 610041, 
Sichuan, China.

The mechanisms underlying the growth inhibitory effect of Benzyl isothiocyanate
(BITC) against breast cancer are still not fully understood. Therefore, we
further investigated the mechanism in BITC triggering breast cancer. In the
present study, we found that the overexpression of FOXH1 in breast cancers
tissues and cells, and FOXH1 significantly promoted cell proliferation, invasion 
and tumorigenesis in vitro. FOXH1 significantly increased the expression levels
of ß-catenin, cyclinD1, and c-myc proteins in breast cancer cells. Furthermore,
siß-catenin reduced FOXH1 promotion of cell proliferation and invasion in breast 
cancer cells. Taken together, these results suggest that FOXH1 promoted breast
cancer cell growth and invasion by potentiating the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway,
suggesting that FOXH1 may be a potential molecular target for breast cancer
prevention and therapy. Furthermore, BITC treatment has remarkable effect on the 
expression level of FOXH1 and ß-catenin mRNA and protein in MCF-7 cells,
MDA-MB-231 cells and SUM 159 cells. BITC treatment has an obvious significance on
transcriptional activity of FOXH1. Cell growth and invasion inhibition resulting 
from BITC exposure were significantly augmented by FoxH1 knockdown. In
conclusion, the present study provides novel insights into the molecular
circuitry of BITC-induced cell death involving FoxH1-mediated tumorigenesis.
Thus, the present study provides a novel insight into the underlying mechanism of
tumorigenesis in BITC triggering breast cancer, indicating the therapeutic
potential of FOXH1 in the treatment of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4694250
PMID: 26770350  [PubMed]


2. Dev Growth Differ. 2015 Dec;57(9):591-600. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12246. Epub 2015 Dec 
14.

Pou5f3.2-induced proliferative state of embryonic cells during gastrulation of
Xenopus laevis embryo.

Nishitani E(1), Li C(1), Lee J(2), Hotta H(2), Katayama Y(2), Yamaguchi M(1,)(2),
Kinoshita T(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, School of Science and Technology, Kwansei Gakuin
University, Hyogo, 669-1337, Japan. (2)Department of Life Science, Faculty of
Science, Rikkyo University, Tokyo, 171-8501, Japan.

POU class V (POU-V) transcription factors play the important role in maintenance 
of pluripotency and cell differentiation. Pou5f3.2 (Oct25), one of Xenopus POU-V 
transcription factors, shows the zygotic expression prior to gastrulation. In
order to know the molecular mechanism of pou5f3.2 expression at gastrula stage,
we examined a responsiveness of pou5f3.2 to Nodal signaling. Animal cap assay
demonstrated that Xnr2 activates the gene expression of pou5f3.2. In comparative 
analysis of the 5'-flanking region of pou5f3.2 between Xenopus laevis and
X. tropicalis, two conserved regions were detected within the flanking region.
Reporter analyses showed that one of the conserved regions contained an enhancer 
region, which had several Smad2/3 and FoxH1 binding motifs. ChIP assay
demonstrated that Smad2 binds to the enhancer region. These results suggest that 
Nodal signaling induces zygotic expression of pou5f3.2 at gastrula stage. To
understand a role of pou5f3.2 in gastrula embryos, morpholino oligo DNA of
pou5f3.2 was injected into the lateral side of one blastomere at the 2-cell
stage. The morphant embryos showed diminution of Xbra1 expression and
gastrulation defect in the injection side, suggesting the essential role of
pou5f3.2 at the gastrula stage. Xbra1 expression and gastrulation were also
inhibited by injecting with the synthesized RNAs of pou5f3.2. Furthermore, in the
pou5f3.2-injected embryo, gene expression of p27Xic1 was drastically suppressed, 
and the number of dividing cells increased in the injection side. These results
suggest that one role of pou5f3.2 is to keep the embryonic cells in
undifferentiated and proliferative state during gastrulation.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 26660397  [PubMed - in process]


3. Life Sci. 2016 Jan 1;144:194-201. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2015.12.001. Epub 2015 Dec
2.

Forkhead box transcription factors in embryonic heart development and congenital 
heart disease.

Zhu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Biology, Hunan University, 1 
Denggao Road, Yuelu District, Changsha, Hunan 410082, PR China. Electronic
address: zhuh6477@126.com.

Embryonic heart development is a very complicated process regulated precisely by 
a network composed of many genes and signaling pathways in time and space.
Forkhead box (Fox, FOX) proteins are a family of transcription factors
characterized by the presence of an evolutionary conserved "forkhead"or
"winged-helix" DNA-binding domain and able to organize temporal and spatial gene 
expression during development. They are involved in a wide variety of cellular
processes, such as cell cycle progression, proliferation, differentiation,
migration, metabolism and DNA damage response. An abundance of studies in model
organisms and systems has established that Foxa2, Foxc1/c2, Foxh1 and Foxm1,
Foxos and Foxps are important components of the signaling pathways that instruct 
cardiogenesis and embryonic heart development, playing paramount roles in heart
development. The previous studies also have demonstrated that mutations in some
of the forkhead box genes and the aberrant expression of forkhead box gene are
heavily implicated in the congenital heart disease (CHD) of humans. This review
primarily focuses on the current understanding of heart development regulated by 
forkhead box transcription factors and molecular genetic mechanisms by which
forkhead box factors modulate heart development during embryogenesis and
organogenesis. This review also summarizes human CHD related mutations in
forkhead box genes as well as the abnormal expression of forkhead box gene, and
discusses additional possible regulatory mechanisms of the forkhead box genes
during embryonic heart development that warrant further investigation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26656470  [PubMed - in process]


4. PLoS One. 2015 Nov 30;10(11):e0143825. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143825.
eCollection 2015.

Nmnat1-Rbp7 Is a Conserved Fusion-Protein That Combines NAD+ Catalysis of Nmnat1 
with Subcellular Localization of Rbp7.

Chen H(1), Babino D(2), Schoenbichler SA(3), Arkhipova V(1), Töchterle S(1),
Martin F(1), Huck CW(3), von Lintig J(2), Meyer D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology/CMBI, University of Innsbruck, Technikerstrasse
25, 6020, Innsbruck, Austria. (2)School of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, 
Case Western Reserve University, 2109 Adelbert Road, Cleveland, Ohio, 44106,
United States of America. (3)Institute of Analytical Chemistry and
Radiochemistry/ CCB-Center for Chemistry and Biomedicine, University of
Innsbruck, Innrain 80-82, 6020, Innsbruck, Austria.

Retinol binding proteins (Rbps) are known as carriers for transport and targeting
of retinoids to their metabolizing enzymes. Rbps are also reported to function in
regulating the homeostatic balance of retinoid metabolism, as their level of
retinoid occupancy impacts the activities of retinoid metabolizing enzymes. Here 
we used zebrafish as a model to study rbp7a function and regulation. We find that
early embryonic rbp7a expression is negatively regulated by the
Nodal/FoxH1-signaling pathway and we show that Nodal/FoxH1 activity has the
opposite effect on aldh1a2, which encodes the major enzyme for early embryonic
retinoic acid production. The data are consistent with a Nodal-dependent
coordination of the allocation of retinoid precursors to processing enzymes with 
the catalysis of retinoic acid formation. Further, we describe a novel
nmnat1-rbp7 transcript encoding a fusion of Rbp7 and the NAD+ (Nicotinamide
adenine dinucleotide) synthesizing enzyme Nmnat1. We show that nmnat1-rbp7 is
conserved in fish, mouse and chicken, and that in zebrafish regulation of
nmnat1-rbp7a is distinct from that of rbp7a and nmnat1. Injection experiments in 
zebrafish further revealed that Nmnat1-Rbp7a and Nmnat1 have similar NAD+
catalyzing activities but a different subcellular localization. HPLC measurements
and protein localization analysis highlight Nmnat1-Rbp7a as the only known
cytoplasmic and presumably endoplasmic reticulum (ER) specific NAD+ catalyzing
enzyme. These studies, taken together with previously documented NAD+ dependent
interaction of RBPs with ER-associated enzymes of retinal catalysis, implicate
functions of this newly described NMNAT1-Rbp7 fusion protein in retinol
oxidation.

PMCID: PMC4664474
PMID: 26618989  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cell Regen (Lond). 2015 Nov 11;4:10. doi: 10.1186/s13619-015-0024-9. eCollection 
2015.

Reprogramming barriers and enhancers: strategies to enhance the efficiency and
kinetics of induced pluripotency.

Ebrahimi B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yazd Cardiovascular Research Center, Shahid Sadoughi University of Medical
Sciences, Yazd, Iran.

Induced pluripotent stem cells are powerful tools for disease modeling, drug
screening, and cell transplantation therapies. These cells can be generated
directly from somatic cells by ectopic expression of defined factors through a
reprogramming process. However, pluripotent reprogramming is an inefficient
process because of various defined and unidentified barriers. Recent studies
dissecting the molecular mechanisms of reprogramming have methodically improved
the quality, ease, and efficiency of reprogramming. Different strategies have
been applied for enhancing reprogramming efficiency, including
depletion/inhibition of barriers (p53, p21, p57, p16(Ink4a)/p19(Arf), Mbd3,
etc.), overexpression of enhancing genes (e.g., FOXH1, C/EBP alpha, UTF1, and
GLIS1), and administration of certain cytokines and small molecules. The current 
review provides an in-depth overview of the cutting-edge findings regarding
distinct barriers of reprogramming to pluripotency and strategies to enhance
reprogramming efficiency. By incorporating the mechanistic insights from these
recent findings, a combined method of inhibition of roadblocks and application of
enhancing factors may yield the most reliable and effective approach in
pluripotent reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC4642739
PMID: 26566431  [PubMed]


6. Mech Dev. 2015 May;136:155-65. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2014.12.002. Epub 2014 Dec 12.

Disrupting Foxh1-Groucho interaction reveals robustness of nodal-based embryonic 
patterning.

Halstead AM(1), Wright CV(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Program in Developmental
Biology, Center for Stem Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical School, 2213
Garland Ave., Nashville, TN 37232, United States. (2)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, Program in Developmental Biology, Center for Stem Cell
Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical School, 2213 Garland Ave., Nashville, TN
37232, United States. Electronic address: chris.wright@vanderbilt.edu.

The winged-helix transcription factor Foxh1 is an essential regulator of Nodal
signaling during the key developmental processes of gastrulation,
anterior-posterior (A-P) patterning, and the derivation of left-right (L-R)
asymmetry. Current models have Foxh1 bound to phospho-Smad2/3 (pSmad2/3) as a
central transcriptional activator for genes targeted by Nodal signaling including
Nodal itself, the feedback inhibitor Lefty2, and the positive transcriptional
effector Pitx2. However, the conserved Engrailed homology-1 (EH1) motif present
in Foxh1 suggests that modulated interaction with Groucho (Grg) co-repressors
would allow Foxh1 to function as a transcriptional switch, toggling between
transcriptional on and off states via pSmad2-Grg protein-switching, to ensure the
properly timed initiation and suppression, and/or amplitude, of expression of
Nodal and its target genes. We minimally mutated the Foxh1 EH1 motif, creating a 
novel Foxh1(mEH1) allele to test directly the contribution of Foxh1-Grg-mediated 
repression on the transient, dynamic pattern of Nodal signaling in mice. All
aspects of Nodal and its target gene expression in Foxh1(mEH1/mEH1) embryos were 
equivalent to wild type. A-P patterning and organ situs in homozygous embryos and
adult mice were also unaffected. The finding that Foxh1-Grg-mediated repression
is not essential for Nodal expression during mouse embryogenesis suggests that
other regulators compensate for the loss of repressive regulatory input that is
mediated by Grg interactions. We suggest that the pervasive inductive properties 
of Nodal signaling exist within the context of a strongly buffered regulatory
system that contributes to resilience and accuracy of its dynamic expression
pattern.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4747026 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25511461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Apr;11(4):2717-22. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.3061. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

Smad4 suppresses the progression of renal cell carcinoma via the activation of
forkhead box protein H1.

Liu Y(1), Xu Y(2), Li X(1), Chen Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urological Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China. (2)Department of
Urological Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, Heilongjiang 150001, P.R. China.

Smad4 has recently been identified as a tumor suppressor gene in a variety of
cancers, yet the role of Smad4 in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) remained to be
elusive. Therefore, the aim of the present study was to explore the function of
Smad4 in RCC. The expression of Smad4 reduced the growth rate of RCC. The levels 
of Smad4 and forkhead box protein H1 (FOXH1) mRNA were reduced, while the levels 
of estrogen receptor were increased in RCC cells compared with those in human
renal epithelial cells (P<0.01). Western blot analysis showed an identical trend 
among the three molecules. Glutathione S-transferase pull-down and
immunoprecipitation assays proved the interaction between Smad4 and FOXH1. An
immunofluorescence assay revealed that Smad4 and FOXH1 were colocalized in the
nuclei of RCC cells. Smad4 interacts with Smad2 and migrates into the nucleus,
where it interacts with FOXH1 to repress the protein expression of estrogen
receptor. These results indicate that Smad4 acts as a tumor suppressor by
activating FOXH1, and then suppressing the expression of estrogen receptor, in
addition to tumor migration and invasion. Hence, Smad4 should be investigated as 
a potential target for the treatment for RCC.

PMID: 25482028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Development. 2014 Dec;141(23):4537-47. doi: 10.1242/dev.107227. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Genome-wide view of TGFß/Foxh1 regulation of the early mesendoderm program.

Chiu WT(1), Charney Le R(1), Blitz IL(1), Fish MB(1), Li Y(2), Biesinger J(2),
Xie X(2), Cho KW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697-2300, USA. (2)Department of Computer Science, University of
California, Irvine, CA 92697-2300, USA. (3)Department of Developmental and Cell
Biology, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-2300, USA kwcho@uci.edu.

Nodal/TGFß signaling regulates diverse biological responses. By combining RNA-seq
on Foxh1 and Nodal signaling loss-of-function embryos with ChIP-seq of Foxh1 and 
Smad2/3, we report a comprehensive genome-wide interaction between Foxh1 and
Smad2/3 in mediating Nodal signaling during vertebrate mesendoderm development.
This study significantly increases the total number of Nodal target genes
regulated by Foxh1 and Smad2/3, and reinforces the notion that
Foxh1-Smad2/3-mediated Nodal signaling directly coordinates the expression of a
cohort of genes involved in the control of gene transcription, signaling pathway 
modulation and tissue morphogenesis during gastrulation. We also show that Foxh1 
may function independently of Nodal signaling, in addition to its role as a
transcription factor mediating Nodal signaling via Smad2/3. Finally, we propose
an evolutionarily conserved interaction between Foxh1 and PouV, a mechanism
observed in Pou5f1-mediated regulation of pluripotency in human embryonic stem
and epiblast cells.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4302925
PMID: 25359723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. BMC Biol. 2014 Oct 3;12:81. doi: 10.1186/s12915-014-0081-5.

Global identification of Smad2 and Eomesodermin targets in zebrafish identifies a
conserved transcriptional network in mesendoderm and a novel role for
Eomesodermin in repression of ectodermal gene expression.

Nelson AC, Cutty SJ, Niini M, Stemple DL, Flicek P, Houart C, Bruce AE, Wardle
FC.

BACKGROUND: Nodal signalling is an absolute requirement for normal mesoderm and
endoderm formation in vertebrate embryos, yet the transcriptional networks acting
directly downstream of Nodal and the extent to which they are conserved is
largely unexplored, particularly in vivo. Eomesodermin also plays a role in
patterning mesoderm and endoderm in vertebrates, but its mechanisms of action,
and how it interacts with the Nodal signalling pathway are still unclear.
RESULTS: Using a combination of ChIP-seq and expression analysis we identify
direct targets of Smad2, the effector of Nodal signalling in blastula stage
zebrafish embryos, including many novel target genes. Through comparison of these
data with published ChIP-seq data in human, mouse and Xenopus we show that the
transcriptional network driven by Smad2 in mesoderm and endoderm is conserved in 
these vertebrate species. We also show that Smad2 and zebrafish Eomesodermin a
(Eomesa) bind common genomic regions proximal to genes involved in mesoderm and
endoderm formation, suggesting Eomesa forms a general component of the Smad2
signalling complex in zebrafish. Combinatorial perturbation of Eomesa and
Smad2-interacting factor Foxh1 results in loss of both mesoderm and endoderm
markers, confirming the role of Eomesa in endoderm formation and its functional
interaction with Foxh1 for correct Nodal signalling. Finally, we uncover a novel,
role for Eomesa in repressing ectodermal genes in the early blastula.
CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate that evolutionarily conserved developmental
functions of Nodal signalling occur through maintenance of the transcriptional
network directed by Smad2. This network is modulated by Eomesa in zebrafish which
acts to promote mesoderm and endoderm formation in combination with Nodal
signalling, whilst Eomesa also opposes ectoderm gene expression. Eomesa therefore
regulates the formation of all three germ layers in the early zebrafish embryo.

PMCID: PMC4206766
PMID: 25277163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Development. 2014 Oct;141(19):3772-81. doi: 10.1242/dev.108274. Epub 2014 Sep 10.

A regulatory network controls nephrocan expression and midgut patterning.

Hou J(1), Wei W(1), Saund RS(2), Xiang P(1), Cunningham TJ(3), Yi Y(4), Alder
O(1), Lu DY(1), Savory JG(5), Krentz NA(1), Montpetit R(1), Cullum R(1), Hofs
N(1), Lohnes D(5), Humphries RK(6), Yamanaka Y(7), Duester G(3), Saijoh Y(2),
Hoodless PA(8).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 1L3, 
Canada. (2)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, University of Utah, Salt Lake 
City, UT 84132-3401, USA. (3)Development, Aging and Regeneration Program,
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. (4)Terry Fox
Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 1L3, Canada Cell
and Developmental Biology Program, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada. (5)Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University 
of Ottawa, Ottawa K1H 8M5, Canada. (6)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, British Columbia, V5Z 1L3, Canada Experimental Medicine, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada. (7)Goodman Cancer 
Research Centre, Department of Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec H2W 1S6, Canada. (8)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver,
British Columbia, V5Z 1L3, Canada Cell and Developmental Biology Program,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada
Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver,
British Columbia V6T 1Z4, Canada hoodless@bccrc.ca.

Although many regulatory networks involved in defining definitive endoderm have
been identified, the mechanisms through which these networks interact to pattern 
the endoderm are less well understood. To explore the mechanisms involved in
midgut patterning, we dissected the transcriptional regulatory elements of
nephrocan (Nepn), the earliest known midgut specific gene in mice. We observed
that Nepn expression is dramatically reduced in Sox17(-/-) and Raldh2(-/-)
embryos compared with wild-type embryos. We further show that Nepn is directly
regulated by Sox17 and the retinoic acid (RA) receptor via two enhancer elements 
located upstream of the gene. Moreover, Nepn expression is modulated by Activin
signaling, with high levels inhibiting and low levels enhancing RA-dependent
expression. In Foxh1(-/-) embryos in which Nodal signaling is reduced, the Nepn
expression domain is expanded into the anterior gut region, confirming that Nodal
signaling can modulate its expression in vivo. Together, Sox17 is required for
Nepn expression in the definitive endoderm, while RA signaling restricts
expression to the midgut region. A balance of Nodal/Activin signaling regulates
the anterior boundary of the midgut expression domain.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197584
PMID: 25209250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 5;9(8):e95453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095453. eCollection 
2014.

Functionally significant, rare transcription factor variants in tetralogy of
Fallot.

Töpf A(1), Griffin HR(1), Glen E(1), Soemedi R(1), Brown DL(1), Hall D(1), Rahman
TJ(1), Eloranta JJ(2), Jüngst C(3), Stuart AG(4), O'Sullivan J(5), Keavney BD(6),
Goodship JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne,
United Kingdom. (2)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland. (3)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland; Department of
Medicine II, Saarland University Medical Center, Homburg, Germany. (4)Bristol
Royal Hospital for Children, Bristol, United Kingdom. (5)Paediatric Cardiology,
Freeman Hospital Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle
upon Tyne, United Kingdom. (6)Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom; Institute of Cardiovascular
Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: Rare variants in certain transcription factors involved in cardiac
development cause Mendelian forms of congenital heart disease. The purpose of
this study was to systematically assess the frequency of rare transcription
factor variants in sporadic patients with the cardiac outflow tract malformation 
tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We sequenced the coding, 5'UTR, and 3'UTR regions of twelve 
transcription factor genes implicated in cardiac outflow tract development
(NKX2.5, GATA4, ISL1, TBX20, MEF2C, BOP/SMYD1, HAND2, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXH, FOXA2
and TBX1) in 93 non-syndromic, non-Mendelian TOF cases. We also analysed Illumina
Human 660W-Quad SNP Array data for copy number variants in these genes; none were
detected. Four of the rare variants detected have previously been shown to affect
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays: FOXC1 p.P297S, FOXC2 p.Q444R, FOXH1 
p.S113T and TBX1 p.P43_G61del PPPPRYDPCAAAAPGAPGP. Two further rare variants,
HAND2 p.A25_A26insAA and FOXC1 p.G378_G380delGGG, A488_491delAAAA, affected
transactivation in in vitro reporter assays. Each of these six functionally
significant variants was present in a single patient in the heterozygous state;
each of the four for which parental samples were available were maternally
inherited. Thus in the 93 TOF cases we identified six functionally significant
mutations in the secondary heart field transcriptional network.
SIGNIFICANCE: This study indicates that rare genetic variants in the secondary
heart field transcriptional network with functional effects on protein function
occur in 3-13% of patients with TOF. This is the first report of a functionally
significant HAND2 mutation in a patient with congenital heart disease.

PMCID: PMC4122343
PMID: 25093829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Cells. 2014 May;37(5):389-98. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2014.0032. Epub 2014 May
14.

Siah ubiquitin ligases modulate nodal signaling during zebrafish embryonic
development.

Kang N(1), Won M(2), Rhee M, Ro H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, College of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Chungnam National University, Daejeon 305-764, Korea. (2)Program in Genomics of
Differentiation, Eunice Kennedy Shiver National Institute of Child Health and
Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Siah2 is a zebrafish homologue of mammalian Siah family. Siah acts as an E3
ubiquitin ligase that binds proteins destined for degradation. Extensive homology
between siah and Drosophila Siah homologue (sina) suggests their important
physiological roles during embryonic development. However, detailed functional
studies of Siah in vertebrate development have not been carried out. Here we
report that Siah2 specifically augments nodal related gene expression in marginal
blastomeres at late blastula through early gastrula stages of zebrafish embryos. 
Siah2 dependent Nodal signaling augmentation is confirmed by cell-based reporter 
gene assays using 293T cells and 3TPluciferase reporter plasmid. We also
established a molecular hierarchy of Siah as a upstream regulator of FoxH1/Fast1 
transcriptional factor in Nodal signaling. Elevated expression of nodal related
genes by overexpression of Siah2 was enough to override the inhibitory effects of
atv and lft2 on the Nodal signaling. In particular, E3 ubiquitin ligase activity 
of Siah2 is critical to limit the duration and/or magnitude of Nodal signaling.
Additionally, since the embryos injected with Siah morpholinos mimicked the atv
overexpression phenotype at least in part, our data support a model in which Siah
is involved in mesendoderm patterning via modulating Nodal signaling.

PMCID: PMC4044310
PMID: 24823357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Thorac Dis. 2014 May;6(5):491-6. doi: 10.3978/j.issn.2072-1439.2014.03.26.

Analysis of mutations in 7 candidate genes for dextro-Transposition of the great 
arteries in Chinese population.

Lei L(1), Lin H(1), Zhong S(1), Zhang Z(1), Chen J(1), Li XX(1), Yu X(1), Liu
X(1), Zhuang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Cardiovascular Surgery of Guangdong Cardiovascular Institute, 
Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou
510080, China ; 2 Department of Hepatobiliary Pancreatic Surgery, Sun Yat-sen
Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China ; 3 Medical
Research Center of Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical
Sciences, Guangzhou 510080, China ; 4 Department of Pediatrics of Guangdong
Cardiovascular Institute, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong Academy of
Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 510080, China.

BACKGROUND: Transposition of great arteries (TGA) represents the most frequent
cyanotic heart defect diagnosed in the neonatal period. Several genes had been
identified to be associated with the pathogenesis of dextro-transposition of the 
great arteries (d-TGA). These genes are located in different chromosomes and
their mutations can only explain few clinical cases. Besides, no genetic scan for
TGA has been implemented in China.
METHODS: To evaluate whether aberrations in any of the 13 reported mutations in
seven genes (MED13L, ZIC3, CFC1, NODAL, FOXH1, GDF1 and NKX2-5) could completely 
or in part be the genetic component involved in TGA in Chinese population, we
screened 102 Chinese patients with d-TGA by direct sequencing for mutations
within the seven genes.
RESULTS: We found none of the reported 13 mutations in those 102 Chinese d-TGA
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: These reported 13 mutations may not be a common cause of d-TGA in
Chinese population due to racial variation and genetic heterogeneity of TGA. New 
approaches including the whole exome sequencing technology are required to
effectively identify genetic variants in TGA patients in China.

PMCID: PMC4015019
PMID: 24822108  [PubMed]


14. Physiol Rep. 2014 Mar 20;2(3):e00261. doi: 10.1002/phy2.261. Print 2014.

Dextran induces differentiation of circulating endothelial progenitor cells.

Obi S(1), Masuda H, Akimaru H, Shizuno T, Yamamoto K, Ando J, Asahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine Science, Tokai University School of
Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

Abstract Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) have been demonstrated to be
effective for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. However, the
differentiation process from circulation to adhesion has not been clarified
because circulating EPCs rarely attached to dishes in EPC cultures previously.
Here we investigated whether immature circulating EPCs differentiate into mature 
adhesive EPCs in response to dextran. When floating-circulating EPCs derived from
ex vivo expanded human cord blood were cultured with 5% and 10% dextran, they
attached to fibronectin-coated dishes and grew exponentially. The bioactivities
of adhesion, proliferation, migration, tube formation, and differentiated type of
EPC colony formation increased in EPCs exposed to dextran. The surface protein
expression rate of the endothelial markers vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2, ICAM1, VCAM1, and integrin av/ß3 increased in
EPCs exposed to dextran. The mRNA levels of VEGF-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2,
endothelial nitric oxide synthase, MMP9, and VEGF increased in EPCs treated with 
dextran. Those of endothelium-related transcription factors ID1/2, FOXM1, HEY1,
SMAD1, FOSL1, NFkB1, NRF2, HIF1A, EPAS1 increased in dextran-treated EPCs;
however, those of hematopoietic- and antiangiogenic-related transcription factors
TAL1, RUNX1, c-MYB, GATA1/2, ERG, FOXH1, HHEX, SMAD2/3 decreased in
dextran-exposed EPCs. Inhibitor analysis showed that PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and
p38 signal transduction pathways are involved in the differentiation in response 
to dextran. In conclusion, dextran induces differentiation of circulating EPCs in
terms of adhesion, migration, proliferation, and vasculogenesis. The
differentiation mechanism in response to dextran is regulated by multiple signal 
transductions including PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and p38. These findings indicate
that dextran is an effective treatment for EPCs in regenerative medicines.

PMCID: PMC4002241
PMID: 24760515  [PubMed]


15. Nat Commun. 2014 Apr 24;5:3678. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4678.

Induction of pluripotency in human somatic cells via a transient state resembling
primitive streak-like mesendoderm.

Takahashi K(1), Tanabe K(1), Ohnuki M(2), Narita M(2), Sasaki A(2), Yamamoto
M(3), Nakamura M(2), Sutou K(2), Osafune K(2), Yamanaka S(4).

Author information: 
(1)1] Center for iPS cell Research and Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8507, Japan [2]. (2)Center for iPS cell Research and Application, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (3)Development Unit, Gunma University
Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. (4)1] Center for iPS cell Research and
Application, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan [2] Gladstone Institute of
Cardiovascular Disease, San Francisco, California 94158, USA.

During mammalian embryonic development, the primitive streak initiates the
differentiation of pluripotent epiblast cells into germ layers. Pluripotency can 
be reacquired in committed somatic cells using a combination of a handful of
transcription factors, such as OCT3/4, SOX2, KLF4 and c-MYC (hereafter referred
to as OSKM), albeit with low efficiency. Here we show that during OSKM-induced
reprogramming towards pluripotency in human cells, intermediate cells transiently
show gene expression profiles resembling mesendoderm, which is a major component 
of the primitive streak. Based on these findings, we discover that forkhead box
H1 (FOXH1), a transcription factor required for anterior primitive streak
specification during early development, significantly enhances the reprogramming 
efficiency of human fibroblasts by promoting their maturation, including
mesenchymal to epithelial transition and the activation of late pluripotency
markers. These results demonstrate that during the reprogramming process, human
somatic cells go through a transient state that resembles mesendoderm.

PMID: 24759836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2014 Aug;40(4):1239-52. doi: 10.1007/s10695-014-9919-6.
Epub 2014 Feb 14.

Genome-wide identification, phylogeny, and gonadal expression of fox genes in
Nile tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus.

Yuan J(1), Tao W, Cheng Y, Huang B, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, 400715, People's Republic of China.

The fox genes play important roles in various biological processes, including
sexual development. In the present study, we isolated 65 fox genes, belonging to 
18 subfamilies named A-R, from Nile tilapia through genome-wide screening.
Twenty-four of them have two or three (foxm1) copies. Furthermore, 16, 25, 68,
and 45 fox members were isolated from nematodes, protochordates, teleosts, and
tetrapods, respectively. Phylogenetic analyses indicated fox gene family had
undergone three expansions parallel to the three rounds of genome duplication
during evolution. We also analyzed the clustered fox genes and found that
apparent linkage duplication existed in teleosts, which further supported
fish-specific genome duplication hypothesis. In addition, species- and
lineage-specific duplication is another reason for fox gene family expansion.
Based on the four pairs of XX and XY gonadal transcriptome data from four
critical developmental stages, we analyzed the expression profile of all fox
genes and identified sexually dimorphic fox genes at each stage. All fox genes
were detected in gonads, with 15 of them at the background expression level
(total read per kb per million reads, RPKM < 10), 29 at moderate expression level
(10 < total RPKM < 100), and 21 at high expression level (total RPKM > 100).
There are 27, 24, 28, and 9 sexually dimorphic fox genes at 5, 30, 90, and
180 days after hatching (dah), respectively. foxq1a, foxf1, foxr1, and foxr1 were
identified as the most differentially expressed genes at each stage. foxl2 was
characterized as XX-dominant gene, while foxd5, foxi3, foxn3, foxj1a, foxj3b, and
foxo6b were characterized as XY-dominant genes. qPCR and in situ hybridization of
foxh1 and foxj1a were performed to confirm the expression profiles and to
validate the transcriptome data. Our results suggest that fox genes might play
important roles in sex determination and gonadal development in teleosts.

PMID: 24526262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Dev Biol. 2014 Mar 1;387(1):28-36. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.01.003. Epub 2014
Jan 17.

A potential molecular pathogenesis of cardiac/laterality defects in
Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental syndrome.

Tanaka K(1), Kato A(1), Angelocci C(1), Watanabe M(2), Kato Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University College of
Medicine, Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA. (2)Institute of Socio-Arts and Sciences,
The University of Tokushima, Tokushima 770-8502, Japan. (3)Department of
Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University College of Medicine, Tallahassee,
FL 32306, USA. Electronic address: yoichi.kato@med.fsu.edu.

Pitx2 is the last effector of the left-right (LR) cascade known to date and plays
a crucial role in the patterning of LR asymmetry. In Xenopus embryos, the
expression of Pitx2 gene in the left lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) is directly
regulated by Xnr1 signaling, which is mediated by Smads and FoxH1. Previous
studies suggest that the suppression of Pitx2 gene in the left LPM is a potential
cause of cardiac/laterality defects in Oculo-Facio-Cardio-Dental (OFCD) syndrome,
which is known to be caused by mutations in BCL6 co-repressor (BCOR) gene.
Recently, our work has revealed that the BCL6/BCOR complex blocks Notch-dependent
transcriptional activity to protect the expression of Pitx2 in the left LPM from 
the inhibitory activity of Notch signaling. These studies indicated that
uncontrolled Notch activity in the left LPM caused by dysfunction of BCOR may
result in cardiac/laterality defects of OFCD syndrome. However, this
Notch-dependent inhibitory mechanism of Pitx2 gene transcription still remains
unknown. Here we report that transcriptional repressor ESR1, which acts
downstream of Notch signaling, inhibits the expression of Pitx2 gene by binding
to a left side-specific enhancer (ASE) region in Pitx2 gene and recruiting
histone deacetylase 1 (HDAC1) to this region. Once HDAC1 is tethered, histone
acetyltransferase p300 is no longer recruited to the Xnr1-dependent
transcriptional complex on the ASE region, leading to the suppression of Pitx2
gene in the left LPM. The study presented here uncovers the regulatory mechanism 
of Pitx2 gene transcription which may contribute to an understanding of
pathogenesis of OFCD syndrome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3951022
PMID: 24440151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Cell Rep. 2013 Dec 26;5(6):1611-24. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.11.021. Epub 2013 
Dec 12.

Switch enhancers interpret TGF-ß and Hippo signaling to control cell fate in
human embryonic stem cells.

Beyer TA(1), Weiss A(1), Khomchuk Y(1), Huang K(1), Ogunjimi AA(1), Varelas X(1),
Wrana JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems Biology, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount
Sinai Hospital, Toronto M5G 1X5, Canada. (2)Center for Systems Biology,
Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto M5G 1X5,
Canada; Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto M5S 1A8,
Canada. Electronic address: wrana@lunenfeld.ca.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Jan 2;14(1):6-8.

A small toolkit of morphogens is used repeatedly to direct development, raising
the question of how context dictates interpretation of the same cue. One example 
is the transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) pathway that in human embryonic stem 
cells fulfills two opposite functions: pluripotency maintenance and mesendoderm
(ME) specification. Using proteomics coupled to analysis of genome occupancy, we 
uncover a regulatory complex composed of transcriptional effectors of the Hippo
pathway (TAZ/YAP/TEAD), the TGF-ß pathway (SMAD2/3), and the pluripotency
regulator OCT4 (TSO). TSO collaborates with NuRD repressor complexes to buffer
pluripotency gene expression while suppressing ME genes. Importantly, the SMAD
DNA binding partner FOXH1, a major specifier of ME, is found near TSO elements,
and upon fate specification we show that TSO is disrupted with subsequent
SMAD-FOXH1 induction of ME. These studies define switch-enhancer elements and
provide a framework to understand how cellular context dictates interpretation of
the same morphogen signal in development.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24332857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Exp Cell Res. 2013 Nov 15;319(19):2954-63. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.07.012. Epub
2013 Jul 24.

8-Oxoguanine DNA glycosylase 1 (ogg1) maintains the function of cardiac
progenitor cells during heart formation in zebrafish.

Yan L(1), Zhou Y, Yu S, Ji G, Wang L, Liu W, Gu A.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Institute of Toxicology,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China; Key Laboratory of Modern
Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China.

Genomic damage may devastate the potential of progenitor cells and consequently
impair early organogenesis. We found that ogg1, a key enzyme initiating the
base-excision repair, was enriched in the embryonic heart in zebrafish. So far,
little is known about DNA repair in cardiogenesis. Here, we addressed the
critical role of ogg1 in cardiogenesis for the first time. ogg1 mainly expressed 
in the anterior lateral plate mesoderm (ALPM), the primary heart tube, and
subsequently the embryonic myocardium by in situ hybridisation. Loss of ogg1
resulted in severe cardiac morphogenesis and functional abnormalities, including 
the short heart length, arrhythmia, decreased cardiomyocytes and nkx2.5(+)
cardiac progenitor cells. Moreover, the increased apoptosis and repressed
proliferation of progenitor cells caused by ogg1 deficiency might contribute to
the heart phenotype. The microarray analysis showed that the expression of genes 
involved in embryonic heart tube morphogenesis and heart structure were
significantly changed due to the lack of ogg1. Among those, foxh1 is an important
partner of ogg1 in the cardiac development in response to DNA damage. Our work
demonstrates the requirement of ogg1 in cardiac progenitors and heart development
in zebrafish. These findings may be helpful for understanding the aetiology of
congenital cardiac deficits.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23892003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Sci Signal. 2013 Jun 18;6(280):ra49. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2003411.

Inhibition of TGF-ß signaling at the nuclear envelope: characterization of
interactions between MAN1, Smad2 and Smad3, and PPM1A.

Bourgeois B(1), Gilquin B, Tellier-Lebègue C, Östlund C, Wu W, Pérez J, El Hage
P, Lallemand F, Worman HJ, Zinn-Justin S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie Structurale et Radiobiologie, URA CNRS 2096, CEA
Saclay, 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Signaling by transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) is critical for various
developmental processes and culminates in the activation of the transcription
factors Smad2 and Smad3. MAN1, an integral protein of the inner nuclear membrane,
inhibits TGF-ß signaling by binding to Smad2 and Smad3. Depletion of the gene
LEMD3 encoding MAN1 leads to developmental anomalies in mice, and heterozygous
loss-of-function mutations in LEMD3 in humans cause sclerosing bone dysplasia. We
modeled the three-dimensional structure of the MAN1-Smad2 complex from nuclear
magnetic resonance and small-angle x-ray scattering data. As predicted by this
model, we found that MAN1 competed in vitro and in cells with the transcription
factor FAST1 (forkhead activin signal transducer 1) for binding to Smad2. The
model further predicted that MAN1 bound to activated Smad2-Smad4 or Smad3-Smad4
complexes, which was confirmed by in vitro experiments; however, in cells, MAN1
bound only to Smad2 and Smad3 and not to the Smad4-containing complexes.
Overexpression of MAN1 led to dephosphorylation of Smad2 and Smad3, thus
hindering their recognition by Smad4, and MAN1 bound directly in vitro to the
phosphatase PPM1A, which catalyzes the dephosphorylation of Smad2/3. These
results demonstrate a nuclear envelope-localized mechanism of inactivating TGF-ß 
signaling in which MAN1 competes with transcription factors for binding to Smad2 
and Smad3 and facilitates their dephosphorylation by PPM1A.

PMCID: PMC3843637
PMID: 23779087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. J Genet Genomics. 2013 Feb 20;40(2):75-81. doi: 10.1016/j.jgg.2012.12.006. Epub
2013 Jan 22.

Identification of the RNAs for transcription factor Mitf as a component of the
Balbiani body.

Li M(1), Yuan Y, Hong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore, Science
Drive 4, Singapore 117543, Singapore.

Balbiani body (BB) is a large distinctive organelle aggregate uniquely present in
developing oocytes of diverse animal species. BB is thought as a stage-specific
structure that resembles germ plasm, the cytoplasmic organelle of germ cells. The
role and function of BB have remained speculative because of a highly dynamic
structure and a lack of genetic and molecular data. BB has been found to contain 
proteins and RNAs, none of them--except the zebrafish foxH1 RNA, is or encodes a 
transcription factor. Here we report in the fish medaka (Oryzias latipes) that
RNAs encoding microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (Mitf) are prominent
components of the BB. By fluorescence in situ hybridization on ovarian section,
we revealed that the transcripts of both mitf1 and mitf2 genes concentrated in
the BB, in which they co-localized with the dazl RNA, a definitive BB marker
highly conserved in vertebrates. Therefore, the mitf product may play dual roles 
in germ gene transcription and BB formation and/or function in this organism. Our
data provide the second evidence that the RNA of a transcription factor can be a 
prominent component of the BB in a vertebrate.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23439406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55186. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055186. Epub 2013 Jan 30.

TGF-ß/Smad2/3 signaling directly regulates several miRNAs in mouse ES cells and
early embryos.

Redshaw N(1), Camps C, Sharma V, Motallebipour M, Guzman-Ayala M, Oikonomopoulos 
S, Thymiakou E, Ragoussis J, Episkopou V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Brain Sciences, Imperial College London,
London, United Kingdom.

The Transforming Growth Factor-ß (TGF-ß) signaling pathway is one of the major
pathways essential for normal embryonic development and tissue homeostasis, with 
anti-tumor but also pro-metastatic properties in cancer. This pathway directly
regulates several target genes that mediate its downstream functions, however
very few microRNAs (miRNAs) have been identified as targets. miRNAs are
modulators of gene expression with essential roles in development and a clear
association with diseases including cancer. Little is known about the
transcriptional regulation of the primary transcripts (pri-miRNA, pri-miR) from
which several mature miRNAs are often derived. Here we present the identification
of miRNAs regulated by TGF-ß signaling in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells and
early embryos. We used an inducible ES cell system to maintain high levels of the
TGF-ß activated/phosphorylated Smad2/3 effectors, which are the transcription
factors of the pathway, and a specific inhibitor that blocks their activation. By
performing short RNA deep-sequencing after 12 hours Smad2/3 activation and after 
16 hours inhibition, we generated a database of responsive miRNAs.
Promoter/enhancer analysis of a subset of these miRNAs revealed that the
transcription of pri-miR-181c/d and the pri-miR-341~3072 cluster were found to
depend on activated Smad2/3. Several of these miRNAs are expressed in early mouse
embryos, when the pathway is known to play an essential role. Treatment of
embryos with TGF-ß inhibitor caused a reduction of their levels confirming that
they are targets of this pathway in vivo. Furthermore, we showed that
pri-miR-341~3072 transcription also depends on FoxH1, a known Smad2/3
transcription partner during early development. Together, our data show that
miRNAs are regulated directly by the TGF-ß/Smad2/3 pathway in ES cells and early 
embryos. As somatic abnormalities in functions known to be regulated by the
TGF-ß/Smad2/3 pathway underlie tumor suppression and metastasis, this research
also provides a resource for miRNAs involved in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3559380
PMID: 23390484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(1):e1003109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003109. Epub 2013 Jan 
24.

Integration of nodal and BMP signals in the heart requires FoxH1 to create
left-right differences in cell migration rates that direct cardiac asymmetry.

Lenhart KF(1), Holtzman NG, Williams JR, Burdine RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, 
USA.

Failure to properly establish the left-right (L/R) axis is a major cause of
congenital heart defects in humans, but how L/R patterning of the embryo leads to
asymmetric cardiac morphogenesis is still unclear. We find that asymmetric Nodal 
signaling on the left and Bmp signaling act in parallel to establish zebrafish
cardiac laterality by modulating cell migration velocities across the L/R axis.
Moreover, we demonstrate that Nodal plays the crucial role in generating
asymmetry in the heart and that Bmp signaling via Bmp4 is dispensable in the
presence of asymmetric Nodal signaling. In addition, we identify a previously
unappreciated role for the Nodal-transcription factor FoxH1 in mediating cell
responsiveness to Bmp, further linking the control of these two pathways in the
heart. The interplay between these TGFß pathways is complex, with Nodal signaling
potentially acting to limit the response to Bmp pathway activation and the dosage
of Bmp signals being critical to limit migration rates. These findings have
implications for understanding the complex genetic interactions that lead to
congenital heart disease in humans.

PMCID: PMC3554567
PMID: 23358434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Development. 2012 Sep;139(18):3343-54. doi: 10.1242/dev.075465.

Antagonism of Nodal signaling by BMP/Smad5 prevents ectopic primitive streak
formation in the mouse amnion.

Pereira PN(1), Dobreva MP, Maas E, Cornelis FM, Moya IM, Umans L, Verfaillie CM, 
Camus A, de Sousa Lopes SM, Huylebroeck D, Zwijsen A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Signaling of the VIB11 Center for the Biology of
Disease, VIB, and Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium.

The strength and spatiotemporal activity of Nodal signaling is tightly controlled
in early implantation mouse embryos, including by autoregulation and feedback
loops, and involves secreted and intracellular antagonists. These control
mechanisms, which are established at the extra-embryonic/embryonic interfaces,
are essential for anterior-posterior patterning of the epiblast and correct
positioning of the primitive streak. Formation of an ectopic primitive streak, or
streak expansion, has previously been reported in mutants lacking antagonists
that target Nodal signaling. Here, we demonstrate that loss-of-function of a
major bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) effector, Smad5, results in formation of
an ectopic primitive streak-like structure in mutant amnion accompanied by
ectopic Nodal expression. This suggests that BMP/Smad5 signaling contributes to
negative regulation of Nodal. In cultured cells, we find that BMP-activated Smad5
antagonizes Nodal signaling by interfering with the Nodal-Smad2/4-Foxh1
autoregulatory pathway through the formation of an unusual BMP4-induced Smad
complex containing Smad2 and Smad5. Quantitative expression analysis supports
that ectopic Nodal expression in the Smad5 mutant amnion is induced by the Nodal 
autoregulatory loop and a slow positive-feedback loop. The latter involves BMP4
signaling and also induction of ectopic Wnt3. Ectopic activation of these Nodal
feedback loops in the Smad5 mutant amnion results in the eventual formation of an
ectopic primitive streak-like structure. We conclude that antagonism of Nodal
signaling by BMP/Smad5 signaling prevents primitive streak formation in the
amnion of normal mouse embryos.

PMID: 22912414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Jun;3(1):1-5. Epub 2012 May 16.

Genetic Overlap between Holoprosencephaly and Kallmann Syndrome.

Vaaralahti K(1), Raivio T, Koivu R, Valanne L, Laitinen EM, Tommiska J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine/Physiology, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Patients with Kallmann syndrome (KS; congenital hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and
decreased/absent sense of smell), septo-optic dysplasia (SOD), or
holoprosencephaly (HPE) reportedly have midline defects. In this study, we
investigate a genetic overlap between KS, SOD, and HPE. Nineteen subjects (18
males, 1 female) with KS and without mutations in the known KS genes were
screened for mutations in SOX2, SHH, SIX3,TGIF1,TDGF1,FOXH1,GLI2, and GLI3. One
male carried 2 heterozygous missense changes, one in SIX3 (c.428G>A, p.G143D) and
the other in GLI2 (c.2509G>A, p.E837K). Both of these genes have been implicated 
in the etiology of HPE and neither of these changes were present in 200 control
subjects. Other variants found among the subjects were known polymorphisms. KS
and HPE may display a genetic overlap. The involvement of genes implicated in the
etiology of midline defects in patients with KS warrants further studies.

PMCID: PMC3398826
PMID: 22855648  [PubMed]


26. ChemMedChem. 2012 Aug;7(8):1447-52. doi: 10.1002/cmdc.201200162. Epub 2012 Jun
19.

Hepatic differentiation of rat mesenchymal stem cells by a small molecule.

Ouyang J(1), Shao J, Zou H, Lou Y, Yu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Materia Medica, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang
University, 866 YuHangTang Road, Hangzhou, 310058, China.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are capable of self-renewal and multilineage
differentiation. A periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) stain-based assay was developed to 
screen for small-molecule inducers of hepatic differentiation of bone marrow
MSCs.
2-(4-Bromophenyl)-N-(4-fluorophenyl)-3-propyl-3H-imidazo[4,5-b]pyridin-5-amine
(SJA710-6) was identified as a novel small molecule able to induce the
differentiation of rat MSCs (rMSCs) toward hepatocyte-like cells in vitro, where 
rMSCs treated with SJA710-6 have typical morphological and functional
characteristics of hepatic cells, including glycogen storage, urea secretion,
uptake of low density lipoprotein (LDL) and expression of hepatocyte-specific
genes and proteins. Expression of FoxH1 (FAST1/2) induces the differentiation of 
rMSCs towards hepatocyte-like cells, suggesting that this gene plays an important
role in the hepatic fate specification of rMSCs.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22715131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Differentiation. 2012 Apr;83(4):169-78. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2011.12.005. Epub
2012 Feb 28.

Developmental effects of tobacco smoke exposure during human embryonic stem cell 
differentiation are mediated through the transforming growth factor-ß superfamily
member, Nodal.

Liszewski W(1), Ritner C, Aurigui J, Wong SS, Hussain N, Krueger W, Oncken C,
Bernstein HS.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of California, San Francisco, CA
94143-1346, USA.

While the pathologies associated with in utero smoke exposure are well
established, their underlying molecular mechanisms are incompletely understood.
We differentiated human embryonic stem cells in the presence of physiological
concentrations of tobacco smoke and nicotine. Using post hoc microarray analysis,
quantitative PCR, and immunoblot analysis, we demonstrated that tobacco smoke has
lineage- and stage-specific effects on human embryonic stem cell differentiation,
through both nicotine-dependent and -independent pathways. We show that three
major stem cell pluripotency/differentiation pathways, Notch, canonical Wnt, and 
transforming growth factor-ß, are affected by smoke exposure, and that Nodal
signaling through SMAD2 is specifically impacted by effects on Lefty1, Nodal, and
FoxH1. These events are associated with upregulation of microRNA-302a, a
post-transcriptional silencer of Lefty1. The described studies provide insight
into the mechanisms by which tobacco smoke influences fetal development at the
cellular level, and identify specific transcriptional, post-transcriptional, and 
signaling pathways by which this likely occurs.

Copyright © 2011 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3314096
PMID: 22381624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Biochem J. 2012 May 1;443(3):821-8. doi: 10.1042/BJ20111491.

Induction of NANOG expression by targeting promoter sequence with small
activating RNA antagonizes retinoic acid-induced differentiation.

Wang X(1), Wang J, Huang V, Place RF, Li LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
CA 94158, USA.

RNAa (RNA activation) is a mechanism by which small dsRNA (double-stranded RNA), 
termed saRNA (small activating RNA), target promoter sequences to induce gene
expression. This technique represents a novel approach to gene overexpression
without the use of exogenous DNA. In the present study, we investigated whether
RNAa can modulate expression of the development-related gene NANOG and manipulate
cell fate. Using a lentivirus-based reporter system as a screening tool, we
identified synthetic saRNAs that stimulate NANOG expression in human NCCIT
embryonic carcinoma cells. Mismatch mutations to saRNA duplexes define sequence
requirement for gene activation. Functional analysis of NANOG induction reveals
saRNA treatment predictably modulates the expression of several known downstream 
target genes, including FOXH1 (forkhead box H1), REST (RE1-silencing
transcription factor), OCT4 (octamer-binding protein 4) and REX1 (reduced
expression protein 1). Treatment with RA (retinoic acid) triggers NCCIT cell
differentiation, reducing NANOG and OCT4 expression and up-regulating several
neural markers [i.e. ASCL1 (achaete-scute complex homologue 1), NEUROD1 (neuronal
differentiation 1) and PAX6 (paired box 6)]. However, co-treatment with saRNA
antagonizes NANOG down-regulation and RA-induced differentiation. Ectopic
overexpression of NANOG via lentiviral transduction further recapitulates saRNA
results, providing proof-of-concept that RNAa may be utilized to activate
development-related genes and manipulate cell fate.

PMCID: PMC3327998
PMID: 22339500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Zygote. 2013 May;21(2):115-24. doi: 10.1017/S0967199411000712. Epub 2012 Jan 10.

Characterization of oocyte-expressed GDF9 gene in buffalo and mapping of its TSS 
and putative regulatory elements.

Roy B(1), Rajput S, Raghav S, Kumar P, Verma A, Jain A, Jain T, Singh D, De S,
Goswami SL, Datta TK.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Genomics Laboratory, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, India.

Summary In spite of emerging evidence about the vital role of GDF9 in
determination of oocyte competence, there is insufficient information about its
regulation of oocyte-specific expression, particularly in livestock animals.
Because of the distinct prominence of buffalo as a dairy animal, the present
study was undertaken to isolate and characterize GDF9 cDNA using orthologous
primers based on the bovine GDF9 sequence. GDF9 transcripts were found to be
expressed in oocytes irrespective of their follicular origin, and shared a single
transcription start site (TSS) at -57 base pairs (bp) upstream of ATG. Assignment
of the TSS is consistent with the presence of a TATA element at -23 of the TSS
mapped in this study. Localization of a buffalo-specific minimal promoter within 
320 bp upstream of ATG was consolidated by identification of an E-box element at 
-113bp. Presence of putative transcription factor binding sites and other cis
regulatory elements were analyzed at ~5 kb upstream of TSS. Various germ
cell-specific cis-acting regulatory elements (BNCF, BRNF, NR2F, SORY, Foxh1,
OCT1, LHXF etc.) have been identified in the 5' flanking region of the buffalo
GDF9 gene, including NOBOX DNA binding elements and consensuses E-boxes (CANNTG).
Presence of two conserved E-boxes found on buffalo sequence at -520 and -718
positions deserves attention in view of its sequence deviation from other
species. Two NOBOX binding elements (NBE) were detected at the -3471 and -203
positions. The fall of the NBE within the putative minimal promoter territory of 
buffalo GDF9 and its unique non-core binding sequence could have a possible role 
in the control of the core promoter activity.

PMID: 22230197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2012;736:247-60. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4419-7210-1_14.

An ensemble approach for inferring semi-quantitative regulatory dynamics for the 
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells using prior knowledge.

Lutter D(1), Bruns P, Theis FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, CMB, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Munich, Germany. dominik.lutter@helmholtz-muenchen.de

The process of differentiation of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) is currently
becoming the focus of many systems biologists not only due to mechanistic
interest but also since it is expected to play an increasingly important role in 
regenerative medicine, in particular with the advert to induced pluripotent stem 
cells. These ESCs give rise to the formation of the three germ layers and
therefore to the formation of all tissues and organs. Here, we present a
computational method for inferring regulatory interactions between the genes
involved in ESC differentiation based on time resolved microarray profiles. Fully
quantitative methods are commonly unavailable on such large-scale data; on the
other hand, purely qualitative methods may fail to capture some of the more
detailed regulations. Our method combines the beneficial aspects of qualitative
and quantitative (ODE-based) modeling approaches searching for quantitative
interaction coefficients in a discrete and qualitative state space. We further
optimize on an ensemble of networks to detect essential properties and compare
networks with respect to robustness. Applied to a toy model our method is able to
reconstruct the original network and outperforms an entire discrete boolean
approach. In particular, we show that including prior knowledge leads to more
accurate results. Applied to data from differentiating mouse ESCs reveals new
regulatory interactions, in particular we confirm the activation of Foxh1 through
Oct4, mediating Nodal signaling.

PMID: 22161333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Circ Res. 2012 Jan 6;110(1):34-46. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.111.249847. Epub 2011 
Nov 10.

Integration of repulsive guidance cues generates avascular zones that shape
mammalian blood vessels.

Meadows SM(1), Fletcher PJ, Moran C, Xu K, Neufeld G, Chauvet S, Mann F, Krieg
PA, Cleaver O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, NA8.300, Dallas, TX 75390-9148, USA.

RATIONALE: Positive signals, such as vascular endothelial growth factor, direct
endothelial cells (ECs) to specific locations during blood vessel formation. Less
is known about repulsive signal contribution to shaping vessels. Recently,
"neuronal guidance cues" have been shown to influence EC behavior, particularly
in directing sprouting angiogenesis by repelling ECs. However, their role during 
de novo blood vessel formation remains unexplored.
OBJECTIVE: To identify signals that guide and pattern the first mammalian blood
vessels.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using genetic mouse models, we show that blood vessels are
sculpted through the generation of stereotyped avascular zones by EC-repulsive
cues. We demonstrate that Semaphorin3E (Sema3E) is a key factor that shapes the
paired dorsal aortae in mouse, as sema3E(-/-) embryos develop an abnormally
branched aortic plexus with a markedly narrowed avascular midline. In vitro
cultures and avian grafting experiments show strong repulsion of ECs by
Sema3E-expressing cells. We further identify the mouse notochord as a rich source
of multiple redundant neuronal guidance cues. Mouse embryos that lack notochords 
fail to form cohesive aortic vessels because of loss of the avascular midline,
yet maintain lateral avascular zones. We demonstrate that lateral avascular zones
are directly generated by the lateral plate mesoderm, a critical source of
Sema3E.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings demonstrate that Sema3E-generated avascular zones are
critical regulators of mammalian cardiovascular patterning and are the first to
identify a repulsive role for the lateral plate mesoderm. Integration of
multiple, and in some cases redundant, repulsive cues from various tissues is
critical to patterning the first embryonic blood vessels.

PMCID: PMC3253216
PMID: 22076636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genes Dev. 2011 Aug 1;25(15):1654-61. doi: 10.1101/gad.16800511.

HEB and E2A function as SMAD/FOXH1 cofactors.

Yoon SJ(1), Wills AE, Chuong E, Gupta R, Baker JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Nodal signaling, mediated through SMAD transcription factors, is necessary for
pluripotency maintenance and endoderm commitment. We identified a new motif,
termed SMAD complex-associated (SCA), that is bound by SMAD2/3/4 and FOXH1 in
human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and derived endoderm. We demonstrate that two 
basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins-HEB and E2A-bind the SCA motif at regions 
overlapping SMAD2/3 and FOXH1. Furthermore, we show that HEB and E2A associate
with SMAD2/3 and FOXH1, suggesting they form a complex at critical target
regions. This association is biologically important, as E2A is critical for
mesendoderm specification, gastrulation, and Nodal signal transduction in Xenopus
tropicalis embryos. Taken together, E proteins are novel Nodal signaling
cofactors that associate with SMAD2/3 and FOXH1 and are necessary for mesendoderm
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3182016
PMID: 21828274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Aug 7;13(9):1084-91. doi: 10.1038/ncb2304.

The T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin acts upstream of Mesp1 to specify
cardiac mesoderm during mouse gastrulation.

Costello I(1), Pimeisl IM, Dräger S, Bikoff EK, Robertson EJ, Arnold SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Sir William Dunn School of Pathology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3RE, UK.

Instructive programmes guiding cell-fate decisions in the developing mouse embryo
are controlled by a few so-termed master regulators. Genetic studies demonstrate 
that the T-box transcription factor Eomesodermin (Eomes) is essential for
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, mesoderm migration and specification of
definitive endoderm during gastrulation. Here we report that Eomes expression
within the primitive streak marks the earliest cardiac mesoderm and promotes
formation of cardiovascular progenitors by directly activating the bHLH
(basic-helix-loop-helix) transcription factor gene Mesp1 upstream of the core
cardiac transcriptional machinery. In marked contrast to Eomes/Nodal signalling
interactions that cooperatively regulate anterior-posterior axis patterning and
allocation of the definitive endoderm cell lineage, formation of cardiac
progenitors requires only low levels of Nodal activity accomplished through a
Foxh1/Smad4-independent mechanism. Collectively, our experiments demonstrate that
Eomes governs discrete context-dependent transcriptional programmes that
sequentially specify cardiac and definitive endoderm progenitors during
gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC4531310
PMID: 21822279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 15;357(2):492-504. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.009. Epub 2011
Jun 29.

Chromatin and transcriptional signatures for Nodal signaling during endoderm
formation in hESCs.

Kim SW(1), Yoon SJ, Chuong E, Oyolu C, Wills AE, Gupta R, Baker J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

The first stages of embryonic differentiation are driven by signaling pathways
hardwired to induce particular fates. Endoderm commitment is controlled by the
TGF-ß superfamily member, Nodal, which utilizes the transcription factors,
SMAD2/3, SMAD4 and FOXH1, to drive target gene expression. While the role of
Nodal is well defined within the context of endoderm commitment, mechanistically 
it is unknown how this signal interacts with chromatin on a genome wide scale to 
trigger downstream responses. To elucidate the Nodal transcriptional network that
governs endoderm formation, we used ChIP-seq to identify genomic targets for
SMAD2/3, SMAD3, SMAD4, FOXH1 and the active and repressive chromatin marks,
H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and derived endoderm.
We demonstrate that while SMAD2/3, SMAD4 and FOXH1 associate with DNA in a highly
dynamic fashion, there is an optimal bivalent signature at 32 gene loci for
driving endoderm commitment. Initially, this signature is marked by both H3K4me3 
and H3K27me3 as a very broad bivalent domain in hESCs. Within the first 24h,
SMAD2/3 accumulation coincides with H3K27me3 reduction so that these loci become 
monovalent marked by H3K4me3. JMJD3, a histone demethylase, is simultaneously
recruited to these promoters, suggesting a conservation of mechanism at multiple 
promoters genome-wide. The correlation between SMAD2/3 binding, monovalent
formation and transcriptional activation suggests a mechanism by which SMAD
proteins coordinate with chromatin at critical promoters to drive endoderm
specification.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21741376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 12;286(32):28520-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.236307. Epub
2011 Jun 13.

Global identification of SMAD2 target genes reveals a role for multiple
co-regulatory factors in zebrafish early gastrulas.

Liu Z(1), Lin X, Cai Z, Zhang Z, Han C, Jia S, Meng A, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Biology,
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100101 Beijing, China.

Nodal and Smad2/3 signals play pivotal roles in mesendoderm induction and axis
determination during late blastulation and early gastrulation in vertebrate
embryos. However, Smad2/3 direct target genes during those critical developmental
stages have not been systematically identified. Here, through ChIP-chip assay, we
show that the promoter/enhancer regions of 679 genes are bound by Smad2 in the
zebrafish early gastrulas. Expression analyses confirm that a significant
proportion of Smad2 targets are indeed subjected to Nodal/Smad2 regulation at the
onset of gastrulation. The co-existence of DNA-binding sites of other
transcription factors in the Smad2-bound regions allows the identification of
well known Smad2-binding partners, such as FoxH1 and Lef1/ß-catenin, as well as
many previously unknown Smad2 partners, including Oct1 and Gata6, during
embryogenesis. We demonstrate that Oct1 physically associates with and enhances
the transcription and mesendodermal induction activity of Smad2, whereas Gata6
exerts an inhibitory role in Smad2 signaling and mesendodermal induction. Thus,
our study systemically uncovers a large number of Smad2 targets in early
gastrulas and suggests cooperative roles of Smad2 and other transcription factors
in controlling target gene transcription, which will be valuable for studying
regulatory cascades during germ layer formation and patterning of vertebrate
embryos.

PMCID: PMC3151094
PMID: 21669877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS Genet. 2011 May;7(5):e1002072. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002072. Epub 2011 
May 26.

Nodal-dependent mesendoderm specification requires the combinatorial activities
of FoxH1 and Eomesodermin.

Slagle CE(1), Aoki T, Burdine RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey, 
United States of America.

Vertebrate mesendoderm specification requires the Nodal signaling pathway and its
transcriptional effector FoxH1. However, loss of FoxH1 in several species does
not reliably cause the full range of loss-of-Nodal phenotypes, indicating that
Nodal signals through additional transcription factors during early development. 
We investigated the FoxH1-dependent and -independent roles of Nodal signaling
during mesendoderm patterning using a novel recessive zebrafish FoxH1 mutation
called midway, which produces a C-terminally truncated FoxH1 protein lacking the 
Smad-interaction domain but retaining DNA-binding capability. Using a combination
of gel shift assays, Nodal overexpression experiments, and genetic epistasis
analyses, we demonstrate that midway more accurately represents a complete loss
of FoxH1-dependent Nodal signaling than the existing zebrafish FoxH1 mutant
schmalspur. Maternal-zygotic midway mutants lack notochords, in agreement with
FoxH1 loss in other organisms, but retain near wild-type expression of markers of
endoderm and various nonaxial mesoderm fates, including paraxial and intermediate
mesoderm and blood precursors. We found that the activity of the T-box
transcription factor Eomesodermin accounts for specification of these tissues in 
midway embryos. Inhibition of Eomesodermin in midway mutants severely reduces the
specification of these tissues and effectively phenocopies the defects seen upon 
complete loss of Nodal signaling. Our results indicate that the specific
combinations of transcription factors available for signal transduction play
critical and separable roles in determining Nodal pathway output during
mesendoderm patterning. Our findings also offer novel insights into the
co-evolution of the Nodal signaling pathway, the notochord specification program,
and the chordate branch of the deuterostome family of animals.

PMCID: PMC3102743
PMID: 21637786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Dev Biol. 2011 May 15;353(2):321-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.03.009. Epub 2011 
Mar 23.

Left-right asymmetry in the level of active Nodal protein produced in the node is
translated into left-right asymmetry in the lateral plate of mouse embryos.

Kawasumi A(1), Nakamura T, Iwai N, Yashiro K, Saijoh Y, Belo JA, Shiratori H,
Hamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Group, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka
University, 1-3 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Left-right (L-R) asymmetry in the mouse embryo is generated in the node and is
dependent on cilia-driven fluid flow, but how the initial asymmetry is
transmitted from the node to the lateral plate has remained unknown. We have now 
identified a transcriptional enhancer (ANE) in the human LEFTY1 gene that
exhibits marked L>R asymmetric activity in perinodal cells of the mouse embryo.
Dissection of ANE revealed that it is activated in the perinodal cells on the
left side by Nodal signaling, suggesting that Nodal activity in the node is
asymmetric at a time when Nodal expression is symmetric. Phosphorylated Smad2/3
(pSmad2) indeed manifested an L-R asymmetric distribution at the node, being
detected in perinodal cells preferentially on the left side. This asymmetry in
pSmad2 distribution was found to be generated not by unidirectional transport of 
Nodal but rather as a result of L<R asymmetric expression of the Nodal antagonist
Cerl2. For various mutant embryos examined, the asymmetry in pSmad2 distribution 
among the perinodal cells closely matched that in lateral plate mesoderm (LPM).
However, autocrine-paracrine Nodal signaling in perinodal cells is dispensable
for L-R patterning of LPM, given that its inhibition by expression of dominant
negative forms of Smad3 or ALK4 was still associated with normal (left-sided)
Nodal expression in LPM. Our results suggest that LPM is the direct target of
Nodal secreted by the perinodal cells, and that an L>R distribution of active
Nodal in the node is translated into the asymmetry in LPM.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4134472
PMID: 21419113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 15;351(2):297-310. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.11.037. Epub 2011
Jan 4.

A gene regulatory network controlling hhex transcription in the anterior endoderm
of the organizer.

Rankin SA(1), Kormish J, Kofron M, Jegga A, Zorn AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Research Foundation
and Department of Pediatrics, College of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The homeobox gene hhex is one of the earliest markers of the anterior endoderm,
which gives rise to foregut organs such as the liver, ventral pancreas, thyroid, 
and lungs. The regulatory networks controlling hhex transcription are poorly
understood. In an extensive cis-regulatory analysis of the Xenopus hhex promoter,
we determined how the Nodal, Wnt, and BMP pathways and their downstream
transcription factors regulate hhex expression in the gastrula organizer. We show
that Nodal signaling, present throughout the endoderm, directly activates hhex
transcription via FoxH1/Smad2 binding sites in the proximal -0.44 Kb promoter.
This positive action of Nodal is suppressed in the ventral-posterior endoderm by 
Vent 1 and Vent2, homeodomain repressors that are induced by BMP signaling.
Maternal Wnt/ß-catenin on the dorsal side of the embryo cooperates with Nodal and
indirectly activates hhex expression via the homeodomain activators Siamois and
Twin. Siamois/Twin stimulate hhex transcription through two mechanisms: (1) they 
induce the expression of Otx2 and Lim1 and together Siamois, Twin, Otx2, and Lim1
appear to promote hhex transcription through homeobox sites in a Wnt-responsive
element located between -0.65 to -0.55 Kb of the hhex promoter. (2) Siamois/Twin 
also induce the expression of the BMP-antagonists Chordin and Noggin, which are
required to exclude Vents from the organizer allowing hhex transcription. This
study reveals a complex network regulating anterior endoderm transcription in the
early embryo.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3044432
PMID: 21215263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Dev Biol. 2011 Jan 15;349(2):350-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.10.036. Epub 2010 
Nov 1.

Nodal cis-regulatory elements reveal epiblast and primitive endoderm
heterogeneity in the peri-implantation mouse embryo.

Granier C(1), Gurchenkov V, Perea-Gomez A, Camus A, Ott S, Papanayotou C, Iranzo 
J, Moreau A, Reid J, Koentges G, Sabéran-Djoneidi D, Collignon J.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris-Diderot, CNRS, Institut Jacques Monod, UMR 7592, Development 
and Neurobiology programme, F-75013 Paris, France.

Nodal, a secreted factor known for its conserved functions in cell-fate
specification and the establishment of embryonic axes, is also required in
mammals to maintain the pluripotency of the epiblast, the tissue that gives rise 
to all fetal lineages. Although Nodal is expressed as early as E3.5 in the mouse 
embryo, its regulation and functions at pre- and peri-implantation stages are
currently unknown. Sensitive reporter transgenes for two Nodal cis-regulatory
regions, the PEE and the ASE, exhibit specific expression profiles before
implantation. Mutant and inhibitor studies find them respectively regulated by
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and Activin/Nodal signaling, and provide evidence for
localized and heterogeneous activities of these pathways in the inner cell mass, 
the epiblast and the primitive endoderm. These studies also show that Nodal and
its prime effector, FoxH1, are not essential to preimplantation Activin/Nodal
signaling. Finally, a strong upregulation of the ASE reporter in implanting
blastocysts correlates with a downregulation of the pluripotency factor Nanog in 
the maturing epiblast. This study uncovers conservation in the mouse blastocyst
of Wnt/ß-catenin and Activin/Nodal-dependent activities known to govern Nodal
expression and the establishment of polarity in the blastula of other
deuterostomes. Our results indicate that these pathways act early on to initiate 
distinct cell-specification processes in the ICM derivatives. Our data also
suggest that the activity of the Activin/Nodal pathway is dampened by
interactions with the molecular machinery of pluripotency until just before
implantation, possibly delaying cell-fate decisions in the mouse embryo.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21047506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Dev Biol. 2010 May 15;341(2):459-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.03.002. Epub 2010 
Mar 19.

Polycomb group protein Ezh1 represses Nodal and maintains the left-right axis.

Arai D(1), Katsura H, Shindo N, Matsumoto M, Higashinakagawa T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku, Tokyo
162-8480, Japan. arai.daisuke@ruri.waseda.jp

The left-right (LR) axis is essential for the proper function of internal organs.
In mammals and fish, left-sided Nodal expression governs LR patterning. Here, we 
show that the Polycomb group protein Ezh1, which is highly conserved from fish to
human, participates in LR patterning. Knockdown of olezh1, a medaka homologue of 
Ezh1, led to LR reversal of internal organs. It was shown that OLEZH1 acts in
silencing the expression of Spaw (a medaka homolog of Nodal) via a previously
unknown pathway. Furthermore, coimmunoprecipitation showed physical interaction
of Ezh1 with FoxH1, a Nodal regulator. This represents a novel mechanism for LR
patterning and implies that Ezh1 has developmental importance.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20227405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Int J Oncol. 2010 Feb;36(2):415-20.

Integrative genomic analyses of CXCR4: transcriptional regulation of CXCR4 based 
on TGFbeta, Nodal, Activin signaling and POU5F1, FOXA2, FOXC2, FOXH1, SOX17, and 
GFI1 transcription factors.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

CXCR4, CD133, CD44 and ABCG2 are representative transmembrane proteins expressed 
on the surfaces of normal and/or cancer stem cells. CXCR4 is co-expressed with
POU5F1 in endodermal precursors and adult-tissue stem cells. CXCR4 is expressed
in a variety of human tumors, such as breast cancer, prostate cancer, pancreatic 
cancer, and gastric cancer. CXCR4 is a G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) for
CXCL12 (SDF1) chemokine, and the CXCL12-CXCR4 signaling axis is involved in
proliferation, survival, migration, and homing of cancer cells. Integrative
genomic analyses of CXCR4 gene were carried out to elucidate the mechanisms of
CXCR4 expression in stem cells, because CXCR4 is a key molecule occupying the
crossroads of oncology, immunology, gerontology and regenerative medicine. Human 
CXCR4 promoter region with binding sites for HIF1alpha, ETS1, NF-kappaB and GLI
was not conserved in mouse and rat Cxcr4 orthologs. Proximal enhancer region with
palindromic Smad-binding sites, FOX-binding site, POU-binding site, triple
SOX17-binding sites, bHLH-binding site, TCF/LEF-binding site, and double
GFI1-binding sites was almost completely conserved among human, chimpanzee,
mouse, and rat CXCR4 orthologs. TGFbeta, Nodal, and Activin signals induce CXCR4 
upregulation based on Smad2/3 and FOX family members, such as FOXA2, FOXC2, and
FOXH1. CXCR4 is expressed in endodermal precursors due to the existence of triple
SOX17-binding sites around the POU-binding site instead of the POU5F1-SOX2 joint 
motif. Because CXCR4 is downregulated by p53-GFI1 signaling axis, p53 mutation in
cancer stem cells leads to CXCR4 upregulation. CXCR4 is also upregulated by
TGFbeta and Hedgehog signals in tumor cells at the invasion front. Small molecule
compound or human antibody targeted to CXCR4 will be applied for cancer
therapeutics focusing on cancer stem cells at the primary lesion as well as
metastasis or recurrence niches, such as bone marrow and peritoneal cavity.

PMID: 20043076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(1):81-92. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082837mf.

Zygotic VegT is required for Xenopus paraxial mesoderm formation and is regulated
by Nodal signaling and Eomesodermin.

Fukuda M(1), Takahashi S, Haramoto Y, Onuma Y, Kim YJ, Yeo CY, Ishiura S,
Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, Japan.

The T-box gene VegT plays a crucial role during mesendoderm specification of the 
amphibian embryo. While the function of maternal VegT (mVegT) has been
extensively investigated, little is known about the function and transcriptional 
regulation of zygotic VegT (zVegT). In the present study, we used comparative
genomics and a knockdown experiment to demonstrate that zVegT is the orthologous 
gene of zebrafish Spadetail/Tbx16 and chick Tbx6L/Tbx6, and has an essential role
in paraxial mesodermal formation. zVegT knockdown embryos show several defects in
the patterning of trunk mesoderm, such as abnormal segmentation of somites, a
reduction in muscle, and the formation of an abnormal mass of cells at the tail
tip. We also identified the cis-regulatory elements of zVegT that are necessary
and sufficient for mesoderm-specific expression. These cis-regulatory elements
are located in two separate upstream regions of zVegT, corresponding to the first
intron of mVegT. The results of in vitro binding and functional assays indicate
that Forkhead box H1 (FoxH1) and Eomesodermin (Eomes) are the trans-acting
factors required for zVegT expression. Our results highlight the essential role
of zVegT in organization of paraxial mesoderm, and reveal that zVegT is regulated
by a coherent feedforward loop of Nodal signaling via Eomes.

PMID: 20013651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 19;4(11):e7914. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007914.

Epigenetic silencing in Friedreich ataxia is associated with depletion of CTCF
(CCCTC-binding factor) and antisense transcription.

De Biase I(1), Chutake YK, Rindler PM, Bidichandani SI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Oklahoma
Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Over 15 inherited diseases are caused by expansion of
triplet-repeats. Friedreich ataxia (FRDA) patients are homozygous for an expanded
GAA triplet-repeat sequence in intron 1 of the FXN gene. The expanded GAA
triplet-repeat results in deficiency of FXN gene transcription, which is reversed
via administration of histone deacetylase inhibitors indicating that
transcriptional silencing is at least partially due to an epigenetic abnormality.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We found a severe depletion of the chromatin
insulator protein CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) in the 5'UTR of the FXN gene in
FRDA, and coincident heterochromatin formation involving the +1 nucleosome via
enrichment of H3K9me3 and recruitment of heterochromatin protein 1. We identified
FAST-1 (FXNAntisense Transcript - 1), a novel antisense transcript that overlaps 
the CTCF binding site in the 5'UTR, which was expressed at higher levels in FRDA.
The reciprocal relationship of deficient FXN transcript and higher levels of
FAST-1 seen in FRDA was reproduced in normal cells via knockdown of CTCF.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: CTCF depletion constitutes an epigenetic switch that
results in increased antisense transcription, heterochromatin formation and
transcriptional deficiency in FRDA. These findings provide a mechanistic basis
for the transcriptional silencing of the FXN gene in FRDA, and broaden our
understanding of disease pathogenesis in triplet-repeat diseases.

PMCID: PMC2780319
PMID: 19956589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Heart. 2010 May;96(9):673-7. doi: 10.1136/hrt.2009.181685. Epub 2009 Nov 20.

Familial transposition of the great arteries caused by multiple mutations in
laterality genes.

De Luca A(1), Sarkozy A, Consoli F, Ferese R, Guida V, Dentici ML, Mingarelli R, 
Bellacchio E, Tuo G, Limongelli G, Digilio MC, Marino B, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)Mendel Laboratory, Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, San
Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. a.deluca@css-mendel.it

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of transposition of the great arteries (TGA) is
still largely unknown. In general, TGA is not associated with the more common
genetic disorders nor with extracardiac anomalies, whereas it can be found in
individuals with lateralisation defects, heterotaxy and asplenia syndrome (right 
isomerism).
OBJECTIVE: To analyse genes previously associated with heterotaxy in order to
assess mutations in familial TGA unassociated with other features of laterality
defects.
METHODS: Probands of seven families with isolated TGA and a family history of
concordant or discordant congenital heart disease were screened for mutations in 
the ZIC3, ACVR2B, LEFTYA, CFC1, NODAL, FOXH1, GDF1, CRELD1, GATA4 and NKX2.5
genes.
RESULTS: Mutation analysis allowed the identification of three sequence
variations in two out of seven TGA probands. A FOXH1 (Pro21Ser) missense variant 
was found in a proband who was also heterozogous for an amino acid substitution
(Gly17Cys) in the ZIC3 gene. This ZIC3 variant was also found in another family
member with a second sequence variation (Val150Ile) in the NKX2.5 gene
homeodomain who was affected by multiple ventricular septal defects. A second
proband was found to harbour a splice site variant (IVS2-1G-->C) in the NODAL
gene.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides evidence that some cases of familial TGA 
are caused by mutations in laterality genes and therefore are part of the same
disease spectrum of heterotaxy syndrome, and argues for an oligogenic or complex 
mode of inheritance in these pedigrees.

PMID: 19933292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 15;337(2):471-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.040. Epub 2009 
Nov 5.

Foxh1 and Foxa2 are not required for formation of the midgut and hindgut
definitive endoderm.

McKnight KD(1), Hou J, Hoodless PA.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada;
Genetics Graduate Program, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

The definitive endoderm forms during gastrulation and is rapidly transformed into
the gut tube which is divided along the anterior-posterior axis into the foregut,
midgut, and hindgut. Lineage tracing and genetic analysis have examined the
origin of the definitive endoderm during gastrulation and demonstrated that the
majority of definitive endoderm arises at the anterior end of the primitive
streak (APS). Foxh1 and Foxa2 have been shown to play a role in specification of 
the APS and definitive endoderm. However, prior studies have focused on the role 
of these factors in specification of foregut definitive endoderm, while their
role in the specification of midgut and hindgut definitive endoderm is less
understood. Furthermore, previous analyses of these mutants have utilized
definitive endoderm markers that are restricted to the anterior endoderm,
expressed in extraembryonic endoderm, or present in other germ layers. Here, we
characterized the expression of several novel definitive and visceral endoderm
markers in Foxh1 and Foxa2 null embryos. In accordance with previous studies, we 
observed a deficiency of foregut definitive endoderm resulting in incorporation
of visceral endoderm into the foregut. Interestingly, this analysis revealed that
formation of midgut and hindgut definitive endoderm is unaffected by loss of
Foxh1 or Foxa2. This finding represents a significant insight into specification 
and regionalization of mouse definitive endoderm.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19896480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Mol Cells. 2009 Jul 31;28(1):67-71. doi: 10.1007/s10059-009-0099-7. Epub 2009 Jul
8.

PKA-mediated stabilization of FoxH1 negatively regulates ERalpha activity.

Yum J(1), Jeong HM, Kim S, Seo JW, Han Y, Lee KY, Yeo CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Division of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Ewha Womans University, Seoul 120-750, Korea.

Estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) mediates the mitogenic effects of estrogen.
ERalpha signaling regulates the normal growth and differentiation of mammary
tissue, but uncontrolled ERalpha activation increases the risk to breast cancer. 
Estrogen binding induces ligand-dependent ERalpha activation, thereby
facilitating ERalpha dimerization, promoter binding and coactivator recruitment. 
ERalpha can also be activated in a ligand-independent manner by many signaling
pathways, including protein kinase A (PKA) signaling. However, in several
ERalpha-positive breast cancer cells, PKA inhibits estrogen-dependent cell
growth. FoxH1 represses the transcriptional activities of estrogen receptors and 
androgen receptors (AR). Interestingly, FoxH1 has been found to inhibit the
PKA-induced and ligand-induced activation of AR. In the present study, we
examined the effects of PKA activation on the ability of FoxH1 to represses
ERalpha transcriptional activity. We found that PKA increases the protein
stability of FoxH1, and that FoxH1 inhibits PKA-induced and estradiol-induced
activation of an estrogen response element (ERE). Furthermore, in MCF7 cells,
FoxH1 knockdown increased the PKA-induced and estradiol-induced activation of the
ERE. These results suggest that PKA can negatively regulate ERalpha, at least in 
part, through FoxH1.

PMID: 19711044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Cardiol. 2010 Nov 5;145(1):83-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2009.05.030. Epub
2009 Jun 13.

Forkhead box H1 (FOXH1) sequence variants in ventricular septal defect.

Wang B, Yan J, Mi R, Zhou S, Xie X, Wang J, Ma X.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the possible genetic role of FOXH1 in the pathogenesis 
of ventricular septal defect (VSD).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: 301 VSD Chinese patients and 111 Chinese patients with the 
other subtypes of congenital heart defects were investigated for mutations in the
FOXH1 gene by direct sequencing.
RESULT: Four variants were found among the isolated VSD patients, including one
pathogenic mutation (c.659_660ins.C).

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19525021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jun;238(6):1422-32. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21931.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation in early Xenopus laevis embryos.

Blythe SA(1), Reid CD, Kessler DS, Klein PS.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Molecular Biology Graduate Group, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. sblythe@mail.med.upenn.edu

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) is a powerful method for analyzing the
interaction of regulatory proteins with genomic loci, but has been difficult to
apply to studies on early embryos due to the limiting amount of genomic material 
in these samples. Here, we present a comprehensive technique for performing ChIP 
on blastula and gastrula stage Xenopus embryos. We also describe methods for
optimizing crosslinking and chromatin shearing, verifying antibody specificity,
maximizing PCR sensitivity, and quantifying PCR results, allowing for the use of 
as few as 50 early blastula stage embryos (approximately 5x10(4) cells) per
experimental condition. Finally, we demonstrate the predicted binding of
endogenous beta-catenin to the nodal-related 6 promoter, binding of tagged
Fast-1/FoxH1 to the goosecoid promoter, and binding of tagged Tcf3 to the siamois
and nodal-related 6 promoters as examples of the potential application of ChIP to
embryological investigations. Developmental Dynamics 238:1422-1432, 2009. (c)
2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2832845
PMID: 19334278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Genes Dev. 2008 Nov 1;22(21):3037-49. doi: 10.1101/gad.1682108.

BMP/SMAD1 signaling sets a threshold for the left/right pathway in lateral plate 
mesoderm and limits availability of SMAD4.

Furtado MB(1), Solloway MJ, Jones VJ, Costa MW, Biben C, Wolstein O, Preis JI,
Sparrow DB, Saga Y, Dunwoodie SL, Robertson EJ, Tam PP, Harvey RP.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Chang Cardiac Research Institute, Darlinghurst, New South Wales,
Australia.

Bistability in developmental pathways refers to the generation of binary outputs 
from graded or noisy inputs. Signaling thresholds are critical for bistability.
Specification of the left/right (LR) axis in vertebrate embryos involves bistable
expression of transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta) member NODAL in the left 
lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) controlled by feed-forward and feedback loops. Here 
we provide evidence that bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)/SMAD1 signaling sets a 
repressive threshold in the LPM essential for the integrity of LR signaling.
Conditional deletion of Smad1 in the LPM led to precocious and bilateral pathway 
activation. NODAL expression from both the left and right sides of the node
contributed to bilateral activation, indicating sensitivity of mutant LPM to
noisy input from the LR system. In vitro, BMP signaling inhibited NODAL pathway
activation and formation of its downstream SMAD2/4-FOXH1 transcriptional complex.
Activity was restored by overexpression of SMAD4 and in embryos, elevated SMAD4
in the right LPM robustly activated LR gene expression, an effect reversed by
superactivated BMP signaling. We conclude that BMP/SMAD1 signaling sets a
bilateral, repressive threshold for NODAL-dependent Nodal activation in LPM,
limiting availability of SMAD4. This repressive threshold is essential for
bistable output of the LR system.

PMCID: PMC2577791
PMID: 18981480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 5;283(49):34168-77. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803532200. Epub 2008 
Oct 15.

Oct25 represses transcription of nodal/activin target genes by interaction with
signal transducers during Xenopus gastrulation.

Cao Y(1), Siegel D, Oswald F, Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

The balance between differentiation signals and signals maintaining the
undifferentiated state of embryonic cells ensures proper formation of germ
layers. The nodal/activin pathway represents one of the major signaling chains
responsible for the differentiation of embryonic cells into mesodermal and
endodermal germ layers, while Oct4 is one of the major players in the maintenance
of an undifferentiated state. Here we show that Oct25, an Oct4 homologue in
Xenopus, antagonizes the activity of nodal/activin signaling by inhibiting the
transcription of its target genes, Gsc and Mix2. The inhibitory effect is
achieved by forming repression complexes on the promoters of Gsc and Mix2 between
Oct25 and the signal transducers of the nodal/activin pathway, WBSCR11, FAST1,
and Smad2. We have analyzed the significance of the Oct binding site for its
inhibitory effect within the Gsc promoter. Albeit VP16-Oct25 fusion protein
demonstrated a stimulating effect and EVE-Oct25 revealed a repression effect on
an artificial reporter that is composed of eight repeats of Oct binding motifs,
both fusions, like wild-type Oct25, inhibited mesendoderm formation and the
activity of Gsc and Mix2 promoters. These results suggest that the regulatory
effect of Oct25 on the expression of Gsc and Mix2 is mediated by specific
protein/protein interactions. Furthermore, we demonstrate that histone
deacetylase activities are not required for the inhibitory effect of Oct25. Our
results provide a novel view in that Oct25 controls the nodal/activin pathway and
thus maintains the undifferentiated state of embryonic cells in preventing them
from premature differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2662234
PMID: 18922797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Dev Genes Evol. 2008 Jul;218(7):353-60. doi: 10.1007/s00427-008-0230-3. Epub 2008
Jun 11.

Left-right asymmetric expression of Pitx is regulated by the asymmetric Nodal
signaling through an intronic enhancer in Ciona intestinalis.

Yoshida K(1), Saiga H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, 
Tokyo Metropolitan University, 1-1 Minamiohsawa, Hachiohji, Tokyo, Japan.

Left-right asymmetric expression of Pitx as well as of Nodal has been observed in
some ascidian species, but a mechanism that regulates the asymmetric expression
of Pitx remains largely unclear. We addressed the transcription regulatory
mechanism of the left-right asymmetric expression of Pitx gene in the ascidian,
Ciona intestinalis. We first identified an intronic enhancer that drives Ci-Pitx 
left-sided expression in the epidermis and found that a single FoxH1 binding site
present in this enhancer is essential for its activity. Also, we have shown that 
the enhancer requires Nodal signaling to drive the Ci-Pitx expression in the left
epidermis. In C. intestinalis, left-sided expression of the Nodal gene has not
been reported so far. We have confirmed that Ci-Nodal is expressed in the left
epidermis of embryos at the tailbud stage only when they are allowed to develop
within the chorion. Then, to test the importance of the FoxH1 binding site, we
carried out knock down experiments using morpholino antisense oligonucleotides
against Ci-FoxHa, the only FoxH gene that is expressed in the same stage as the
left-sided expression of Ci-Pitx is observed. Knocking down of the function of
Ci-FoxHa led to the down regulation of the expression of Ci-Pitx in the left
epidermis. The present results suggest that the regulatory mechanism controlling 
the left-right asymmetric expression of the Pitx genes is well conserved between 
C. intestinalis and vertebrates.

PMID: 18546017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Jul;83(1):18-29. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.05.012. Epub 2008 
Jun 5.

Reduced NODAL signaling strength via mutation of several pathway members
including FOXH1 is linked to human heart defects and holoprosencephaly.

Roessler E(1), Ouspenskaia MV, Karkera JD, Vélez JI, Kantipong A, Lacbawan F,
Bowers P, Belmont JW, Towbin JA, Goldmuntz E, Feldman B, Muenke M.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Abnormalities of embryonic patterning are hypothesized to underlie many common
congenital malformations in humans including congenital heart defects (CHDs),
left-right disturbances (L-R) or laterality, and holoprosencephaly (HPE). Studies
in model organisms suggest that Nodal-like factors provide instructions for key
aspects of body axis and germ layer patterning; however, the complex genetics of 
pathogenic gene variant(s) in humans are poorly understood. Here we report our
studies of FOXH1, CFC1, and SMAD2 and summarize our mutational analysis of three 
additional components in the human NODAL-signaling pathway: NODAL, GDF1, and
TDGF1. We identify functionally abnormal gene products throughout the pathway
that are clearly associated with CHD, laterality, and HPE. Abnormal gene products
are most commonly detected in patients within a narrow spectrum of isolated
conotruncal heart defects (minimum 5%-10% of subjects), and far less commonly in 
isolated laterality or HPE patients (approximately 1% for each). The difference
in the mutation incidence between these groups is highly significant. We show
that apparent gene dosage discrepancies between humans and model organisms can be
reconciled by considering a broader combination of sequence variants. Our studies
confirm that (1) the genetic vulnerabilities inferred from model organisms with
defects in Nodal signaling are indeed analogous to humans; (2) the molecular
analysis of an entire signaling pathway is more complete and robust than that of 
individual genes and presages future studies by whole-genome analysis; and (3) a 
functional genomics approach is essential to fully appreciate the complex genetic
interactions necessary to produce these effects in humans.

PMCID: PMC2443854
PMID: 18538293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Exp Cell Res. 2008 Apr 15;314(7):1585-94. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2008.01.023. Epub 
2008 Feb 9.

Sumoylation differentially regulates Goosecoid-mediated transcriptional
repression.

Izzi L(1), Narimatsu M, Attisano L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, Donnelly Centre for Cellular and
Biomolecular Research, University of Toronto, 160 College Street, Toronto,
Ontario Canada M5S 3E1.

Goosecoid (Gsc), a paired-like homeobox gene expressed in the vertebrate
organizer, functions as a transcriptional repressor either by direct DNA binding 
to paired TAAT homeodomain sites or through recruitment by the forkhead/winged
helix transcription factor Foxh1. Here, we report that Gsc is
post-translationally modified by small ubiquitin-like modifier proteins (SUMO).
Members of the PIAS family of proteins enhance Gsc sumoylation and this
modification occurs on at least six lysine residues. Stable expression of a
SUMO-defective Gsc mutant (Gsc 6Km) in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells results in 
morphological changes giving rise to cells with increased cell area. We
demonstrate that Gsc 6Km can effectively repress Foxh1-mediated induction of the 
Mixl1 promoter, indicating that sumoylation is not required for Gsc-mediated
repression of promoters where recruitment occurs through Foxh1. In contrast, Gsc 
6Km exhibits a decreased ability to repress the induction of promoters to which
it is directly recruited through paired-homeodomain binding sites, including its 
own promoter and that of the Xenopus Brachyury gene. Taken together, our data
suggests that regulation of Gsc repressive activity by SUMO modification is
promoter specific and may serve to differentially regulate genes that function to
control cell morphology during early development and cancer.

PMID: 18336814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Dev Cell. 2008 Mar;14(3):411-23. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2008.01.004.

Genome-wide identification of Smad/Foxh1 targets reveals a role for Foxh1 in
retinoic acid regulation and forebrain development.

Silvestri C(1), Narimatsu M, von Both I, Liu Y, Tan NB, Izzi L, McCaffery P,
Wrana JL, Attisano L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, 160 College Street,
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E1, Canada.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2008 Apr;14(4):633.

Foxh1, a Smad DNA-binding partner, mediates TGFbeta-dependent gene expression
during early development. Few Foxh1 targets are known. Here, we describe a
genome-wide approach that we developed that couples systematic mapping of a
functional Smad/Foxh1 enhancer (SFE) to Site Search, a program used to search
annotated genomes for composite response elements. Ranking of SFEs that are
positionally conserved across species yielded a set of genes enriched in Foxh1
targets. Analysis of top candidates, such as Hesx1, Lgr4, Lmo1, Fgf8, and members
of the Aldh1a subfamily, revealed that Foxh1 initiates a transcriptional
regulatory network within the developing anterior neuroectoderm. The Aldh1a
family is required for retinoic acid (RA) synthesis, and, in Foxh1 mutants,
expression of Aldh1a1, -2, and -3 and activation of a RA-responsive transgenic
reporter is abolished in anterior structures. Integrated mapping of a
developmental transcription factor network thus reveals a key role for Foxh1 in
patterning and initiating RA signaling in the forebrain.

PMID: 18331719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Dev Biol. 2007 Oct 1;310(1):10-22. Epub 2007 Jul 19.

An early requirement for maternal FoxH1 during zebrafish gastrulation.

Pei W(1), Noushmehr H, Costa J, Ouspenskaia MV, Elkahloun AG, Feldman B.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, Building 35, Room 1B 205, Bethesda, MD
20892, USA.

The Forkhead Box H1 (FoxH1) protein is a co-transcription factor recruited by
phosphorylated Smad2 downstream of several TGFbetas, including Nodal-related
proteins. We have reassessed the function of zebrafish FoxH1 using antisense
morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs). MOs targeting translation of foxH1 disrupt
embryonic epiboly movements during gastrulation and cause death on the first day 
of development. The FoxH1 morphant phenotype is much more severe than that of
zebrafish carrying foxh1/schmalspur (sur) DNA-binding domain mutations, FoxH1
splice-blocking morphants or other Nodal pathway mutants, and it cannot be
altered by concomitant perturbations in Nodal signaling. Apart from disrupting
epiboly, FoxH1 MO treatment disrupts convergence and internalization movements.
Late gastrula-stage FoxH1 morphants exhibit delayed mesoderm and endoderm marker 
gene expression and failed patterning of the central nervous system. Probing
FoxH1 morphant RNA by microarray, we identified a cohort of five keratin
genes--cyt1, cyt2, krt4, krt8 and krt18--that are normally transcribed in the
embryo's enveloping layer (EVL) and which have significantly reduced expression
in FoxH1-depleted embryos. Simultaneously disrupting these keratins with a
mixture of MOs reproduces the FoxH1 morphant phenotype. Our studies thus point to
an essential role for maternal FoxH1 and downstream keratins during gastrulation 
that is epistatic to Nodal signaling.

PMCID: PMC2121100
PMID: 17719025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2007 Aug;15(8):615-6.

[A study on transcription regulation of human alpha 2(I) procollagen gene by
FoxH-1].

[Article in Chinese]

Xia LM(1), Tian DA, Wang B, Huang WJ, Lin JS, Liang KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.

PMID: 17711636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Sep;27(17):6068-83. Epub 2007 Jun 25.

Arkadia activates Smad3/Smad4-dependent transcription by triggering
signal-induced SnoN degradation.

Levy L(1), Howell M, Das D, Harkin S, Episkopou V, Hill CS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Signalling, Cancer Research UK London Research
Institute, Lincoln's Inn Fields Laboratories, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London
WC2A 3PX, United Kingdom.

E3 ubiquitin ligases play important roles in regulating transforming growth
factor beta (TGF-beta)/Smad signaling. Screening of an E3 ubiquitin ligase small 
interfering RNA library, using TGF-beta induction of a Smad3/Smad4-dependent
luciferase reporter as a readout, revealed that Arkadia is an E3 ubiquitin ligase
that is absolutely required for this TGF-beta response. Knockdown of Arkadia or
overexpression of a dominant-negative mutant completely abolishes transcription
from Smad3/Smad4-dependent reporters, but not from Smad1/Smad4-dependent
reporters or from reporters driven by Smad2/Smad4/FoxH1 complexes. We show that
Arkadia specifically activates transcription via Smad3/Smad4 binding sites by
inducing degradation of the transcriptional repressor SnoN. Arkadia is essential 
for TGF-beta-induced SnoN degradation, but it has little effect on SnoN levels in
the absence of signal. Arkadia interacts with SnoN and induces its ubiquitination
irrespective of TGF-beta/Activin signaling, but SnoN is efficiently degraded only
when it forms a complex with both Arkadia and phosphorylated Smad2 or Smad3.
Finally, we describe an esophageal cancer cell line (SEG-1) that we show has lost
Arkadia expression and is deficient for SnoN degradation. Reintroduction of
wild-type Arkadia restores TGF-beta-induced Smad3/Smad4-dependent transcription
and SnoN degradation in these cells, raising the possibility that loss of Arkadia
function may be relevant in cancer.

PMCID: PMC1952153
PMID: 17591695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. EMBO J. 2007 Jul 11;26(13):3132-43. Epub 2007 Jun 14.

Foxh1 recruits Gsc to negatively regulate Mixl1 expression during early mouse
development.

Izzi L(1), Silvestri C, von Both I, Labbé E, Zakin L, Wrana JL, Attisano L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Mixl1 is a member of the Mix/Bix family of paired-like homeodomain proteins and
is required for proper axial mesendoderm morphogenesis and endoderm formation
during mouse development. Mix/Bix proteins are transcription factors that
function in Nodal-like signaling pathways and are themselves regulated by Nodal. 
Here, we show that Foxh1 forms a DNA-binding complex with Smads to regulate
transforming growth factor beta (TGFbeta)/Nodal-dependent Mixl1 gene expression. 
Whereas Foxh1 is commonly described as a transcriptional activator, we observed
that Foxh1-null embryos exhibit expanded and enhanced Mixl1 expression during
gastrulation, indicating that Foxh1 negatively regulates expression of Mixl1
during early mouse embryogenesis. We demonstrate that Foxh1 associates with the
homeodomain-containing protein Goosecoid (Gsc), which in turn recruits histone
deacetylases to repress Mixl1 gene expression. Ectopic expression of Gsc in
embryoid bodies represses endogenous Mixl1 expression and this effect is
dependent on Foxh1. As Gsc is itself induced in a Foxh1-dependent manner, we
propose that Foxh1 initiates positive and negative transcriptional circuits to
refine cell fate decisions during gastrulation.

PMCID: PMC1914101
PMID: 17568773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Stem Cells. 2007 Sep;25(9):2200-5. Epub 2007 May 31.

Differentiation in vivo of cardiac committed human embryonic stem cells in
postmyocardial infarcted rats.

Tomescot A(1), Leschik J, Bellamy V, Dubois G, Messas E, Bruneval P, Desnos M,
Hagège AA, Amit M, Itskovitz J, Menasché P, Pucéat M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale/Evry University
Unité Mixte de Recherche 861, I-Stem, Association Française contre les
Myopathies, 5, rue Desbrières, Evry 91030, France.

Human embryonic stem (HES) cells can give rise to cardiomyocytes in vitro.
However, whether undifferentiated HES cells also feature a myocardial
regenerative capacity after in vivo engraftment has not been established yet. We 
compared two HES cell lines (HUES-1 and I6) that were specified toward a cardiac 
lineage by exposure to bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP2) and SU5402, a
fibroblast growth factor receptor inhibitor. Real-time polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR) revealed that the cardiogenic inductive factor turned on expression of
mesodermal and cardiac genes (Tbx6, Isl1, FoxH1, Nkx2.5, Mef2c, and alpha-actin).
Thirty immunosuppressed rats underwent coronary artery ligation and, 2 weeks
later, were randomized and received in-scar injections of either culture medium
(controls) or BMP2 (+/-SU5402)-treated HES cells. After 2 months, human cells
were detected by anti-human lamin immunostaining, and their cardiomyocytic
differentiation was evidenced by their expression of cardiac markers by reverse
transcription-PCR and immunofluorescence using an anti-beta myosin antibody. No
teratoma was observed in hearts or any other organ of the body. The ability of
cardiac-specified HES cells to differentiate along the cardiomyogenic pathway
following transplantation into infarcted myocardium raises the hope that these
cells might become effective candidates for myocardial regeneration.

PMID: 17540853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Development. 2007 Jun;134(11):2051-60.

Cerberus is a feedback inhibitor of Nodal asymmetric signaling in the chick
embryo.

Tavares AT(1), Andrade S, Silva AC, Belo JA.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, 2781-901 Oeiras, Portugal.
atavares@igc.gulbenkian.pt

The TGF-beta-related molecule Nodal plays an essential and conserved role in
left-right patterning of the vertebrate embryo. Previous reports have shown that 
the zebrafish and mouse Cerberus-related proteins Charon and Cerberus-like-2
(Cerl-2), respectively, act in the node region to prevent the Nodal signal from
crossing to the right side, whereas chick Cerberus (cCer) has an unclear function
in the left-side mesoderm. In this study, we investigate the transcriptional
regulation and function of cCer in left-right development. By analyzing the
enhancer activity of cCer 5' genomic sequences in electroporated chick embryos,
we identified a cCer left-side enhancer that contains two FoxH1 and one SMAD
binding site. We show that these Nodal-responsive elements are necessary and
sufficient for the activation of transcription in the left-side mesoderm. In
transgenic mouse embryos, cCer regulatory sequences behave as in chick embryos,
suggesting that the cis-regulatory sequences of Cerberus-related genes have
diverged during vertebrate evolution. Moreover, our findings from cCer
overexpression and knockdown experiments indicate that cCer is a
negative-feedback regulator of Nodal asymmetric signaling. We propose that cCer
and mouse Cerl-2 have evolved distinct regulatory mechanisms but retained a
conserved function in left-right development, which is to restrict Nodal activity
to the left side of the embryo.

PMID: 17507406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 15;304(2):735-44. Epub 2007 Jan 20.

FoxH1 negatively modulates flk1 gene expression and vascular formation in
zebrafish.

Choi J(1), Dong L, Ahn J, Dao D, Hammerschmidt M, Chen JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Flk1 is the major receptor for VEGF on endothelial cells. During embryogenesis,
flk1 is required for both vasculogenesis and angiogenesis and abnormally elevated
flk1 expression is often associated with pathological conditions in adults. While
the biological function of flk1 has been studied extensively, very little is
known about how the flk1 gene is regulated at the transcriptional level. Our
transgenic study led to the identification of a flk1 endothelial enhancer
positioned approximately 5 kb upstream of the flk1 translation initiation site.
Binding sites for FoxH1, scl, ets and gata factors are found in the zebrafish
flk1 endothelial enhancer, as well as in upstream sequences of mouse flk1 and
human kdr genes, suggesting that the regulatory machinery for flk1/kdr is
conserved from fish to mammals. The roles of scl, ets and gata factors in
hemangioblasts have been well defined, but the significance of FoxH1 in vessel
formation has not been explored previously. Here we show that FoxH1 binds to the 
flk1 endothelial enhancer in vitro and functions as a repressor for flk1
transcription in cultured cells. Consistent with these findings, the expression
level of flk1 is elevated in embryos lacking both maternal and zygotic FoxH1. We 
further show that overexpression of FoxH1 has a negative effect on vascular
formation that can be counteracted by the down-regulation of smad2 activity in
zebrafish embryos. Taken together, our data provide the first evidence that flk1 
is a direct target of FoxH1 and that FoxH1 is involved in vessel formation in
zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC1876740
PMID: 17306248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Development. 2007 Feb;134(4):769-77.

Negative regulation of Activin/Nodal signaling by SRF during Xenopus
gastrulation.

Yun CH(1), Choi SC, Park E, Kim SJ, Chung AS, Lee HK, Lee HJ, Han JK.

Author information: 
(1)Natural Medicines Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 305-333, Korea.

Activin/Nodal signaling is essential for germ-layer formation and axial
patterning during embryogenesis. Recent evidence has demonstrated that the intra-
or extracellular inhibition of this signaling is crucial for ectoderm
specification and correct positioning of mesoderm and endoderm. Here, we analyzed
the function of Xenopus serum response factor (XSRF) in establishing germ layers 
during early development. XSRF transcripts are restricted to the animal pole
ectoderm in Xenopus early embryos. Ectopic expression of XSRF RNA suppresses
mesoderm induction, both in the marginal zone in vivo and caused by Activin/Nodal
signals in animal caps. Dominant-negative mutant or antisense morpholino
oligonucleotide-mediated inhibition of XSRF function expands the expression of
mesendodermal genes toward the ectodermal territory and enhances the inducing
activity of the Activin signal. SRF interacts with Smad2 and FAST-1, and inhibits
the formation of the Smad2-FAST-1 complex induced by Activin. These results
suggest that XSRF might act to ensure proper mesoderm induction in the
appropriate region by inhibiting the mesoderm-inducing signals during early
embryogenesis.

PMID: 17259304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Nov 15;15(22):3369-77. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

Sesn1 is a novel gene for left-right asymmetry and mediating nodal signaling.

Peeters H(1), Voz ML, Verschueren K, De Cat B, Pendeville H, Thienpont B,
Schellens A, Belmont JW, David G, Van De Ven WJ, Fryns JP, Gewillig M,
Huylebroeck D, Peers B, Devriendt K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Clinical Genetics Unit, University of Leuven,
Belgium. hilde.peeters@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

Remarkable progress has been made in understanding the molecular mechanisms
underlying left-right asymmetry in vertebrate animal models but little is known
on left-right axis formation in humans. Previously, we identified SESN1 (also
known as PA26) as a candidate gene for heterotaxia by positional cloning of the
breakpoint regions of a de novo translocation in a heterotaxia patient. In this
study, we show by means of a zebrafish sesn1-knockdown model that Sesn1 is
required for normal embryonic left-right determination. In this model,
developmental defects and expression data of genes implicated in vertebrate
left-right asymmetry indicate a role for Sesn1 in mediating Nodal signaling. In
the lateral plate mesoderm, Nodal signaling plays a central role in left-right
axis formation in vertebrates and is mediated by FoxH1 transcriptional induction.
In line with this, we show that Sesn1 physically interacts with FoxH1 or a
FoxH1-containing complex. Mutation analysis in a panel of 234 patients with
isolated heterotaxia did not reveal mutations, indicating that these are only
exceptional causes of human heterotaxia. In this study, we identify SESN1 as an
indispensable gene for vertebrate left-right asymmetry and a new player in
mediating Nodal signaling.

PMID: 17038485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Dev Cell. 2006 Oct;11(4):495-504.

Generation of robust left-right asymmetry in the mouse embryo requires a
self-enhancement and lateral-inhibition system.

Nakamura T(1), Mine N, Nakaguchi E, Mochizuki A, Yamamoto M, Yashiro K, Meno C,
Hamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Group, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka
University and CREST/SORST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation, Suita,
Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The bilateral symmetry of the mouse embryo is broken by leftward fluid flow in
the node. However, it is unclear how this directional flow is then translated
into the robust, left side-specific Nodal gene expression that determines and
coordinates left-right situs throughout the embryo. While manipulating Nodal and 
Lefty gene expression, we have observed phenomena that are indicative of the
involvement of a self-enhancement and lateral-inhibition (SELI) system. We
constructed a mathematical SELI model that not only simulates, but also predicts,
experimental data. As predicted by the model, Nodal expression initiates even on 
the right side. These results indicate that directional flow represents an
initial small difference between the left and right sides of the embryo, but is
insufficient to determine embryonic situs. Nodal and Lefty are deployed as a SELI
system required to amplify this initial bias and convert it into robust
asymmetry.

PMID: 17011489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2006 Sep;76(9):658-73.

Holoprosencephaly: clinical, anatomic, and molecular dimensions.

Cohen MM Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. 
michael.cohen@dal.ca

Holoprosencephaly is addressed under the following headings: alobar, semilobar,
and lobar holoprosencephaly; arrhinencephaly; agenesis of the corpus callosum;
pituitary abnormalities; hindbrain abnormalities; syntelencephaly;
aprosencephaly/atelencephaly; neural tube defects; facial anomalies; median cleft
lip; minor facial anomalies; single maxillary central incisor;
holoprosencephaly-like phenotype; epidemiology; genetic causes of
holoprosencephaly; teratogenic causes of holoprosencephaly; SHH mutations; ZIC2
mutations; SIX3 mutations; TGIF mutations; PTCH mutations; GLI2 mutations; FAST1 
mutations; TDGF1 mutations; and DHCR7 mutations.

PMID: 17001700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Development. 2006 Aug;133(15):3015-25.

Conserved regulation and role of Pitx2 in situs-specific morphogenesis of
visceral organs.

Shiratori H(1), Yashiro K, Shen MM, Hamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Group, Graduate School for Frontier Biosciences, Osaka 
University, and CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST Yamada-oka, 
Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan. shiratori@fbs.osaka-u.cjp

Pitx2 is expressed in developing visceral organs on the left side and is
implicated in left-right (LR) asymmetric organogenesis. The asymmetric expression
of Pitx2 is controlled by an intronic enhancer (ASE) that contains multiple
Foxh1-binding sites and an Nkx2-binding site. These binding sites are essential
and sufficient for asymmetric enhancer activity and are evolutionarily conserved 
among vertebrates. We now show that mice that lack the ASE of Pitx2
(Pitx2(Delta)(ASE/)(Delta)(ASE) mice) fail to manifest left-sided Pitx2
expression and exhibit laterality defects in most visceral organs, although the
position of the stomach and heart looping remain unaffected. Asymmetric Pitx2
expression in some domains, such as the common cardinal vein, was found to be
induced by Nodal signaling but to be independent of the ASE of Pitx2. Expression 
of Pitx2 appears to be repressed in a large portion of the heart ventricle and
atrioventricular canal of wild-type mice by a negative feedback mechanism at a
time when the gene is still expressed in its other domains. Rescue of the early
phase of asymmetric Pitx2 expression in the left lateral plate of
Pitx2(Delta)(ASE/)(Delta)(ASE) embryos was not sufficient to restore normal
organogenesis, suggesting that continuous expression of Pitx2 in the lineage of
the left lateral plate is required for situs-specific organogenesis.

PMID: 16835440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Int J Mol Med. 2006 May;17(5):795-9.

CER1 is a common target of WNT and NODAL signaling pathways in human embryonic
stem cells.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Nodal and BMP signaling pathways network with WNT signaling pathway during
embryogenesis and carcinogenesis. CER1 (Cerberus 1) and GREM3 (CKTSF1B3 or CER2) 
inhibit NODAL signaling through ACVR1B (ALK4) or ACVR1C (ALK7) to SMAD2 or SMAD3.
GREM1 (CKTSF1B1) inhibits BMP signaling through BMPR1A (ALK3), BMPR1B (ALK6) or
ACVR1 (ALK2) to SMAD1, SMAD5 or SMAD8. CER1, GREM1 and GREM3 are DAN domain
(DAND) family members; however, transcriptional regulation of DAND family members
by canonical WNT signaling pathway remains unclear. We searched for the
TCF/LEF-binding site within the promoter region of DAND family genes, including
CER1, GREM1, GREM2, GREM3 and NBL1. Because triple TCF/LEF-binding sites were
identified within human CER1 promoter by using bioinformatics and human
intelligence, comparative genomics analyses on CER1 orthologs were further
performed. Chimpanzee CER1 gene, encoding 267-amino-acid protein, was identified 
within NW_111298.1 genome sequence. XM_528542.1 was not a correct coding sequence
for chimpanzee CER1. Primate CER1 orthologs were significantly divergent from
rodent Cer1 orthologs. Three TCF/LEF-binding sites within human CER1 promoter
were conserved in chimpanzee CER1 promoter, two in cow and dog Cer1 promoters,
but not in rodent Cer1 promoters. Binding sites for NODAL signaling effectors,
SMAD3/SMAD4 and FOXH1, were also conserved among human, chimpanzee, cow and dog
CER1 promoters. CER1 orthologs were evolutionarily conserved target of WNT and
NODAL signaling pathways in non-rodent mammals. Human CER1 mRNA was expressed in 
embryonic stem (ES) cells in the undifferentiated state and in the early
endodermal lineage. CER1 upregulation in human ES cells leads to Nodal signaling 
inhibition associated with differentiation of human ES cells. Primate CER1
orthologs, playing a pivotal role during early embryogenesis, underwent protein
evolution as well as promoter evolution. These facts indicate that molecular
evolution of CER1 orthologs contributes to the significantly divergent scenarios 
of early embryogenesis in primates and rodents.

PMID: 16596263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Biol Chem. 2005 Oct 28;280(43):36355-63. Epub 2005 Aug 23.

Modulation of androgen receptor transactivation by FoxH1. A newly identified
androgen receptor corepressor.

Chen G(1), Nomura M, Morinaga H, Matsubara E, Okabe T, Goto K, Yanase T, Zheng H,
Lu J, Nawata H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Bioregulatory Science, Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kyushu University, Maidashi 3-1-1, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.

Androgen signaling plays key roles in the development and progression of prostate
cancer, and numerous ongoing studies focus on the regulation of androgen receptor
(AR) transactivity to develop novel therapies for the treatment of
androgen-independent prostate cancer. FoxH1, a member of the Forkhead-box (FOX)
gene family of transcription factors, takes part in mediating transforming growth
factor-beta/activin signaling through its interaction with the Smad2.Smad4
complex. Using a series of experiments, we found that FoxH1 repressed both
ligand-dependent and -independent transactivation of the AR on androgen-induced
promoters. This action of FoxH1 was independent of its transactivation capacity
and activin A but relieved by Smad2.Smad4. In addition, the repression of the AR 
by FoxH1 did not require deacetylase activity. A protein-protein interaction was 
identified between the AR and FoxH1 independently of dihydrotestosterone.
Furthermore, a confocal microscopic analysis of LNCaP cells revealed that the
interaction between the AR and FoxH1 occurred in the nucleus and that FoxH1
specifically blocked the foci formation of dihydrotestosterone-activated AR,
which has been shown to be correlated with the AR transactivation potential.
Taken together, our results indicate that FoxH1 functions as a new corepressor of
the AR. Our observations not only strengthen the role of FoxH1 in AR-mediated
transactivation but also suggest that therapeutic interventions based on
AR-coregulator interactions could be designed to block both androgen-dependent
and -independent growth of prostate cancer.

PMID: 16120611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Aug 12;333(4):1361-9.

Transcriptional regulation of the homeobox gene Mixl1 by TGF-beta and FoxH1.

Hart AH(1), Willson TA, Wong M, Parker K, Robb L.

Author information: 
(1)The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade
Parkville 3050, Vic., Australia. hart@wehi.edu.au

Mixl1 is a paired-type homeodomain protein that plays a crucial role in
morphogenesis and endoderm differentiation in the murine embryo. To understand
how Mixl1 directs embryogenesis, we studied the regulation of Mixl1 expression at
a transcriptional level. In HepG2 cells, a genomic fragment encompassing the
Mixl1 promoter conferred strong TGF-beta-induced transcription that was dependent
on the presence of the DNA-binding protein FoxH1. Further analysis of the Mixl1
promoter identified a proximal response element (PRE) containing SMAD- and
FoxH1-binding sites required for TGF-beta responsiveness. The PRE was also
responsive to signalling by Nodal, a TGF-beta ligand required for normal
embryonic patterning. These results demonstrate for the first time a functional
role for TGF-beta ligands in regulation of mammalian Mixl1, identify FoxH1 as an 
essential transcriptional co-activator, and implicate Nodal as the embryonic
regulator of Mixl1 in mesendoderm morphogenesis.

PMID: 15982639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Oncogene. 2005 Jun 2;24(24):3864-74.

Selective inhibition of TGF-beta responsive genes by Smad-interacting peptide
aptamers from FoxH1, Lef1 and CBP.

Cui Q(1), Lim SK, Zhao B, Hoffmann FM.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) stimulation results in the assembly of
Smad-containing protein complexes that mediate activation or repression of
TGF-beta responsive genes. To determine if disruption of specific Smad
protein-protein interactions would selectively inhibit responses to TGF-beta or
generally interfere with Smad-dependent signaling, we developed three
Smad-binding peptide aptamers by introducing Smad interaction motifs from
Smad-binding proteins CBP, FoxH1 and Lef1 into the scaffold protein E. coli
thioredoxin A (Trx). All three classes of aptamers bound to Smads by GST pulldown
assays and co-immunoprecipitation from mammalian cells. Expression of the
aptamers in HepG2 cells did not generally inhibit Smad-dependent signaling as
evaluated using seven TGF-beta responsive luciferase reporter genes. The
Trx-xFoxH1b aptamer inhibited TGF-beta-induced expression from a reporter
dependent on the Smad-FoxH1 interaction, A3-lux, by 50%. Trx-xFoxH1b also
partially inhibited two reporters not dependent on a Smad-FoxH1 interaction,
3TP-lux and Twntop, and endogenous PAI-1 expression. Trx-Lef1 aptamer only
inhibited expression of the Smad-Lef1 responsive reporter gene TwnTop. The
Trx-CBP aptamer had no significant effect on reporter gene expression. The
results suggest that Smad-binding peptide aptamers can be developed to
selectively inhibit TGF-beta-induced gene expression.

PMID: 15750622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2005 Mar;24(3):246-50.

Expression of the FAST-1 transcription factor in coronary artery transplant
vasculopathy and activated vascular smooth muscle cells.

Kelemen SF(1), Eisen HJ, Autieri MV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Cardiovascular Research Center, Temple University
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.

BACKGROUND: The activation of vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) causes most of
the obliterative vasculopathy responsible for solid-organ allograft failure.
Identification of genes expressed in activated VSMCs may provide clues to the
pathogenesis and progression of cardiac allograft vasculopathy (CAV).
METHODS: We performed cDNA micro-array analysis of mRNA isolated from a healthy
human coronary artery, from a coronary artery from a patient with CAV, and from
quiescent and stimulated cultured human coronary artery VSMCs. Western blot
analysis and immunohistochemistry verified fork-head activin signal transducer 1 
(FAST-1) expression.
RESULTS: Fold-change analysis determined that increased expression of a
transcription factor involved in transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta)
signaling, FAST-1, was induced in arteries with CAV and in activated VSMCs,
compared with normal and unstimulated cells. Western blotting confirmed increased
FAST-1 expression in arteries with CAV vs normal arteries and arteries from
failing hearts and confirmed increased expression in cultured VSMCs stimulated
with a variety of cytokines. Immunohistochemical analysis determined that FAST-1 
expression localized to neo-intimal VSMCs in rejecting arteries. In cultured
VSMCs, FAST-1 immunolocalizes to the nucleus after TGF-beta stimulation.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate differential expression of the FAST-1 gene
in the VSMC response to inflammatory stimuli. Considering the significant role of
TGF-beta in vascular fibroproliferative diseases, this work suggests that FAST-1 
may participate in the VSMC response to injury and may represent a potential
molecular target for modulating the progression of CAV.

PMID: 15737749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Dev Dyn. 2005 Apr;232(4):1031-6.

Two nodal-responsive enhancers control left-right asymmetric expression of Nodal.

Saijoh Y(1), Oki S, Tanaka C, Nakamura T, Adachi H, Yan YT, Shen MM, Hamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Group, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka
University, and CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST), Suita,
Osaka 565-08, Japan. y.saijoh@utah.edu

Asymmetric expression of Nodal in the lateral plate mesoderm (LPM) plays the
major role in left-right (L-R) patterning. A Nodal-responsive enhancer located in
the intron 1 (ASE) regulates asymmetric Nodal expression, but it is unknown how
Nodal expression is initiated in the left LPM. Here, we have identified a second 
asymmetric enhancer (left side-specific enhancer, LSE) in the upstream region of 
mouse Nodal gene. LSE is also located in the corresponding region of human NODAL.
L-R specificity of LSE is affected by iv and inv mutations. The requirement of a 
conserved FoxH1-binding sequence for LSE activity and the dependence of LSE
activity on Nodal coreceptor Cryptic indicate that LSE is activated by Nodal
signal. However, the mutant mouse lacking LSE does not show obvious L-R
patterning defects. These results suggest that Nodal expression in the left LPM
is induced by a combination of two Nodal-responsive autoregulatory enhancers, ASE
and LSE.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15736223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Virol. 2004 Dec;78(23):13046-52.

Cell-type-dependent effect of transforming growth factor beta, a major cytokine
in breast milk, on human immunodeficiency virus type 1 infection of mammary
epithelial MCF-7 cells or macrophages.

Moriuchi M(1), Moriuchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nagasaki University Hospital, 1-7-1 Sakamoto,
Nagasaki 852-8501, Japan.

Breastfeeding plays a substantial role in mother-to-child transmission of human
immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1). Mammary epithelial cells, as well as
macrophages and lymphocytes, are thought to serve as sources of the virus in
breast milk. Soluble factors in breast milk exert various biological functions,
including immune tolerance or immune modulation, and may influence milk-borne
infection with HIV-1. In this study we show that transforming growth factor beta 
(TGF-beta), a major cytokine in breast milk, inhibited HIV-1 infection of mammary
epithelial MCF-7 cells but enhanced that of macrophages. TGF-beta downregulated
the HIV-1 long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter in MCF-7 cells but upregulated it
in macrophages. Stimulation with TGF-beta suppressed NF-kappaB binding to the
HIV-1 LTR in MCF-7 cells, at least in part by downregulating induced IkappaB
kinase expression. Cell type-dependent effects of TGF-beta on HIV-1 expression
may play a role in milk-borne infection with HIV-1.

PMCID: PMC524996
PMID: 15542656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Development. 2004 Oct;131(20):5065-78.

New roles for FoxH1 in patterning the early embryo.

Kofron M(1), Puck H, Standley H, Wylie C, Old R, Whitman M, Heasman J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Research Foundation, 
3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

FoxH1 (Fast1) was first characterized as the transcriptional partner for Smad
proteins. Together with Smad2/4, it forms the activin response factor (ARF) that 
binds to the Mix.2 promoter in Xenopus embryos. Foxh1 is expressed maternally in 
Xenopus. Depletion of maternal Foxh1 mRNA results in abnormalities of head and
dorsal axis formation. We show that FoxH1 is required, together with XTcf3/beta
catenin, to activate the zygotic expression of the nodal gene, Xnr3 in a
Smad2-independent manner. In contrast, maternal FoxH1 acts as an inhibitor of
Xnr5 and 6 transcription, preventing their upregulation on the ventral side of
the embryo, by the maternal T-box transcription factor VegT. We conclude that
maternal FoxH1 has essential, context-dependent roles in regulating the pattern
of zygotic gene expression in the early embryo.

PMID: 15459100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Dev Cell. 2004 Sep;7(3):331-45.

Foxh1 is essential for development of the anterior heart field.

von Both I(1), Silvestri C, Erdemir T, Lickert H, Walls JR, Henkelman RM, Rossant
J, Harvey RP, Attisano L, Wrana JL.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X5, Canada.

The anterior heart field (AHF) mediates formation of the outflow tract (OFT) and 
right ventricle (RV) during looping morphogenesis of the heart. Foxh1 is a
forkhead DNA binding transcription factor in the TGFbeta-Smad pathway. Here we
demonstrate that Foxh1-/- mutant mouse embryos form a primitive heart tube, but
fail to form OFT and RV and display loss of outer curvature markers of the future
working myocardium, similar to the phenotype of Mef2c-/- mutant hearts. Further, 
we show that Mef2c is a direct target of Foxh1, which physically and functionally
interacts with Nkx2-5 to mediate strong Smad-dependent activation of a TGFbeta
response element in the Mef2c gene. This element directs transgene expression to 
the presumptive AHF, as well as the RV and OFT, a pattern that closely parallels 
endogenous Mef2c expression in the heart. Thus, Foxh1 and Nkx2-5 functionally
interact and are essential for development of the AHF and its derivatives, the RV
and OFT, in response to TGFbeta-like signals.

PMID: 15363409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Development. 2004 Apr;131(8):1717-28. Epub 2004 Mar 17.

Combinatorial activities of Smad2 and Smad3 regulate mesoderm formation and
patterning in the mouse embryo.

Dunn NR(1), Vincent SD, Oxburgh L, Robertson EJ, Bikoff EK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, 16 Divinity 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

TGFbeta/activin/Nodal receptors activate both Smad2 and Smad3 intracellular
effector proteins. The functional activities of these closely related molecules
have been extensively studied in cell lines. We show both are expressed in the
early mouse embryo from the blastocyst stage onwards and mediate Foxh1-dependent 
activation of the Nodal autoregulatory enhancer in vitro. Genetic manipulation of
their expression ratios reveals that Smad3 contributes essential signals at early
post-implantation stages. Thus, loss of Smad3 in the context of one wild-type
copy of Smad2 results in impaired production of anterior axial mesendoderm, while
selective removal of both Smad2 and Smad3 from the epiblast additionally disrupts
specification of axial and paraxial mesodermal derivatives. Finally, we
demonstrate that Smad2;Smad3 double homozygous mutants entirely lack mesoderm and
fail to gastrulate. Collectively, these results demonstrate that dose-dependent
Smad2 and Smad3 signals cooperatively mediate cell fate decisions in the early
mouse embryo.

PMID: 15084457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Nature. 2004 Mar 25;428(6981):387-92. Epub 2004 Mar 7.

Nodal antagonists regulate formation of the anteroposterior axis of the mouse
embryo.

Yamamoto M(1), Saijoh Y, Perea-Gomez A, Shawlot W, Behringer RR, Ang SL, Hamada
H, Meno C.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Group, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka
University, and CREST, Japan Science and Technology Corporation (JST), 1-3
Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Patterning of the mouse embryo along the anteroposterior axis during body plan
development requires migration of the distal visceral endoderm (DVE) towards the 
future anterior side by a mechanism that has remained unknown. Here we show that 
Nodal signalling and the regionalization of its antagonists are required for
normal migration of the DVE. Whereas Nodal signalling provides the driving force 
for DVE migration by stimulating the proliferation of visceral endoderm cells,
the antagonists Lefty1 and Cerl determine the direction of migration by
asymmetrically inhibiting Nodal activity on the future anterior side.

PMID: 15004567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Feb;24(3):1106-21.

Recognition of phosphorylated-Smad2-containing complexes by a novel Smad
interaction motif.

Randall RA(1), Howell M, Page CS, Daly A, Bates PA, Hill CS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Signalling, Cancer Research UK London Research
Institute, London WC2A 3PX, United Kingdom.

Transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) superfamily members signal via
complexes of activated Smads, comprising phosphorylated receptor-regulated Smads,
such as Smad2 and Smad3, and Smad4. These complexes are recruited to DNA by
specific transcription factors. The forkhead/winged-helix transcription factors, 
XFast-1/XFoxH1a and XFast-3/XFoxH1b, bind an activated Smad heterotrimer
comprising two Smad2s and one Smad4. Here we identify a novel Smad2 interaction
motif, the Fast/FoxH1 motif (FM), present in all known Fast/FoxH1 family members,
N-terminal to the common Smad interaction motif (SIM). The FM is necessary and
sufficient to bind active Smad2/Smad4 complexes. The FM differs from the SIM
since it discriminates between Smad2 and Smad3, and moreover only binds
phosphorylated Smad2 in the context of activated Smad complexes. It is the first 
Smad interaction motif with this property. Site-directed mutagenesis indicates
that the binding site for the FM on a Smad2/Smad4 heterotrimer is a hydrophobic
pocket that incorporates the Smad/Smad interface. We demonstrate that the
presence of an FM and SIM in the Fast/FoxH1 proteins allows them to compete
efficiently for activated Smad2/Smad4 complexes with transcription factors such
as Mixer that only contain a SIM. This establishes a hierarchy of
Smad-interacting transcription factors, determined by their affinity for active
Smad complexes.

PMCID: PMC321443
PMID: 14729957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biochem J. 2004 Apr 1;379(Pt 1):209-16.

Molecular and functional consequences of Smad4 C-terminal missense mutations in
colorectal tumour cells.

De Bosscher K(1), Hill CS, Nicolás FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Signalling, Cancer Research UK London Research
Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK.

Smad4 is an essential signal transducer of the transforming growth factor beta
(TGF-beta) signalling pathway and has been identified as a tumour suppressor,
being mutated in approx. 50% of pancreatic cancers and approx. 15% of colorectal 
cancers. Two missense mutations in the C-terminal domain of Smad4, D351H
(Asp351-->His) and D537Y (Asp537-->Tyr), have been described recently in the
human colorectal cancer cell lines CACO-2 and SW948 respectively
[Woodford-Richens, Rowan, Gorman, Halford, Bicknell, Wasan, Roylance, Bodmer and 
Tomlinson (2001) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 98, 9719-9723]. Previous work in
vitro suggested that only Asp-351 was required for interaction with Smad2 [Wu,
Fairman, Penry and Shi (2001) J. Biol. Chem. 276, 20688-20694]. In the present
study, we investigate the functional consequences of these point mutations in
vivo. We demonstrate that neither of these colorectal cancer cells undergo growth
arrest in response to TGF-beta, which can be explained, at least in part, by
their inability to up-regulate cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p21 (CIP1 ) or 
p15 ( INK4b) after TGF-beta stimulation. Although the point-mutated Smad4s are
expressed at normal levels in these colorectal cancer cells, they cannot interact
with either TGF-beta-induced phosphorylated Smad2 or Smad3. As a result, these
Smad4 mutants do not accumulate in the nucleus after TGF-beta stimulation, are
not recruited to DNA by relevant Smad-binding transcription factors and cannot
generate transcriptionally active DNA-bound complexes. Therefore both these
colorectal tumour cells completely lack functional Smad4 activity owing to the
missense mutations. Given the location of these mutations in the
three-dimensional structure of the Smad4 C-terminal domain, the results also give
us significant insights into Smad complex formation.

PMCID: PMC1224058
PMID: 14715079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol. 2003;19:589-621.

Nodal signaling in vertebrate development.

Schier AF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine,
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.
schier@saturn.med.nyu.edu

TGFss signals belonging to the Nodal family set up the embryonic axes, induce
mesoderm and endoderm, pattern the nervous system, and determine left-right
asymmetry in vertebrates. Nodal signaling activates a canonical TGFss pathway
involving activin receptors, Smad2 transcription factors, and FoxH1 coactivators.
In addition, Nodal signaling is dependent on coreceptors of the EGF-CFC family
and antagonized by the Lefty and Cerberus families of secreted factors.
Additional modulators of Nodal signaling include convertases that regulate the
generation of the mature signal, and factors such as Arkadia and DRAP1 that
regulate the cellular responses to the signal. Complex regulatory cascades and
autoregulatory loops coordinate Nodal signaling during early development. Nodals 
have concentration-dependent roles and can act both locally and at a distance.
These studies demonstrate that Nodal signaling is modulated at almost every level
to precisely orchestrate tissue patterning during vertebrate embryogenesis.

PMID: 14570583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Development. 2003 Dec;130(23):5589-99. Epub 2003 Oct 1.

Mixer/Bon and FoxH1/Sur have overlapping and divergent roles in Nodal signaling
and mesendoderm induction.

Kunwar PS(1), Zimmerman S, Bennett JT, Chen Y, Whitman M, Schier AF.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball Institute of Biomolecular Medicine,
Department of Cell Biology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 
10016, USA.

Transcription factors belonging to the FoxH1 and Mixer families are required for 
facets of Nodal signaling during vertebrate mesendoderm induction. Here, we
analyze whether zebrafish proteins related to FoxH1 [Schmalspur (Sur)] and Mixer 
[Bonnie and clyde (Bon)] act within or downstream of the Nodal signaling pathway,
test whether these two factors have additive or overlapping activities, and
determine whether FoxH1/Sur and Mixer/Bon can account for all Nodal signaling
during embryogenesis. We find that sur expression is independent of Nodal
signaling and that bon is expressed in the absence of Nodal signaling but
requires Nodal signaling and Sur for enhanced, maintained expression. These
results and the association of FoxH1 and Mixer/Bon with phosphorylated Smad2
support a role for these factors as components of the Nodal signaling pathway. In
contrast to the relatively mild defects observed in single mutants, loss of both 
bon and sur results in a severe phenotype characterized by absence of prechordal 
plate, cardiac mesoderm, endoderm and ventral neuroectoderm. Analysis of
Nodal-regulated proteins reveals that Bon and Sur have both distinct and
overlapping regulatory roles. Some genes are regulated by both Bon and Sur, and
others by either Bon or Sur. Complete loss of Nodal signaling results in a more
severe phenotype than loss of both Bon and Sur, indicating that additional
Smad-associated transcription factors remain to be identified that act as
components of the Nodal signaling pathway.

PMID: 14522874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Development. 2003 Oct;130(20):4989-98. Epub 2003 Aug 20.

The Mix family homeodomain gene bonnie and clyde functions with other components 
of the Nodal signaling pathway to regulate neural patterning in zebrafish.

Trinh LA(1), Meyer D, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0448, USA.

Mix family homeodomain proteins, such as Xenopus Mixer and zebrafish Bonnie and
clyde (Bon), have been shown to regulate the formation of the endoderm and are
likely to be transcriptional mediators of Nodal signaling. Here, we show that, in
addition to its previously described role in endoderm formation, Bon also
regulates the anteroposterior patterning of the neuroectoderm. bon-mutant embryos
exhibit an anterior reduction of the neural plate. By using targeted injection of
antisense morpholino oligonucleotides, we demonstrate that Bon is required in the
axial mesoderm for anterior neural development. Consistent with these results,
bon-mutant embryos show defects in axial mesoderm gene expression starting at
mid-gastrulation stages. In addition, genetic analyses demonstrate a functional
interaction during neural patterning between bon and two components of the Nodal 
signaling pathway, the nodal-related gene squint (sqt) and forkhead box H1
[foxh1; mutant locus schmalspur (sur)]. bon-/-;sqt-/- and bon-/-;sur-/- embryos
exhibit neural patterning defects that are much more severe than those seen in
the single mutants, suggesting that these genes function in parallel in this
process. We also show that the severity of the neural patterning defects in the
single- and double-mutant embryos correlates with the degree of reduction in
expression of the Wnt antagonist gene dickkopf 1. Furthermore, bon-/-;sqt-/- and 
bon-/-;sur-/- embryos exhibit identical morphological and gene expression
defects, suggesting, in part, that bon, sqt and sur (foxh1) play overlapping
roles in neural patterning. Taken together, these results provide evidence for a 
complex genetic network in which bon functions both downstream of, and possibly
in parallel to, Nodal signaling to regulate neural patterning via the modulation 
of mesendodermal gene expression.

PMID: 12930774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Development. 2003 May;130(9):1795-804.

Nodal signaling induces the midline barrier by activating Nodal expression in the
lateral plate.

Yamamoto M(1), Mine N, Mochida K, Sakai Y, Saijoh Y, Meno C, Hamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Group, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka
University, 1-3 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The transcription factor Foxh1 mediates Nodal signaling. The role of Foxh1 in
left-right (LR) patterning was examined with mutant mice that lack this protein
in lateral plate mesoderm (LPM). The mutant mice failed to express Nodal, Lefty2 
and Pitx2 on the left side during embryogenesis and exhibited right isomerism.
Ectopic introduction of Nodal into right LPM, by transplantation of left LPM or
by electroporation of a Nodal vector, induced Nodal expression in wild-type
embryos but not in the mutant. Ectopic Nodal expression in right LPM also induced
Lefty1 expression in the floor plate. Nodal signaling thus initiates asymmetric
Nodal expression in LPM and induces Lefty1 at the midline. Monitoring of Nodal
activity in wild-type and Foxh1 mutant embryos suggested that Nodal activity
travels from the node to left LPM, and from left LPM to the midline.

PMID: 12642485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Science. 2002 Dec 6;298(5600):1996-9.

Inhibition of excess nodal signaling during mouse gastrulation by the
transcriptional corepressor DRAP1.

Iratni R(1), Yan YT, Chen C, Ding J, Zhang Y, Price SM, Reinberg D, Shen MM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biochemistry, Division of
Nucleic Acids Enzymology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

The formation and patterning of mesoderm during mammalian gastrulation require
the activity of Nodal, a secreted mesoderm-inducing factor of the transforming
growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) family. Here we show that the transcriptional
corepressor DRAP1 has a very specific role in regulation of Nodal activity during
mouse embryogenesis. We find that loss of Drap1 leads to severe gastrulation
defects that are consistent with increased expression of Nodal and can be
partially suppressed by Nodal heterozygosity. Biochemical studies indicate that
DRAP1 interacts with and inhibits DNA binding by the winged-helix transcription
factor FoxH1 (FAST), a critical component of a positive feedback loop for Nodal
activity. We propose that DRAP1 limits the spread of a morphogenetic signal by
down-modulating the response to the Nodal autoregulatory loop.

PMID: 12471260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Dev Dyn. 2002 Dec;225(4):448-56.

Regulation of the Lim-1 gene is mediated through conserved FAST-1/FoxH1 sites in 
the first intron.

Watanabe M(1), Rebbert ML, Andreazzoli M, Takahashi N, Toyama R, Zimmerman S,
Whitman M, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

The Lim-1 gene encodes a LIM-homeodomain transcription factor that is highly
conserved among vertebrates and is required for successful gastrulation and head 
formation. The expression of this gene in the mesoderm of the gastrula is known
to require an activin/nodal signal. Earlier studies have shown that the Xenopus
Lim-1 (Xlim-1) gene contains an activin response element (ARE) in its first
intron, which cooperates with an activin-unresponsive upstream promoter in the
regulation of the gene. Here, we show that the Xlim-1 ARE contains a cluster of
FAST-1/FoxH1 and Smad4 recognition sites; such sites have been shown to mediate
activin/nodal responses in other genes. By using reporter constructs with mutated
FAST-1/FoxH1 sites and FAST-1/FoxH1 protein chimeras, we show that the regulation
of Xlim-1 by activin depends on FAST-1/FoxH1 function. Comparative studies on the
zebrafish lim1 gene indicate the presence of FoxH1 sites in the first intron of
this gene and provide evidence for the requirement for FoxH1 function in its
regulation. These results illuminate the conserved nature of the transcriptional 
regulation of the Lim-1 gene in different vertebrate animals.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12454922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Development. 2002 Oct;129(20):4867-76.

Direct and indirect regulation of derrière, a Xenopus mesoderm-inducing factor,
by VegT.

White RJ(1), Sun BI, Sive HL, Smith JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

One candidate for an endogenous mesoderm-inducing factor in Xenopus is derrière, 
a member of the TGFbeta family closely related to Vg1. In this paper we first
show that derrière is able to exert long-range effects in the early Xenopus
embryo, reinforcing the view that it functions as a secreted factor required for 
proper formation of posterior structures. Analysis of the derrière promoter shows
that expression of the gene is controlled through a complex inductive network
involving VegT and TGFbeta-related molecules and also, perhaps, FGF family
members. The work confirms that derrière plays an important role in mesoderm
formation and it illustrates the complex regulation to which inducing factors are
subject.

PMID: 12361977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Gene. 2002 May 29;291(1-2):135-47.

Structure, upstream promoter region, and functional domains of a mouse and human 
Mix paired-like homeobox gene.

Sahr K(1), Dias DC, Sanchez R, Chen D, Chen SW, Gudas LJ, Baron MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, 1425 Madison Avenue,
New York, NY 10029, USA.

Mix/Bix proteins represent a vertebrate subgroup of paired-like homeodomain
proteins which are known to function around the time of gastrulation. Here we
report the structures of the genomic and upstream promoter regions of a mouse and
human Mix-like gene. Both genes map to syntenic regions of chromosome 1 and
contain two coding exons, with the paired-type homeodomain split between the
exons within helix 3. Differentiating mouse embryonic stem cells transcribe a
messenger RNA of approximately 2.6 kb. The first exon encodes the translation
initiation codon and a 5' untranslated region of approximately 90 bp. Sequence
analysis of the 960 bp upstream of the transcription start site of the mouse Mix 
gene revealed the presence of a putative initiator region and TATA box as well as
potential Smad, FoxH1/FAST, T-box, COUP-TF, C/EBP, GATA, HNF3 binding sites and
retinoic acid response elements. A number of these sites are conserved in the
human Mix promoter. We find that most paired-related homeodomain proteins,
including mouse and human Mix, contain a proline-rich region within their amino
termini which may interact with other proteins. Mouse and human Mix proteins
contain highly conserved carboxy-terminal polar/acidic regions with the potential
to form an amphipathic helix and the ability to activate transcription in yeast. 
Mouse Mix expressed in COS cells or in vitro binds a DNA consensus sequence
identified previously for paired class homeodomain proteins. These studies
suggest that a number of features of paired-like protein structure and function
are conserved across diverse species and provide a useful framework for studying 
the function and regulation of the mouse Mix gene.

PMID: 12095687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Development. 2002 Jul;129(14):3455-68.

The Foxh1-dependent autoregulatory enhancer controls the level of Nodal signals
in the mouse embryo.

Norris DP(1), Brennan J, Bikoff EK, Robertson EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, The
Biological Laboratories, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

The TGFbeta-related growth factor Nodal governs anteroposterior (AP) and
left-right (LR) axis formation in the vertebrate embryo. A conserved intronic
enhancer (ASE), containing binding sites for the fork head transcription factor
Foxh1, modulates dynamic patterns of Nodal expression during early mouse
development. This enhancer is responsible for early activation of Nodal
expression in the epiblast and visceral endoderm, and at later stages governs
asymmetric expression during LR axis formation. We demonstrate ASE activity is
strictly Foxh1 dependent. Loss of this autoregulatory enhancer eliminates
transcription in the visceral endoderm and decreases Nodal expression in the
epiblast, but causes surprisingly discrete developmental abnormalities. Thus
lowering the level of Nodal signaling in the epiblast disrupts both orientation
of the AP axis and specification of the definitive endoderm. Targeted removal of 
the ASE also dramatically reduces left-sided Nodal expression, but the early
events controlling LR axis specification are correctly initiated. However loss of
the ASE disrupts Lefty2 (Leftb) expression and causes delayed Pitx2 expression
leading to late onset, relatively minor LR patterning defects. The feedback loop 
is thus essential for maintenance of Nodal signals that selectively regulate
target gene expression in a temporally and spatially controlled fashion in the
mouse embryo.

PMID: 12091315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Development. 2002 Jun;129(12):2823-34.

A novel Xenopus Smad-interacting forkhead transcription factor (XFast-3)
cooperates with XFast-1 in regulating gastrulation movements.

Howell M(1), Inman GJ, Hill CS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Signalling, Cancer Research UK London Research
Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, UK.

In early Xenopus embryos, the prototypical XFast-1/Smad2/Smad4 complex ARF1 is
induced at the Mix.2 ARE by activin overexpression. We have characterised ARF2, a
related, but much more abundant, complex formed during gastrulation in response
to endogenous TGFbeta family members and we have identified a novel Fast family
member, XFast-3, as its transcription factor component. Endogenous ARF2
efficiently competes out ARF1 at early gastrulation, due to the ability of
XFast-3 to interact with activated Smads with much higher affinity than XFast-1. 
We demonstrate that ARF1 and ARF2 are activated by distinct TGFbeta family
members. Using morpholino antisense oligonucleotides to deplete levels of the
constituent transcription factors XFast-1 and XFast-3 specifically, we
demonstrate an important role for ARF1 and ARF2 in early Xenopus embryos in
controlling the convergent extension movements of gastrulation.

PMID: 12050132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. FEBS Lett. 2002 May 22;519(1-3):93-8.

Phosphorylation regulation of the interaction between Smad7 and activin type I
receptor.

Liu X(1), Nagarajan RP, Vale W, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics and the Walther Oncology Center, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, and the Walther Cancer Institute, 975 West
Walnut Street, IB130, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Signal transduction of activin, one of the members in the transforming growth
factor-beta superfamily, is initiated by ligand binding with two distinct
membrane receptors (type II and type I) followed by activation of Smad2 or Smad3.
We report here that activin-induced signaling is negatively regulated by another 
Smad molecule, Smad7. When expressed in Chinese hamster ovary cells, Smad7
inhibited the transcriptional response induced by either activin treatment or a
constitutively active activin type I receptor (ALK-4). In addition, Smad7 also
inhibited mouse FAST-2-mediated transactivation of the Xenopus Mix.2 promoter
stimulated by the constitutively active ALK-4. Smad7 was able to directly
associate with ALK-4 and this association was dependent on the phosphorylation of
the type I receptor in its GS domain by activin type II receptors. Expression of 
kinase defective activin type II receptors decreased the association of Smad7
with ALK-4. Correspondingly, Smad7 bound poorly to a mutant ALK-4 bearing serine 
to alanine substitutions in four putative phosphorylation sites in its GS domain.
These studies not only illustrated the counter regulatory function of Smad7 on
activin signaling, but also indicated the involvement of phosphorylation at
activin type I receptor in the inhibitory action of Smad7.

PMID: 12023024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Genes Dev. 2002 Apr 1;16(7):820-35.

The role of a Williams-Beuren syndrome-associated helix-loop-helix
domain-containing transcription factor in activin/nodal signaling.

Ring C(1), Ogata S, Meek L, Song J, Ohta T, Miyazono K, Cho KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, and Developmental Biology
Center, University of California, Irvine, California 92697-2300, USA.

We investigated the regulation of the activin/nodal-inducible distal element (DE)
of the Xenopus goosecoid (gsc) promoter. On the basis of its interaction with the
DE, we isolated a Xenopus homolog of the human Williams-Beuren syndrome critical 
region 11 (XWBSCR11), and further, show that it interacts with pathway-specific
Smad2 and Smad3 in a ligand-dependent manner. Interestingly, we also find that
XWBSCR11 functions cooperatively with FoxH1 (Fast-1) to stimulate DE-dependent
transcription. We propose a mechanism in which FoxH1 functions together with
Smads as a cofactor for the recruitment of transcription factors like XWBSCR11 in
the process of activin/nodal-mediated gsc-specific induction. This mechanism
provides considerable opportunities for modulation of transcription across a
variety of activin/nodal-inducible genes, increasing diversity in promoter
selection, thus leading to the differential induction of activin/nodal target
genes.

PMCID: PMC186325
PMID: 11937490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Cell. 2001 Nov;1(5):605-17.

Nodal signaling in early vertebrate embryos: themes and variations.

Whitman M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, 240 Longwood Avenue,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. mwhitman@hms.harvard.edu

The nodal family of TGFbeta-related ligands have emerged as critical regulators
of early vertebrate embryogenesis. Recent studies in mice, fish, and frogs of
nodals and their intracellular transducers allow a comparison of how this
signaling pathway is used in the patterning of early embryos of these different
vertebrates.

PMID: 11709181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Sep 25;98(20):11468-73.

Increased levels of forkhead box M1B transcription factor in transgenic mouse
hepatocytes prevent age-related proliferation defects in regenerating liver.

Wang X(1), Quail E, Hung NJ, Tan Y, Ye H, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois, College of Medicine,
900 South Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

The forkhead box (Fox) family of transcription factors share homology in the
winged helix/forkhead DNA-binding domain and play important roles in regulating
cellular proliferation, differentiation, longevity, and cellular transformation. 
Forkhead box M1B (FoxM1B) is a ubiquitously expressed member of the Fox
transcription factor family whose expression is restricted to proliferating cells
and that mediates hepatocyte entry into DNA synthesis and mitosis during liver
regeneration. Recent cDNA microarray studies indicated that age-related defects
in cellular proliferation are associated with diminished expression of the FoxM1B
transcription factor. Here, we show that increased levels of FoxM1B in
regenerating liver of old transgenic mice restore the sharp peaks in hepatocyte
DNA replication and mitosis that are the hallmarks of young regenerating mouse
liver. Restoration of the young regenerating liver phenotype is associated with
increased expression of numerous cell cycle regulatory genes that include cyclin 
D1, cyclin A2, cyclin F, cyclin B1, cyclin B2, Cdc25B, and p55cdc. Cotransfection
assays in the human hepatoma HepG2 cell line demonstrated that FoxM1B protein
stimulated expression of both the cyclin B1 and cyclin D1 promoters, suggesting
that these cyclin genes are a direct FoxM1B transcriptional target. These results
suggest that FoxM1B controls the transcriptional network of genes that are
essential for cell division and exit from mitosis. Our results indicate that
reduced expression of the FoxM1B transcription factor contributes to the decline 
in cellular proliferation observed in the aging process.

PMCID: PMC58753
PMID: 11572993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Development. 2001 Jul;128(14):2769-79.

Suppression of head formation by Xmsx-1 through the inhibition of intracellular
nodal signaling.

Yamamoto TS(1), Takagi C, Hyodo AC, Ueno N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology, 38 
Nishigonaka, Myodaiji, Okazaki, 444-8585, Japan.

It is well established that in Xenopus, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
ventralizes the early embryo through the activation of several target genes
encoding homeobox proteins, some of which are known to be necessary and
sufficient for ventralization. Here, we used an inhibitory form of Xmsx-1, one of
BMP's targets, to examine its role in head formation. Interestingly, ventral
overexpression of a dominant Xmsx-1 inhibitor induced an ectopic head with eyes
and a cement gland in the ventral side of the embryo, suggesting that Xmsx-1 is
normally required to suppress head formation in the ventral side. Supporting this
observation, we also found that wild-type Xmsx-1 suppresses head formation
through the inhibition of nodal signaling, which is known to induce head
organizer genes such as cerberus, Xhex and Xdkk-1. We propose that negative
regulation of the BMP/Xmsx-1 signal is involved not only in neural induction but 
also in head induction and formation. We further suggest that the inhibition of
nodal signaling by Xmsx-1 may occur intracellularly, through interaction with
Smads, at the level of the transcriptional complex, which activates the activin
responsive element.

PMID: 11526082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2001 Jun 30;180(1-2):3-11.

The transcriptional role of Smads and FAST (FoxH1) in TGFbeta and activin
signalling.

Attisano L(1), Silvestri C, Izzi L, Labbé E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Medical Sciences Building, Rm. 6336, 1
King's College Circle, University of Toronto, ON, M5S 1A8, Toronto, Canada.
liliana.attisano@utoronto.ca

The Smad family of proteins are critical components of the TGFbeta superfamily
signalling pathway. Ligand addition induces phosphorylation of specific
receptor-regulated Smads, which then form heteromeric complexes with the common
mediator Smad, Smad4. This complex then translocates from the cytoplasm into the 
nucleus. Once there, the R-Smad/Smad4 complex interacts with a variety of DNA
binding proteins and is thereby targetted to a diverse array of gene promoters.
The Smad-containing DNA binding complex can then positively or negatively
regulate gene expression through the recruitment of co-activators and
co-repressors. Xenopus FAST (now known as FoxH1) was the first Smad DNA binding
partner identified and the FoxH1 family now includes related proteins from mouse,
human and Zebrafish. In all organisms examined, FoxH1 is expressed primarily
during the earliest stages of development and thus FoxH1 is thought to play a
critical role in mediating TGFbeta superfamily signals during these early
developmental stages. Other Smad partners range from those that are ubiquitously 
expressed to others that are present only in specific cell types or developmental
stages. Thus, it is the interaction of Smads with a wide range of specific
transcriptional partners that is important for the generation of diverse
biological responses to TGFbeta superfamily members.

PMID: 11451566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 May 22;98(11):6198-203.

c-Jun interacts with the corepressor TG-interacting factor (TGIF) to suppress
Smad2 transcriptional activity.

Pessah M(1), Prunier C, Marais J, Ferrand N, Mazars A, Lallemand F, Gauthier JM, 
Atfi A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U 482, Hôpital
Saint-Antoine, 184 Rue du Faubourg Saint-Antoine, 75571, Paris Cedex 12, France.

The Sma and Mad related (Smad) family proteins are critical mediators of the
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily signaling. After
TGF-beta-mediated phosphorylation and association with Smad4, Smad2 moves to the 
nucleus and activates expression of specific genes through cooperative
interactions with DNA-binding proteins, including members of the winged-helix
family of transcription factors, forkhead activin signal transducer (FAST)-1 and 
FAST2. TGF-beta has also been described to activate other signaling pathways,
such as the c-Jun N-terminal Kinase (JNK) pathway. Here, we show that activation 
of JNK cascade blocked the ability of Smad2 to mediate TGF-beta-dependent
activation of the FAST proteins. This inhibitory activity is mediated through the
transcriptional factor c-Jun, which enhances the association of Smad2 with the
nuclear transcriptional corepressor TG-interacting factor (TGIF), thereby
interfering with the assembly of Smad2 and the coactivator p300 in response to
TGF-beta signaling. Interestingly, c-Jun directly binds to the nuclear
transcriptional corepressor TGIF and is required for TGIF-mediated repression of 
Smad2 transcriptional activity. These studies thus reveal a mechanism for
suppression of Smad2 signaling pathway by JNK cascade through transcriptional
repression.

PMCID: PMC33445
PMID: 11371641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Genes Dev. 2001 May 15;15(10):1257-71.

FoxH1 (Fast) functions to specify the anterior primitive streak in the mouse.

Hoodless PA(1), Pye M, Chazaud C, Labbé E, Attisano L, Rossant J, Wrana JL.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada M5G 1X5.

The node and the anterior visceral endoderm (AVE) are important organizing
centers that pattern the mouse embryo by establishing the anterior-posterior
(A-P), dorsal-ventral (D-V), and left-right (L-R) axes. Activin/nodal signaling
through the Smad2 pathway has been implicated in AVE formation and in
morphogenesis of the primitive streak, the anterior end of which gives rise to
the node. The forkhead DNA-binding protein, FoxH1 (or Fast), functions as a Smad 
DNA-binding partner to regulate transcription in response to activin signaling.
Here, we show that deletion of FoxH1 in mice results in failure to pattern the
anterior primitive streak (APS) and form node, prechordal mesoderm, notochord,
and definitive endoderm. In contrast, formation of the AVE can occur in the
absence of FoxH1. The FoxH1 mutant phenotype is remarkably similar to that of
mice deficient in the forkhead protein Foxa2 (HNF3beta), and we show that Foxa2
expression is dependent on FoxH1 function. These results show that FoxH1
functions in an activin/nodal-Smad signaling pathway that acts upstream of Foxa2 
and is required specifically for patterning the APS and node in the mouse.

PMCID: PMC313796
PMID: 11358869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Genes Dev. 2001 May 15;15(10):1242-56.

The transcription factor FoxH1 (FAST) mediates Nodal signaling during
anterior-posterior patterning and node formation in the mouse.

Yamamoto M(1), Meno C, Sakai Y, Shiratori H, Mochida K, Ikawa Y, Saijoh Y, Hamada
H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Osaka University, Japan.

FoxH1 (FAST) is a transcription factor that mediates signaling by transforming
growth factor-beta, Activin, and Nodal. The role of FoxH1 in development has now 
been investigated by the generation and analysis of FoxH1-deficient (FoxH1(-/-)) 
mice. The FoxH1(-/-) embryos showed various patterning defects that recapitulate 
most of the defects induced by the loss of Nodal signaling. A substantial
proportion of FoxH1(-/-) embryos failed to orient the anterior-posterior (A-P)
axis correctly, as do mice lacking Cripto, a coreceptor for Nodal. In less
severely affected FoxH1(-/-) embryos, A-P polarity was established, but the
primitive streak failed to elongate, resulting in the lack of a definitive node
and its derivatives. Heterozygosity for nodal renders the FoxH1(-/-) phenotype
more severe, indicative of a genetic interaction between FoxH1 and nodal. The
expression of FoxH1 in the primitive endoderm rescued the A-P patterning defects,
but not the midline defects, of FoxH1(-/-) mice. These results indicate that a
Nodal-FoxH1 signaling pathway plays a central role in A-P patterning and node
formation in the mouse.

PMCID: PMC313795
PMID: 11358868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Nat Rev Genet. 2000 Nov;1(2):87.

Development biology. Nodal signalling gets foxy.

Alfred J.

PMID: 11253662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Mol Cell. 2001 Jan;7(1):137-49.

Two-step regulation of left-right asymmetric expression of Pitx2: initiation by
nodal signaling and maintenance by Nkx2.

Shiratori H(1), Sakuma R, Watanabe M, Hashiguchi H, Mochida K, Sakai Y, Nishino
J, Saijoh Y, Whitman M, Hamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Osaka University, 1-3 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Pitx2 is left--right (L--R) asymmetrically expressed initially in the lateral
plate and later in primordial visceral organs. The transcriptional regulatory
mechanisms that underlie L--R asymmetric expression of Pitx2 were investigated.
Mouse Pitx2 has a left side-specific enhancer (ASE) that mediates both the
initiation and maintenance of L--R asymmetric expression. This element contains
three binding sites for the transcription factor FAST. The FAST binding sites
function as Nodal-responsive elements and are sufficient for the initiation but
not for the maintenance of asymmetric expression. The maintenance requires an
Nkx2-5 binding site also present within the ASE. These results suggest that the
left-sided expression of Pitx2 is directly initiated by Nodal signaling and is
subsequently maintained by Nkx2. Such two-step control may represent a general
mechanism for gene regulation during development.

PMID: 11172719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Curr Biol. 2000 Nov 16;10(22):R843-6.

Vertebrate development: the fast track to nodal signalling.

Stemple DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, National Institute for Medical Research,
The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, NW7 1AA, London, UK. dstempl@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

The transcription factors Fast-1 and Mixer are important terminal components of
Smad2-mediated TGF-beta signal transduction. Recent studies demonstrate that
Fast-1 and Mixer play critical roles in the formation of endoderm and dorsal
mesoderm in zebrafish.

PMID: 11102828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mech Dev. 2000 Dec;99(1-2):187-90.

Cloning and expression pattern of a zebrafish homolog of forkhead activin signal 
transducer (FAST), a transcription factor mediating Nodal-related signals.

Boggetti B(1), Argenton F, Haffter P, Bianchi ME, Cotelli F, Beltrame M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e di Biologia dei Microrganismi, Universita' degli
Studi di Milano, Via Celoria 26, 20133, Milano, Italy.

Forkhead activin signal transducer (FAST) is a member of the winged-helix family 
of DNA-binding proteins that has been implicated in mesoderm induction and
left-right axis specification during embryonic development in Xenopus and mouse. 
We have cloned and characterized a zebrafish FAST homolog. Zebrafish fast is
expressed maternally and zygotically. Transcripts start regionalizing and decline
in level during gastrulation. During somitogenesis, fast is expressed bilaterally
in the lateral plate mesoderm, like its mouse homolog. In addition, zebrafish
fast is also expressed bilaterally in the dorsal diencephalon, where the
nodal-related cyclops gene is only expressed on the left side. It remains to be
demonstrated whether FAST expression in the brain can mediate Nodal-induced
asymmetric development.

PMID: 11091091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Dec;20(23):9041-54.

Transforming growth factor beta-independent shuttling of Smad4 between the
cytoplasm and nucleus.

Pierreux CE(1), Nicolás FJ, Hill CS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Signalling, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London 
WC2A 3PX, United Kingdom.

Smad4 plays a pivotal role in all transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta)
signaling pathways. Here we describe six widely expressed alternatively spliced
variants of human Smad4 with deletions of different exons in the linker, the
region of Smad4 that separates the two well-conserved MH1 and MH2 domains. All
these Smad4 variants form complexes with activated Smad2 and Smad3 and are
incorporated into DNA-binding complexes with the transcription factor Fast-1,
regardless of the amount of linker they contain. However, sequences encoded by
exons 5 to 7 in the linker are essential for transcriptional activation. Most
importantly, our observation that different Smad4 isoforms have different
subcellular localizations has led us to the identification of a functional
CRM1-dependent nuclear export signal in the Smad4 linker and a constitutively
active nuclear localization signal in the N-terminal MH1 domain. In the absence
of TGF-beta signaling, we conclude that Smad4 is rapidly and continuously
shuttling between the nucleus and the cytoplasm, the distribution of Smad4
between the nucleus and the cytoplasm being dictated by the relative strengths of
the nuclear import and export signals. We demonstrate that inhibition of
CRM1-mediated nuclear export by treatment of cells with leptomycin B results in
endogenous Smad4 accumulating very rapidly in the nucleus. Endogenous Smad2 and
Smad3 are completely unaffected by leptomycin B treatment, indicating that the
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling is specific for Smad4. We propose that, upon TGF-beta
signaling, complex formation between Smad4 and activated Smad2 or -3 leads to
nuclear accumulation of Smad4 through inhibition of its nuclear export. We
demonstrate that after prolonged TGF-beta signaling Smad2 becomes
dephosphorylated and Smad2 and Smad4 accumulate back in the cytoplasm.

PMCID: PMC86557
PMID: 11074002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Curr Biol. 2000 Sep 7;10(17):1051-4.

Fast1 is required for the development of dorsal axial structures in zebrafish.

Sirotkin HI(1), Gates MA, Kelly PD, Schier AF, Talbot WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Beckman Center B300, Stanford, California 94305, USA.

Erratum in
    Curr Biol 2001 Oct 16;2001 Oct 16;11(20):1643.

Nodal-related signals comprise a subclass of the transforming growth factor-beta 
(TGF-beta) superfamily and regulate key events in vertebrate embryogenesis,
including mesoderm formation, establishment of left-right asymmetry and neural
patterning [1-8]. Nodal ligands are thought to act with EGF-CFC protein
co-factors to activate activin type I and II or related receptors, which
phosphorylate Smad2 and trigger nuclear translocation of a Smad2/4 complex
[8-12]. The winged-helix transcription factor forkhead activin signal
transducer-1 (Fast-1) acts as a co-factor for Smad2 [12-20]. Xenopus Fast-1 is
thought to function as a transcriptional effector of Nodal signals during
mesoderm formation [17], but no mutations in the Fast-1 gene have been
identified. We report the identification of the zebrafish fast1 gene and show
that it is disrupted in schmalspur (sur) mutants, which have defects in the
development of dorsal midline cell types and establishment of left-right
asymmetry [21-25]. We find that prechordal plate and notochord are strongly
reduced in maternal-zygotic sur mutants, whereas other mesendodermal structures
are present - a less severe phenotype than that caused by complete loss of Nodal 
signaling. These results show that fast1 is required for development of dorsal
axial structures and left-right asymmetry, and suggest that Nodal signals act
through Fast1-dependent and independent pathways.

PMID: 10996072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Curr Biol. 2000 Sep 7;10(17):1041-9.

The zebrafish forkhead transcription factor FoxH1/Fast1 is a modulator of nodal
signaling required for organizer formation.

Pogoda HM(1), Solnica-Krezel L, Driever W, Meyer D.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für Entwicklungsbiologie, Biologie I, Universität Freiburg,
Hauptstrasse1, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Signaling molecules related to the Nodal protein play essential roles
in the formation and patterning of the gastrula organizer and the germ layers
during vertebrate development. The forkhead transcription factor FoxH1 (also
known as Fast1) is a component of the Nodal signaling pathway. Although different
roles have been suggested for FoxH1, its specific function during development is 
still unclear.
RESULTS: We report that the zebrafish locus schmalspur (sur) encodes a member of 
the FoxH1 family. Maternal sur transcripts were localized to the animal pole
during oogenesis. Further expression was detected in a dorsoventral gradient at
the onset of gastrulation and in specific domains in the organizer, notochord and
lateral plate mesoderm. Embryos lacking zygotic sur function had variable
deficiencies of prechordal plate and ventral neuroectoderm. In the absence of
both maternal and zygotic sur function, embryos failed to form a morphologically 
distinct gastrula organizer and, later, developed severe defects in all axial
structures. In these embryos, expression of nodal genes was initiated but not
maintained. Unlike embryos lacking Nodal signaling, sur mutants formed endoderm
and paraxial mesoderm.
CONCLUSIONS: FoxH1 is involved in regulatory feedback loops that control the
duration and intensity of Nodal signals in early patterning. In zebrafish, FoxH1 
is not essential to induce Nodal-dependent cell fates, but its function is
central in modulating and enhancing morphogenetic Nodal signals.

PMID: 10996071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Development. 2000 Sep;127(18):3889-97.

Direct action of the nodal-related signal cyclops in induction of sonic hedgehog 
in the ventral midline of the CNS.

Müller F(1), Albert S, Blader P, Fischer N, Hallonet M, Strähle U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, BP 163, CU de Strasbourg, France.

The secreted molecule Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is crucial for floor plate and ventral
brain development in amniote embryos. In zebrafish, mutations in cyclops (cyc), a
gene that encodes a distinct signal related to the TGF(beta) family member Nodal,
result in neural tube defects similar to those of shh null mice. cyc mutant
embryos display cyclopia and lack floor plate and ventral brain regions,
suggesting a role for Cyc in specification of these structures. cyc mutants
express shh in the notochord but lack expression of shh in the ventral brain.
Here we show that Cyc signalling can act directly on shh expression in neural
tissue. Modulation of the Cyc signalling pathway by constitutive activation or
inhibition of Smad2 leads to altered shh expression in zebrafish embryos. Ectopic
activation of the shh promoter occurs in response to expression of Cyc signal
transducers in the chick neural tube. Furthermore an enhancer of the shh gene,
which controls ventral neural tube expression, is responsive to Cyc signal
transducers. Our data imply that the Nodal related signal Cyc induces shh
expression in the ventral neural tube. Based on the differential responsiveness
of shh and other neural tube specific genes to Hedgehog and Cyc signalling, a
two-step model for the establishment of the ventral midline of the CNS is
proposed.

PMID: 10952887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Sep;20(17):6201-11.

BF-1 interferes with transforming growth factor beta signaling by associating
with Smad partners.

Dou C(1), Lee J, Liu B, Liu F, Massague J, Xuan S, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

The winged-helix (WH) BF-1 gene, which encodes brain factor 1 (BF-1) (also known 
as foxg1), is essential for the proliferation of the progenitor cells of the
cerebral cortex. Here we show that BF-1-deficient telencephalic progenitor cells 
are more apt to leave the cell cycle in response to transforming growth factor
beta (TGF-beta) and activin. We found that ectopic expression of BF-1 in vitro
inhibits TGF-beta mediated growth inhibition and transcriptional activation.
Surprisingly, we found that the ability of BF-1 to function as a TGF-beta
antagonist does not require its DNA binding activity. Therefore, we investigated 
whether BF-1 can inhibit Smad-dependent transcriptional responses by interacting 
with Smads or Smad binding partners. We found that BF-1 does not interact with
Smads. Because the identities of the Smad partners mediating growth inhibition by
TGF-beta are not clearly established, we examined a model reporter system which
is known to be activated by activin and TGF-beta through Smads and the WH factor 
FAST-2. We demonstrate that BF-1 associates with FAST-2. This interaction is
dependent on the same region of protein which mediates its ability to interfere
with the antiproliferative activity of TGF-beta and with TGF-beta-dependent
transcriptional activation. Furthermore, the interaction of FAST-2 with BF-1 is
mediated by the same domain which is required for FAST-2 to interact with Smad2. 
We propose a model in which BF-1 interferes with transcriptional responses to
TGF-beta by interacting with FAST-2 or with other DNA binding proteins which
function as Smad2 partners and which have a common mode of interaction with
Smad2.

PMCID: PMC86095
PMID: 10938097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biochem J. 2000 Aug 15;350 Pt 1:253-9.

Structural basis for the functional difference between Smad2 and Smad3 in FAST-2 
(forkhead activin signal transducer-2)-mediated transcription.

Nagarajan RP(1), Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics and the Walther Oncology Center, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, 975 West Walnut Street, IB130,
Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Smad2 and Smad3 are signalling proteins that are involved in mediating the
transcriptional regulation of target genes downstream of transforming growth
factor-beta and activin receptors. Although they are structurally very similar,
Smad2 and Smad3 have some functional differences in transducing signals for these
receptors. In FAST-2 (forkhead activin signal transducer-2)-mediated
transcriptional regulation using the activin-responsive element derived from
Xenopus Mix.2 promoter as a reporter, Smad3 but not Smad2 alone was able to
stimulate the transcription. In addition, Smad3 was able to inhibit the
transactivation of the promoter induced by co-expression of Smad2, Smad4 and an
active activin type-I receptor. We used a series of chimaeras between Smad1 and
Smad3 and found that the Mad homology 1 (MH1) domain of Smad3 was indispensable
for the dual regulatory function of Smad3. However, this Smad3-specific function 
could not be manifested in Smad2 mutants that were devoid of the two amino acid
insertions (at the MH1 domain) that comprise the major structural difference
between Smad2 and Smad3, indicating that other structural motifs are involved in 
determining the regulatory activity of Smad3. By using chimaeras between Smad2
and Smad3, we found that the most N-terminal portion of Smad3 was crucial for its
function. Taken together, these results suggest that, as compared with Smad2, the
unique function of Smad3 in modulating the FAST-2-mediated transcription is
contributed to by a subtle difference in the structural features at the MH1
domain.

PMCID: PMC1221249
PMID: 10926851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Mech Dev. 2000 Jun;94(1-2):133-46.

The Xenopus eomesodermin promoter and its concentration-dependent response to
activin.

Ryan K(1), Garrett N, Bourillot P, Stennard F, Gurdon JB.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome CRC Institute, Cambridge, UK. ryank@email.chop.edu

Eomesodermin is an essential early gene in Xenopus mesoderm formation and shows a
morphogen-like response to activin. Here we define the regions of the
Eomesodermin promoter required for mesodermal expression and for
concentration-dependent response to activin. We find an activin response element 
(ARE) located between -5.6 and -5.0 kb which contains two critical FAST2 binding 
sites. The ARE alone is necessary and sufficient for concentration-dependent
response to activin. A 5.6 kb promoter recapitulates Eomes expression in normal
mesoderm cells. A repressor element extinguishes Eomes expression in the
endoderm. We relate our results to mesoderm patterning in early Xenopus
development and to a mechanism of morphogen gradient response.

PMID: 10842065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Oncogene. 2000 May 4;19(19):2305-11.

Heterogeneities in the biological and biochemical functions of Smad2 and Smad4
mutants naturally occurring in human lung cancers.

Yanagisawa K(1), Uchida K, Nagatake M, Masuda A, Sugiyama M, Saito T, Yamaki K,
Takahashi T, Osada H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Ultrastructure Research, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan.

Smad family members are essential intracellular signaling components of the
transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily involved in a range of
biological activities. The loss of sensitivity to TGF-beta is frequent in human
lung cancers and inactivation of Smad family members are thought to play
important roles in disruption of TGF-beta signaling. In the study presented here,
we characterized the biological and biochemical functions of six Smad2 and Smad4 
mutants, which we previously identified in human lung cancers. All mutant Smad2
and Smad4 were in fact found to be defective in transmitting growth inhibitory
signals originating from TGF-beta and incapable of activating
Smad/hFAST-1-mediated transcription. Transcriptional activation of plasminogen
activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) was impaired in four of the six mutants due to
the defects in homo- and/or hetero-oligomerization with wild-type Smads. In
contrast, the remaining two Smad mutants showed a modest reduction in the PAI-1
transcriptional activation and apparently retained the ability to oligomerize
with wild-type Smads. Significant loss of growth inhibition and
Smad/hFAST-1-mediated transcriptional activation by all of the six mutants
suggested that Smad mutants are indeed functionally impaired Smad mutations and
may play a role in lung tumorigenesis. Moreover, the present findings suggest
that in addition to the impairment in the homo- and/or hetero-oligomerization,
there may be an alternative mechanism producing disruption of TGF-beta signaling,
involving hFAST-1-or possibly other transcriptional cofactor(s)-mediated
transcriptional activation.

PMID: 10822381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Development. 2000 Jun;127(11):2503-14.

Activin/nodal responsiveness and asymmetric expression of a Xenopus nodal-related
gene converge on a FAST-regulated module in intron 1.

Osada SI(1), Saijoh Y, Frisch A, Yeo CY, Adachi H, Watanabe M, Whitman M, Hamada 
H, Wright CV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-2175, USA.

Vertebrate Nodal-related factors play central roles in mesendoderm induction and 
left-right axis specification, but the mechanisms regulating their expression are
largely unknown. We identify an element in Xnr1 intron 1 that is activated by
activin and Vg1, autoactivated by Xnrs, and suppressed by ventral inducers like
BMP4. Intron 1 contains three FAST binding sites on which FAST/Smad
transcriptional complexes can assemble; these sites are differentially involved
in intron 1-mediated reporter gene expression. Interference with FAST function
abolishes intron 1 activity, and transcriptional activation of Xnrs by activin in
embryonic tissue explant assays, identifying FAST as an essential mediator of Xnr
autoregulation and/or 'signal relay' from activin-like molecules. Furthermore,
the mapping of endogenous activators of the Xnr1 intronic enhancer within Xenopus
embryos agrees well with the pattern of Xnr1 transcription during embryogenesis. 
In transgenic mice, Xnr1 intron 1 mimics a similarly located enhancer in the
mouse nodal gene, and directs FAST site-dependent expression in the primitive
streak during gastrulation, and unilateral expression during early somitogenesis.
The FAST cassette is similar in an ascidian nodal-related gene, suggesting an
ancient origin for this regulatory module. Thus, an evolutionarily conserved
intronic enhancer in Xnr1 is involved in both mesendoderm induction and
asymmetric expression during left-right axis formation.

PMID: 10804190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Cell. 2000 Jan;5(1):35-47.

Left-right asymmetric expression of lefty2 and nodal is induced by a signaling
pathway that includes the transcription factor FAST2.

Saijoh Y(1), Adachi H, Sakuma R, Yeo CY, Yashiro K, Watanabe M, Hashiguchi H,
Mochida K, Ohishi S, Kawabata M, Miyazono K, Whitman M, Hamada H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

The left-right (L-R) asymmetric expression of lefty2 and nodal is controlled by a
left side-specific enhancer (ASE). The transcription factor FAST2, which can
mediate signaling by TGF beta and activin, has now been identified as a protein
that binds to a conserved sequence in ASE. These FAST2 binding sites were both
essential and sufficient for L-R asymmetric gene expression. The Fast2 gene is
bilaterally expressed when nodal and lefty2 are expressed on the left side. TGF
beta and activin can activate the ASE activity in a FAST2-dependent manner, while
Nodal can do so in the presence of an EGF-CFC protein. These results suggest that
the asymmetric expression of lefty2 and nodal is induced by a left side-specific 
TGF beta-related factor, which is most likely Nodal itself.

PMID: 10678167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Genes Dev. 2000 Feb 15;14(4):435-51.

Homeodomain and winged-helix transcription factors recruit activated Smads to
distinct promoter elements via a common Smad interaction motif.

Germain S(1), Howell M, Esslemont GM, Hill CS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Signalling, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, WC2A
3PX London, UK.

We have investigated the regulation of the activin-inducible distal element (DE) 
of the Xenopus goosecoid promoter. The results show that paired-like homeodomain 
transcription factors of the Mix family, Mixer and Milk, but not Mix.1, mediate
activin/TGF-beta-induced transcription through the DE by interacting with the
effector domain of Smad2, thereby recruiting active Smad2/Smad4 complexes to the 
Mixer/Milk-binding site. We identify a short motif in the carboxyl termini of
Mixer and Milk, which is demonstrated to be both necessary and sufficient for
interaction with the effector domain of Smad2 and is required for mediating
activin/TGF-beta-induced transcription. This motif is not confined to these
homeodomain proteins, but is also present in the Smad2-interacting winged-helix
proteins Xenopus Fast-1, human Fast-1, and mouse Fast-2. We demonstrate directly 
that transcription factors of different DNA-binding specificity recruit activated
Smads to distinct promoter elements via a common mechanism. These observations,
together with the temporal and spatial expression patterns of Mixer and Milk,
lead us to propose a model for mesoendoderm formation in Xenopus in which these
homeodomain transcription factor/Smad complexes play a role in initiating and
maintaining transcription of target genes in response to endogenous activin-like 
signals.

PMCID: PMC316385
PMID: 10691736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Biol Chem. 1999 Oct 29;274(44):31229-35.

Smad3 inhibits transforming growth factor-beta and activin signaling by competing
with Smad4 for FAST-2 binding.

Nagarajan RP(1), Liu J, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Walther Oncology Center, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Transcriptional regulation by transforming growth factor-beta and activin is
mediated by interaction of Smad2 and Smad3 with specific transcription factors
and/or DNA elements. However, Smad3 behaves differently from Smad2 in regulating 
transcription by a winged-helix transcription factor, FAST-2, on an
activin-responsive element (ARE) in the Xenopus Mix.2 promoter. Smad3 alone was
able to stimulate the ARE through FAST-2, but inhibited the ARE transactivation
mediated by Smad2/Smad4 following receptor activation. We characterized the
functional domains that are involved in these two activities of Smad3. Deletion
of the MH1 domain as well as mutations of four lysine residues in the MH1 domain 
abrogated the inhibitory activity of Smad3, but did not compromise the
self-stimulatory function. In contrast, deletion of the MH2 domain or a point
mutation of glycine 379 within this domain obliterated the self-stimulatory
activity of Smad3, but not the inhibitory activity. In an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay, we found that Smad3 was able to associate with the
FAST-2.ARE complex and that this association was dependent on FAST-2. In
addition, Smad3 was not able to directly bind the ARE in a DNase I protection
assay, in which FAST-2 binds the ARE around a motif (TGTGTATT) previously
characterized to associate with the human FAST-1 protein. Interestingly, Smad4
was also able to directly associate with the FAST-2.ARE complex through binding
with FAST-2. In a gel shift assay, the association of FAST-2 with Smad4 was
mutually exclusive from the association with Smad3. Taken together, these data
indicate that Smad3 exerts the inhibitory activity by competitive association
with FAST-2.

PMID: 10531318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Dev Biol. 1999 Oct 15;214(2):354-69.

Xenopus Smad4beta is the co-Smad component of developmentally regulated
transcription factor complexes responsible for induction of early mesodermal
genes.

Howell M(1), Itoh F, Pierreux CE, Valgeirsdottir S, Itoh S, ten Dijke P, Hill CS.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, 91 Riding House Street, London, W1P 8BT,
United Kingdom.

Smad4 is defined as the common-mediator Smad (co-Smad) required for transducing
signals for all TGF-beta superfamily members. This paper describes two Smad4s in 
Xenopus: XSmad4alpha, which is probably the Xenopus orthologue of human Smad4,
and a distinct family member, XSmad4beta, which differs primarily at the extreme 
N-terminus and in the linker region. Both XSmad4s act as co-Smads, forming
ligand-dependent complexes with receptor-regulated Smads 1 and 2 and synergizing 
with them to activate transcription of mesodermal genes in Xenopus embryos. The
two XSmad4 genes have reciprocal temporal expression patterns in Xenopus embryos 
and are expressed in varying ratios in adult tissues, suggesting distinct
functional roles in vivo. XSmad4beta is the predominant maternal co-Smad and we
go on to demonstrate its role in the transcriptional regulation of early
mesodermal genes. We have identified two distinct nuclear complexes that bind the
activin-responsive element of the Xenopus Mix.2 promoter: one formed in response 
to high levels of activin signaling and the other activated by endogenous
signaling pathways. Using specific antisera we demonstrate the presence of
endogenous XSmad4beta and also XSmad2 in both of these complexes, and our data
indicate that the DNA-binding components of the complexes are different.
Furthermore, we show that the presence of these complexes in the nucleus
perfectly correlates with the transcriptional activity of the target gene, Mix.2,
and we show that one of the XSmad4beta-containing transcription factor complexes 
undergoes a developmentally regulated nuclear translocation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10525340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Jul;45(5):537-43.

The role of transcription factors involved in TGFbeta superfamily signaling
during development.

Watanabe M(1), Whitman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
mwatanbe@hms.harvard.edu

Recent studies of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling have
identified a signaling pathway that includes Ser/Thr kinase transmembrane
receptors, intracellular substrates and transducers of receptor activation known 
as Smads, and DNA-binding transcription factors that are regulated by interaction
with Smads. Both genetic and biochemical studies show that Smads are central
mediators of TGF-beta signaling. How do Smads regulate the expression of target
genes in the nucleus? Over the past three years, transcription factors involved
in TGF-beta signaling have been identified and the molecular events in the
nucleus have begun to be understood. Both Smads, which have intrinsic DNA binding
activity, and additional transcription factors, act together to regulate the
expression of target genes in the nucleus. Smads are relatively ubiquitously
expressed in embryos during the development, while interacting transcription
factors are expressed with a restricted pattern, either temporally or spatially. 
Therefore the developmental specificity of TGF-beta signaling may be, at least in
part, determined by cell-type specific transcription factors.

PMID: 10512186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Biol Chem. 1999 Sep 10;274(37):26584-90.

The role of FAST-1 and Smads in transcriptional regulation by activin during
early Xenopus embryogenesis.

Yeo CY(1), Chen X, Whitman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Graduate Program in Biological and Biomedical
Sciences, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Smads are signal transducers for the transforming growth factor-beta superfamily 
of factors. In early Xenopus embryos, the transforming growth factor-beta member 
activin induces the gene Mix.2 by stimulating the formation of a multiprotein
complex, activin-responsive factor (ARF). This complex contains Smad2 or Smad3,
Smad4, and a novel forkhead transcription factor, FAST-1, and binds to an
enhancer (activin-responsive element; ARE) that confers activin regulation of
Mix.2 transcription. Both FAST-1 and Smads can bind directly to the ARE; we have 
investigated 1) the role of FAST-1 and Smad DNA binding sites in ARF recognition 
of the ARE, 2) the contributions of FAST-1 and Smad binding to ARF binding in
vitro and to ARE regulation in early Xenopus embryos, 3) the extent to which
different Smads can replace Smad4 in regulation of the ARE. We find that ARF
binds to ARE through both FAST-1 and Smad binding sites. FAST-1 recognition of
the ARE is essential both for ARF binding in vitro and activin regulation in
vivo. In contrast, Smad binding of ARE is unnecessary for ARF binding or activin 
regulation but does enhance the binding and regulatory activity of ARF. Also,
Smad3 can partially substitute for Smad4 in the regulation of the ARE. These
observations elucidate how broadly expressed signal transducers (Smads) regulate 
a developmentally specific transcriptional response in conjunction with a
temporally restricted transcription factor, FAST-1.

PMID: 10473623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mech Dev. 1998 Dec;79(1-2):17-27.

A mouse homologue of FAST-1 transduces TGF beta superfamily signals and is
expressed during early embryogenesis.

Weisberg E(1), Winnier GE, Chen X, Farnsworth CL, Hogan BL, Whitman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The transcription factor FAST-1 has recently been shown to play a key role in the
specification of mesoderm by TGF beta superfamily signals in the early Xenopus
embryo. We have cloned Fast1, a mouse homologue of Xenopus FAST-1, and
characterized its expression during embryogenesis and function in activin/TGF
beta signal transduction. In vitro, Fast1 associates with Smads in response to an
activin/TGF beta signal to form a complex that recognizes the Xenopus activin
responsive element (ARE) targeted by Xenopus FAST-1. In intact cells,
introduction of Fast1 confers activin/TGF beta regulation of an ARE-luciferase
reporter. In embryos, Fast1 is expressed predominantly throughout the epiblast
before gastrulation and declines as development progresses. We propose that mouse
Fast1, like Xenopus FAST-1, mediates TGF beta superfamily signals specifying
developmental fate during early embryogenesis.

PMID: 10349617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cell. 1999 Apr 2;97(1):29-39.

A Smad transcriptional corepressor.

Wotton D(1), Lo RS, Lee S, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Following TGFbeta receptor-mediated phosphorylation and association with Smad4,
Smad2 moves into the nucleus, binds to target promoters in association with
DNA-binding cofactors, and recruits coactivators such as p300/CBP to activate
transcription. We identified the homeodomain protein TGIF as a Smad2-binding
protein and a repressor of transcription. A TGFbeta-activated Smad complex can
recruit TGIF and histone deacetylases (HDACs) to a Smad target promoter,
repressing transcription. Thus, upon entering the nucleus, a Smad2-Smad4 complex 
may interact with coactivators, forming a transcriptional activation complex, or 
with TGIF and HDACs, forming a transcriptional repressor complex. Formation of
one of these two mutually exclusive complexes is determined by the relative
levels of Smad corepressors and coactivators within the cell.

PMID: 10199400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Dev Biol. 1999 Mar 15;207(2):364-79.

Dominant-negative Smad2 mutants inhibit activin/Vg1 signaling and disrupt axis
formation in Xenopus.

Hoodless PA(1), Tsukazaki T, Nishimatsu S, Attisano L, Wrana JL, Thomsen GH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto,
Ontario, M5S 1A8, Canada.

Smads are central mediators of signal transduction for the TGFbeta superfamily.
However, the precise functions of Smad-mediated signaling pathways in early
development are unclear. Here we demonstrate a requirement for Smad2 signaling in
dorsoanterior axis formation during Xenopus development. Using two point
mutations of Smad2 previously identified in colorectal carcinomas, we show that
Smad2 ushers Smad4 to the nucleus to form a transcriptional activation complex
with the nuclear DNA-binding protein FAST-1 and that the mutant proteins interact
normally with FAST-1 but fail to recruit Smad4 into the nucleus. This mechanism
of inhibition specifically restricts the dominant-negative activity of these
mutants to the activin/Vg1 signaling pathway without inhibiting BMPs.
Furthermore, expression of these mutants in Xenopus animal caps inhibits but does
not abolish activin and Vg1 induction of mesoderm and in the embryo results in a 
truncated dorsoanterior axis. These studies define a mechanism through which
mutations in Smad2 may block TGFbeta-dependent signaling and suggest a critical
role for inductive signaling mediated by the Smad2 pathway in Xenopus organizer
function.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10068469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):424-30.

FAST-2 is a mammalian winged-helix protein which mediates transforming growth
factor beta signals.

Liu B(1), Dou CL, Prabhu L, Lai E.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York, USA.

The mechanisms by which transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta) and related
ligands regulate transcription remain poorly understood. The winged-helix (WH)
transcription factor fork head activin signal transducer 1 (FAST-1) was
identified as a mediator of activin signaling in Xenopus embryos (X. Chen, M. J. 
Rubock, and M. Whitman, Nature 383:691-696, 1996). We have cloned a novel WH gene
from the mouse which shares many properties with FAST-1. We find that this gene, 
which we call FAST-2, is able to mediate transcriptional activation by TGF-beta. 
FAST-2 also interacts directly with Smad2, a cytoplasmic protein which is
translocated to the nucleus in response to TGF-beta, and forms a multimeric
complex with Smad2 and Smad4 on the activin response element, a high-affinity
binding site for FAST-1. Analysis of the sequences of FAST-1 and FAST-2 reveals
substantial protein sequence divergence compared to known vertebrate orthologs in
the WH family. This suggests that FAST-2 represents a new WH gene related to
FAST-1, which functions to mediate TGF-beta signals in mammals. We have also
examined the structure of the FAST-2 gene and find that it overlaps with a
kinesin motor protein gene. The genes are transcribed in opposite orientations,
and their transcripts overlap in the 3' untranslated region.

PMCID: PMC83900
PMID: 9858566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell. 1998 Jul;2(1):121-7.

Characterization of human FAST-1, a TGF beta and activin signal transducer.

Zhou S(1), Zawel L, Lengauer C, Kinzler KW, Vogelstein B.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore,
Maryland 21231, USA.

We have identified a human homolog of the Xenopus forkhead activin signal
transducer-1 (xFAST-1). Although significantly different in sequence from its
Xenopus counterpart, hFAST-1 shared with xFAST-1 the ability to bind to human
Smad2 and activate an activin response element (ARE). The hFAST-1-dependent
activation of ARE was completely dependent on endogenous Smad4 and stimulation by
a TGF beta-like ligand. The hFAST-1 protein was shown to bind to a novel DNA
motif, TGT (G/T) (T/G)ATT, an exact copy of which was present within the ARE. A
single copy of this motif could activate a reporter in a TGF beta-dependent
fashion but only when an adjacent Smad-binding element was present in the
construct. These data suggest that responses to TGF beta family members may be
mediated by a DNA-binding complex formed by hFAST-1, hSmad2, and hSmad4.

PMID: 9702198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Mol Cell. 1998 Jul;2(1):109-20.

Smad2 and Smad3 positively and negatively regulate TGF beta-dependent
transcription through the forkhead DNA-binding protein FAST2.

Labbé E(1), Silvestri C, Hoodless PA, Wrana JL, Attisano L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

We identify a mammalian forkhead domain protein, FAST2, that is required for
induction of the goosecoid (gsc) promoter by TGF beta or activin signaling. FAST2
binds to a sequence in the gsc promoter, but efficient transcriptional activation
and assembly of a DNA-binding complex of FAST2, Smad2, and Smad4 requires an
adjacent Smad4 site. Smad3 is closely related to Smad2 but suppresses activation 
of the gsc promoter. Inhibitory activity is conferred by the MH1 domain, which
unlike that of Smad2, binds to the Smad4 site. Through competition for this
shared site, Smad3 may prevent transcription by altering the conformation of the 
DNA-binding complex. Thus, we describe a mechanism whereby Smad2 and Smad3
positively and negatively regulate a TGF beta/activin target gene.

PMID: 9702197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Genes Dev. 1998 Jul 15;12(14):2144-52.

Determinants of specificity in TGF-beta signal transduction.

Chen YG(1), Hata A, Lo RS, Wotton D, Shi Y, Pavletich N, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021 USA.

Signal transduction by the TGF-beta family involves sets of receptor
serine/threonine kinases, Smad proteins that act as receptor substrates, and
Smad-associated transcription factors that target specific genes. We have
identified discrete structural elements that dictate the selective interactions
between receptors and Smads and between Smads and transcription factors in the
TGF-beta and BMP pathways. A cluster of four residues in the L45 loop of the type
I receptor kinase domain, and a matching set of two residues in the L3 loop of
the Smad carboxy-terminal domain establish the specificity of receptor-Smad
interactions. A cluster of residues in the highly exposed alpha-helix 2 of the
Smad carboxy-terminal domain specify the interaction with the DNA-binding factor 
Fast1 and, as a result, the gene responses mediated by the pathway. By
establishing specific interactions, these determinants keep the TGF-beta and BMP 
pathways segregated from each other.

PMCID: PMC317013
PMID: 9679059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Mar 3;95(5):2412-6.

Targeted deletion of Smad4 shows it is required for transforming growth factor
beta and activin signaling in colorectal cancer cells.

Zhou S(1), Buckhaults P, Zawel L, Bunz F, Riggins G, Dai JL, Kern SE, Kinzler KW,
Vogelstein B.

Author information: 
(1)The Howard Hughes Medical Institute at Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD
21231, USA.

Smad4 (DPC4) is a candidate tumor suppressor gene that has been hypothesized to
be critical for transmitting signals from transforming growth factor (TGF) beta
and related ligands. To directly test this hypothesis, the Smad4 gene was deleted
through homologous recombination in human colorectal cancer cells. This deletion 
abrogated signaling from TGF-beta, as well as from the TGF-beta family member
activin. These results provide unequivocal evidence that mutational inactivation 
of Smad4 causes TGF-beta unresponsiveness and provide a basis for understanding
the physiologic role of this gene in tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC19358
PMID: 9482899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Genes Dev. 1997 Dec 1;11(23):3157-67.

Dual role of the Smad4/DPC4 tumor suppressor in TGFbeta-inducible transcriptional
complexes.

Liu F(1), Pouponnot C, Massagué J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Upon ligand binding, the receptors of the TGFbeta family phosphorylate Smad
proteins, which then move into the nucleus where they activate transcription. To 
carry out this function, the receptor-activated Smads 1 and 2 require association
with the product of deleted in pancreatic carcinoma, locus 4 (DPC4), Smad4. We
investigated the step at which Smad4 is required for transcriptional activation. 
Smad4 is not required for nuclear translocation of Smads 1 or 2, or for
association of Smad2 with a DNA binding partner, the winged helix protein FAST-1.
Receptor-activated Smad2 takes Smad4 into the nucleus where they form a complex
with FAST-1 that requires these three components to activate transcription. Smad4
contributes two functions: Through its amino-terminal domain, Smad4 promotes
binding of the Smad2/Smad4/FAST-1 complex to DNA; through its carboxy-terminal
domain, Smad4 provides an activation function required for Smad1 or Smad2 to
stimulate transcription. The dual function of Smad4 in transcriptional activation
underscores its central role in TGFbeta signaling.

PMCID: PMC316747
PMID: 9389648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Nature. 1997 Sep 4;389(6646):85-9.

Smad4 and FAST-1 in the assembly of activin-responsive factor.

Chen X(1), Weisberg E, Fridmacher V, Watanabe M, Naco G, Whitman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115-5730, USA.

Members of the TGF-beta superfamily of signalling molecules work by activating
transmembrane receptors with phosphorylating activity (serine-threonine kinase
receptors); these in turn phosphorylate and activate SMADs, a class of signal
transducers. Activins are growth factors that act primarily through Smad2,
possibly in partnership with Smad4, which forms heteromeric complexes with
different ligand-specific SMADs after activation. In frog embryos, Smad2
participates in an activin-responsive factor (ARF), which then binds to a
promoter element of the Mix.2 gene. The principal DNA-binding component of ARF is
FAST-1, a transcription factor with a novel winged-helix structure. We now report
that Smad4 is present in ARF, and that FAST-1, Smad4 and Smad2
co-immunoprecipitate in a ligand-regulated fashion. We have mapped the site of
interaction between FAST-1 and Smad2/Smad4 to a novel carboxy-terminal domain of 
FAST-1, and find that overexpression of this domain specifically inhibits activin
signalling. In a yeast two-hybrid assay, the FAST-1 carboxy terminus interacts
with Smad2 but not Smad4. Deletion mutants of the FAST-1 carboxy terminus that
still participate in ligand-regulated Smad2 binding no longer associated with
Smad4 or ARF. These results indicate that Smad4 stabilizes a ligand-stimulated
Smad2-FAST-1 complex as an active DNA-binding factor.

PMID: 9288972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nature. 1996 Oct 24;383(6602):691-6.

A transcriptional partner for MAD proteins in TGF-beta signalling.

Chen X(1), Rubock MJ, Whitman M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature 1996 Dec 19-26;384(6610):648.

The transforming-growth-factor-beta (TGF-beta) superfamily is critical for
establishing mesoderm during early embryogenesis in Xenopus. The transcriptional 
activation of Mix.2, an immediate-early response gene specific to activin-like
members of the TGF-beta superfamily, is associated with the rapid appearance of a
site-specific DNA-binding activity that recognizes a fifty-base-pair regulatory
element known as ARE in the Mix.2 promoter. Cloning of the site-specific
DNA-binding component of this activity revealed it to be a new winged-helix
transcription factor and a direct target for signalling by the TGF-beta
superfamily. XMAD2, a recently identified TGF-beta signal transducer, forms a
complex with the transcription factor in an activin-dependent fashion to generate
an activated ARE-binding complex. A model is proposed to explain how TGF-beta
superfamily signals might regulate the expression of specific genes in the early 
embryo.

PMID: 8878477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


