
1. BMC Genomics. 2015 Oct 28;16(1):874. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2022-2.

Prior infection with Type A Francisella tularensis antagonizes the pulmonary
transcriptional response to an aerosolized Toll-like receptor 4 agonist.

Walters KA(1), Olsufka R(2), Kuestner RE(3), Wu X(4), Wang K(5), Skerrett SJ(6), 
Ozinsky A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
Kathie.Walters@systemsbiology.org. (2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care
Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98104, USA.
rachael.olsufka@uky.edu. (3)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N,
Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. Rolf.Kuestner@systemsbiology.org. (4)Institute for
Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA.
Xiagang.Wu@systemsbiology.org. (5)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave.
N, Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. Kai.Wang@systemsbiology.com. (6)Division of Pulmonary
and Critical Care Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98104, USA.
shawn@u.washington.edu. (7)Institute for Systems Biology, 401 Terry Ave. N,
Seattle, WA, 98109, USA. aozinsky@systemsbiology.org.

BACKGROUND: Francisella infection attenuates immune cell infiltration and
expression of selected pro-inflammatory cytokines in response to endogenous LPS, 
suggesting the bacteria is actively antagonizing at least some part of the
response to Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) engagement. The ability of different
Francisella strains to inhibit the ability of E. coli LPS to induce a pulmonary
inflammatory response, as measured by gene expression profiling, was examined to 
define the scope of modulation and identify of inflammatory genes/pathways that
are specifically antagonized by a virulent F. tularensis infection.
RESULTS: Prior aerosol exposure to F. tularensis subsp. tularensis, but not the
live attenuated strain (LVS) of F. tularensis subsp. holarctica or F. novicida,
significantly antagonized the transcriptional response in the lungs of infected
mice exposed to aerosolized E. coli LPS. The response to E. coli LPS was not
completely inhibited, suggesting that the bacteria is targeting further
downstream of the TLR4 molecule. Analysis of the promotors of LPS-responsive
genes that were perturbed by Type A Francisella infection identified candidate
transcription factors that were potentially modulated by the bacteria, including 
multiple members of the forkhead transcription factor family (FoxA1, Foxa2,
FoxD1, Foxd3, Foxf2, FoxI1, Fox03, Foxq1), IRF1, CEBPA, and Mef2. The annotated
functional roles of the affected genes suggested that virulent Francisella
infection suppressed cellular processes including mRNA processing, antiviral
responses, intracellular trafficking, and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton.
Surprisingly, despite the broad overall suppression of LPS-induced genes by
virulent Francisella, and contrary to what was anticipated from prior studies,
Type A Francisella did not inhibit the expression of the majority of LPS-induced 
cytokines, nor the expression of many classic annotated inflammatory genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, this analysis demonstrates clear differences in the
ability of different Francisella strains to modulate TLR4 signaling and
identifies genes/pathways that are specifically targeted by virulent Type A
Francisella.

PMCID: PMC4625460
PMID: 26510639  [PubMed - in process]


2. Stem Cells. 2015 Mar;33(3):806-18. doi: 10.1002/stem.1899.

Time point-based integrative analyses of deep-transcriptome identify four signal 
pathways in blastemal regeneration of zebrafish lower jaw.

Zhang H(1), Wang X, Lyu K, Gao S, Wang G, Fan C, Zhang XA, Yan J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Institute for Marine Biosystem and Neurosciences,
College of Fisheries and Life Sciences, Shanghai Ocean University Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.

There has been growing interest in applying tissue engineering to stem cell-based
regeneration therapies. We have previously reported that zebrafish can faithfully
regenerate complicated tissue structures through blastemal cell type conversions 
and tissue reorganization. To unveil the regenerative factors and engineering
arts of blastemal regeneration, we conducted transcriptomal analyses at four time
points corresponding to preamputation, re-epitheliation, blastemal formation, and
respecification. By combining the hierarchical gene ontology term network, the
DAVID annotation system, and Euclidean distance clustering, we identified four
signaling pathways: foxi1-foxo1b-pou3f1, pax3a-mant3a-col11/col2,
pou5f1-cdx4-kdrl, and isl1-wnt11 PCP-sox9a. Results from immunohistochemical
staining and promoter-driven transgenic fish suggest that these pathways,
respectively, define wound epidermis reconstitution, cell type conversions,
blastemal angiogenesis/vasculogenesis, and cartilage matrix-orientation. Foxi1
morpholino-knockdown caused expansions of Foxo1b- and Pax3a-expression in the
basal layer-blastemal junction region. Moreover, foxi1 morphants displayed
increased sox9a and hoxa2b transcripts in the embryonic pharyngeal arches. Thus, 
a Foxi1 signal switch is required to establish correct tissue patterns, including
re-epitheliation and blastema formation. This study provides novel insight into a
blastema regeneration strategy devised by epithelial cell transdifferentiation,
blood vessel engineering, and cartilage matrix deposition.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25420467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Dev Biol. 2014 Sep-Oct;3(5):349-63. doi: 10.1002/wdev.142. 
Epub 2014 Jul 2.

Early embryonic specification of vertebrate cranial placodes.

Schlosser G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, School of Natural Sciences & Regenerative Medicine
Institute (REMEDI), National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway, Ireland.

Cranial placodes contribute to many sensory organs and ganglia of the vertebrate 
head. The olfactory, otic, and lateral line placodes form the sensory receptor
cells and neurons of the nose, ear, and lateral line system; the lens placode
develops into the lens of the eye; epibranchial, profundal, and trigeminal
placodes contribute sensory neurons to cranial nerve ganglia; and the
adenohypophyseal placode gives rise to the anterior pituitary, a major endocrine 
control organ. Despite these differences in fate, all placodes are now known to
originate from a common precursor, the preplacodal ectoderm (PPE). The latter is 
a horseshoe-shaped domain of ectoderm surrounding the anterior neural plate and
neural crest and is defined by expression of transcription factor Six1, its
cofactor Eya1, and other members of the Six and Eya families. Studies in
zebrafish, Xenopus, and chick reveal that the PPE is specified together with
other ectodermal territories (epidermis, neural crest, and neural plate) during
early embryogenesis. During gastrulation, domains of ventrally (e.g., Dlx3/Dlx5, 
GATA2/GATA3, AP2, Msx1, FoxI1, and Vent1/Vent2) and dorsally (e.g., Zic1, Sox3,
and Geminin) restricted transcription factors are established in response to a
gradient of BMP and help to define non-neural and neural competence territories, 
respectively. At neural plate stages, the PPE is then induced in the non-neural
competence territory by signals from the adjacent neural plate and mesoderm
including FGF, BMP inhibitors, and Wnt inhibitors. Subsequently, signals from
more localized signaling centers induce restricted expression domains of various 
transcription factors within the PPE, which specify multiplacodal areas and
ultimately individual placodes. For further resources related to this article,
please visit the WIREs website.CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The author has declared no
conflicts of interest for this article.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25124756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Dev Dyn. 2014 Oct;243(10):1338-51. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24160. Epub 2014 Jul 19.

Dissecting the differentiation process of the preplacodal ectoderm in zebrafish.

Yao D(1), Zhao F, Wu Y, Wang J, Dong W, Zhao J, Zhu Z, Liu D.

Author information: 
(1)The Education Ministry Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and
Differentiation and the State Key Laboratory of Bio-membrane and Membrane
Bio-engineering, School of Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The preplacodal region (PPR) is a region of specialized ectoderm at
the border of neural and nonneural ectoderm (NNE). Coordinated Bmp, Fgf, and Wnt 
signals are known to drive PPR development; however, the underlying mechanism is 
unknown.
RESULTS: We identified key components involved in PPR differentiation. The
mesoderm/marginal Wnts at the early gastrula stage trigger differentiation by
allowing the adjacent NNE border cells to start adopting caudal PPR fates;
otherwise, the development of caudal PPR identity is hindered due to the
persistent presence of gata3 mRNA. The caudal PPR fate dominates when foxi1
expression is enhanced at the late gastrula stage, and depleting Foxi1 after 6
hours postfertilization (hpf) reduces the otic-epibranchial placodal domain. When
the Gata3 level is manipulated at the fertilized egg stage or near 6 hpf, the
lens is always affected. In establishing PPR polarity, both Gata3 and Foxi1
inhibit Bmp signaling, whereas Foxi1 inhibits, but Gata3 enhances, Fgf
sensitivity of the PPR cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study reveals that in zebrafish, (1) the PPR at the shield stage
may enter a developmental state when the PPR cells preferentially adopt a
particular placodal fate and (2) a network of genetically linked factors,
including Wnt/beta-catenin, Fgfr, Bmp, Gata3, and Foxi1, direct the process of
PPR differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25044691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Jan;26(1):149-59. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2013070764. Epub 2014
Jun 5.

Adam10 mediates the choice between principal cells and intercalated cells in the 
kidney.

Guo Q(1), Wang Y(2), Tripathi P(2), Manda KR(2), Mukherjee M(3), Chaklader M(3), 
Austin PF(4), Surendran K(5), Chen F(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, and
Division of Pediatric Urology, Department of Surgery, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri; (2)Department of Medicine, Department of
Cell Biology and Physiology, and. (3)Sanford Children's Health Research Center,
Sanford Research/USD, Sioux Falls, South Dakota; and. (4)Division of Pediatric
Urology, Department of Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri; (5)Sanford Children's Health Research Center, Sanford
Research/USD, Sioux Falls, South Dakota; and Department of Pediatrics, Sanford
School of Medicine, University of South Dakota, Sioux Falls, South Dakota
fchen@dom.wustl.edu kameswaran.surendran@sanfordhealth.org. (6)Department of
Medicine, Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, and fchen@dom.wustl.edu
kameswaran.surendran@sanfordhealth.org.

A disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain 10 (Adam10), a member of the ADAM
family of cell membrane-anchored proteins, has been linked to the regulation of
the Notch, EGF, E-cadherin, and other signaling pathways. However, it is unclear 
what role Adam10 has in the kidney in vivo. In this study, we showed that Adam10 
deficiency in ureteric bud (UB) derivatives leads to a decrease in urinary
concentrating ability, polyuria, and hydronephrosis in mice. Furthermore, Adam10 
deficiency led to a reduction in the percentage of aquaporin 2 (Aqp2)(+)
principal cells (PCs) in the collecting ducts that was accompanied by a
proportional increase in the percentage of intercalated cells (ICs). This
increase was more prominent in type A ICs than in type B ICs. Foxi1, a
transcription factor important for the differentiation of ICs, was upregulated in
the Adam10 mutants. The observed reduction of Notch activity in Adam10 mutant
collecting duct epithelium and the similar reduction of PC/IC ratios in the
collecting ducts in mice deficient for mindbomb E3 ubiquitin protein ligase 1, a 
key regulator of the Notch and Wnt/receptor-like tyrosine kinase signaling
pathways, suggest that Adam10 regulates cell fate determination through the
activation of Notch signaling, probably through the regulation of Foxi1
expression. However, phenotypic differences between the Adam10 mutants, the Mib1 
mutants, and the Foxi1 mutants suggest that the functions of Adam10 in
determining the fate of collecting duct cells are more complex than those of a
simple upstream factor in a linear pathway involving Notch and Foxi1.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4279728
PMID: 24904084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PeerJ. 2014 May 8;2:e384. doi: 10.7717/peerj.384. eCollection 2014.

Mutation analysis of the SLC26A4, FOXI1 and KCNJ10 genes in individuals with
congenital hearing loss.

Pique LM(1), Brennan ML(2), Davidson CJ(3), Schaefer F(4), Greinwald J Jr(5),
Schrijver I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center , Stanford, CA ,
USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University Medical Center , Stanford, 
CA , USA. (3)Life Technologies , South San Francisco, CA , USA. (4)Molecular
Genetics, Center for Genetic Testing at Saint Francis Hospital , Tulsa, OK , USA.
(5)Divisions of Human Genetics and Otolaryngology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Medical Center , Cincinnati, OH , USA. (6)Department of Pathology, Stanford
University Medical Center , Stanford, CA , USA ; Department of Pediatrics,
Stanford University Medical Center , Stanford, CA , USA.

Pendred syndrome (PDS) and DFNB4 comprise a phenotypic spectrum of sensorineural 
hearing loss disorders that typically result from biallelic mutations of the
SLC26A4 gene. Although PDS and DFNB4 are recessively inherited, sequencing of the
coding regions and splice sites of SLC26A4 in individuals suspected to be
affected with these conditions often fails to identify two mutations. We
investigated the potential contribution of large SLC26A4 deletions and
duplications to sensorineural hearing loss (SNHL) by screening 107 probands with 
one known SLC26A4 mutation by Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification
(MLPA). A heterozygous deletion, spanning exons 4-6, was detected in only one
individual, accounting for approximately 1% of the missing mutations in our
cohort. This low frequency is consistent with previously published MLPA results. 
We also examined the potential involvement of digenic inheritance in PDS/DFNB4 by
sequencing the coding regions of FOXI1 and KCNJ10. Of the 29 probands who were
sequenced, three carried nonsynonymous variants including one novel sequence
change in FOXI1 and two polymorphisms in KCNJ10. We performed a review of prior
studies and, in conjunction with our current data, conclude that the frequency of
FOXI1 (1.4%) and KCNJ10 (3.6%) variants in PDS/DFNB4 individuals is low. Our
results, in combination with previously published reports, indicate that large
SLC26A4 deletions and duplications as well as mutations of FOXI1 and KCNJ10 play 
limited roles in the pathogenesis of SNHL and suggest that other genetic factors 
likely contribute to the phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4017815
PMID: 24860705  [PubMed]


7. Dev Biol. 2014 Jun 1;390(1):1-13. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.03.004. Epub 2014 Mar
18.

Foxi transcription factors promote pharyngeal arch development by regulating
formation of FGF signaling centers.

Edlund RK(1), Ohyama T(2), Kantarci H(3), Riley BB(3), Groves AK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, BCM295, 1 Baylor
Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Division of Cell Biology and Genetics, House
Research Institute, 2100 W 3rd Street, Los Angeles, CA 90057, USA. (3)Biology
Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3258, USA. (4)Program
in Developmental Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, BCM295, 1 Baylor Plaza,
Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor
College of Medicine, BCM295, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA; Department
of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine, BCM295, 1 Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 
77030, USA. Electronic address: akgroves@bcm.edu.

The bones of the vertebrate face develop from transient embryonic branchial
arches that are populated by cranial neural crest cells. We have characterized a 
mouse mutant for the Forkhead family transcription factor Foxi3, which is
expressed in branchial ectoderm and endoderm. Foxi3 mutant mice are not viable
and display severe branchial arch-derived facial skeleton defects, including
absence of all but the most distal tip of the mandible and complete absence of
the inner, middle and external ear structures. Although cranial neural crest
cells of Foxi3 mutants are able to migrate, populate the branchial arches, and
display some elements of correct proximo-distal patterning, they succumb to
apoptosis from embryonic day 9.75 onwards. We show this cell death correlates
with a delay in expression of Fgf8 in branchial arch ectoderm and a failure of
neural crest cells in the arches to express FGF-responsive genes. Zebrafish foxi1
is also expressed in branchial arch ectoderm and endoderm, and morpholino
knock-down of foxi1 also causes apoptosis of neural crest in the branchial
arches. We show that heat shock induction of fgf3 in zebrafish arch tissue can
rescue cell death in foxi1 morphants. Our results suggest that Foxi3 may play a
role in the establishment of signaling centers in the branchial arches that are
required for neural crest survival, patterning and the subsequent development of 
branchial arch derivatives.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4013273
PMID: 24650709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Dev Biol. 2014 Jun 1;390(1):51-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.02.019. Epub 2014
Feb 26.

Ephrin-B2 governs morphogenesis of endolymphatic sac and duct epithelia in the
mouse inner ear.

Raft S(1), Andrade LR(2), Shao D(3), Akiyama H(4), Henkemeyer M(5), Wu DK(6).

Author information: 
(1)Section on Sensory Cell Regeneration and Development, National Institute on
Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address: rafts@nidcd.nih.gov. (2)Laboratory
of Biomineralization, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, CCS, Universidade Federal
do Rio de Janeiro, RJ 21941-902, Brazil. (3)Department of Otolaryngology,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.
(4)Department of Orthopedics, Gifu University, Gifu City 501-1194, Japan.
(5)Department of Developmental Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. (6)Section on Sensory Cell Regeneration and
Development, National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. Electronic address:
wud@nidcd.nih.gov.

Control over ionic composition and volume of the inner ear luminal fluid
endolymph is essential for normal hearing and balance. Mice deficient in either
the EphB2 receptor tyrosine kinase or the cognate transmembrane ligand ephrin-B2 
(Efnb2) exhibit background strain-specific vestibular-behavioral dysfunction and 
signs of abnormal endolymph homeostasis. Using various loss-of-function mouse
models, we found that Efnb2 is required for growth and morphogenesis of the
embryonic endolymphatic epithelium, a precursor of the endolymphatic sac (ES) and
duct (ED), which mediate endolymph homeostasis. Conditional inactivation of Efnb2
in early-stage embryonic ear tissues disrupted cell proliferation, cell survival,
and epithelial folding at the origin of the endolymphatic epithelium. This
correlated with apparent absence of an ED, mis-localization of ES ion transport
cells relative to inner ear sensory organs, dysplasia of the endolymph fluid
space, and abnormally formed otoconia (extracellular calcite-protein composites) 
at later stages of embryonic development. A comparison of Efnb2 and Notch
signaling-deficient mutant phenotypes indicated that these two signaling systems 
have distinct and non-overlapping roles in ES/ED development. Homozygous deletion
of the Efnb2 C-terminus caused abnormalities similar to those found in the
conditional Efnb2 null homozygote. Analyses of fetal Efnb2 C-terminus deletion
heterozygotes found mis-localized ES ion transport cells only in the genetic
background exhibiting vestibular dysfunction. We propose that developmental
dysplasias described here are a gene dose-sensitive cause of the vestibular
dysfunction observed in EphB-Efnb2 signaling-deficient mice.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4113727
PMID: 24583262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Yi Chuan. 2013 Oct;35(10):1198-208.

[Comparative analysis of conservation and regulatory network on core
transcription factors in mouse inner ear development].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen ZQ(1), Han XH(2), Wei QJ(2), Xing GQ(3), Cao X(2).

Author information: 
(1)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing
210029, China. erwin_0108@sina.com (2)School of Basic Medicine, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing 210029, China. (3)The First Clinical Medical College, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.

During vertebrate inner ear development, several core genes, such as Six1, Six4, 
Pax2, Pax8, Foxi1, Dlx5, Gbx2, Irx2/3, and Msx1, are crucial to the regulation of
the otic placode induction. In order to get the gene regulatory network during
inner ear development, bioinformatics methods were adopted to analyze
conservation and regulation of the core transcription factors in mice. Pax2,
Pax8, Foxi1, and Dlx5 remained to be the main regulators during inner ear
development, which was consistent with the gene regulatory network from
literature. Six1 was regulated by many transcription factors, and Gbx2, Irx2/3,
and Msx1 played important roles in the regulatory network. The differences in the
constructed regulatory network were reasonably analyzed. It was predicted that
Msxl regulated the expression of Six1 and Gbx2. In addition, several
transcription factors, such as Sox5, Lhx2, Rax, Otx1, Otx2, Pitxl, Pitx2, Nkx2-5,
Irx4, Irx6, Dlx2, Hmx1/2/3, Pou4f3, Pax4 and Tlx2, were found to be involved in
the regulatory network. Our results provide an improved understanding of the
regulatory mechanism during inner ear development.

PMID: 24459893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nihon Rinsho. 2013 Dec;71(12):2215-22.

[Current status and perspectives of the research in Pendred syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsunaga T(1), Fujioka M(2), Hosoya M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology/Laboratory of Auditory Disorders, National
Institute of Sensory Organs, National Tokyo Medical Center. (2)Department of
Otorhinolarygology, Keiyu Hospital.

Pendred syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by
sensorineural hearing loss, goiter, and a partial defect in iodide
organification, and is the most common syndromic hearing loss. Hearing loss is
congenital in most cases and is accompanied by an enlarged vestibular aqueduct
and a Mondini cochlea. Pendred syndrome and autosomal recessive deafness-4
(DFNB4) with enlarged vestibular aqueduct comprise a phenotypic spectrum caused
by mutations in SLC26A4. Recently, mutations in FOXI1 and KCNJ10 have also been
identified in DFNB4. Molecular mechanism of hearing loss and goiter remains to be
elucidated, and therapies which can reverse or prevent the progression of the
symptoms are not available. Here, we describe advances in the basic, clinical,
and translational studies on Pendred syndrome.

PMID: 24437281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Laryngoscope. 2014 May;124(5):E194-202. doi: 10.1002/lary.24504. Epub 2013 Dec
13.

Intrafamilial phenotypic variability in families with biallelic SLC26A4
mutations.

Song MH(1), Shin JW, Park HJ, Lee KA, Kim Y, Kim UK, Jeon JH, Choi JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Kwandong University College of Medicine,
Myongji Hospital, Goyang, South Korea.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: Enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA) and hearing loss are
known to be caused by SLC26A4 mutations, but large phenotypic variability exists 
among patients with biallelic SLC26A4 mutations. Intrafamilial phenotypic
variability was analyzed in multiplex EVA families carrying biallelic SLC26A4
mutations to identify the contribution of SLC26A4 mutations and other genetic or 
environmental factors influencing the clinical manifestations.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective case series.
METHODS: Eleven multiplex Korean families with EVA and hearing loss that carry
biallelic mutations of the SLC26A4 gene were included. Genetic analysis for
SLC26A4 and other genes including FOXI1, FOXI1-DBD, and KCNJ10 was performed. The
auditory and other phenotypes were compared among siblings with the same SLC26A4 
mutations.
RESULTS: The difference in the auditory phenotypes was identified between
siblings in approximately half of the EVA families. Families with SLC26A4
mutations other than H723R homozygous mutations demonstrated more phenotypic
variability, especially in those carrying IVS7-2A>G splice site mutation.
Cochlear malformation was a consistent finding among siblings with the same
SLC26A4 mutations. No mutation was identified in the FOXI1, FOXI1-DBD, and KCNJ10
genes in the tested families.
CONCLUSIONS: The possibility of variability concerning auditory phenotype should 
be considered even within family members carrying the same SLC26A4 mutations when
providing genetic counseling to multiplex EVA families. Mutations in the
currently known genes associated with EVA other than SLC26A4 were not found to be
responsible for the intrafamilial phenotypic variability. Modifier genes or
environmental factors other than the currently known genes seem to play a role in
the phenotypic expressions of EVA patients.

© 2013 The American Laryngological, Rhinological and Otological Society, Inc.

PMID: 24338212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Oct 31;4:e900. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.432.

Gene miles-apart is required for formation of otic vesicle and hair cells in
zebrafish.

Hu ZY(1), Zhang QY, Qin W, Tong JW, Zhao Q, Han Y, Meng J, Zhang JP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicinal Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and 
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.

Hearing loss is a serious burden to physical and mental health worldwide.
Aberrant development and damage of hearing organs are recognized as the causes of
hearing loss, the molecular mechanisms underlining these pathological processes
remain elusive. Investigation of new molecular mechanisms involved in
proliferation, differentiation, migration and maintenance of neuromast primordium
and hair cells will contribute to better understanding of hearing loss pathology.
This knowledge will enable the development of protective agents and mechanism
study of drug ototoxicity. In this study, we demonstrate that the zebrafish gene 
miles-apart, a homolog of sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 2 (s1pr2) in mammals, 
has an important role in the development of otic vesicle, neuromasts and survival
of hair cells. Whole-mount in situ hybridization of embryos showed that
miles-apart expression occurred mainly in the encephalic region and the somites
at 24 h.p.f. (hour post fertilization), in the midbrain/hindbrain boundary, the
brainstem and the pre-neuromast of lateral line at 48 h.p.f. in a strict
spatiotemporal regulation. Both up- and downregulation of miles-apart led to
abnormal otoliths and semicircular canals, excess or few hair cells and
neuromasts, and their disarranged depositions in the lateral lines. Miles-apart
(Mil) dysregulation also caused abnormal expression of hearing-associated genes, 
including hmx2, fgf3, fgf8a, foxi1, otop1, pax2.1 and tmieb during zebrafish
organogenesis. Moreover, in larvae miles-apart gene knockdown significantly
upregulated proapoptotic gene zBax2 and downregulated prosurvival gene zMcl1b; in
contrast, the level of zBax2 was decreased and of zMcl1b enhanced by miles-apart 
overexpression. Collectively, Mil activity is linked to organization and number
decision of hair cells within a neuromast, also to deposition of neuromasts and
formation of otic vesicle during zebrafish organogenesis. At the larva stage, Mil
as an upstream regulator of bcl-2 gene family has a role in protection of hair
cells against apoptosis by promoting expression of prosurvival gene zMcl1b and
suppressing proapoptotic gene zBax2.

PMCID: PMC3920936
PMID: 24176858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2014 Mar;38(3):694-703. doi: 10.1111/acer.12286. Epub 2013 
Oct 24.

A screen of zebrafish mutants identifies ethanol-sensitive genetic loci.

Swartz ME(1), Wells MB, Griffin M, McCarthy N, Lovely CB, McGurk P, Rozacky J,
Eberhart JK.

Author information: 
(1)Waggoner Center for Alcohol & Addiction Research, Institute for Cell and
Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas.

BACKGROUND: Fetal alcohol spectrum disorders (FASD) are a highly variable set of 
phenotypes caused by fetal alcohol exposure. Numerous factors influence FASD
phenotypes, including genetics. The zebrafish is a powerful vertebrate model
system with which to identify these genetic factors. Many zebrafish mutants are
housed at the Zebrafish International Resource Center (ZIRC). These mutants are
readily accessible and an excellent source to screen for ethanol (EtOH)-sensitive
developmental structural mutants.
METHODS: We screened mutants obtained from ZIRC for sensitivity to EtOH
teratogenesis. Embryos were treated with 1% EtOH (41 mM tissue levels) from
6 hours postfertilization onward. Levels of apoptosis were evaluated at 24 hours 
postfertilization. At 4 days postfertilization, the craniofacial skeleton,
peripheral axon projections, and sensory neurons of neuromasts were examined.
Fish were genotyped to determine whether there were phenotype/genotype
correlations.
RESULTS: Five of 20 loci interacted with EtOH. Notable among these was that
vangl2, involved in convergent extension movements of the embryonic axis,
interacted strongly with EtOH. Untreated vangl2 mutants had normal craniofacial
morphology, while severe midfacial defects including synophthalmia and narrowing 
of the palatal skeleton were found in all EtOH-treated mutants and a low
percentage of heterozygotes. The cell cycle gene, plk1, also interacted strongly 
with EtOH. Untreated mutants have slightly elevated levels of apoptosis and loss 
of ventral craniofacial elements. Exposure to EtOH results in extensive apoptosis
along with loss of neural tissue and the entire craniofacial skeleton. Phenotypes
of hinfp, mars, and foxi1 mutants were also exacerbated by EtOH.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide insight into the gene-EtOH interactions that may
underlie EtOH teratogenesis. They support previous findings that EtOH disrupts
elongation of the embryonic axis. Importantly, these results show that the
zebrafish is an efficient model with which to test for gene-EtOH interactions.
Understanding these interactions will be crucial to understanding of the FASD
variation.

Copyright © 2013 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMCID: PMC3959233
PMID: 24164477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. BMC Med Genet. 2013 Aug 21;14:85. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-14-85.

Lack of significant association between mutations of KCNJ10 or FOXI1 and SLC26A4 
mutations in Pendred syndrome/enlarged vestibular aqueducts.

Landa P(1), Differ AM, Rajput K, Jenkins L, Bitner-Glindzicz M.

Author information: 
(1)North East Thames Regional Genetics Service Laboratory, Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children NHS Foundation Trust, 37 Queen Square,York House, London
WC1N 3BH, UK.

BACKGROUND: Pendred syndrome is a common autosomal recessive disorder causing
deafness. Features include sensorineural hearing impairment, goitre, enlarged
vestibular aqueducts (EVA) and occasionally Mondini dysplasia. Hearing impairment
and EVA may occur in the absence of goitre or thyroid dyshormonogensis in a
condition known as non-syndromic EVA. A significant number of patients with
Pendred syndrome and non-syndromic EVA show only one mutation in SLC26A4. Two
genes, KCNJ10, encoding an inwardly rectifying potassium channel and FOXI1, a
transcriptional factor gene, are thought to play a role in the disease
phenotypes.
METHODS: Using Polymerase Chain Reaction and Sanger sequencing, sixty-eight
patients with monoallelic mutations of SLC26A4 were tested for mutations in
KCNJ10 and FOXI1.
RESULTS: Two variants were observed in the KCNJ10 gene, p.Arg271Cys in three
patients and p.Arg18Gln in one patient; only one variant, p.Arg123Trp was
observed in the FOXI1 gene in a single patient. Both p.Arg271Cys and p.Arg18Gln
are likely to be polymorphisms as judged by their frequency in the general
population.
CONCLUSION: Therefore we found no evidence for a significant association between 
mutations of KCNJ10 and FOXI1 with SLC26A4. It was also observed that the
variant, p.Arg271Cys in KCNJ10, previously thought to have a protective effect
against seizure susceptibility, was found in a patient with Pendred syndrome with
co-existing epilepsy.

PMCID: PMC3765178
PMID: 23965030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Sep;161A(9):2226-33. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36068. Epub 2013 
Aug 5.

Molecular etiology of hearing impairment associated with nonsyndromic enlarged
vestibular aqueduct in East China.

Chai Y(1), Huang Z, Tao Z, Li X, Li L, Li Y, Wu H, Yang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Xinhua Hospital,
Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Recessive mutations in SLC26A4 and in rarer cases double heterozygous mutations
of FOXI1/SLC26A4 and KCNJ10/SLC26A4 lead to hearing impairment associated with
enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA), the most common inner ear malformation. In
our large cohort study, we addressed several important questions to the molecular
etiology of this disorder. The overall prevalence of SLC26A4 mutations in
nonsyndromic childhood sensorineural hearing loss (11.2%, 37/330) were determined
by sequencing of SLC26A4 in 330 hearing impaired children who did not undergo
inner ear radiologic imaging prior to their genetic test. The penetrance of EVA
in bi-allelic SLC26A4 mutation carriers (100%, 37/37) was determined by follow-up
computed tomography scanning. Combined with the study of 140 additional probands 
diagnosed with nonsyndromic EVA, we characterized the mutation spectrum of
SLC26A4 in East China, which consisted of 19 novel SLC26A4 mutations and differed
from those reported in other regions of China.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23918157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2013 Sep 15;305(6):F919-29. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00152.2012. Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Evaluation of cellular plasticity in the collecting duct during recovery from
lithium-induced nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.

Trepiccione F(1), Capasso G, Nielsen S, Christensen BM.

Author information: 
(1)The Water and Salt Research Center, Dept. of Biomedicine, Aarhus Univ.,
Wilhelm Meyers Allé 3, 8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. bmc@ana.au.dk.

The cellular morphology of the collecting duct is altered by chronic lithium
treatment. We have previously shown that lithium increases the fraction of type-A
intercalated cells and lowers the fraction of principal cells along the
collecting duct. Moreover, type-A intercalated cells acquire a long-row
distribution pattern along the tubules. In the present study, we show that these 
morphological changes reverse progressively after discontinuation of lithium and 
finally disappear after 19 days from lithium suspension. In this time frame we
have identified for the first time, in vivo, a novel cellular type positive for
both intercalated and principal cells functional markers, as recognized by
colabeling with H(+)-ATPase/aquaporin-4 (AQP4) and anion exchanger-1 (AE-1)/AQP2 
and Foxi1/AQP4. This cell type is mainly present after 6 days of lithium washout,
and it disappears in parallel with the long-row pattern of the type-A
intercalated cells. It usually localizes either in the middle or at the edge of
the long-row pattern. Its ultrastructure resembles the intercalated cells as
shown both by differential interference contrast and by electron microscopy. The 
time course of appearance, the localization along the collecting duct, and the
ultrastructure suggest that the cells double labeled for principal and
intercalated cells markers could represent a transition element driving the
conversion of intercalated cells into principal cells.

PMID: 23825070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Aug;161A(8):1904-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36026. Epub 2013
Jul 4.

A unique case of de novo 5q33.3-q34 triplication with uniparental isodisomy of
5q34-qter.

Fujita A(1), Suzumura H, Nakashima M, Tsurusaki Y, Saitsu H, Harada N, Matsumoto 
N, Miyake N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Yokohama City University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yokohama, Japan.

De novo triplication together with uniparental disomy (UPD) is a rare genomic
rearrangement, and, to our knowledge, co-occurrence has previously only been
reported in two individuals. We encountered a patient with a suspected karyotype 
of 46,XX,del(5)(q33.1q33.3),dup(5)(q31.3q33.3) or (q33.1q35.1). Genetic analysis 
revealed tetrasomy of 5q33.3-q34 caused by de novo middle inverted triplication
and uniparental isodisomy of 5q34-qter. Most clinical features in the patient
were observed in previously reported cases of duplication overlapping with
5q33.3-q34, with the exception of hearing loss. The FOXI1 gene, which causes
autosomal recessive deafness (OMIM 600791, DFNB4) when mutated, was contained
within the uniparental isodisomy region (5q34-qter). However, no mutations were
identified following Sanger sequencing of FOXI1. This is the first report of a
patient with de novo triplication together with uniparental isodisomy of
chromosome 5q. As segmental isodisomy is a post-fertilization error, it is
thought to have occurred during mitosis just after fertilization via a U-type
exchange, while inverted duplication could have occurred during meiosis or
mitosis. This study reaffirms that the single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array
is a powerful tool to screen for UPD in a single experiment, especially in cases 
of isodisomy.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23824987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. PLoS One. 2013 May 21;8(5):e63835. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063835. Print 2013.

Deletion of the prorenin receptor from the ureteric bud causes renal
hypodysplasia.

Song R(1), Preston G, Ichihara A, Yosypiv IV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hypertension and Renal Center of Excellence, Tulane 
University School of Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.

The role of the prorenin receptor (PRR) in the regulation of ureteric bud (UB)
branching morphogenesis is unknown. Here, we investigated whether PRR acts
specifically in the UB to regulate UB branching, kidney development and function.
We demonstrate that embryonic (E) day E13.5 mouse metanephroi, isolated intact
E11.5 UBs and cultured UB cells express PRR mRNA. To study its role in UB
development, we conditionally ablated PRR in the developing UB (PRR (UB-/-))
using Hoxb7 (Cre) mice. On E12.5, PRR (UB-/-) mice had decreased UB branching and
increased UB cell apoptosis. These defects were associated with decreased
expression of Ret, Wnt11, Etv4/Etv5, and reduced phosphorylation of Erk1/2 in the
UB. On E18.5, mutants had marked kidney hypoplasia, widespread apoptosis of
medullary collecting duct cells and decreased expression of Foxi1, AE1 and
H(+)-ATPase a4 mRNA. Ultimately, they developed occasional small cysts in
medullary collecting ducts and had decreased nephron number. To test the
functional consequences of these alterations, we determined the ability of PRR
(UB-/-) mice to acidify and concentrate the urine on postnatal (P) day P30. PRR
(UB-/-) mice were polyuric, had lower urine osmolality and a higher urine pH
following 48 hours of acidic loading with NH4Cl. Taken together, these data show 
that PRR present in the UB epithelia performs essential functions during UB
branching morphogenesis and collecting duct development via control of Ret/Wnt11 
pathway gene expression, UB cell survival, activation of Erk1/2, terminal
differentiation and function of collecting duct cells needed for maintaining
adequate water and acid-base homeostasis. We propose that mutations in PRR could 
possibly cause renal hypodysplasia and renal tubular acidosis in humans.

PMCID: PMC3660567
PMID: 23704941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Development. 2013 May;140(9):1936-45. doi: 10.1242/dev.087718.

Zebrafish Foxi1 provides a neuronal ground state during inner ear induction
preceding the Dlx3b/4b-regulated sensory lineage.

Hans S(1), Irmscher A, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Technische Universität Dresden, Biotechnology Center and DFG-Center for
Regenerative Therapies Dresden Cluster of Excellence, Tatzberg 47-49, Dresden,
Germany. stefan.hans@biotec.tu-dresden.de

Vertebrate inner ear development is a complex process that involves the induction
of a common territory for otic and epibranchial precursors and their subsequent
segregation into otic and epibranchial cell fates. In zebrafish, the
otic-epibranchial progenitor domain (OEPD) is induced by Fgf signaling in a
Foxi1- and Dlx3b/4b-dependent manner, but the functional differences of Foxi1 and
Dlx3b/4b in subsequent cell fate specifications within the developing inner ear
are poorly understood. Based on pioneer tracking (PioTrack), a novel
Cre-dependent genetic lineage tracing method, and genetic data, we show that the 
competence to embark on a neuronal or sensory fate is provided sequentially and
very early during otic placode induction. Loss of Foxi1 prevents neuronal
precursor formation without affecting hair cell specification, whereas loss of
Dlx3b/4b inhibits hair cell but not neuronal precursor formation. Consistently,
in Dlx3b/4b- and Sox9a-deficient b380 mutants almost all otic epithelial fates
are absent, including sensory hair cells, and the remaining otic cells adopt a
neuronal fate. Furthermore, the progenitors of the anterior lateral line ganglia 
also arise from the OEPD in a Foxi1-dependent manner but are unaffected in the
absence of Dlx3b/4b or in b380 mutants. Thus, in addition to otic fate Foxi1
provides neuronal competence during OEPD induction prior to and independently of 
the Dlx3b/4b-mediated sensory fate of the developing inner ear.

PMID: 23571216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Hypertens. 2013 Jan;31(1):123-33. doi: 10.1097/HJH.0b013e32835b053d.

Heredity and cardiometabolic risk: naturally occurring polymorphisms in the human
neuropeptide Y(2) receptor promoter disrupt multiple transcriptional response
motifs.

Wei Z(1), Zhang K, Wen G, Balasubramanian K, Shih PA, Rao F, Friese RS,
Miramontes-Gonzalez JP, Schmid-Schoenbein GW, Kim HS, Mahata SK, O'Connor DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Institute for Genomic Medicine, University of
California at San Diego, VA San Diego Healthcare System, La Jolla, California
92093-0838, USA.

OBJECTIVES: The neuropeptide Y(2) G-protein-coupled receptor (NPY2R) relays
signals from PYY or neuropeptide Y toward satiety and control of body mass.
Targeted ablation of the NPY2R locus in mice yields obesity, and studies of NPY2R
promoter genetic variation in more than 10,000 human participants indicate its
involvement in control of obesity and BMI. Here we searched for genetic variation
across the human NPY2R locus and probed its functional effects, especially in the
proximal promoter.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Twin pair studies indicated substantial heritability for
multiple cardiometabolic traits, including BMI, SBP, DBP, and PYY, an endogenous 
agonist at NPY2R. Systematic polymorphism discovery by resequencing across NPY2R 
uncovered 21 genetic variants, 10 of which were common [minor allele frequency
(MAF) >5%], creating one to two linkage disequilibrium blocks in multiple
biogeographic ancestries. In vivo, NPY2R haplotypes were associated with both BMI
(P<U+200A>=<U+200A>3.75E-04) and PYY (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>4.01E-06). Computational approaches revealed that
proximal promoter variants G-1606A, C-599T, and A-224G disrupt predicted IRF1
(A>G), FOXI1 (T>C), and SNAI1 (A>G) response elements. In neuroendocrine cells
transfected with NPY2R promoter/luciferase reporter plasmids, all three variants 
and their resulting haplotypes influenced transcription (G-1606A, P<U+200A><<U+200A>2.97E-06;
C-599T, P<U+200A><<U+200A>1.17E-06; A-224G, P<U+200A><<U+200A>2.04E-06), and transcription was differentially
augmented or impaired by coexpression of either the cognate full-length
transcription factors or their specific siRNAs at each site. Endogenous
expression of transcripts for NPY2R, IRF1, and SNAI1 was documented in
neuroendocrine cells, and the NPY2R mRNA was differentially expressed in two
neuroendocrine tissues (adrenal gland, brainstem) of a rodent model of
hypertension and the metabolic syndrome, the spontaneously hypertensive rat.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that common genetic variation in the proximal NPY2R
promoter influences transcription factor binding so as to alter gene expression
in neuroendocrine cells, and consequently cardiometabolic traits in humans. These
results unveil a novel control point, whereby cis-acting genetic variation
contributes to control of complex cardiometabolic traits, and point to new
transcriptional strategies for intervention into neuropeptide actions and their
cardiometabolic consequences.

PMCID: PMC3615981
PMID: 23149563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 1;373(1):107-17. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.10.012. Epub 2012
Oct 16.

A gene network that coordinates preplacodal competence and neural crest
specification in zebrafish.

Bhat N(1), Kwon HJ, Riley BB.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3258, USA.

Preplacodal ectoderm (PPE) and neural crest (NC) are specified at the interface
of neural and nonneural ectoderm and together contribute to the peripheral
nervous system in all vertebrates. Bmp activates early steps for both fates
during late blastula stage. Low Bmp activates expression of transcription factors
Tfap2a and Tfap2c in the lateral neural plate, thereby specifying neural crest
fate. Elevated Bmp establishes preplacodal competence throughout the ventral
ectoderm by coinducing Tfap2a, Tfap2c, Foxi1 and Gata3. PPE specification occurs 
later at the end of gastrulation and requires complete attenuation of Bmp, yet
expression of PPE competence factors continues well past gastrulation. Here we
show that competence factors positively regulate each other's expression during
gastrulation, forming a self-sustaining network that operates independently of
Bmp. Misexpression of Tfap2a in embryos blocked for Bmp from late blastula stage 
can restore development of both PPE and NC. However, Tfap2a alone is not
sufficient to activate any other competence factors nor does it rescue individual
placodes. On the other hand, misexpression of any two competence factors in
Bmp-blocked embryos can activate the entire transcription factor network and
support the development of NC, PPE and some individual placodes. We also show
that while these factors are partially redundant with respect to PPE
specification, they later provide non-redundant functions needed for development 
of specific placodes. Thus, we have identified a gene regulatory network that
coordinates development of NC, PPE and individual placodes in zebrafish.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3508392
PMID: 23078916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2013 Mar;287(3):477-85. doi: 10.1007/s00404-012-2580-3. Epub
2012 Oct 17.

Elucidation of regulatory mechanisms revealed by human promoter sequence analysis
of genes co-expressed in forskolin-treated theca cells in PCOS.

Sarkar C(1), Maitra A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, National Institute for Research in
Reproductive Health (ICMR), Jehangir Merwanji Street, Parel, Mumbai 400012,
India.

PURPOSE: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is a reproductive endocrinopathy and is
the most common cause of anovulatory infertility in women of reproductive age
group. In PCOS research, there have been several reports which have shown the
differential expression of genes from various tissue and cell types. However,
little information can be gained about the regulation of these genes from the
microarray data itself. Therefore, with the assumption that co-expression can
also imply co-regulation in high-throughput gene expression studies, we
investigated the role of various transcription factors by elucidating their
binding sites (TFBSs) in these genes.
METHODS: For this purpose, a group of 40 genes altered in a forskolin-treated
PCOS gene expression study in theca cells were analyzed using in silico tools.
2,000 bp of the upstream region were extracted from all these genes, and the
PAINT suite of programs was used to identify over-represented TFBSs in these
genes.
RESULTS: We identified three different TFBSs which were over-represented as
compared with a human promoter background model. These three transcription
factors (TFs) are Oct, HFH, and neuron-restrictive silencing factor. Each of
these three TFs and their compatible members can be implicated in the
pathogenesis of PCOS, as described in detail in this article.
CONCLUSIONS: These factors might reveal a new insight into the complex
pathogenesis of PCOS especially with respect to cAMP pathway.

PMID: 23073722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Dis Model Mech. 2013 Mar;6(2):434-42. doi: 10.1242/dmm.010645. Epub 2012 Oct 12.

Mice deficient in H+-ATPase a4 subunit have severe hearing impairment associated 
with enlarged endolymphatic compartments within the inner ear.

Lorente-Cánovas B(1), Ingham N, Norgett EE, Golder ZJ, Karet Frankl FE, Steel KP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SA, UK.

Mutations in the ATP6V0A4 gene lead to autosomal recessive distal renal tubular
acidosis in patients, who often show sensorineural hearing impairment. A first
Atp6v0a4 knockout mouse model that recapitulates the loss of H(+)-ATPase function
seen in humans has been generated and recently reported (Norgett et al., 2012).
Here, we present the first detailed analysis of the structure and function of the
auditory system in Atp6v0a4(-/-) knockout mice. Measurements of the auditory
brainstem response (ABR) showed significantly elevated thresholds in homozygous
mutant mice, which indicate severe hearing impairment. Heterozygote thresholds
were normal. Analysis of paint-filled inner ears and sections from E16.5 embryos 
revealed a marked expansion of cochlear and endolymphatic ducts in Atp6v0a4(-/-) 
mice. A regulatory link between Atp6v0a4, Foxi1 and Pds has been reported and we 
found that the endolymphatic sac of Atp6v0a4(-/-) mice expresses both Foxi1 and
Pds, which suggests a downstream position of Atp6v0a4. These mutants also showed 
a lack of endocochlear potential, suggesting a functional defect of the stria
vascularis on the lateral wall of the cochlear duct. However, the main K(+)
channels involved in the generation of endocochlear potential, Kcnj10 and Kcnq1, 
are strongly expressed in Atp6v0a4(-/-) mice. Our results lead to a better
understanding of the role of this proton pump in hearing function.

PMCID: PMC3597025
PMID: 23065636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45380. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045380. Epub 2012 Sep 21.

Two origins of blastemal progenitors define blastemal regeneration of zebrafish
lower jaw.

Wang X(1), He H, Tang W, Zhang XA, Hua X, Yan J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Marine Biosystems and Neurosciences, Institutes of Marine
Sciences, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai, China.

Zebrafish possess a remarkable ability to regenerate complicated structures by
formation of a mass of undifferentiated mesenchymal cells called blastema. To
understand how the blastema retains the original structural form, we investigate 
cellular transitions and transcriptional characteristics of cell identity genes
during all stages of regeneration of an amputated lower jaw. We find that
mesenchymal blastema originates from multiple sources including nucleated blood
cells, fibroblasts, damaged muscle cells and pigment cells. These cells are
transformed into two populations of blastemal progenitors: foxi1-expression and
isl1-expression, before giving rise to cartilage, bone, and muscle. Time point-
based transcriptomal analysis of 45 annotated Hox genes reveal that five 3'-end
Hox genes and an equal number of 5'-end Hox genes are activated largely at the
stage of blastema reformation. RNA in situ hybridization shows that foxi1 and
pax3a are respectively expressed in the presumptive mandible skeletal region and 
regenerating muscle at 5 dpa. In contrast, hoxa2b and hoxa11b are widely
expressed with different domain in chondrogenic blastema and blastema mesenchyme.
Knockdown foxi1 changes the expression patterns of sox9a and hoxa2b in
chondrogenic blastema. From these results we propose that two origins of
blastemal progenitors define blastema skeleton and muscle respecifications
through distinct signaling pathways. Meanwhile, the positional identity of
blastema reformation is implicated in mesenchymal segmentation and characteristic
expression pattern of Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC3448660
PMID: 23028974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2012 Nov;76(11):1633-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2012.07.035. Epub 2012 Aug 18.

Novel heterozygous mutation c.662_663insG compound with IVS7-2A>G mutation in
SLC26A4 gene in a Chinese family with Pendred syndrome.

Chen K(1), Zhou W, Zong L, Liu M, Du J, Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University and Institute of Otorhinolaryngology, Sun Yat-Sen University,
Guangzhou 510080, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Pendred syndrome is one of the most common hereditary determined
diseases in patients with syndromic sensorineural hearing impairment. Mutations
in the SLC26A4 gene are a major cause of Pendred syndrome. However, Pendred
syndrome is quite rare in China. This investigation aims to identify genetic
cause of a Chinese family with Pendred syndrome.
METHODS: Clinical and molecular evaluations were conducted in a Chinese family
with Pendred syndrome.
RESULTS: A novel SLC26A4 c.662_663insG mutation was detected in compound
heterozygosity with IVS7-2A>G. No FOXI1, KCNJ10 or GJB2 pathogenic mutation was
found. The novel mutation c.662_663insG (p.G221) locates in SLC26A4 gene exon 6, 
and cause frameshift mutation on pendrin protein transmembrane domain five.
CONCLUSION: The compound heterozygosity of the novel c.662_663insG and IVS7-2A>G 
mutations in the SLC26A4 gene was considered to be the cause of Pendred syndrome 
in the proband. This study also supplemented the mutation spectrum of Pendred
syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22906308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2012 Jun;146(6):972-8. doi: 10.1177/0194599812439670.
Epub 2012 Mar 12.

Screening of SLC26A4, FOXI1, KCNJ10, and GJB2 in bilateral deafness patients with
inner ear malformation.

Chen K(1), Wang X, Sun L, Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen 
University and Institute of Otorhinolaryngology, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: Bilateral nonsyndromic sensorineural hearing loss associated with
inner ear malformation is closely related to genetics. SLC26A4 is considered to
be the major involved gene. Recently, FOXI1 and KCNJ10 mutations have been linked
to enlarged vestibular aqueducts and GJB2 mutations linked to temporal bone
malformation. The authors aimed to investigate the mutation spectrums of these
genes in Chinese patients with bilateral hearing impairment associated with inner
ear malformation.
STUDY DESIGN: Cross-sectional study.
SETTING: Affiliated hospital of the university.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: The authors analyzed the GJB2, SLC26A4, FOXI1, and KCNJ10
gene sequences in 43 patients presenting with bilateral hearing impairment
associated with inner ear malformation using pyrosequencing and direct DNA
sequencing.
RESULTS: In total, 74.4% (32/43) of patients carried at least 1 of 14 pathogenic 
SLC26A4 mutations, including 6 novel mutations and 4 polymorphisms. Patients with
enlarged vestibular aqueducts had a higher rate of SLC26A4 mutation than Mondini 
dysplasia patients. No FOXI1 or KCNJ10 potential pathogenic mutation was present,
and GJB2 biallelic pathogenic mutations were uncommon (2.3%; 1/43). No
significant correlation was observed between the genotype and phenotype of
SLC26A4 mutations.
CONCLUSION: SLC26A4 accounts for 74.4% of inner ear malformations in our cohort, 
whereas FOXI1, KCNJ10, and GJB2 mutations are not common. Other possible genes or
external factors may contribute to this multibranch abnormality.

PMID: 22412181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Dev Biol. 2012 Apr 1;364(1):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.01.022. Epub 2012 Feb
1.

Conditions that influence the response to Fgf during otic placode induction.

Padanad MS(1), Bhat N, Guo B, Riley BB.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3258, USA.

Despite the vital importance of Fgf for otic induction, previous attempts to
study otic induction through Fgf misexpression have yielded widely varying and
contradictory results. There are also discrepancies regarding the ability of Fgf 
to induce otic tissue in ectopic locations, raising questions about the
sufficiency of Fgf and the degree to which other local factors enhance or
restrict otic potential. Using heat shock-inducible transgenes to misexpress Fgf3
or Fgf8 in zebrafish, we found that the stage, distribution and level of
misexpression strongly influence the response to Fgf. Fgf misexpression during
gastrulation can inhibit or promote otic development, depending on context,
whereas misexpression after gastrulation leads to expansion of otic markers
throughout preplacodal ectoderm surrounding the head. Elevated Fgf also expands
expression of the putative competence factor Foxi1, which is required for Fgf to 
expand other otic markers. Misexpression of downstream factors Pax2a or Pax8 also
expands otic markers but cannot bypass the requirement for Fgf or Foxi1.
Co-misexpression of Pax2/8 with Fgf8 potentiates formation of ectopic otic
vesicles expressing a full range of otic markers. These findings document the
variables critically affecting the response to Fgf and clarify the roles of foxi1
and pax2/8 in the otic response.

© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4709014
PMID: 22327005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Laryngol Otol. 2012 Apr;126(4):349-55. doi: 10.1017/S002221511100346X. Epub
2012 Jan 31.

Genetic diagnosis and cochlear implantation for patients with nonsyndromic
hearing loss and enlarged vestibular aqueduct.

Lai R(1), Hu P, Zhu F, Zhu G, Vivero R, Peng A, Wu W, Xiao Z, Liu X, Xie D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Otology, Department of Otolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, 
Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China.

OBJECTIVE: To review the genotype and cochlear implantation outcome of patients
with nonsyndromic hearing loss and enlarged vestibular aqueduct.
METHODS: Twenty-one Chinese children with nonsyndromic hearing loss and enlarged 
vestibular aqueduct underwent genetic examination. A DNA microarray was used to
screen for the IVS7-2A>G and H723R mutations. Any DNA samples with one or none of
the two mutant alleles were sequenced to detect other mutations in the SLC26A4
and FOXI1 genes.
RESULTS: Twelve SLC26A4 mutations were detected, including three novel mutations.
The most common mutations detected were IVS7-2A>G and H723R. Twelve patients
received cochlear implants, and subsequently demonstrated excellent speech
perception.
CONCLUSION: Three novel mutations were detected in Chinese patients with
nonsyndromic hearing loss and enlarged vestibular aqueduct. The SLC26A4 mutation 
spectrum in the Chinese population is similar to that in other East Asian
populations. Cochlear implantation is a safe and effective treatment in patients 
with enlarged vestibular aqueduct.

PMID: 22289209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Apr 4;351(2):342-50. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.01.013.
Epub 2012 Jan 25.

Molecular and functional studies of 4 candidate loci in Pendred syndrome and
nonsyndromic hearing loss.

Cirello V(1), Bazzini C, Vezzoli V, Muzza M, Rodighiero S, Castorina P, Maffini
A, Bottà G, Persani L, Beck-Peccoz P, Meyer G, Fugazzola L.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medical Sciences, Università degli Studi, Milan, Italy.

Patients with PS or non-syndromic deafness were submitted to genetic/functional
analyzes of SLC26A4, of its binding domain for FOXI1 (FOXI1-DBD), of the
transcription activator FOXI1, and of the potassium channel KCNJ10. SLC26A4 was
the most frequently mutated gene. An altered intracellular localization with
immunocytochemistry, and a hampered maturation process were demonstrated for two 
novel SLC26A4 variants. Biochemical and immunocytochemical analyzes led to the
development of a more sensitive fluorometric functional assay able to reveal the 
partial loss-of-function of SLC26A4 mutations. A novel missense variant was found
in FOXI1 gene, though functional analysis showed no significant impairment in the
transcriptional activation of SLC26A4. Finally, 3 patients were found to harbor a
variant in KCNJ10, which was classified as polymorphism. The novelty of the study
resides in the analysis of all the 4 candidate genetic loci linked to
PS/non-syndromic deafness, and in the precise definition of the thyroid
phenotype. PS was invariably associated with biallelic mutations of SLC26A4,
whereas the genetic origin of non-syndromic deafness remained largely
undetermined, since monoallelic SLC26A4 variants accounted for one fourth of the 
cases and FOXI1 and KCNJ10 were not involved in this series.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22285650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2011;28(3):451-66. doi: 10.1159/000335107. Epub 2011 Nov
18.

Molecular and functional characterization of human pendrin and its allelic
variants.

Dossena S(1), Nofziger C, Tamma G, Bernardinelli E, Vanoni S, Nowak C, Grabmayer 
E, Kössler S, Stephan S, Patsch W, Paulmichl M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Paracelsus Medical University,
Salzburg, Austria. silvia.dossena@pmu.ac.at

Pendrin (SLC26A4, PDS) is an electroneutral anion exchanger transporting I(-),
Cl(-), HCO(3)(-), OH(-), SCN(-) and formate. In the thyroid, pendrin is expressed
at the apical membrane of the follicular epithelium and may be involved in
mediating apical iodide efflux into the follicle; in the inner ear, it plays a
crucial role in the conditioning of the pH and ion composition of the endolymph; 
in the kidney, it may exert a role in pH homeostasis and regulation of blood
pressure. Mutations of the pendrin gene can lead to syndromic and non-syndromic
hearing loss with EVA (enlarged vestibular aqueduct). Functional tests of mutated
pendrin allelic variants found in patients with Pendred syndrome or non-syndromic
EVA (ns-EVA) revealed that the pathological phenotype is due to the reduction or 
loss of function of the ion transport activity. The diagnosis of Pendred syndrome
and ns-EVA can be difficult because of the presence of phenocopies of Pendred
syndrome and benign polymorphisms occurring in the general population. As a
consequence, defining whether or not an allelic variant is pathogenic is crucial.
Recently, we found that the two parameters used so far to assess the pathogenic
potential of a mutation, i.e. low incidence in the control population, and
substitution of evolutionary conserved amino acids, are not always reliable for
predicting the functionality of pendrin allelic variants; actually, we identified
mutations occurring with the same frequency in the cohort of hearing impaired
patients and in the control group of normal hearing individuals. Moreover, we
identified functional polymorphisms affecting highly conserved amino acids. As a 
general rule however, we observed a complete loss of function for all truncations
and amino acid substitutions involving a proline. In this view, clinical and
radiological studies should be combined with genetic and molecular studies for a 
definitive diagnosis. In performing genetic studies, the possibility that the
mutation could affect regions other than the pendrin coding region, such as its
promoter region and/or the coding regions of functionally related genes (FOXI1,
KCNJ10), should be taken into account. The presence of benign polymorphisms in
the population suggests that genetic studies should be corroborated by functional
studies; in this context, the existence of hypo-functional variants and possible 
differences between the I(-)/Cl(-) and Cl(-)/HCO(3)(-) exchange activities should
be carefully evaluated.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22116358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;786:275-90. doi: 10.1007/978-1-61779-292-2_17.

Using a yeast inverse one-hybrid system to identify functional binding sites of
transcription factors.

Yan J(1), Burgess SM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Marine Biosystem and Neurosciences, Department of Hydrobiology, 
Shanghai Ocean University, College of Fisheries and Life Sciences, Lingang New
City, Shanghai, China.

Binding of transcription factors to promoters is a necessary step to initiate
transcription. From an evolutionary standpoint, the regulatory proteins and their
binding sites are considered to have molecularly coevolved. We developed an
efficient yeast strategy, an "inverse one-hybrid system", to identify binding
targets of transcription factors globally in a genome of interest. The technique 
consists of a yeast strain expressing a -transcription factor of interest mated
to yeast containing a library of random genomic fragments cloned upstream of a
reporter gene (URA3). Positive growth on media without uracil denotes a fragment 
being bound by the transcription factor, e.g., zebrafish FoxI1. The bound
fragments in hundreds of positive clones are sequenced and retested for their
binding activities using a colony PCR and sequencing strategy. The resulting
tools allow for rapid and genomic-wide identification of transcriptional binding 
targets.

PMID: 21938633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2011 May;15(5):365-8. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2010.0177.
Epub 2011 Mar 2.

Identification of SLC26A4 mutations in patients with hearing loss and enlarged
vestibular aqueduct using high-resolution melting curve analysis.

Mercer S(1), Mutton P, Dahl HH.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Flemington
Road, Parkville, Melbourne, Australia.

Mutations in the SLC26A4 gene can cause both Pendred syndrome and nonsyndromic
enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct, two conditions associated with
sensorineural hearing loss. We analyzed the SLC26A4 gene in 44 hearing-impaired
patients by nested polymerase chain reaction followed by high-resolution melt
analysis. We also used this approach to scan for mutations in KCNJ10 and FOXI1,
two genes reported to play a role in the pathogenesis of Pendred syndrome and
enlarged vestibular aqueduct. Seven patients with known SLC26A4 mutations were
included as controls. All previously identified mutations were detected by
high-resolution melt analysis. Of the patients with no known mutations, we
detected two SLC26A4 mutations in 5 probands (12%), one mutation in 9 probands
(21%), and no mutations in 29 probands (67%). We identified two novel SLC26A4
mutations, p.T485M and p.F718S, and found no evidence of a digenic contribution
of KCNJ10 and FOXI1 mutations.

PMID: 21366435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Development. 2011 Feb;138(4):705-14. doi: 10.1242/dev.055699.

Specification of ion transport cells in the Xenopus larval skin.

Quigley IK(1), Stubbs JL, Kintner C.

Author information: 
(1)The Salk Institute for Biological Studies, 10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Specialized epithelial cells in the amphibian skin play important roles in ion
transport, but how they arise developmentally is largely unknown. Here we show
that proton-secreting cells (PSCs) differentiate in the X. laevis larval skin
soon after gastrulation, based on the expression of a `kidney-specific' form of
the H(+)v-ATPase that localizes to the plasma membrane, orthologs of the
Cl(-)/HCO(-)(3) antiporters ae1 and pendrin, and two isoforms of carbonic
anhydrase. Like PSCs in other species, we show that the expression of these genes
is likely to be driven by an ortholog of foxi1, which is also sufficient to
promote the formation of PSC precursors. Strikingly, the PSCs form in the skin as
two distinct subtypes that resemble the alpha- and beta-intercalated cells of the
kidney. The alpha-subtype expresses ae1 and localizes H(+)v-ATPases to the apical
plasma membrane, whereas the beta-subtype expresses pendrin and localizes the
H(+)v-ATPase cytosolically or basolaterally. These two subtypes are specified
during early PSC differentiation by a binary switch that can be regulated by
Notch signaling and by the expression of ubp1, a transcription factor of the
grainyhead family. These results have implications for how PSCs are specified in 
vertebrates and become functionally heterogeneous.

PMCID: PMC3026415
PMID: 21266406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Dev Biol. 2011 Mar 1;351(1):90-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.036. Epub 2011 Jan
4.

Pax2/8 proteins coordinate sequential induction of otic and epibranchial placodes
through differential regulation of foxi1, sox3 and fgf24.

Padanad MS(1), Riley BB.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3258, USA.

Erratum in
    Dev Biol. 2012 Mar 1;363(1):331.

Vertebrate cranial placodes contribute vitally to development of sensory
structures of the head. Amongst posterior placodes, the otic placode forms the
inner ear whereas nearby epibranchial placodes produce sensory ganglia within
branchial clefts. Though diverse in fate, these placodes show striking
similarities in their early regulation. In zebrafish, both are initiated by
localized Fgf signaling plus the ubiquitous competence factor Foxi1, and both
express pax8 and sox3 in response. It has been suggested that Fgf initially
induces a common otic/epibranchial field, which later subdivides in response to
other signals. However, we find that otic and epibranchial placodes form at
different times and by distinct mechanisms. Initially, Fgf from surrounding
tissues induces otic expression of pax8 and sox3, which cooperate synergistically
to establish otic fate. Subsequently, pax8 works with related genes pax2a/pax2b
to downregulate otic expression of foxi1, a necessary step for further otic
development. Additionally, pax2/8 activate otic expression of fgf24, which
induces epibranchial expression of sox3. Knockdown of fgf24 or sox3 causes severe
epibranchial deficiencies but has little effect on otic development. These
findings clarify the roles of pax8 and sox3 and support a model whereby the otic 
placode forms first and induces epibranchial placodes through an Fgf-relay.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3039053
PMID: 21215261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Med Genet. 2011 Mar;48(3):152-9. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2010.081851. Epub 2010 Oct
23.

Variants in CFTR untranslated regions are associated with congenital bilateral
absence of the vas deferens.

Lopez E(1), Viart V, Guittard C, Templin C, René C, Méchin D, Des Georges M,
Claustres M, Romey-Chatelain MC, Taulan M.

Author information: 
(1)Université Montpellier1, UFR de Médecine, Montpellier, France.

BACKGROUND: Congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD), a frequent 
cause of obstructive azoospermia, is generated by mutations in the cystic
fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene. Despite extensive
testing for point mutations and large rearrangements, a small proportion of
alleles still remains unidentified in CBAVD patients.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Mutation scanning analysis of microsatellite variability in 
the CFTR gene identified two undescribed 4 bp sequence repeats (TAAA)(6) and
(TAAA)(8) in intron 9 in two CBAVD patients heterozygote for either the -33G<U+2192>A
promoter transition or the classical [TG12T5] CBAVD mutation. This study explores
the putative impact of this promoter variant by using a combination of web based 
prediction tools, reporter gene assays, and DNA/proteins interaction analyses.
Results of transiently transfected vas deferens cells with either the -33G
wild-type or the -33A variant CFTR directed luciferase reporter gene confirmed
that the -33A variant, which alters the FOXI1 (Forkhead box I1) binding,
significantly decreases the CFTR promoter activity. It was also investigated
whether regulatory elements located within the intronic tetrarepeat might
influence the CFTR expression. There was evidence that both the (TAAA)(6) and the
(TAAA)(8) alleles modulate the CFTR transcription and the binding affinity for
FOX transcription factors, involved in the chromatin architecture.
CONCLUSIONS: As the vas deferens seems to be one of the tissues most susceptible 
to a reduction in the normal CFTR transcripts levels, and as two mild mutations
are sufficient to induce CBAVD phenotype, these findings raise the possibility
that these uncommon variants may be a novel cause of CBAVD.

PMID: 20972246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS Genet. 2010 Sep 23;6(9):e1001133. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001133.

Identification of early requirements for preplacodal ectoderm and sensory organ
development.

Kwon HJ(1), Bhat N, Sweet EM, Cornell RA, Riley BB.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United
States of America.

Preplacodal ectoderm arises near the end of gastrulation as a narrow band of
cells surrounding the anterior neural plate. This domain later resolves into
discrete cranial placodes that, together with neural crest, produce paired
sensory structures of the head. Unlike the better-characterized neural crest,
little is known about early regulation of preplacodal development. Classical
models of ectodermal patterning posit that preplacodal identity is specified by
readout of a discrete level of Bmp signaling along a DV gradient. More recent
studies indicate that Bmp-antagonists are critical for promoting preplacodal
development. However, it is unclear whether Bmp-antagonists establish the proper 
level of Bmp signaling within a morphogen gradient or, alternatively, block Bmp
altogether. To begin addressing these issues, we treated zebrafish embryos with a
pharmacological inhibitor of Bmp, sometimes combined with heat shock-induction of
Chordin and dominant-negative Bmp receptor, to fully block Bmp signaling at
various developmental stages. We find that preplacodal development occurs in two 
phases with opposing Bmp requirements. Initially, Bmp is required before
gastrulation to co-induce four transcription factors, Tfap2a, Tfap2c, Foxi1, and 
Gata3, which establish preplacodal competence throughout the nonneural ectoderm. 
Subsequently, Bmp must be fully blocked in late gastrulation by dorsally
expressed Bmp-antagonists, together with dorsally expressed Fgf and Pdgf, to
specify preplacodal identity within competent cells abutting the neural plate.
Localized ventral misexpression of Fgf8 and Chordin can activate ectopic
preplacodal development anywhere within the zone of competence, whereas dorsal
misexpression of one or more competence factors can activate ectopic preplacodal 
development in the neural plate. Conversely, morpholino-knockdown of competence
factors specifically ablates preplacodal development. Our work supports a
relatively simple two-step model that traces regulation of preplacodal
development to late blastula stage, resolves two distinct phases of Bmp
dependence, and identifies the main factors required for preplacodal competence
and specification.

PMCID: PMC2944784
PMID: 20885782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. BMC Evol Biol. 2010 Sep 1;10:267. doi: 10.1186/1471-2148-10-267.

African signatures of recent positive selection in human FOXI1.

Moreno-Estrada A(1), Aparicio-Prat E, Sikora M, Engelken J, Ramírez-Soriano A,
Calafell F, Bosch E.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
Institut de Biologia Evolutiva UPF-CSIC, Parc de Recerca Biomèdica de Barcelona, 
08003 Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The human FOXI1 gene codes for a transcription factor involved in the
physiology of the inner ear, testis, and kidney. Using three interspecies
comparisons, it has been suggested that this may be a gene under human-specific
selection. We sought to confirm this finding by using an extended set of
orthologous sequences. Additionally, we explored for signals of natural selection
within humans by sequencing the gene in 20 Europeans, 20 East Asians and 20
Yorubas and by analysing SNP variation in a 2 Mb region centered on FOXI1 in 39
worldwide human populations from the HGDP-CEPH diversity panel.
RESULTS: The genome sequences recently available from other primate and
non-primate species showed that FOXI1 divergence patterns are compatible with
neutral evolution. Sequence-based neutrality tests were not significant in
Europeans, East Asians or Yorubas. However, the Long Range Haplotype (LRH) test, 
as well as the iHS and XP-Rsb statistics revealed significantly extended tracks
of homozygosity around FOXI1 in Africa, suggesting a recent episode of positive
selection acting on this gene. A functionally relevant SNP, as well as several
SNPs either on the putatively selected core haplotypes or with significant iHS or
XP-Rsb values, displayed allele frequencies strongly correlated with the absolute
geographical latitude of the populations sampled.
CONCLUSIONS: We present evidence for recent positive selection in the FOXI1 gene 
region in Africa. Climate might be related to this recent adaptive event in
humans. Of the multiple functions of FOXI1, its role in kidney-mediated
water-electrolyte homeostasis is the most obvious candidate for explaining a
climate-related adaptation.

PMCID: PMC2939579
PMID: 20809947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Int J Pediatr Otorhinolaryngol. 2010 Sep;74(9):1049-53. doi:
10.1016/j.ijporl.2010.06.002.

Screening of SLC26A4, FOXI1 and KCNJ10 genes in unilateral hearing impairment
with ipsilateral enlarged vestibular aqueduct.

Jonard L(1), Niasme-Grare M, Bonnet C, Feldmann D, Rouillon I, Loundon N, Calais 
C, Catros H, David A, Dollfus H, Drouin-Garraud V, Duriez F, Eliot MM, Fellmann
F, Francannet C, Gilbert-Dussardier B, Gohler C, Goizet C, Journel H, Mom T,
Thuillier-Obstoy MF, Couderc R, Garabédian EN, Denoyelle F, Marlin S.

Author information: 
(1)AP-HP, Centre de Référence des Surdités Généttiques, Hôpital Armand-Trousseau,
Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the implication of SLC26A4, FOXI and KCNJ10 genes in
unilateral hearing impairment associated with ipsilateral inner ear malformation 
(Enlargement of the vestibular aqueduct and/or Mondini dysplasia).
METHODS: We have gathered 25 patients presenting unilateral hearing impairment
and ipsilateral enlarged vestibular aqueduct. For each of the patients, we have
analyzed SLC26A4, FOXI1 and KCNJ10 genes sequences.
RESULTS: The analysis of SLC26A4 revealed only eight heterozygous SLC26A4
sequence variants, three of them being novel (p.Met147Ile, p.Asn538Asn and
p.Leu627Arg). None of the patients carried a second mutation on the other allele.
Moreover, the SLC26A4 locus was excluded by segregation analysis in two families.
No mutations were present in FOXI1 and KCNJ10 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these data suggest that SLC26A4, FOXI1 and KCNJ10 are not 
major determinants in unilateral deafness and enlarged vestibular aqueduct
compared with their implication in Pendred syndrome and non-syndromic bilateral
enlarged vestibular aqueduct.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20621367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2010 Aug;299(2):L252-62. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00062.2010. Epub 2010 Apr 23.

Transcriptional regulation of SP-B gene expression by nitric oxide in H441 lung
epithelial cells.

Boggaram V(1), Chandru H, Gottipati KR, Thakur V, Das A, Berhane K.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Research, Univ. of Texas Health Science Center at Tyler,
TX 75708-3154, USA. vijay.boggaram@uthct.edu

Surfactant protein B (SP-B) is essential for the surface tension-lowering
function of pulmonary surfactant. Surfactant dysfunction and reduced SP-B levels 
are associated with elevated nitric oxide (NO) in inflammatory lung diseases,
such as acute respiratory distress syndrome. We previously found that NO donors
decreased SP-B expression in H441 and MLE-12 lung epithelial cells by reducing
SP-B promoter activity. In this study, we determined the roles of DNA elements
and interacting transcription factors necessary for NO inhibition of SP-B
promoter activity in H441 cells. We found that the NO donor
diethylenetriamine-nitric oxide adduct (DETA-NO) decreased SP-B promoter thyroid 
transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF-3), and Sp1
binding activities but increased activator protein 1 (AP-1) binding activity.
DETA-NO decreased TTF-1, but not Sp1, levels, suggesting that reduced TTF-1
expression contributes to reduced TTF-1 binding activity. Lack of effect on Sp1
levels suggested that DETA-NO inhibits Sp1 binding activity per se.
Overexpression of Sp1, but not TTF-1, blocked DETA-NO inhibition of SP-B promoter
activity. DETA-NO inhibited SP-B promoter induction by exogenous TTF-1 without
altering TTF-1 levels. DETA-NO decreased TTF-1 mRNA levels and gene transcription
rate, indicating that DETA-NO inhibits TTF-1 expression at the transcriptional
level. We conclude that NO inhibits SP-B promoter by decreasing TTF-1, Sp1, and
HNF-3 binding activities and increasing AP-1 binding activity. NO inhibits TTF-1 
levels and activity to decrease SP-B expression. NO inhibition of SP-B expression
could be a mechanism by which surfactant dysfunction occurs in inflammatory lung 
diseases.

PMCID: PMC2928609
PMID: 20418387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. ASN Neuro. 2010 Mar 31;2(2):e00032. doi: 10.1042/AN20100003.

A single nucleotide polymorphism in the Bax gene promoter affects transcription
and influences retinal ganglion cell death.

Semaan SJ(1), Li Y, Nickells RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Opthalmology and Visual Sciences, University of Wisconsin,
School of Medicine and Public Health, 1300 University Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, 
U.S.A.

Pro-apoptotic Bax is essential for RGC (retinal ganglion cell) death. Gene dosage
experiments in mice, yielding a single wild-type Bax allele, indicated that
genetic background was able to influence the cell death phenotype. DBA/2J(Bax+/-)
mice exhibited complete resistance to nerve damage after 2 weeks (similar to
Bax(-/-) mice), but 129B6(Bax+/-) mice exhibited significant cell loss (similar
to wild-type mice). The different cell death phenotype was associated with the
level of Bax expression, where 129B6 neurons had twice the level of endogenous
Bax mRNA and protein as DBA/2J neurons. Sequence analysis of the Bax promoters
between these strains revealed a single nucleotide polymorphism (T(129B6) to
C(DBA/2J)) at position -515. A 1.5- to 2.5-fold increase in transcriptional
activity was observed from the 129B6 promoter in transient transfection assays in
a variety of cell types, including RGC5 cells derived from rat RGCs. Since this
polymorphism occurred in a p53 half-site, we investigated the requirement of p53 
for the differential transcriptional activity. Differential transcriptional
activity from either 129B6 or DBA/2J Bax promoters were unaffected in p53(-/-)
cells, and addition of exogenous p53 had no further effect on this difference,
thus a role for p53 was excluded. Competitive electrophoretic mobility-shift
assays identified two DNA-protein complexes that interacted with the polymorphic 
region. Those forming Complex 1 bound with higher affinity to the 129B6
polymorphic site, suggesting that these proteins probably comprised a
transcriptional activator complex. These studies implicated quantitative
expression of the Bax gene as playing a possible role in neuronal susceptibility 
to damaging stimuli.

PMCID: PMC2847828
PMID: 20360947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Pendred Syndrome/DFNB4.

Alasti F, Van Camp G, Smith RJH.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
1998 Sep 28.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Pendred syndrome (PDS) and DFNB4 comprise a phenotypic 
spectrum of hearing loss with or without other findings. Pendred syndrome is
characterized by: severe-to-profound bilateral sensorineural hearing impairment
that is usually congenital (or prelingual) and non-progressive; vestibular
dysfunction; temporal bone abnormalities; and development of euthyroid goiter in 
late childhood to early adulthood. Variability of findings is considerable, even 
within the same family. DFNB4 is characterized by nonsyndromic sensorineural
hearing impairment, vestibular dysfunction, and enlarged vestibular aqueduct
(EVA). Thyroid defects are not seen in DFNB4.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: PDS and DFNB4 are diagnosed clinically in individuals with (1)
hearing impairment that is usually congenital and often severe to profound
(although mild-to-moderate progressive hearing impairment also occurs) and (2)
bilateral dilation of the vestibular aqueduct (DVA; also called enlarged
vestibular aqueduct, or EVA) with or without cochlear hypoplasia. The presence of
both DVA and cochlear hypoplasia is known as Mondini malformation or dysplasia.
In addition, individuals with PDS have either an abnormal perchlorate discharge
test or goiter. Pathogenic variants in three known genes account for
approximately half of PDS/DFNB4 cases: SLC26A4 (~50% of affected individuals),
FOXI1 (<1%), and KCNJ10 (<1%), suggesting further genetic heterogeneity. Sequence
analysis of SLC26A4 identifies pathogenic variants in approximately 50% of
affected individuals from either simplex or multiplex families. These persons are
usually compound heterozygotes for disease-causing variants in SLC26A4, although 
not infrequently only a single pathogenic variant is detected.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Hearing habituation, hearing aids, and
educational programs designed for the hearing impaired; consideration of cochlear
implantation in individuals with severe-to-profound deafness; standard treatment 
of abnormal thyroid function. Surveillance: Semiannual or annual assessment of
hearing and endocrine function. Baseline ultrasound of the thyroid with periodic 
ultrasound surveillance to monitor volumetric changes. Repeat audiometry
initially every three to six months if hearing loss is progressive.
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Weightlifting and contact sports.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Pendred syndrome/DFNB4 is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. At conception, each sib of an affected individual has a 25% chance of
being affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance
of being unaffected and not a carrier. Carrier testing for at-risk family members
and prenatal testing for at-risk pregnancies are possible when the
family-specific pathogenic variants are known.

PMID: 20301640  [PubMed]


42. Audiol Neurootol. 2010;15(1):57-66. doi: 10.1159/000231567. Epub 2009 Aug 1.

Phenotypic analyses and mutation screening of the SLC26A4 and FOXI1 genes in 101 
Taiwanese families with bilateral nonsyndromic enlarged vestibular aqueduct
(DFNB4) or Pendred syndrome.

Wu CC(1), Lu YC, Chen PJ, Yeh PL, Su YN, Hwu WL, Hsu CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei,
Taiwan.

Recessive mutations in the SLC26A4 gene are responsible for nonsyndromic enlarged
vestibular aqueduct (EVA) and Pendred syndrome. However, in some affected
families, only 1 or 0 mutated allele can be identified, as well as no clear
correlation between SLC26A4 genotypes and clinical phenotypes, hampering the
accuracy of genetic counseling. To elucidate the genetic composition of
nonsyndromic EVA and Pendred syndrome, we screened related genomic fragments,
including the SLC26A4 coding regions, the SLC26A4 promoter and the FOXI1
transcription factor gene, in 101 Taiwanese families, and analyzed their
phenotypic and genotypic results. Mutation screening in the SLC26A4 coding
regions by direct sequencing and quantitative polymerase chain reaction detected 
2 mutations in 63 (62%) families, 1 mutation in 24 (24%) families and no mutation
in 14 (14%) families. The radiological findings, the presence of goiters and the 
audiological results were not different among probands (i.e. index cases of the
families) with different SLC26A4 genotypes. Specifically, probands heterozygous
for SLC26A4 mutations demonstrated clinical features indistinguishable from those
of probands with 2 mutated alleles, implicating that there might be undetected
mutations. However, except for a variant (c.-2554G>A of SLC26A4) with possible
pathological consequences, no definite mutation was detected after extensive
screening in the SLC26A4 promoter and FOXI1. In other words, in most Taiwanese
families nonsyndromic EVA or Pendred syndrome might not result from aberrance in 
the transcriptional control of SLC26A4 by FOXI1. Meanwhile, exploration of
undetected mutations in the SLC26A4 noncoding regions revealed 9 divergent
haplotypes among the 21 no-mutation-detected SLC26A4 alleles of the c.919-2A>G
heterozygotes, indicating that there might be no common and predominant mutations
in the SLC26A4 introns.

PMID: 19648736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 May 15;18(10):1769-78. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp089. Epub 2009 Mar
6.

Requirement for Shh and Fox family genes at different stages in sweat gland
development.

Kunisada M(1), Cui CY, Piao Y, Ko MS, Schlessinger D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, NIH Biomedical Research Center, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Sweat glands play a fundamental role in thermal regulation in man, but the
molecular mechanism of their development remains unknown. To initiate analyses,
we compared the model of Eda mutant Tabby mice, in which sweat glands were not
formed, with wild-type (WT) mice. We inferred developmental stages and critical
genes based on observations at seven time points spanning embryonic, postnatal
and adult life. In WT footpads, sweat gland germs were detected at E17.5. The
coiling of secretory portions started at postnatal day 1 (P1), and sweat gland
formation was essentially completed by P5. Consistent with a controlled
morphological progression, expression profiling revealed stage-specific gene
expression changes. Similar to the development of hair follicles-the other major 
skin appendage controlled by EDA-sweat gland induction and initial progression
were accompanied by Eda-dependent up-regulation of the Shh pathway. During the
further development of sweat gland secretory portions, Foxa1 and Foxi1, not at
all expressed in hair follicles, were progressively up-regulated in WT but not in
Tabby footpads. Upon completion of WT development, Shh declined to Tabby levels, 
but Fox family genes remained at elevated levels in mature sweat glands. The
results provide a framework for the further analysis of phased down-stream
regulation of gene action, possibly by a signaling cascade, in response to Eda.

PMCID: PMC2671986
PMID: 19270025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Biol. 2009 May 1;329(1):116-29. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.02.026. Epub 2009
Mar 4.

Mechanism of development of ionocytes rich in vacuolar-type H(+)-ATPase in the
skin of zebrafish larvae.

Esaki M(1), Hoshijima K, Nakamura N, Munakata K, Tanaka M, Ookata K, Asakawa K,
Kawakami K, Wang W, Weinberg ES, Hirose S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Midori-ku,
Yokohama, Japan.

Mitochondrion-rich cells (MRCs), or ionocytes, play a central role in aquatic
species, maintaining body fluid ionic homeostasis by actively taking up or
excreting ions. Since their first description in 1932 in eel gills, extensive
morphological and physiological analyses have yielded important insights into
ionocyte structure and function, but understanding the developmental pathway
specifying these cells remains an ongoing challenge. We previously succeeded in
identifying a key transcription factor, Foxi3a, in zebrafish larvae by database
mining. In the present study, we analyzed a zebrafish mutant, quadro (quo),
deficient in foxi1 gene expression and found that foxi1 is essential for
development of an MRC subpopulation rich in vacuolar-type H(+)-ATPase (vH-MRC).
foxi1 acts upstream of Delta-Notch signaling that determines sporadic
distribution of vH-MRC and regulates foxi3a expression. Through gain- and
loss-of-function assays and cell transplantation experiments, we further
clarified that (1) the expression level of foxi3a is maintained by a positive
feedback loop between foxi3a and its downstream gene gcm2 and (2) Foxi3a
functions cell-autonomously in the specification of vH-MRC. These observations
provide a better understanding of the differentiation and distribution of the
vH-MRC subtype.

PMCID: PMC2751791
PMID: 19268451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4471. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004471. Epub 2009 Feb 13.

The forkhead transcription factor Foxi1 is a master regulator of vacuolar
H-ATPase proton pump subunits in the inner ear, kidney and epididymis.

Vidarsson H(1), Westergren R, Heglind M, Blomqvist SR, Breton S, Enerbäck S.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy,
Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden.

The vacuolar H(+)-ATPase dependent transport of protons across cytoplasmic
membranes in FORE (forkhead related) cells of endolymphatic epithelium in the
inner ear, intercalated cells of collecting ducts in the kidney and in narrow and
clear cells of epididymis require expression of several subunits that assemble
into a functional multimeric proton pump. We demonstrate that expression of four 
such subunits A1, B1, E2 and a4 all co-localize with the forkhead transcription
factor Foxi1 in a subset of epithelial cells at these three locations. In cells, 
of such epithelia, that lack Foxi1 we fail to identify any expression of A1, B1, 
E2 and a4 demonstrating an important role for the transcription factor Foxi1 in
regulating subunit availability. Promoter reporter experiments, electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA) and site directed mutagenesis demonstrate that a
Foxi1 expression vector can trans-activate an a4-promoter reporter construct in a
dose dependent manner. Furthermore, we demonstrate using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays that Foxi1-dependent activation to a large
extent depends on cis-elements at position -561/-547 in the a4 promoter. Thus, we
provide evidence that Foxi1 is necessary for expression of at least four subunits
in three different epithelia and most likely is a major determinant for proper
assembly of a functional vacuolar H(+)-ATPase complex at these locations.

PMCID: PMC2637605
PMID: 19214237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biochem J. 2009 Jan 1;417(1):205-12. doi: 10.1042/BJ20080014.

An N-terminally truncated Smad2 protein can partially compensate for loss of
full-length Smad2.

Das D(1), Randall RA, Hill CS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Signalling, Cancer Research UK London Research
Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A3PX, UK.

TGFbeta (transforming growth factor beta) superfamily signalling is critical both
for early embryonic development and later for tissue homoeostasis in adult
organisms. The use of gene-disruption techniques in mice has been essential to
understanding the functional roles of the components of the pathways downstream
of TGFbeta superfamily ligands, in particular, the receptors and the Smads that
transduce signals from the plasma membrane to the nucleus. Smad2 functions
downstream of TGFbeta, Activin and Nodal, and a number of Smad2 mutant mice have 
been generated by different laboratories. Although in all cases these
Smad2-deficient mice were embryonic lethal, those created by deletion of the
first coding exon survived longer than those generated by replacing part of the
MH (Mad homology) 1 domain or deleting all or part of the MH2 domain. Moreover,
they displayed a less severe phenotype, as they were capable of transiently
inducing mesoderm. In the present study, we show that embryonic fibroblasts taken
from the Smad2 mutant mice created by deletion of the first coding exon express a
small amount of an N-terminally truncated Smad2 protein. We show this protein
results from internal initiation at Met(241) and encodes the entire MH2 domain
and the C-terminal part of the linker. We demonstrate that this protein is
incorporated into Smad heteromeric complexes, can interact with DNA-binding
transcription factors and thereby can mediate TGFbeta-induced transcriptional
activation from a number of TGFbeta-responsive elements. We propose that this
functional truncated Smad2 protein can partially compensate for the loss of
full-length Smad2, thereby providing an explanation for the differing phenotypes 
of Smad2 mutant mice.

PMID: 18764783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2008 Jun;294(6):F1273-8. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00562.2007. Epub 2008 Feb 20.

Transcriptional control of terminal nephron differentiation.

El-Dahr SS(1), Aboudehen K, Saifudeen Z.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Pediatric Nephrology, Department of Pediatrics, SL-37, Tulane Univ.
Health Sciences Center, 1430 Tulane Ave., New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.
seldahr@tulane.edu

Terminal differentiation of epithelial cells into more specialized cell types is 
a critical step in organogenesis. Throughout the process of terminal
differentiation, epithelial progenitors acquire or upregulate expression of renal
function genes and cease to proliferate, while expression of embryonic genes is
repressed. This exquisite coordination of gene expression is accomplished by
signaling networks and transcription factors which couple the external
environment with the new functional demands of the cell. While there has been
much progress in understanding the early steps involved in renal epithelial cell 
differentiation, a major gap remains in our knowledge of the factors that control
the steps of terminal differentiation. A number of signaling molecules and
transcription factors have been recently implicated in determining segmental
nephron identity and functional differentiation. While some of these factors (the
p53 gene family, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta) promote the terminal epithelial
differentiation fate, others (Notch, Brn-1, IRX, KLF4, and Foxi1) tend to
regulate differentiation of specific nephron segments and individual cell types. 
This review summarizes current knowledge related to these transcription factors
and discusses how diverse cellular signals are integrated to generate a
transcriptional output during the process of terminal differentiation. Since
these transcriptional processes are accompanied by profound changes in nuclear
chromatin structure involving the genes responsible for creating and maintaining 
the differentiated cell phenotype, future studies should focus on identifying the
nature of these epigenetic events and factors, how they are regulated temporally 
and spatially, and the chromatin environment they eventually reside in.

PMCID: PMC2606293
PMID: 18287399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jan;36(1):e8. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Genome wide screens in yeast to identify potential binding sites and target genes
of DNA-binding proteins.

Zeng J(1), Yan J, Wang T, Mosbrook-Davis D, Dolan KT, Christensen R, Stormo GD,
Haussler D, Lathrop RH, Brachmann RK, Burgess SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
California, Irvine, CA, USA.

Knowledge of all binding sites for transcriptional activators and repressors is
essential for computationally aided identification of transcriptional networks.
The techniques developed for defining the binding sites of transcription factors 
tend to be cumbersome and not adaptable to high throughput. We refined a
versatile yeast strategy to rapidly and efficiently identify genomic targets of
DNA-binding proteins. Yeast expressing a transcription factor is mated to yeast
containing a library of genomic fragments cloned upstream of the reporter gene
URA3. DNA fragments with target-binding sites are identified by growth of yeast
clones in media lacking uracil. The experimental approach was validated with the 
tumor suppressor protein p53 and the forkhead protein FoxI1 using genomic
libraries for zebrafish and mouse generated by shotgun cloning of short genomic
fragments. Computational analysis of the genomic fragments recapitulated the
published consensus-binding site for each protein. Identified fragments were
mapped to identify the genomic context of each binding site. Our yeast screening 
strategy, combined with bioinformatics approaches, will allow both detailed and
high-throughput characterization of transcription factors, scalable to the
analysis of all putative DNA-binding proteins.

PMCID: PMC2248728
PMID: 18086703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 15;307(2):408-20. Epub 2007 Apr 24.

Distinct roles of Fgf8, Foxi1, Dlx3b and Pax8/2 during otic vesicle induction and
maintenance in medaka.

Aghaallaei N(1), Bajoghli B, Czerny T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine, 
Veterinärplatz 1, A-1210 Vienna, Austria.

The development of the vertebrate inner ear is a complex process that has been
investigated in several model organisms. In this work, we examined genetic
interactions regulating early development of otic structures in medaka. We
demonstrate that misexpression of Fgf8, Dlx3b and Foxi1 during early gastrulation
is sufficient to produce ectopic otic vesicles. Combined misexpression strongly
increases the appearance of this phenotype. By using a heat-inducible promoter we
were furthermore able to separate the regulatory interactions among Fgf8, Foxi1, 
Dlx3b, Pax8 and Pax2 genes, which are active during different stages of early
otic development. In the preplacodal stage we suggest a central position of Foxi1
within a regulatory network of early patterning genes including Dlx3b and Pax8.
Different pathways are active after the placodal stage with Dlx3b playing a
central role. There Dlx3b regulates members of the Pax-Six-Eya-Dach network and
also strongly affects the early dorsoventral marker genes Otx1 and Gbx2.

PMID: 17555740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Development. 2007 Jul;134(13):2449-58. Epub 2007 May 23.

Changes in retinoic acid signaling alter otic patterning.

Hans S(1), Westerfield M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA) has pleiotropic functions during embryogenesis. In zebrafish, 
increasing or blocking RA signaling results in enlarged or reduced otic vesicles,
respectively. Here we elucidate the mechanisms that underlie these changes and
show that they have origins in different tissues. Excess RA leads to ectopic
foxi1 expression throughout the entire preplacodal domain. Foxi1 provides
competence to adopt an otic fate. Subsequently, pax8, the expression of which
depends upon Foxi1 and Fgf, is also expressed throughout the preplacodal domain. 
By contrast, loss of RA signaling does not affect foxi1 expression or otic
competence, but instead results in delayed onset of fgf3 expression and impaired 
otic induction. fgf8 mutants depleted of RA signaling produce few otic cells, and
these cells fail to form a vesicle, indicating that Fgf8 is the primary factor
responsible for otic induction in RA-depleted embryos. Otic induction is rescued 
by fgf8 overexpression in RA-depleted embryos, although otic vesicles never
achieve a normal size, suggesting that an additional factor is required to
maintain otic fate. fgf3;tcf2 double mutants form otic vesicles similar to
RA-signaling-depleted embryos, suggesting a signal from rhombomere 5-6 may also
be required for otic fate maintenance. We show that rhombomere 5 wnt8b expression
is absent in both RA-signaling-depleted embryos and in fgf3;tcf2 double mutants, 
and inactivation of wnt8b in fgf3 mutants by morpholino injection results in
small otic vesicles, similar to RA depletion in wild type. Thus, excess RA
expands otic competence, whereas the loss of RA impairs the expression of fgf3
and wnt8b in the hindbrain, compromising the induction and maintenance of otic
fate.

PMID: 17522161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Immunol. 2007 Jun 1;178(11):7302-9.

A novel RBP-J kappa-dependent switch from C/EBP beta to C/EBP zeta at the C/EBP
binding site on the C-reactive protein promoter.

Singh PP(1), Voleti B, Agrawal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, James H. Quillen College of Medicine, East
Tennessee State University, Johnson City, TN 37614, USA.

Regulation of basal and cytokine (IL-6 and IL-1beta)-induced expression of
C-reactive protein (CRP) in human hepatoma Hep3B cells occurs during
transcription. A critical transcriptional regulatory element on the CRP promoter 
is a C/EBP binding site overlapping a NF-kappaB p50 binding site. In response to 
IL-6, C/EBPbeta and p50 occupy the C/EBP-p50 site on the CRP promoter. The aim of
this study was to identify the transcription factors occupying the C/EBP-p50 site
in the absence of C/EBPbeta. Accordingly, we treated Hep3B nuclear extract with a
C/EBP-binding consensus oligonucleotide to generate an extract lacking active
C/EBPbeta. Such treated nuclei contain only C/EBPzeta (also known as CHOP10 and
GADD153) because the C/EBP-binding consensus oligonucleotide binds to all C/EBP
family proteins except C/EBPzeta. EMSA using this extract revealed formation of a
C/EBPzeta-containing complex at the C/EBP-p50 site on the CRP promoter. This
complex also contained RBP-Jkappa, a transcription factor known to interact with 
kappaB sites. RBP-Jkappa was required for the formation of C/EBPzeta-containing
complex. The RBP-Jkappa-dependent C/EBPzeta-containing complexes were formed at
the C/EBP-p50 site on the CRP promoter in the nuclei of primary human hepatocytes
also. In luciferase transactivation assays, overexpressed C/EBPzeta abolished
both C/EBPbeta-induced and (IL-6 + IL-1beta)-induced CRP promoter-driven
luciferase expression. These results indicate that under basal conditions,
C/EBPzeta occupies the C/EBP site, an action that requires RBP-Jkappa. Under
induced conditions, C/EBPzeta is replaced by C/EBPbeta and p50. We conclude that 
the switch between C/EBPbeta and C/EBPzeta participates in regulating CRP
transcription. This process uses a novel phenomenon, that is, the incorporation
of RBP-Jkappa into C/EBPzeta complexes solely to support the binding of C/EBPzeta
to the C/EBP site.

PMCID: PMC3831876
PMID: 17513780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Jun;80(6):1055-63. Epub 2007 Apr 23.

Transcriptional control of SLC26A4 is involved in Pendred syndrome and
nonsyndromic enlargement of vestibular aqueduct (DFNB4).

Yang T(1), Vidarsson H, Rodrigo-Blomqvist S, Rosengren SS, Enerback S, Smith RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 
52242, USA.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Sep;81(3):634.

Although recessive mutations in the anion transporter gene SLC26A4 are known to
be responsible for Pendred syndrome (PS) and nonsyndromic hearing loss associated
with enlarged vestibular aqueduct (EVA), also known as "DFNB4," a large
percentage of patients with this phenotype lack mutations in the SLC26A4 coding
region in one or both alleles. We have identified and characterized a key
transcriptional regulatory element in the SLC26A4 promoter that binds FOXI1, a
transcriptional activator of SLC26A4. In nine patients with PS or nonsyndromic
EVA, a novel c.-103T-->C mutation in this regulatory element interferes with
FOXI1 binding and completely abolishes FOXI1-mediated transcriptional activation.
We have also identified six patients with mutations in FOXI1 that compromise its 
ability to activate SLC26A4 transcription. In one family, the EVA phenotype
segregates in a double-heterozygous mode in the affected individual who carries
single mutations in both SLC26A4 and FOXI1. This finding is consistent with our
observation that EVA occurs in the Slc26a4(+/-); Foxi1(+/-) double-heterozygous
mouse mutant. These results support a novel dosage-dependent model for the
molecular pathogenesis of PS and nonsyndromic EVA that involves SLC26A4 and its
transcriptional regulatory machinery.

PMCID: PMC1867094
PMID: 17503324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Jan 19;7:5.

Fgf-dependent otic induction requires competence provided by Foxi1 and Dlx3b.

Hans S(1), Christison J, Liu D, Westerfield M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.
hans@mpi-cbg.de <hans@mpi-cbg.de>

BACKGROUND: The inner ear arises from a specialized set of cells, the otic
placode, that forms at the lateral edge of the neural plate adjacent to the
hindbrain. Previous studies indicated that fibroblast growth factors (Fgfs) are
required for otic induction; in zebrafish, loss of both Fgf3 and Fgf8 results in 
total ablation of otic tissue. Furthermore, gain-of-function studies suggested
that Fgf signaling is not only necessary but also sufficient for otic induction, 
although the amount of induced ectopic otic tissue reported after misexpression
of fgf3 or fgf8 varies among different studies. We previously suggested that
Foxi1 and Dlx3b may provide competence to form the ear because loss of both foxi1
and dlx3b results in ablation of all otic tissue even in the presence of a fully 
functional Fgf signaling pathway.
RESULTS: Using a transgenic line that allows us to misexpress fgf8 under the
control of the zebrafish temperature-inducible hsp70 promoter, we readdressed the
role of Fgf signaling and otic competence during placode induction. We find that 
misexpression of fgf8 fails to induce formation of ectopic otic vesicles outside 
of the endogenous ear field and has different consequences depending upon the
developmental stage. Overexpression of fgf8 from 1-cell to midgastrula stages
leads to formation of no or small otic vesicles, respectively. Overexpression of 
fgf8 at these stages never leads to ectopic expression of foxi1 or dlx3b,
contrary to previous studies that indicated that foxi1 is activated by Fgf
signaling. Consistent with our results we find that pharmacological inhibition of
Fgf signaling has no effect on foxi1 or dlx3b expression, but instead, Bmp
signaling activates foxi1, directly and dlx3b, indirectly. In contrast to early
activation of fgf8, fgf8 overexpression at the end of gastrulation, when otic
induction begins, leads to much larger otic vesicles. We further show that
application of a low dose of retinoic acid that does not perturb patterning of
the anterior neural plate leads to expansion of foxi1 and to a massive
Fgf-dependent otic induction.
CONCLUSION: These results provide further support for the hypothesis that Foxi1
and Dlx3b provide competence for cells to respond to Fgf and form an otic
placode.

PMCID: PMC1794237
PMID: 17239227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Dev Biol. 2007 Mar 15;303(2):675-86. Epub 2006 Dec 9.

Epibranchial and otic placodes are induced by a common Fgf signal, but their
subsequent development is independent.

Sun SK(1), Dee CT, Tripathi VB, Rengifo A, Hirst CS, Scotting PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Brain Tumour Research Centre, Institute of Genetics, Queen's
Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2UH, UK.

The epibranchial placodes are cranial, ectodermal thickenings that give rise to
sensory neurons of the peripheral nervous system. Despite their importance in the
developing animal, the signals responsible for their induction remain unknown.
Using the placodal marker, sox3, we have shown that the same Fgf signaling
required for otic vesicle development is required for the development of the
epibranchial placodes. Loss of both Fgf3 and Fgf8 is sufficient to block placode 
development. We further show that epibranchial sox3 expression is unaffected in
mutants in which no otic placode forms, where dlx3b and dlx4b are knocked down,
or deleted along with sox9a. However, the forkhead factor, Foxi1, is required for
both otic and epibranchial placode development. Thus, both the otic and
epibranchial placodes form in a common region of ectoderm under the influence of 
Fgfs, but these two structures subsequently develop independently. Although
previous studies have investigated the signals that trigger neurogenesis from the
epibranchial placodes, this represents the first demonstration of the signaling
events that underlie the formation of the placodes themselves, and therefore, the
process that determines which ectodermal cells will adopt a neural fate.

PMID: 17222818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Development. 2007 Feb;134(3):611-23.

Specification of epibranchial placodes in zebrafish.

Nechiporuk A(1), Linbo T, Poss KD, Raible DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195-7420, USA.

In all vertebrates, the neurogenic placodes are transient ectodermal thickenings 
that give rise to sensory neurons of the cranial ganglia. Epibranchial (EB)
placodes generate neurons of the distal facial, glossopharyngeal and vagal
ganglia, which convey sensation from the viscera, including pharyngeal endoderm
structures, to the CNS. Recent studies have implicated signals from pharyngeal
endoderm in the initiation of neurogenesis from EB placodes; however, the signals
underlying the formation of placodes are unknown. Here, we show that zebrafish
embryos mutant for fgf3 and fgf8 do not express early EB placode markers,
including foxi1 and pax2a. Mosaic analysis demonstrates that placodal cells must 
directly receive Fgf signals during a specific crucial period of development.
Transplantation experiments and mutant analysis reveal that cephalic mesoderm is 
the source of Fgf signals. Finally, both Fgf3 and Fgf8 are sufficient to induce
foxi1-positive placodal precursors in wild-type as well as Fgf3-plus
Fgf8-depleted embryos. We propose a model in which mesoderm-derived Fgf3 and Fgf8
signals establish both the EB placodes and the development of the pharyngeal
endoderm, the subsequent interaction of which promotes neurogenesis. The
coordinated interplay between craniofacial tissues would thus assure proper
spatial and temporal interactions in the shaping of the vertebrate head.

PMID: 17215310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Development. 2007 Jan;134(2):295-305. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

Zebrafish atoh1 genes: classic proneural activity in the inner ear and regulation
by Fgf and Notch.

Millimaki BB(1), Sweet EM, Dhason MS, Riley BB.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843-3258, USA.

Hair cells of the inner ear develop from an equivalence group marked by
expression of the proneural gene Atoh1. In mouse, Atoh1 is necessary for hair
cell differentiation, but its role in specifying the equivalence group (proneural
function) has been questioned and little is known about its upstream activators. 
We have addressed these issues in zebrafish. Two zebrafish homologs, atoh1a and
atoh1b, are together necessary for hair cell development. These genes
crossregulate each other but are differentially required during distinct
developmental periods, first in the preotic placode and later in the otic
vesicle. Interactions with the Notch pathway confirm that atoh1 genes have early 
proneural function. Fgf3 and Fgf8 are upstream activators of atoh1 genes during
both phases, and foxi1, pax8 and dlx genes regulate atoh1b in the preplacode. A
model is presented in which zebrafish atoh1 genes operate in a complex network
leading to hair cell development.

PMID: 17166920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. J Neurosci. 2006 Oct 11;26(41):10438-51.

The transcription factor six1 inhibits neuronal and promotes hair cell fate in
the developing zebrafish (Danio rerio) inner ear.

Bricaud O(1), Collazo A.

Author information: 
(1)Leslie and Susan Gonda (Goldschmied) Cell and Molecular Biology Department,
House Ear Institute, Los Angeles, California 90057, USA. obricaud@hei.org

The developmental processes leading to the differentiation of mechanosensory hair
cells and statoacoustic ganglion neurons from the early otic epithelium remain
unclear. Possible candidates include members of the Pax-Six-Eya-Dach (paired
box-sine oculis homeobox-eyes absent-dachshund) gene regulatory network. We
cloned zebrafish six1 and studied its function in inner ear development. Gain-
and loss-of-function experiments show that six1 has opposing roles in hair cell
and neuronal lineages. It promotes hair cell fate and, conversely, inhibits
neuronal fate by differentially affecting cell proliferation and cell death in
these lineages. By independently targeting hair cells with atoh1a (atonal homolog
1a) knockdown or neurons with neurog1 (neurogenin 1) knockdown, we showed that
the remaining cell population, neurons or hair cells, respectively, is still
affected by gain or loss of six1 function. six1 interacts with other members of
the Pax-Six-Eya-Dach regulatory network, in particular dacha and dachb in the
hair cell but not neuronal lineage. Unlike in mouse, six1 does not appear to be
dependent on eya1, although it seems to be important for the regulation of eya1
and pax2b expression in the ventral otic epithelium. Furthermore, six1 expression
appears to be regulated by pax2b and also by foxi1 (forkhead box I1) as expected 
for an early inducer of the otic placode. Our results are the first to
demonstrate a dual role for a member of the Pax-Six-Eya-Dach regulatory network
in inner ear development.

PMID: 17035528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gene Expr Patterns. 2007 Jan;7(3):355-62. Epub 2006 Jul 27.

Expression of marker genes during early ear development in medaka.

Hochmann S(1), Aghaallaei N, Bajoghli B, Soroldoni D, Carl M, Czerny T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine, 
Veterinarplatz 1, A-1210 Vienna, Austria.

Induction of the otic placode involves a number of regulatory interactions. Early
studies revealed that the induction of this program is initiated by instructive
signals from the mesendoderm as well as from the adjacent hindbrain. Further
investigations on the molecular level identified in zebrafish Fgf3, Fgf8, Foxi1, 
Pax8, Dlx3b and Dlx4b genes as key players during the induction phase. Thereafter
an increasing number of genes participates in the regulatory interactions finally
resulting in a highly structured sensory organ. Based on data from zebrafish we
selected medaka genes with presumptive functions during early ear development for
an expression analysis. In addition we isolated Foxi1 and Dlx3b gene fragments
from embryonic cDNA. Altogether we screened the spatio-temporal distribution of
more than 20 representative marker genes for otic development in medaka embryos, 
with special emphasis on the early phases. Whereas the spatial distribution of
these genes is largely conserved between medaka and zebrafish, our comparative
analysis revealed several differences, in particular for the timing of
expression.

PMID: 16950663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. EMBO J. 2006 Sep 6;25(17):4131-41. Epub 2006 Aug 24.

Epididymal expression of the forkhead transcription factor Foxi1 is required for 
male fertility.

Blomqvist SR(1), Vidarsson H, Söder O, Enerbäck S.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Medical Genetics, Institute of Biomedicine, Göteborg University,
Göteborg, Sweden.

An essential aspect of male reproductive capacity is the immediate availability
of fertilization-ready spermatozoa. To ensure this, most mammals rely on
post-testicular sperm maturation. In epididymis, germ cells are matured and
stored in a quiescent state that readily can be altered to produce active
spermatozoa. This depends on active proton secretion into the epididymal lumen.
We have identified Foxi1 as an important regulator of gene expression in narrow
and clear cells-the major proton secretory cells of epididymal epithelia. Foxi1
appears to be required for the expression of the B1-subunit of the vacuolar H+
-ATPase proton pump and for carbonic anhydrase II as well as the
chloride/bicarbonate transporter pendrin. Using transfection experiments, we have
identified a Foxi1 binding cis-element in the ATP6V1B1 (encoding the B1-subunit) 
promoter that is critical for reporter gene activation. When this site is mutated
to eliminate Foxi1 binding, activation is also abolished. As a consequence of
defect Foxi1-dependent epididymal sperm maturation, we demonstrate that
spermatozoa from Foxi1 null males fail to reach the female genital tract in
sufficient number to allow fertilization.

PMCID: PMC1560351
PMID: 16932748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Dev Dyn. 2006 Sep;235(9):2470-82.

Foxg1 is required for morphogenesis and histogenesis of the mammalian inner ear.

Pauley S(1), Lai E, Fritzsch B.

Author information: 
(1)Creighton University, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Omaha, Nebraska
68178, USA.

The forkhead genes are involved in patterning, morphogenesis, cell fate
determination, and proliferation. Several Fox genes (Foxi1, Foxg1) are expressed 
in the developing otocyst of both zebrafish and mammals. We show that Foxg1 is
expressed in most cell types of the inner ear of the adult mouse and that Foxg1
mutants have both morphological and histological defects in the inner ear. These 
mice have a shortened cochlea with multiple rows of hair cells and supporting
cells. Additionally, they demonstrate striking abnormalities in cochlear and
vestibular innervation, including loss of all crista neurons and numerous fibers 
that overshoot the organ of Corti. Closer examination shows that some anterior
crista fibers exist in late embryos. Tracing these fibers shows that they do not 
project to the brain but, instead, to the cochlea. Finally, these mice completely
lack a horizontal crista, although a horizontal canal forms but comes off the
anterior ampulla. Anterior and posterior cristae, ampullae, and canals are
reduced to varying degrees, particularly in combination with Fgf10
heterozygosity. Compounding Fgf10 heterozygotic effects suggest an additive
effect of Fgf10 on Foxg1, possibly mediated through bone morphogenetic protein
regulation. We show that sensory epithelia formation and canal development are
linked in the anterior and posterior canal systems. Much of the Foxg1 phenotype
can be explained by the participation of the protein binding domain in the
delta/notch/hes signaling pathway. Additional Foxg1 effects may be mediated by
the forkhead DNA binding domain.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3901532
PMID: 16691564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Jan;26(1):155-68.

The forkhead transcription factor FoxI1 remains bound to condensed mitotic
chromosomes and stably remodels chromatin structure.

Yan J(1), Xu L, Crawford G, Wang Z, Burgess SM.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, Genome Technology Branch, NIH, Bldg.
50, Rm. 5537, 50 South Dr., Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

All forkhead (Fox) proteins contain a highly conserved DNA binding domain whose
structure is remarkably similar to the winged-helix structures of histones H1 and
H5. Little is known about Fox protein binding in the context of higher-order
chromatin structure in living cells. We created a stable cell line expressing
FoxI1-green fluorescent protein (GFP) or FoxI1-V5 fusion proteins under control
of the reverse tetracycline-controlled transactivator doxycycline inducible
system and found that unlike most transcription factors, FoxI1 remains bound to
the condensed chromosomes during mitosis. To isolate DNA fragments directly bound
by the FoxI1 protein within living cells, we performed chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays (ChIPs) with antibodies to either enhanced GFP or the 
V5 epitope and subcloned the FoxI1-enriched DNA fragments. Sequence analyses
indicated that 88% (106/121) of ChIP sequences contain the consensus binding
sites for all Fox proteins. Testing ChIP sequences with a quantitative DNase I
hypersensitivity assay showed that FoxI1 created stable DNase I sensitivity
changes in condensed chromosomes. The majority of ChIP targets and random targets
increased in resistance to DNase I in FoxI1-expressing cells, but a small number 
of targets became more accessible to DNase I. Consistently, the accessibility of 
micrococcal nuclease to chromatin was generally inhibited. Micrococcal nuclease
partial digestion generated a ladder in which all oligonucleosomes were slightly 
longer than those observed with the controls. On the basis of these findings, we 
propose that FoxI1 is capable of remodeling chromatin higher-order structure and 
can stably create site-specific changes in chromatin to either stably create or
remove DNase I hypersensitive sites.

PMCID: PMC1317626
PMID: 16354687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2005 Nov;16(11):3235-46. Epub 2005 Sep 21.

Ubiquitous and kidney-specific subunits of vacuolar H+-ATPase are differentially 
expressed during nephrogenesis.

Jouret F(1), Auzanneau C, Debaix H, Wada GH, Pretto C, Marbaix E, Karet FE,
Courtoy PJ, Devuyst O.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Université catholique de Louvain, 10 Avenue
Hippocrate, Brussels, Belgium B-1200.

The vacuolar H(+)-ATPase (V-ATPase) is a ubiquitous multisubunit pump that is
responsible for acidification of intracellular organelles. In the kidney, a
particular form of V-ATPase, made of specific subunits isoforms, has been located
at the plasma membrane of intercalated cells (IC). Mutations in genes encoding
IC-specific subunits cause infant distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA),
suggesting that the segmental distribution of these subunits is acquired at birth
or during early infancy. However, the comparative ontogeny of the IC-specific
versus the ubiquitous subunits of V-ATPase and the mechanisms involved in their
segmental expression remain unknown. Real-time reverse transcription-PCR, in situ
hybridization, immunoblotting, immunostaining, and subcellular fractionation
analyses characterized the expression and distribution of V-ATPase subunits,
transcription factors, and differentiation markers during mouse nephrogenesis.
Ubiquitous A, E1, B2, G1, and C1 subunits showed an early (embryonic day 13.5
[E13.5]) and stable expression throughout nephrogenesis, followed by a slight
increase around birth. The developmental pattern of a1 was bimodal, with early
induction, gradual decrease during organogenesis, and neonatal increase. These
patterns contrasted with the later (from E15.5) and progressive expression of
IC-specific a4, B1, G3, and C2 subunits, after the induction of the forkhead
transcription factor Foxi1. From E15.5, Foxi1 mRNA was detected in IC, where it
co-distributed with B1 in late nephrogenesis. Immunostaining showed that the
distribution of ubiquitous E1 and B2 was acquired from E15.5, whereas a4 was
located in IC during late nephrogenesis. Subcellular fractionation showed that in
both fetal and mature (cortex and medulla) kidneys, E1 and a4 were located in
endosomes. These data demonstrate a differential expression and a coordinate
regulation of IC-specific versus ubiquitous V-ATPase subunits during
nephrogenesis. They provide new insights into the complex regulation of V-ATPase 
subunits, the maturation of IC along the nephron, and the pathophysiology of
hereditary dRTA.

PMID: 16177003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biochem J. 2006 Jan 1;393(Pt 1):277-83.

The forkhead transcription factor Foxi1 directly activates the AE4 promoter.

Kurth I(1), Hentschke M, Hentschke S, Borgmeyer U, Gal A, Hübner CA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Universitätsklinikum Hamburg-Eppendorf, Butenfeld
42, 22529 Hamburg, Germany.

Intercalated cells are highly specialized cells within the renal collecting duct 
epithelium and play an important role in systemic acid-base homoeostasis. Whereas
type A intercalated cells secrete protons via an apically localized H+-ATPase,
type B intercalated cells secrete HCO3-. Type B intercalated cells specifically
express the HCO3-/Cl- exchanger AE4 (anion exchanger 4), encoded by Slc4a9. Mice 
with a targeted disruption of the gene for the forkhead transcription factor
Foxi1 display renal tubular acidosis due to an intercalated cell-differentiation 
defect. Collecting duct cells in these mice are characterized by the absence of
inter-calated cell markers including AE4. To test whether Slc4a9 is a direct
target gene of Foxi1, an AE4 promoter construct was generated for a cell-based
reporter gene assay. Co-transfection with the Foxi1 cDNA resulted in an approx.
100-fold activation of the AE4 promoter construct. By truncating the AE4 promoter
at the 5'-end, we demonstrate that a fragment of approx. 462 bp upstream of the
transcription start point is sufficient to mediate activation by Foxi1. Sequence 
analysis of this region revealed at least eight potential binding sites for Foxi1
in both sense and antisense orientation. Only one element was bound by
recombinant Foxi1 protein in bandshift assays. Mutation of this site abolished
both binding in bandshift assays and transcriptional activation by
co-transfection of Foxi1 in the reporter gene assay. We thus identify the AE4
promoter as a direct target of Foxi1.

PMCID: PMC1383686
PMID: 16159312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Development. 2005 Aug;132(16):3717-30.

Endoderm-derived Fgf3 is necessary and sufficient for inducing neurogenesis in
the epibranchial placodes in zebrafish.

Nechiporuk A(1), Linbo T, Raible DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Structure, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195-7420, USA.

In vertebrates, epibranchial placodes are transient ectodermal thickenings that
contribute sensory neurons to the epibranchial ganglia. These ganglia innervate
internal organs and transmit information on heart rate, blood pressure and
visceral distension from the periphery to the central nervous system. Despite
their importance, the molecular mechanisms that govern the induction and
neurogenesis of the epibranchial placodes are only now being elucidated. In this 
study, we demonstrate that endoderm is required for neurogenesis of the zebrafish
epibranchial placodes. Mosaic analyses confirm that endoderm is the source of the
neurogenic signal. Using a morpholino knockdown approach, we find that fgf3 is
required for the majority of placode cells to undergo neurogenesis. Tissue
transplants demonstrate that fgf3 activity is specifically required in the
endodermal pouches. Furthermore, ectopic fgf3 expression is sufficient for
inducing phox2a-positive neurons in wild-type and endoderm-deficient embryos.
Surprisingly, ectodermal foxi1 expression, a marker for the epibranchial placode 
precursors, is present in both endoderm-deficient embryos and fgf3 morphants,
indicating that neither endoderm nor Fgf3 is required for initial placode
induction. Based on these findings, we propose a model for epibranchial placode
development in which Fgf3 is a major endodermal determinant required for
epibranchial placode neurogenesis.

PMID: 16077091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Development. 2005 Jan;132(2):371-82. Epub 2004 Dec 16.

Zebrafish pax8 is required for otic placode induction and plays a redundant role 
with Pax2 genes in the maintenance of the otic placode.

Mackereth MD(1), Kwak SJ, Fritz A, Riley BB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Vertebrate Pax2 and Pax8 proteins are closely related transcription factors
hypothesized to regulate early aspects of inner ear development. In zebrafish and
mouse, Pax8 expression is the earliest known marker of otic induction, and Pax2
homologs are expressed at slightly later stages of placodal development. Analysis
of compound mutants has not been reported. To facilitate analysis of zebrafish
pax8, we completed sequencing of the entire gene, including the 5' and 3' UTRs.
pax8 transcripts undergo complex alternative splicing to generate at least ten
distinct isoforms. Two different subclasses of pax8 splice isoforms encode
different translation initiation sites. Antisense morpholinos (MOs) were designed
to block translation from both start sites, and four additional MOs were designed
to target different exon-intron boundaries to block splicing. Injection of MOs,
individually and in various combinations, generated similar phenotypes. Otic
induction was impaired, and otic vesicles were small. Regional ear markers were
expressed correctly, but hair cell production was significantly reduced. This
phenotype was strongly enhanced by simultaneously disrupting either of the
co-inducers fgf3 or fgf8, or another early regulator, dlx3b, which is thought to 
act in a parallel pathway. In contrast, the phenotype caused by disrupting foxi1,
which is required for pax8 expression, was not enhanced by simultaneously
disrupting pax8. Disrupting pax8, pax2a and pax2b did not further impair otic
induction relative to loss of pax8 alone. However, the amount of otic tissue
gradually decreased in pax8-pax2a-pax2b-deficient embryos such that no otic
tissue was detectable by 24 hours post-fertilization. Loss of otic tissue did not
correlate with increased cell death, suggesting that otic cells dedifferentiate
or redifferentiate as other cell type(s). These data show that pax8 is initially 
required for normal otic induction, and subsequently pax8, pax2a and pax2b act
redundantly to maintain otic fate.

PMID: 15604103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Development. 2004 Oct;131(20):5091-102.

Pax8 and Pax2a function synergistically in otic specification, downstream of the 
Foxi1 and Dlx3b transcription factors.

Hans S(1), Liu D, Westerfield M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA.

The vertebrate inner ear arises from an ectodermal thickening, the otic placode, 
that forms adjacent to the presumptive hindbrain. Previous studies have suggested
that competent ectodermal cells respond to Fgf signals from adjacent tissues and 
express two highly related paired box transcription factors Pax2a and Pax8 in the
developing placode. We show that compromising the functions of both Pax2a and
Pax8 together blocks zebrafish ear development, leaving only a few residual otic 
cells. This suggests that Pax2a and Pax8 are the main effectors downstream of Fgf
signals. Our results further provide evidence that pax8 expression and pax2a
expression are regulated by two independent factors, Foxi1 and Dlx3b,
respectively. Combined loss of both factors eliminates all indications of otic
specification. We suggest that the Foxi1-Pax8 pathway provides an early
'jumpstart' of otic specification that is maintained by the Dlx3b-Pax2a pathway.

PMID: 15459102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dev Dyn. 2004 Nov;231(3):640-6.

Expression of mouse Foxi class genes in early craniofacial development.

Ohyama T(1), Groves AK.

Author information: 
(1)Gonda Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, House Ear Institute, 2100 West
3rd Street, Los Angeles, CA 90057, USA.

Recent models of craniofacial development suggest the existence of a common
pan-placodal domain lying next to the neural plate, from which all sensory
placodes will arise. In support of this idea, several genes are expressed in the 
surface ectoderm of the head adjacent to the neural plate, before the appearance 
of genes in specific cranial placodes. In this study, we examine the expression
patterns of the mouse Foxi class genes from embryonic day 6.5 to 10.5. Foxi2 is
expressed throughout the cranial ectoderm adjacent to the neural plate from the
4-somite stage, later becoming excluded from the otic placode. Foxi3 is expressed
in a broad region of the pan-placodal ectoderm adjacent to the neural plate from 
embryonic day (E) 6.75 to the first somite stage. Its expression becomes
restricted to the ectoderm and the endoderm of the branchial pouches at E10.5.
Foxi1 expression is first detected in the endolymphatic duct in the otic vesicle 
at E10.5. These results suggest that the mouse Foxi class genes may play
important roles, both during cranial placode specification and in later
development of individual cranial sensory structures and other organs derived
from the cranial ectoderm.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15376323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Dev Dyn. 2004 Jul;230(3):419-33.

Genetic interactions underlying otic placode induction and formation.

Solomon KS(1), Kwak SJ, Fritz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

The formation of the otic placode is a complex process requiring multiple
inductive signals. In zebrafish, fgf3 and fgf8, dlx3b and dlx4b, and foxi1 have
been identified as the earliest-acting genes in this process. fgf3 and fgf8 are
required as inductive signals, whereas dlx3b, dlx4b, and foxi1 appear to act
directly within otic primordia. We have investigated potential interactions among
these genes. Depletion of either dlx3b and dlx4b or foxi1 leads to a delay of
pax2a expression in the otic primordia and reduction of the otic vesicle.
Depletion of both foxi1 and dlx3b results in a complete ablation of otic placode 
formation. A strong synergistic interaction is also observed among foxi1, fgf3,
and fgf8, and a weaker interaction among dlx3b, fgf3, and fgf8. Misexpression of 
foxi1 can induce expression of pax8, an early marker for the otic primordia, in
embryos treated with an inhibitor of fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signaling.
Conversely, morpholino knockdown of foxi1 blocks ectopic pax8 expression and otic
vesicle formation induced by misexpression of fgf3 and/or fgf8. The observed
genetic interactions suggest a model in which foxi1 and dlx3b/dlx4b act in
independent pathways together with distinct phases of FGF signaling to promote
otic placode induction and development.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15188428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Clin Invest. 2004 Jun;113(11):1560-70.

Distal renal tubular acidosis in mice that lack the forkhead transcription factor
Foxi1.

Blomqvist SR(1), Vidarsson H, Fitzgerald S, Johansson BR, Ollerstam A, Brown R,
Persson AE, Bergström G Gö, Enerbäck S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Institute of Anatomy and
Cell Biology, Göteborg University, Sweden.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2004 Jun;113(11):1528-30.

While macro- and microscopic kidney development appear to proceed normally in
mice that lack Foxi1, electron microscopy reveals an altered ultrastructure of
cells lining the distal nephron. Northern blot analyses, cRNA in situ
hybridizations, and immunohistochemistry demonstrate a complete loss of
expression of several anion transporters, proton pumps, and anion exchange
proteins expressed by intercalated cells of the collecting ducts, many of which
have been implicated in hereditary forms of distal renal tubular acidosis (dRTA).
In Foxi1-null mutants the normal epithelium with its two major cell types -
principal and intercalated cells - has been replaced by a single cell type
positive for both principal and intercalated cell markers. To test the functional
consequences of these alterations, Foxi1(-/-) mice were compared with WT
littermates in their response to an acidic load. This revealed an inability to
acidify the urine as well as a lowered systemic buffer capacity and overt
acidosis in null mutants. Thus, Foxi1(-/-) mice seem to develop dRTA due to
altered cellular composition of the distal nephron epithelium, thereby denying
this epithelium the proper gene expression pattern needed for maintaining
adequate acid-base homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC419486
PMID: 15173882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Clin Invest. 2004 Jun;113(11):1528-30.

A fork in the road of cell differentiation in the kidney tubule.

Al-Awqati Q(1), Schwartz GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, New York 10032, USA. qa1@columbia.edu

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2004 Jun;113(11):1560-70.

The collecting ducts of the kidney are composed of intercalated cells
(responsible for acid/base transport), principal cells (mediating salt and water 
absorption), and inner medullary cells, which mediate all three types of
transport. Forkhead box (Fox) genes are a large family of transcription factors
that are important in cell-type specification during organogenesis. In this
issue, Blomqvist et al. find that mice lacking Foxi1 have no intercalated cells
in the kidney. The collecting ducts of the null mice contained primitive cells
that expressed both intercalated cell and principal cell proteins, yet the
acid/base transport function of the kidney was disrupted and the mice exhibited
distal renal tubular acidosis. These findings suggest that Foxi1 plays a critical
role in determining cell identity during collecting duct development.

PMCID: PMC419498
PMID: 15173877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Dev Biol. 2004 May 15;269(2):552-66.

Analysis of Spemann organizer formation in Xenopus embryos by cDNA macroarrays.

Wessely O(1), Kim JI, Geissert D, Tran U, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1662, USA.

The understanding of vertebrate development has greatly benefited from the study 
of gastrulation in the Xenopus embryo. Over the years, the molecular dissection
of the Spemann organizer has proven to be a very fruitful source for gene
discovery. Here, we report a comprehensive screen of gene expression in the
Xenopus gastrula using cDNA macroarrays. Nylon filters containing more than 72000
cDNAs from a gastrula stage library were hybridized with differential probes from
embryos in which organizer induction had been inhibited by reducing Nodal-related
or maternal beta-Catenin signaling. Combining the changes in gene expression
levels caused by these two major signaling pathways in a single graph identified 
both known and novel dorsoventral regulated genes. The most highly enriched
organizer-specific genes were the secreted molecules chordin and Xnr-3, followed 
by the transmembrane protein paraxial protocadherin (PAPC). Ventral-specific
abundant cDNAs included S10-40-H5, members of the Hyaluronan synthase family,
Xvent-2 and XFD2/FoxI1. A differential probe of dorsal and ventral lips
identified many more organizer-specific cDNAs than the screens inhibiting
Nodal-related and beta-Catenin signaling, suggesting that additional, as yet
uncharacterized signaling pathways, contribute to organizer formation. Finally,
extension of this approach to the blastula preorganizer signaling center
identified the transcription factor pintallavis/FoxA2 as a new preorganizer
component.

PMID: 15110719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Dev Dyn. 2003 Nov;228(3):301-7.

Expression and phylogenetic analyses of three zebrafish FoxI class genes.

Solomon KS(1), Logsdon JM Jr, Fritz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

We have identified three novel members of the zebrafish forkhead class I gene
family, which we have named foxi2, foxi3a, and foxi3b. We have reported
previously the identification of zebrafish foxi1, which is required for otic
placode and jaw development. Expression analysis shows that foxi2 is expressed
within the chordamesoderm during early somitogenesis and the retina and
pharyngeal arches during later stages. The foxi3a and foxi3b genes likely
represent a recently duplicated pair, and they are similarly expressed in
epidermal mucous cells throughout embryogenesis and early larval stages. None of 
these newly identified FoxI genes are expressed in otic precursor cells and,
therefore, are unlikely to share functional overlap with foxi1 in the development
of the inner ear. In addition to these zebrafish FoxI paralogs, we have
identified 16 new FoxI sequences in species ranging from Ciona intestinalis to
Homo sapiens. We present an extensive phylogenetic analysis of the FoxI class
that includes these new sequences together with those previously reported. This
analysis supports the existence of three subfamilies within the FoxI class, each 
containing at least one zebrafish member.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14579370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Development. 2003 Jun;130(12):2669-79.

The zebrafish forkhead transcription factor Foxi1 specifies epibranchial
placode-derived sensory neurons.

Lee SA(1), Shen EL, Fiser A, Sali A, Guo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94143-0446, USA.

Vertebrate epibranchial placodes give rise to visceral sensory neurons that
transmit vital information such as heart rate, blood pressure and visceral
distension. Despite the pivotal roles they play, the molecular program underlying
their development is not well understood. Here we report that the zebrafish
mutation no soul, in which epibranchial placodes are defective, disrupts the fork
headrelated, winged helix domain-containing protein Foxi1. Foxi1 is expressed in 
lateral placodal progenitor cells. In the absence of foxi1 activity, progenitor
cells fail to express the basic helix-loop-helix gene neurogenin that is
essential for the formation of neuronal precursors, and the paired homeodomain
containing gene phox2a that is essential for neuronal differentiation and
maintenance. Consequently, increased cell death is detected indicating that the
placodal progenitor cells take on an apoptotic pathway. Furthermore, ectopic
expression of foxi1 is sufficient to induce phox2a-positive and
neurogenin-positive cells. Taken together, these findings suggest that Foxi1 is
an important determination factor for epibranchial placodal progenitor cells to
acquire both neuronal fate and subtype visceral sensory identity.

PMID: 12736211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Development. 2003 Jun;130(11):2543-54.

Zebrafish foxi one modulates cellular responses to Fgf signaling required for the
integrity of ear and jaw patterning.

Nissen RM(1), Yan J, Amsterdam A, Hopkins N, Burgess SM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

We identified four insertional alleles of foxi one (foo), an embryonic lethal
mutation in zebrafish that displays defects in both otic placode and the jaw. In 
foo/foo embryos the otic placode is split into two smaller placodes and mutant
embryos show a dorsoventral (DV) cartilage defect manifested as a reduced
hyomandibular and reduced third and fourth branchial arches. We identified foxi
one (foo), the zebrafish ortholog of Foxi1 (FREAC6, FKHL10, HFH-3, Fkh10) and a
member of the forkhead domain transcriptional regulator family, as the gene
mutated in foo/foo embryos. foo is expressed in otic placode precursor cells, and
foo/foo embryos lack placodal pax8 expression and have disorganized otic
expression of pax2.1 and dlx3. Third stream neural crest cell migration, detected
by dlx2 and krox20 expression, is aberrant in that it invades the otic placode
territory. foo is expressed in pharyngeal pouch endoderm and is required for
pouch expression of pax8 and proper patterning of other markers in the pouch such
as nkx2.3. In foo/foo embryos, we observed a failure to maintain fgf3 expression 
in the pouches, followed by apoptosis of neural crest cells in adjacent arches.
We conclude that foo expression is essential for pax8 expression probably
downstream of Fgf signaling in a conserved pathway jointly required for integrity
of patterning in the otic placode and pharyngeal pouches. We propose that correct
placement of survival/proliferation cues is essential for shaping the pharyngeal 
cartilages and that evolutionary links between jaw and ear formation can be
traced to Fgf-Foxi1-Pax8 pathways.

PMID: 12702667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Development. 2003 May;130(9):2013-25.

Lack of pendrin expression leads to deafness and expansion of the endolymphatic
compartment in inner ears of Foxi1 null mutant mice.

Hulander M(1), Kiernan AE, Blomqvist SR, Carlsson P, Samuelsson EJ, Johansson BR,
Steel KP, Enerbäck S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Institute of Anatomy and
Cell Biology, Göteborg University, Box 440, SE-405 30 Göteborg, Sweden.

Mice that lack the winged helix/forkhead gene Foxi1 (also known as Fkh10) are
deaf and display shaker/waltzer behavior, an indication of disturbed balance.
While Foxi1 is expressed in the entire otic vesicle at E9.5, it becomes gradually
restricted to the endolymphatic duct/sac epithelium and at E16.5 Foxi1 expression
in the inner ear is confined to this epithelium. Histological sections, paintfill
experiments and whole-mount hybridizations reveal no abnormality in inner ear
development of Foxi1(-/-) mice before E13.5. Between E13.5 and E16.5 the
membranous labyrinth of inner ears from null mutants starts to expand as can be
seen in histological sections, paint-fill experiments and three-dimensional
reconstruction. Postnatally, inner ears of Foxi1(-/-) mice are extremely
expanded, and large irregular cavities, compressing the cerebellum and the
otherwise normal middle ear, have replaced the delicate compartments of the
wild-type inner ear. This phenotype resembles that of the human sensorineural
deafness syndrome Pendred syndrome, caused by mutations in the PDS gene. In situ 
hybridization of Foxi1(-/-) endolymphatic duct/sac epithelium shows a complete
lack of the transcript encoding the chloride/iodide transporter pendrin. Based on
this, we would like to suggest that Foxi1 is an upstream regulator of pendrin and
that the phenotype seen in Foxi1 null mice is, at least in part, due to defective
pendrin-mediated chloride ion resorption in the endolymphatic duct/sac
epithelium. We show that this regulation could be mediated by absence of a
specific endolymphatic cell type--FORE (forkhead related) cells--expressing
Foxi1, Pds, Coch and Jag1. Thus, mutations in FOXI1 could prove to cause a
Pendred syndrome-like human deafness.

PMID: 12642503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Development. 2003 Mar;130(5):929-40.

Zebrafish foxi1 mediates otic placode formation and jaw development.

Solomon KS(1), Kudoh T, Dawid IB, Fritz A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

The otic placode is a transient embryonic structure that gives rise to the inner 
ear. Although inductive signals for otic placode formation have been
characterized, less is known about the molecules that respond to these signals
within otic primordia. Here, we identify a mutation in zebrafish, hearsay, which 
disrupts the initiation of placode formation. We show that hearsay disrupts
foxi1, a forkhead domain-containing gene, which is expressed in otic precursor
cells before placodes become visible; foxi1 appears to be the earliest marker
known for the otic anlage. We provide evidence that foxi1 regulates expression of
pax8, indicating a very early role for this gene in placode formation. In
addition, foxi1 is expressed in the developing branchial arches, and jaw
formation is disrupted in hearsay mutant embryos.

PMID: 12538519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Apr 12;1574(3):337-44.

Cell-type dependency of two Foxa/HNF3 sites in the regulation of vitronectin
promoter activity.

Shimizu S(1), Miyamoto Y, Hayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Ochanomizu University, Bunkyo-ku, 112-8610, Tokyo,
Japan.

The mouse vitronectin promoter has two consensus sequences of the Foxa/hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF) 3-binding site (from -34 to -25, site A, and +15 to +26 base
pairs (bp), site B). Site-directed mutagenesis of site B inhibited binding of
nuclear proteins from mouse neuroblastoma Neuro2a and reduced the promoter
activity to 4.6% in a 101-bp fragment (from -48 to +53 bp) in Neuro2a cells. The 
nuclear proteins of site B were identified as the Foxa1/HNF3alpha and
Foxa2/HNF3beta proteins by supershift assay. Next, we examined site A. Mutation
of site A in Neuro2a cells did not affect the promoter activity, and binding of
nuclear proteins was not detected. Overexpression of Foxa1 or Foxa2 protein
activated the mutated site B promoter, but failed to activate the sites A and B
double-mutated promoter in Neuro2a cells, indicating that site A is a potential
transcription regulatory site. Recombinant Foxa1 and Foxa2 proteins and nuclear
extract from mouse liver bound not only to site B, but also to site A. In human
hepatoma HepG2 cells, mutation of sites A and B decreased the promoter activity
to 82% and 38%, respectively, in the wild promoter, and double mutation of sites 
A and B decreased the wild promoter activity to 5%, indicating that sites A and B
contribute to the promoter activity in HepG2 cells. These results demonstrate
that the two Foxa-binding sites regulate the vitronectin promoter activity in
cell type-dependent manner.

PMID: 11997100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Am J Pathol. 2001 Dec;159(6):2055-69.

Effects of paramyxoviral infection on airway epithelial cell Foxj1 expression,
ciliogenesis, and mucociliary function.

Look DC(1), Walter MJ, Williamson MR, Pang L, You Y, Sreshta JN, Johnson JE,
Zander DS, Brody SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

To elucidate molecular mechanisms underlying the association between respiratory 
viral infection and predisposition to subsequent bacterial infection, we used in 
vivo and in vitro models and human samples to characterize respiratory
virus-induced changes in airway epithelial cell morphology, gene expression, and 
mucociliary function. Mouse paramyxoviral bronchitis resulted in airway
epithelial cell infection and a distinct pattern of epithelial cell morphology
changes and altered expression of the differentiation markers beta-tubulin-IV,
Clara cell secretory protein, and Foxj1. Furthermore, changes in gene expression 
were recapitulated using an in vitro epithelial cell culture system and
progressed independent of the host inflammatory response. Restoration of mature
airway epithelium occurred in a pattern similar to epithelial cell
differentiation and ciliogenesis in embryonic lung development characterized by
sequential proliferation of undifferentiated cells, basal body production, Foxj1 
expression, and beta-tubulin-IV expression. The effects of virus-induced
alterations in morphology and gene expression on epithelial cell function were
illustrated by decreased airway mucociliary velocity and impaired bacterial
clearance. Similar changes in epithelial cell Foxj1 expression were also observed
in human paramyxoviral respiratory infection. Taken together, these model systems
of paramyxoviral respiratory infection mimic human pathology and identify
epithelial cell Foxj1 expression as an early marker of epithelial cell
differentiation, recovery, and function.

PMCID: PMC1850590
PMID: 11733356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Histochem Cytochem. 2001 Dec;49(12):1593-604.

Immunolocalization of sonic hedgehog (Shh) in developing mouse lung.

Miller LA(1), Wert SE, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Expression of sonic hedgehog (Shh) is required for normal development of the lung
during embryogenesis. Loss of Shh expression in mice results in tracheoesophageal
fistula, lung hypoplasia, and abnormal lung lobulation. To determine whether Shh 
may play a role later in lung morphogenesis, immunostaining for Shh was performed
in mouse lung from embryonic day (E) 10.5 to postnatal day (PD) 24. Shh was
detected in the distal epithelium of the developing mouse lung from E10.5 to
E16.5. From E16.5 until PD15, Shh was present in epithelial cells in both the
peripheral and conducting airways. Although all cells of the developing
epithelium uniformly expressed Shh at E10.5, Shh expression was restricted to
subsets of epithelial cells by E16.5. Between E16.5 and PD15, non-uniform Shh
staining of epithelial cells was observed in the conducting airways in a pattern 
consistent with the distribution of non-ciliated bronchiolar cells (i.e., Clara
cells) and the Clara cell marker CCSP. Shh did not co-localize with hepatocyte
nuclear factor/forkhead homologue-4 (HFH-4), beta-tubulin, or with the presence
of cilia. These results support the concept that Shh plays a distinct regulatory 
role in the lung later in morphogenesis, when it may influence formation or
cytodifferentiation of the conducting airways.

PMID: 11724907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Int J Dev Biol. 2001 Jun;45(4):643-52.

Synergistic action of HNF-3 and Brachyury in the notochord differentiation of
ascidian embryos.

Shimauchi Y(1), Chiba S, Satoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Japan.

In vertebrate embryos, the class I subtype forkhead domain gene HNF-3 is
essential for the formation of the endoderm, notochord and overlying ventral
neural tube. In ascidian embryos, Brachyury is involved in the formation of the
notochord. Although the results of previous studies imply a role of HNF-3 in
notochord differentiation in ascidian embryos, no experiments have been carried
out to address this issue directly. Therefore the present study examined the
developmental role of HNF-3 in ascidian notochord differentiation. When embryos
were injected with a low dose of HNF-3 mRNA, their tails were shortened and when 
embryos were injected with a high dose of HNF-3 mRNA, which was enough to inhibit
differentiation of epidermis and muscle, no obvious ectopic differentiation of
endoderm or notochord cells was observed. However, co-injection of HNF-3 mRNA
along with Brachyury mRNA resulted in ectopic differentiation of notochord cells 
in the animal hemisphere, suggesting that HNF-3 acts synergistically with
Brachyury in ascidian notochord differentiation. Notochord differentiation of the
A-line precursor cells depends on inducing signal(s) from endodermal cells, which
can be mimicked by bFGF treatment. Treatment of notochord precursor cells
isolated from the 32-cell stage embryoswith bFGF resulted in upregulation of both
the HNF-3 and Brachyury genes.

PMID: 11461000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Gene. 2000 Dec 23;259(1-2):171-6.

Planaria FoxA (HNF3) homologue is specifically expressed in the pharynx-forming
cells.

Koinuma S(1), Umesono Y, Watanabe K, Agata K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Regeneration Biology, Department of Life Science, Faculty of
Science, Himeji Institute of Technology, Hyogo 678-1297, Japan.

We have isolated a planarian Forkhead box A (FoxA, a new name for a gene group
containing HNF3 alpha,beta,gamma)-related gene, DjFoxA, and examined its spatial 
and temporal distribution in both intact and regenerating planarians by in situ
hybridization. In intact worms, DjFoxA is specifically expressed in the cells
participating in pharynx development in the region surrounding the pharynx, which
is located in the central portion of the body. During regeneration,
DjFoxA-positive cells appear in the pharynx-forming region and migrate to the
midline to form a pharynx rudiment. These results suggest that DjFoxA is
specifically expressed in the cells participating in pharynx formation and has an
evolutionarily conserved function in digestive tract formation.

PMID: 11163974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2000;90(1-2):119-22.

No deleterious mutations in the FOXJ1 (alias HFH-4) gene in patients with primary
ciliary dyskinesia (PCD).

Maiti AK(1), Bartoloni L, Mitchison HM, Meeks M, Chung E, Spiden S, Gehrig C,
Rossier C, DeLozier-Blanchet CD, Blouin J, Gardiner RM, Antonarakis SE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva Medical School and Cantonal
Hospital, Switzerland.

The transcription factor FOXJ1 (alias HFH-4 or FKHL13) of the
winged-helix/forkhead family is expressed in cells with cilia or flagella, and
seems to be involved in the regulation of axonemal structural proteins. The
knockout mouse Foxj1(-/-) shows abnormalities of organ situs, consistent with
random determination of left-right asymmetry, and a complete absence of cilia.
The human FOXJ1 gene which maps to chromosome 17q, is thus an excellent candidate
gene for Kartagener Syndrome (KS), a subphenotype of Primary Ciliary Dyskinesia
(PCD), characterized by bronchiectasis, chronic sinusitis and situs inversus. We 
have collected samples from 61 PCD families, in 31 of which there are at least
two affected individuals. Two families with complete aciliogenesis, and six
families, in which the affected members have microsatellite alleles concordant
for a locus on distal chromosome 17q, were screened for mutations in the two
exons and intron-exon junctions of the FOXJ1 gene. No sequence abnormalities were
observed in the DNAs of the affected individuals of the selected families. These 
results demonstrate that the FOXJ1 gene is not responsible for the PCD/KS
phenotype in the families examined.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 11060460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mech Dev. 2000 Jul;95(1-2):77-87.

The developmental potentials of the caudalmost part of the neural crest are
restricted to melanocytes and glia.

Catala M(1), Ziller C, Lapointe F, Le Douarin NM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire du CNRS et du Collège de
France, 49 bis, Avenue de la belle Gabrielle, 94736 Cedex, Nogent-Sur-Marne,
France. martin.catala@psl.ap-hop-paris.fr

The avian spinal cord is characterized by an absence of motor nerves and sensory 
nerves and ganglia at its caudalmost part. Since peripheral sensory neurons
derive from neural crest cells, three basic mechanisms could account for this
feature: (i) the caudalmost neural tube does not generate any neural crest cells;
(ii) neural crest cells originating from the caudal part of the neural tube
cannot give rise to dorsal root ganglia or (iii) the caudal environment is not
permissive for the formation of dorsal root ganglia. To solve this problem, we
have first studied the pattern of expression of ventral (HNF3beta) and dorsal
(slug) marker genes in the caudal region of the neural tube; in a second
approach, we have recorded the emergence of neural crest cells using the HNK1
monoclonal antibody; and finally, we have analyzed the developmental potentials
of neural crest cells arising from the caudalmost part of the neural tube in
avian embryo in in vitro culture and by means of heterotopic transplantations in 
vivo. We show here that neural crest cells arising from the neural tube located
at the level of somites 47-53 can differentiate both in vitro and in vivo into
melanocytes and Schwann cells but not into neurons. Furthermore, the neural tube 
located caudally to the last pair of somites (i.e. the 53rd pair) does not give
rise to neural crest cells in any of the situations tested. The specific
anatomical aspect of the avian spinal cord can thus be accounted for by limited
developmental potentials of neural crest cells arising from the most caudal part 
of the neural tube.

PMID: 10906452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Mol Cell. 1999 Dec;4(6):961-9.

An early developmental transcription factor complex that is more stable on
nucleosome core particles than on free DNA.

Cirillo LA(1), Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA.

In vivo footprinting studies have shown that transcription factor binding sites
for HNF3 and GATA-4 are occupied on the albumin gene enhancer in embryonic
endoderm, prior to the developmental activation of liver gene transcription. We
have investigated how these factors can stably occupy silent chromatin.
Remarkably, we find that HNF3, but not GATA-4 or a GAL4 control protein, binds
far more stably to nucleosome core particles than to free DNA. In the presence of
HNF3, GATA-4 binds stably to an HNF3-positioned nucleosome. Histone acetylation
does not affect HNF3 binding. This is evidence for stable nucleosome binding by a
transcription factor and shows that a winged helix protein is sufficient to
initiate the assembly of an enhancer complex on nonacetylated nucleosomes.

PMID: 10635321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Dev Genes Evol. 2000 Jan;210(1):11-7.

Characterization of a hemichordate fork head/HNF-3 gene expression.

Taguchi S(1), Tagawa K, Humphreys T, Nishino A, Satoh N, Harada Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan E-mail: taguchi@ascidian.zool. kyoto-u.ac.jp.

Based on anatomical and developmental similarities, hemichordates are thought to 
be most closely related to chordates. However, so far very few developmental
genes have been characterized from hemichordates. To gain molecular insight into 
the developmental mechanisms involved in the origin and evolution of chordates,
we investigated the expression of a fork head/HNF-3 (PfHNF3) gene in the acorn
worm embryo. Chordate fork head genes are implicated in the formation of
endoderm, notochord and floor plate. We found that a PfHNF3 transcript was first 
detected at the early blastula stage; the signal of in situ hybridization was
found in the vegetal plate cells, invaginating endoderm and then in the
archenteron. By the late gastrula and into the early tornaria larva stages, an
intense signal remained in the anterior region of the archenteron, while the
expression in the other regions of archenteron decreased. The intense signal was 
retained in the pharynx of the tornaria larva. A comparison of the pattern of
PfHNF3 with that of HNF-3 genes of sea urchin, ascidian, amphioxus and vertebrate
suggests a possible acquisition of new functions of the gene during deuterostome 
evolution.

PMID: 10603081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nat Genet. 1999 Sep;23(1):71-5.

Pancreas dorsal lobe agenesis and abnormal islets of Langerhans in
Hlxb9-deficient mice.

Harrison KA(1), Thaler J, Pfaff SL, Gu H, Kehrl JH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunoregulation National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

In most mammals the pancreas develops from the foregut endoderm as ventral and
dorsal buds. These buds fuse and develop into a complex organ composed of
endocrine, exocrine and ductal components. This developmental process depends
upon an integrated network of transcription factors. Gene targeting experiments
have revealed critical roles for Pdx1, Isl1, Pax4, Pax6 and Nkx2-2 (refs
3,4,5,6,7, 8,9,10). The homeobox gene HLXB9 (encoding HB9) is prominently
expressed in adult human pancreas, although its role in pancreas development and 
function is unknown. To facilitate its study, we isolated the mouse HLXB9
orthologue, Hlxb9. During mouse development, the dorsal and ventral pancreatic
buds and mature beta-cells in the islets of Langerhans express Hlxb9. In mice
homologous for a null mutation of Hlxb9, the dorsal lobe of the pancreas fails to
develop. The remnant Hlxb9-/- pancreas has small islets of Langerhans with
reduced numbers of insulin-producing beta-cells. Hlxb9-/- beta-cells express low 
levels of the glucose transporter Glut2 and homeodomain factor Nkx 6-1. Thus,
Hlxb9 is key to normal pancreas development and function.

PMID: 10471502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1999 Aug;21(2):153-4.

Forkhead transcription factor HFH-4 and respiratory epithelial cell
differentiation.

Whitsett JA(1), Tichelaar JW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio, USA. whitj0@chmcc.org

PMID: 10423395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Biol. 1999 May 1;209(1):1-10.

Developmental competence of the gut endoderm: genetic potentiation by GATA and
HNF3/fork head proteins.

Zaret K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA.

A long-standing problem in developmental biology has been to understand how the
embryonic germ layers gain the competence to differentiate into distinct cell
types. Genetic studies have shown that members of the GATA and HNF3/fork head
transcription factor families are essential for the formation and differentiation
of gut endoderm tissues in worms, flies, and mammals. Recent in vivo footprinting
studies have shown that GATA and HNF3 binding sites in chromatin are occupied on 
a silent gene in endoderm that has the potential to be activated solely in that
germ layer. These and other data indicate that these evolutionarily conserved
factors help impart the competence of a gene to be activated in development, a
phenomenon called genetic potentiation. The mechanistic implications of genetic
potentiation and its general significance are discussed.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10208738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;18(2):157-64.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (winged helix domain) activates trefoil factor gene
TFF1 through a binding motif adjacent to the TATAA box.

Beck S(1), Sommer P, dos Santos Silva E, Blin N, Gött P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Anthropology and Human Genetics, 
University of Tübingen, Germany.

The winged helix transcription factors HNF-3/FKH (forkhead homologs) activate
endodermal-derived and acute-phase gene expression and control gut development in
Drosophila. Trefoil factor family (TFFs) peptides are vertebrate products
secreted by mucin-producing epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract
involved in restitution and repair of the mucosa. They are positively regulated
in ulcerative and neoplastic conditions. We describe a consensus sequence in
human and rodent TFF promoters close to the TATAA box showing striking similarity
to the binding site of the HNF-3/FKH family. In gel retardation assays, HNF-3
alpha and beta bound predominantly to the site in TFF1 (formerly pS2) and, to a
lesser extent, to the sites in TFF2 or TFF3. Mutations generated in this motif
severely impaired transcription of TFF1 reporter genes. Cotransfection with
expression vectors of HNF-3alpha and beta, but not the related HFH 11A and B,
specifically activated the wild-type TFF1 reporter genes. Activation of
endogenous expression of TFF1 by HNF-3 alpha and beta gene products was more than
1000 fold in the pancreatic cell line Capan-2 and fivefold in the gastric cell
line MKN-45, whereas the intestinal cell lines HUTU 80 and HT-29 displayed no
effect. Thus, HNF-3/FKH factors contribute causally to cell-specific regulation
of TFF genes and may explain the acute-phase response of TFF peptides.

PMID: 10073575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Gene. 1998 Dec 11;224(1-2):97-107.

Exon-I is involved in positive as well as negative regulation of human
angiotensinogen gene expression.

Cui Y(1), Narayanan CS, Zhou J, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.

Angiotensinogen is the glycoprotein precursor of one of the most potent
vasoactive hormones, angiotensin-II. Angiotensinogen gene is primarily expressed 
in the liver, and this gene locus is linked with human essential hypertension. We
show here that a mutation in exon-I reduces the basal expression of the human
angiotensinogen gene in liver cells. We also show that a nucleotide sequence in
exon-I binds to liver-enriched transcription factor HNF-3 and a ubiquitous factor
AP4. Our studies also show that transient transfection of an expression vector
containing AP4 coding sequence downregulates the expression of reporter
constructs containing human angiotensinogen gene promoter. By contrast,
co-transfection of an expression vector containing HNF-3beta coding sequence
increases the expression of these reporter constructs. The human angiotensinogen 
gene has a C/A polymorphism located at -20, and we have shown that estrogen
receptor-alpha binds to this sequence when nucleoside A is present at this site. 
We show here that co-transfection of an expression vector containing AP4 coding
sequence reduces estrogen-induced promoter activity of reporter constructs
containing human angiotensinogen gene promoter (with nucleoside A at -20)
attached to the CAT gene. These studies partly explain the molecular mechanisms
involved in tissue-specific expression of the human angiotensinogen gene.

PMID: 9931457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Endocrinology. 1998 Dec;139(12):4967-75.

A winged-helix family member is involved in a steroid hormone-triggered
regulatory circuit.

Dean DM(1), Berger RR, Sanders MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis 55455, USA.

A common theme emerging in eukaryotic gene regulation is that maximal gene
induction requires several transcription factors acting in concert to regulate
the activation of critical genes. Increasingly, nuclear receptors play key roles 
in orchestrating this regulation, often by integrating additional signaling
pathways, through complex regulatory elements known as hormone response units.
The ovalbumin gene contains one such unit, known as the steroid-dependent
regulatory element. The binding of the chicken ovalbumin induced regulatory
protein-I (Chirp-I) to this element occurs only in response to treatment with
estrogen and glucocorticoid. Evidence presented herein demonstrates that Chirp-I 
has many features in common with the winged-helix (W-H) family of transcription
factors. The binding sites for Chirp-I and for the W-H proteins have similar
sequence recognition requirements. Northern blots establish that members of the
W-H family are expressed in oviduct. Most convincing, the Chirp-I complex
interacts with two different antibodies specific to W-H family members. The
culmination of this work supports the hypothesis that Chirp-I is a member of the 
W-H family, and it lends credence to the idea that W-H proteins are essential
components of some steroid hormone regulatory circuits.

PMID: 9832435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dokl Akad Nauk. 1998 Aug;361(5):700-3.

[The effect of o-aminoazotoluene on glucocorticoid induction of tyrosine
aminotransferase in mice sensitive to its hepatocarcinogenic activity is mediated
by transcription factor HNF3gamma].

[Article in Russian]

Merkulova TI, Kaledin VI, Kropachev KIu, Kobzev VF, Vasil'ev GV.

PMID: 9785020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Genes Dev. 1998 Jul 1;12(13):1947-52.

pha-4, an HNF-3 homolog, specifies pharyngeal organ identity in Caenorhabditis
elegans.

Horner MA(1), Quintin S, Domeier ME, Kimble J, Labouesse M, Mango SE.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Center for Children, Department of Oncological
Sciences, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112 USA.

To build complex organs, embryos have evolved mechanisms that integrate the
development of cells unrelated to one another by cell type or ancestry. Here we
show that the pha-4 locus establishes organ identity for the Caenorhabditis
elegans pharynx. In pha-4 mutants, pharyngeal cells are transformed into
ectoderm. Conversely, ectopic pha-4 expression produces excess pharyngeal cells. 
pha-4 encodes an HNF-3 homolog selectively expressed in the nascent digestive
tract, including all pharynx precursors at the time they are restricted to a
pharyngeal fate. We suggest that pha-4 is a key component of a
transcription-based mechanism to endow cells with pharyngeal organ identity.

PMCID: PMC316969
PMID: 9649499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 17;273(16):9821-8.

Combinatorial action of HNF3 and Sp family transcription factors in the
activation of the rabbit uteroglobin/CC10 promoter.

Braun H(1), Suske G.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Tumorforschung, Philipps-Universität
Marburg, Emil-Mannkopff-Strasse 2, D-35037 Marburg, Germany.

It has been reported that respiratory epithelium-specific transcription is
mediated by thyroid transcription factor 1 and members of the HNF3/forkhead
family of transcription factors. Here, we show that the uteroglobin/Clara cell
10-kDa promoters from rabbit and man are regulated by HNF3alpha and HNF3beta but 
not by HFH-4 and TTF-1. We have identified two HNF3-responsive elements in the
rabbit uteroglobin/CC10 promoter located around 95 and 130 base pairs upstream of
the transcriptional start site. Both elements contribute to promoter activity in 
H441 cells expressing uteroglobin/CC10 and HNF3alpha. Gene transfer experiments
into Drosophila Schneider cells that lack many mammalian transcription factor
homologs revealed that HNF3alpha and HNF3beta on their own cannot activate the
uteroglobin/CC10 promoter. However, HNF3alpha and HNF3beta strongly enhanced
Sp1-mediated promoter activation. Synergistic activation by HNF3alpha and Sp1 was
absolutely dependent on the integrity of two Sp1 sites located at around -65 and 
-230. We show further that multiple activation domains of Sp1 are required for
cooperativity with HNF3alpha. These studies demonstrate that transcription from
the rabbit uteroglobin/CC10 promoter in lung epithelium is controlled by the
combinatorial action of the cell-specific factor HNF3alpha and the ubiquitous
factor Sp1.

PMID: 9545321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Mech Dev. 1997 Dec;69(1-2):143-54.

Autonomy of ascidian fork head/HNF-3 gene expression.

Shimauchi Y(1), Yasuo H, Satoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, Japan.

We have characterized the expression pattern of a class I fork head/HNF-3 gene
(HrHNF3-1) of the ascidian Halocynthia roretzi. Zygotic HrHNF3-1 expression was
detectable as early as the 16-cell stage, and the transcript was evident in
blastomeres of the endoderm, notochord and mesenchyme lineages of the early
embryos. After the late gastrula stage, HrHNF3-1 was also expressed in the
presumptive spinal cord cells and some brain cells. The spinal cord of the
ascidian tadpole consists of four layers of cells; the dorsal layer, two lateral 
layers and the ventral layer, the latter of which simply lies on the notochord.
Cross-sections of in situ hybridized specimens showed that HrHNF3-1 was expressed
in cells of the ventral layer, reminiscent of the floor plate of vertebrate
embryos. In addition, we found autonomy in the initiation of early HrHNF3-1
expression, because the gene was expressed in blastomeres continuously
dissociated from the first cleavage until the 16-cell stage.

PMID: 9486537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Biol Chem. 1997 May 23;272(21):13725-30.

The winged helix transcriptional activator HFH-3 is expressed in the distal
tubules of embryonic and adult mouse kidney.

Overdier DG(1), Ye H, Peterson RS, Clevidence DE, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois
60612-7334, USA.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF-3)/fork head homolog (HFH) proteins are an
extensive family of transcription factors, which share homology in the winged
helix DNA binding domain. Members of the HFH/winged helix family have been
implicated in cell fate determination during pattern formation, in organogenesis,
and in cell-type-specific gene expression. In this study we isolated a
full-length HFH-3 cDNA clone from a human kidney library which encoded a
351-amino acid protein containing a centrally located winged helix DNA binding
domain. We demonstrate that HFH-3 is a potent transcriptional activator requiring
138 C-terminal residues for activity. We used in situ hybridization to
demonstrate that HFH-3 expression is restricted to the epithelium of the renal
distal convoluted tubules. We determined the HFH-3 DNA binding consensus sequence
by in vitro DNA binding site selection using recombinant HFH-3 protein and used
this consensus sequence to identify putative HFH-3 target genes expressed there. 
These putative HFH-3 target genes include the Na/K-ATPase, Na/H and anion
exchangers, E-cadherin, and mineralocorticoid receptor genes as well as genes for
the transcription factors HNF-1, vHNF-1, and HNF-4.

PMID: 9153225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Genomics. 1997 Mar 15;40(3):462-9.

The human hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head gene FKHL13: genomic structure
and pattern of expression.

Murphy DB(1), Seemann S, Wiese S, Kirschner R, Grzeschik KH, Thies U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Gosslerstrasse 12d, Göttingen, 37073, Germany.

We describe the isolation and characterization of the cDNA for FKHL13, the human 
homologue of the mouse hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head homologue 4 (HFH-4) 
gene, a member of the HNF-3/fork head (also called winged helix) gene family.
Members of this gene family contain a conserved DNA binding region of approx. 110
amino acids and are thought to play an important role in cell-specific
differentiation. Previous analysis of the mouse and rat HFH-4 cDNAs revealed a
distinct pattern of expression for this gene, suggesting that the gene plays an
important role in the differentiation of lung and oviduct/ampulla epithelial
cells and testicular spermatids. Analysis of the human FKHL13 gene confirmed this
pattern of expression. We also found expression in adult human brain cortex,
which we were able to confirm for the mouse. The expression pattern of
FKHL13/HFH-4, confined to cilia/flagella-producing cells, leads us to believe
that the gene plays an important role in the regulation of axonemal structural
proteins. We show that the human gene for FKHL13 lies on chromosome 17
(comparison with the chromosomal location of the mouse gene strongly suggests
17q22-q25) and that the gene, which is approx. 6 kb, contains a single intron
disrupting the fork head DNA binding domain. Such a disruption of a functional
unit provides strong evidence for the theory of intron insertion during gene
evolution. The expression of the gene is probably controlled by the CpG island,
which is located in the promoter region of the gene. We also demonstrate that the
FKHL13 gene is highly conserved among a wide variety of species, including birds.

PMID: 9073514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


