
1. J Immunol. 2015 Nov 15;195(10):4578-82. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1501157. Epub 2015 
Oct 7.

Cutting Edge: Plasmacytoid Dendritic Cells in Late-Stage Lupus Mice Defective in 
Producing IFN-a.

Liao X(1), Li S(2), Settlage RE(3), Sun S(4), Ren J(1), Reihl AM(1), Zhang H(5), 
Karyala SV(3), Reilly CM(6), Ahmed SA(1), Luo XM(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences and Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland College 
of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
Blacksburg, VA 24061; (2)Department of Crop and Soil Environmental Sciences,
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and
State University, Blacksburg, VA 24061; (3)Virginia Bioinformatics Institute,
Blacksburg, VA 24061; (4)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University
of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697; (5)Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering, College of Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, Blacksburg, VA 24061; and. (6)Edward Via College of Osteopathic
Medicine, Blacksburg, VA 24060. (7)Department of Biomedical Sciences and
Pathobiology, Virginia-Maryland College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, VA 24061; xinluo@vt.edu.

Plasmacytoid dendritic cells (pDCs) are professional type I IFN producers
believed to promote lupus. However, questions exist about whether they function
at the same level throughout the course of lupus disease. We analyzed high-purity
pDCs sorted from lupus mice. Although pDCs produced a large amount of IFN-a
during disease initiation, those sorted from late-stage lupus mice were found to 
be defective in producing IFN-a. These pDCs expressed an increased level of MHC, 
suggesting a functional drift to Ag presentation. We examined the potential
mechanism behind the defect and identified a novel transcriptional factor, Foxj2,
which repressed the expression of several genes in pDCs, but not IFN-a.
Dysregulation in pDCs appears to be predisposed, because they exhibited an
altered transcriptional profile before the onset of clinical signs. Our results
suggest that pDCs do not function the same throughout the disease course and lose
the ability to produce IFN-a in late-stage lupus mice.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26447229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Int J Oncol. 2015;46(6):2449-58. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2015.2957. Epub 2015 Apr 7.

Abnormal expression of Forkhead Box J2 (FOXJ2) suppresses migration and invasion 
in extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma and is associated with prognosis.

Qiang Y(1), Wang F(1), Yan S(2), Zhang H(3), Zhu L(1), Chen Z(1), Tu F(4), Wang
D(1), Wang G(1), Wang W(1), Chen Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University
and Research Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery of Nantong University, Nantong,
Jiangsu 226001, P.R. China. (2)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, The
First People's Hospital of Jingmen, Dongbao District, Jingmen, Hubei 448000, P.R.
China. (3)Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Nantong University,
Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, P.R. China. (4)Department of Operating Rooms, Shayang
People's Hospital, Shayang, Hubei 448200, P.R. China.

Extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (CC) is an aggressive malignancy with dismal
prognosis and characterized by early invasion, metastasis and postoperative
recurrence. Therefore, understanding the main molecular mechanisms of this
malignancy is the key for the development of novel and effective therapeutic
strategies for extrahepatic CC. Foxj2 is a novel forkhead factor. Several FOX
family members have been reported to play an important role in tumorigenesis and 
the progression of certain cancers. In this study, real-time quantitative RT-PCR 
(qRT-PCR), western blotting, and immunohistochemical staining were used to
examine FOXJ2 expression in extrahepatic CC tissues and adjacent normal bile duct
tissues. The molecular mechanisms of FOXJ2 expression and its effects on cell
proliferation, migration and invasion were also explored by MTT assay, wound
healing assay and Transwell assay. The relationships between the FOXJ2 expression
levels, the clinicopathological factors, and patient survival were investigated. 
FOXJ2 mRNA and protein levels were downregulated in extrahepatic CC tissues
compared to adjacent normal bile duct tissues. In addition, decreased FOXJ2 was
associated disease progression in extrahepatic CC samples. Overexpression FOXJ2
expression markedly inhibited cell proliferation, migration and invasion in
vitro. FOXJ2 is a transcription factor that has been reported to induce
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). These findings indicated that FOXJ2 gene
played a tumor suppressor role in extrahepatic CC, which proposed this gene as a 
new therapeutic target for extrahepatic CC patients.

PMID: 25873280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Pathol Res Pract. 2015 May;211(5):389-97. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.01.005. Epub
2015 Jan 21.

The role of FoxJ2 in the migration of human glioma cells.

Qiu X(1), Ji B(2), Yang L(3), Huang Q(4), Shi W(4), Ding Z(5), He X(5), Ban N(5),
Fan S(5), Zhang J(6), Tian Y(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiotherapy and Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of
Soochow University, San Xiang Road No. 1055, Suzhou 215004, People's Republic of 
China; Department of Radiotherapy and Oncology, The Affiliated Hospital of
Nantong University, Xisi Road No. 20, Nantong 226001, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Radiotherapy and Oncology, The Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, Xisi Road No. 20, Nantong 226001, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province 215006, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, The Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Xisi Road No. 20, Nantong 226001, People's Republic of China. (5)Jiangsu Province
Key Laboratory for Inflammation and Molecular Drug Target, Medical College of
Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu Province 226001, People's Republic of China.
(6)Department of Pathology, The Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University, Xisi
Road No. 20, Nantong 226001, People's Republic of China. (7)Department of
Radiotherapy and Oncology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, 
San Xiang Road No. 1055, Suzhou 215004, People's Republic of China. Electronic
address: dryetian@hotmail.com.

Previous studies have demonstrated that FoxJ2 (forkhead box J2) is a member of
Forkhead Box transcription factors and acts as an important prognostic indicator 
in human breast cancer. Our study aimed to assess the expression and function in 
human glioma. Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry were performed in
human glioma tissues. Low FoxJ2 expression was observed in 80 samples and its
level was correlated with the grade of malignancy. A strongly positive
correlation was observed between FoxJ2 and E-cadherin. Overexpression of FoxJ2
increased E-cadherin expression and decreased vimentin expression. The wound
healing and transwell assays showed that overexpression of FoxJ2 significantly
inhibited their migration in U87 cells. Consistent with this, knockdown of FoxJ2 
promoted cellular motility. In a word, FoxJ2 suppressed cell migration and
invasion in glioma, which might be a potential novel molecular targeted therapy
for surgery and immune treatment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25661068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jan;1849(1):32-43. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.10.002. 
Epub 2014 Oct 22.

STAT6 silencing up-regulates cholesterol synthesis via miR-197/FOXJ2 axis and
induces ER stress-mediated apoptosis in lung cancer cells.

Dubey R(1), Saini N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology
(CSIR), Mall Road, Delhi-110007, India. (2)Functional Genomics Unit, Institute of
Genomics and Integrative Biology (CSIR), Mall Road, Delhi-110007, India.
Electronic address: nsaini@igib.in.

MiRNAs and transcription factors have emerged as important regulators for gene
expression and are known to regulate various biological processes, including cell
proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Previously, using genome-wide
expression profiling studies, we have shown an inverse relationship of STAT6 and 
cholesterol biosynthesis and also identified FOXJ2 binding sites in the upstream 
region of 3 key genes (HMGCR, HMGCS1 and IDI1) of the cholesterol synthesis
pathway. Our previous study also provided clues toward the anti-apoptotic role
played by STAT6. For better understanding of the cellular response and underlying
signaling pathways activated by STAT6 silencing, we examined the changes in
miRNome profile after the siRNA-mediated silencing of STAT6 gene in NCI-H460
cells using LNA-based miRNA microarray. Our analysis showed significant
downregulation of miRNAs, let-7b and miR-197, out of which miR-197 was predicted 
to target FOXJ2. We here show that miR-197 not only negatively regulates FOXJ2
expression through direct binding to its respective binding site in its 3'UTR but
also alters total cholesterol levels by regulating genes associated with
cholesterol biosynthesis pathway. We further demonstrated that STAT6 silencing
elicited ER stress-mediated apoptosis in NCI-H460 cells through C/EBP homologous 
protein (CHOP) induction, alteration of BH3 only proteins expression and ROS
production. The apoptosis induced by STAT6 downregulation was partially reversed 
by NAC, the ROS scavenger. Based on the above findings, we suggest that ER stress
plays a major role in STAT6-induced apoptosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25451482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2014 Sep;74:4-12. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2014.04.016. Epub 2014
May 2.

MicroRNA-34a targets Forkhead box j2 to modulate differentiation of endothelial
progenitor cells in response to shear stress.

Cheng BB(1), Qu MJ(2), Wu LL(1), Shen Y(1), Yan ZQ(1), Zhang P(1), Qi YX(3),
Jiang ZL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mechanobiology & Medical Engineering, School of Life Sciences &
Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of
Cell Biology & Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Ludong University, Yantai,
China. (3)Institute of Mechanobiology & Medical Engineering, School of Life
Sciences & Biotechnology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.
Electronic address: qiyx@sjtu.edu.cn.

Flow shear stress plays important roles in modulating differentiation of
endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs). MicroRNAs are crucial for diverse cellular
processes, but the expressions and functions of microRNAs in EPCs responding to
mechanical stimuli remain unclear. We sought to determine the effects of
microRNA-34a (miR-34a) and a novel target Forkhead box j2 (Foxj2) on shear
stress-induced EPC differentiation. Human umbilical cord blood-derived EPCs were 
exposed to laminar shear stress of 15dyn/cm(2) with parallel plate flow chamber
system. Real time RT-PCR showed that shear stress significantly increased miR-34a
expression, which was accompanied by the endothelial differentiation of EPCs.
Whereas Foxj2, a putative target of miR-34a predicted by multiple algorithms, was
suppressed in this process. Dual luciferase reporter assays, as well as miR-34a
mimics and inhibitor treatment were used to confirm the interplay between miR-34a
and Foxj2. Our results revealed an inverse correlation of miR-34a and Foxj2
expressions implicated in the endothelial differentiation of EPCs. MiR-34a
contributed to this process by up-regulating the expressions of endothelial cell 
markers, and down-regulating smooth muscular cell markers. In addition, Foxj2
overexpression attenuated endothelial differentiation of EPCs, while Foxj2 siRNA 
had the opposite effect. These data suggested a unique mechanism that shear
stress induces the expression of miR-34a, which targets to Foxj2 and promotes
endothelial differentiation of EPCs. The results provide new insights into
miR-34a/Foxj2 on shear stress-induced EPC differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24792364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Cell Biochem. 2012 Aug;113(8):2729-37. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24146.

Overexpression of forkhead box J2 can decrease the migration of breast cancer
cells.

Wang Y(1), Yang S, Ni Q, He S, Zhao Y, Yuan Q, Li C, Chen H, Zhang L, Zou L, Shen
A, Cheng C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Medical College, Nantong University, Nantong,
Jiangsu 226001, People's Republic of China.

The prognosis of breast cancer patients with metastases is generally poor, so it 
is essential to elucidate related molecules mechanisms. Forkhead Box J2 (FOXJ2)
is a member of Forkhead Box transcription factors, many of which have been
reported to participate in tumor migration and invasion. In this study, we showed
the expression of FOXJ2 was higher in primary breast cancer tissues without lymph
nodes metastases than those with, and there was statistical significance between 
the expression of FXOJ2 and the clinical factors. Hence, we identified a novel
function of metastasis, which was not previously known for FOXJ2. Overexpression 
of FOXJ2 decreased the motility property of highly migrative MDA-MB-231 cells in 
vitro by wound healing assays and trans-well migration assays, and it was
concurrent with the increased expression of epithelial marker E-cadherin and the 
decreased expression of mesenchymal marker vimentin by Western blot analysis,
reverse transcription PCR analysis, and immunofluorescence analysis. Consistent
with these observations, the repression of FOXJ2 in weakly metastatic MCF-7 cells
remarkably promoted cellular motility. Our study demonstrates that FOXJ2 can
inhibit the metastasis of human breast cancer by regulating the EMT key markers
E-cadherin and vimentin.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22441887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Mol Neurosci. 2012 May;47(1):158-65. doi: 10.1007/s12031-011-9704-2. Epub 2012 
Jan 13.

FOXJ2 expression in rat spinal cord after injury and its role in inflammation.

Chen X(1), Cao X, Tao G, Cao Z, Wang S, Zhou F, Xie W, Zhao P, Zhang Z, Cui Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, Nantong 226001, People's Republic of China.

Foxj2 (forkhead box J2), a novel member of the forkhead/HNF3 family, binds DNA
with a dual sequence specificity. It may play a role in maintenance and survival 
of developing and adult neurons. However, its expression and function in the
central nervous system lesion are still unclear. In this study, we performed a
spinal cord injury (SCI) model in adult Sprague-Dawley rats and investigated the 
dynamic changes of Foxj2 expression in the spinal cord. Western blot analysis
revealed that Foxj2 was present in normal spinal cord. It gradually increased,
reached a peak at day 5 after SCI, and then declined during the following days.
Double immunofluorescence staining revealed wide expression of Foxj2, which is
detected in neurons and astrocytes. After injury, Foxj2 expression was increased 
predominantly in astrocytes, which highly expressed proliferating cell nuclear
antigen, a marker for proliferating cells. And knockdown of Foxj2 in cultured
primary astrocytes by siRNA showed that Foxj2 played an important role in
lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammatory responses. These results suggested that
Foxj2 may be involved in the pathophysiology of SCI, and further research is
needed to have a good understanding of its function and mechanism.

PMID: 22246994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS One. 2011;6(12):e28509. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0028509. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Small interfering RNA against transcription factor STAT6 leads to increased
cholesterol synthesis in lung cancer cell lines.

Dubey R(1), Chhabra R, Saini N.

Author information: 
(1)Functional Genomics Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology
(CSIR), Delhi, India.

STAT6 transcription factor has become a potential molecule for therapeutic
intervention because it regulates broad range of cellular processes in a large
variety of cell types. Although some target genes and interacting partners of
STAT6 have been identified, its exact mechanism of action needs to be elucidated.
In this study, we sought to further characterize the molecular interactions,
networks, and functions of STAT6 by profiling the mRNA expression of STAT6
silenced human lung cells (NCI-H460) using microarrays. Our analysis revealed 273
differentially expressed genes after STAT6 silencing. Analysis of the gene
expression data with Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) software revealed Gene
expression, Cell death, Lipid metabolism as the functions associated with highest
rated network. Cholesterol biosynthesis was among the most enriched pathways in
IPA as well as in PANTHER analysis. These results have been validated by
real-time PCR and cholesterol assay using scrambled siRNA as a negative control. 
Similar findings were also observed with human type II pulmonary alveolar
epithelial cells, A549. In the present study we have, for the first time, shown
the inverse relationship of STAT6 with the cholesterol biosynthesis in lung
cancer cells. The present findings are potentially significant to advance the
understanding and design of therapeutics for the pathological conditions where
both STAT6 and cholesterol biosynthesis are implicated viz. asthma,
atherosclerosis etc.

PMCID: PMC3230611
PMID: 22162773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cryobiology. 2011 Apr;62(2):130-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cryobiol.2011.01.014. Epub 2011
Jan 25.

Consequences of metaphase II oocyte cryopreservation on mRNA content.

Chamayou S(1), Bonaventura G, Alecci C, Tibullo D, Di Raimondo F, Guglielmino A, 
Barcellona ML.

Author information: 
(1)Unità di Medicina della Riproduzione--Fondazione Hera, Via Barriera del Bosco 
n. 51/53, Sant'Agata Li Battiali (CT), Italy. s.chamayou@yahoo.fr

INTRODUCTION: We studied the consequences of freezing/thawing processes on mRNA
contents in MII oocytes after slow-freezing/rapid thawing (SF/RT) and
vitrification/warming (V/W) protocols, and compared the results to fresh MII
oocytes. We quantified the nuclear transcript mRNA responsible for the
translation of proteins belonging either to trans-regulatory protein family or to
functional structural proteins such as proteins involved in DNA structural
organization (NAP1L1, TOP1, H1F0H1), chromosomal structure maintenance (SMC,
SCC3, RAD21, SMC1A, SMC1B, STAG3, REC8), mitochondrial energetic pathways
(ATP5GJ, SDHC), cell cycle regulation and processes (CLTA, MAPK6, CKS2) and
staminal cell potency-development competence stage (DPPA3, OCT4, FOXJ2).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Surplus MII oocytes were donated from patients in IVF
cycles and divided in three groups of 15 oocytes. Group 1 was comprised of
non-cryopreserved oocytes and Groups 2 and 3 underwent SF/RT and V/W procedures, 
respectively.
RESULTS: There was an overall decrease of mRNA extracted from cryopreserved
oocytes compared to control group. Only 39.4% of mRNA content were preserved
after SF/RT while 63.3% of mRNA content were maintained after V/W.
CONCLUSIONS: Oocyte cryopreservation is associated with molecular injury
associated with the decrease of stored mRNA. However the V/W protocol is more
conservative than SF/RT resulting in a level of mRNA sufficient to maintain
biologic functions in the subsequent fertilized oocyte.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21272569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nucleic Acids Res. 2011 Apr;39(8):3064-78. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq1221. Epub 2010
Dec 21.

Fox-3 and PSF interact to activate neural cell-specific alternative splicing.

Kim KK(1), Kim YC, Adelstein RS, Kawamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cardiology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Disease, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Fox-1 family (Fox) proteins, which consist of Fox-1 (A2BP1), Fox-2 (Rbm9) and
Fox-3 (NeuN) in mammals, bind to the RNA element UGCAUG and regulate alternative 
pre-mRNA splicing. However the mechanisms for Fox-regulated splicing are largely 
unknown. We analyzed the expression pattern of the three Fox proteins as well as 
neural cell-specific alternative splicing of a cassette exon N30 of nonmuscle
myosin heavy chain (NMHC) II-B in the mouse central nervous system. Histological 
and biochemical analyses following fluorescence-activated cell sorting
demonstrate a positive correlation of N30 inclusion and Fox-3 expression.
Further, we identified polypyrimidine tract binding protein-associated splicing
factor (PSF) as an interacting protein with Fox-3 by affinity-chromatography. In 
cultured cells, enhancement of N30 inclusion by Fox-3 depends on the presence of 
PSF. PSF enhances N30 inclusion in a UGCAUG-dependent manner, although it does
not bind directly to this element. Fox-3 is recruited to the UGCAUG element
downstream of N30 in the endogenous NMHC II-B transcript in a PSF-dependent
manner. This study is the first to identify PSF as a coactivator of Fox proteins 
and provides evidence that the Fox-3 and PSF interaction is an integral part of
the mechanism by which Fox proteins regulate activation of alternative exons via 
a downstream intronic enhancer.

PMCID: PMC3082911
PMID: 21177649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 4;5(2):e9063. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009063.

Gene expression profiling and network analysis reveals lipid and steroid
metabolism to be the most favored by TNFalpha in HepG2 cells.

Pandey AK(1), Munjal N, Datta M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology (Council of Scientific and
Industrial Research), Delhi, India.

BACKGROUND: The proinflammatory cytokine, TNFalpha, is a crucial mediator of the 
pathogenesis of several diseases, more so in cases involving the liver wherein it
is critical in maintaining liver homeostasis since it is a major determiner of
hepatocyte life and death. Gene expression profiling serves as an appropriate
strategy to unravel the underlying signatures to envisage such varied responses
and considering this, gene transcription profiling was examined in control and
TNFalpha treated HepG2 cells.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Microarray experiments between control and TNFalpha treated
HepG2 cells indicated that TNFalpha could significantly alter the expression
profiling of 140 genes; among those up-regulated, several GO (Gene Ontology)
terms related to lipid and fat metabolism were significantly (p<0.01)
overrepresented indicating a global preference of fat metabolism within the
hepatocyte and those within the down-regulated dataset included genes involved in
several aspects of the immune response like immunoglobulin receptor activity and 
IgE binding thereby indicating a compromise in the immune defense mechanism(s).
Conserved transcription factor binding sites were identified in identically
clustered genes within a common GO term and SREBP-1 and FOXJ2 depicted increased 
occupation of their respective binding elements in the presence of TNFalpha. The 
interacting network of "lipid metabolism, small molecule biochemistry" was
derived to be significantly overrepresented that correlated well with the top
canonical pathway of "biosynthesis of steroids".
CONCLUSIONS: TNFalpha alters the transcriptome profiling within HepG2 cells with 
an interesting catalog of genes being affected and those involved in lipid and
steroid metabolism to be the most favored. This study represents a composite
analysis of the effects of TNFalpha in HepG2 cells that encompasses the altered
transcriptome profiling, the functional analysis of the up- and down- regulated
genes and the identification of conserved transcription factor binding sites.
These could possibly determine TNFalpha mediated alterations mainly the
phenotypes of hepatic steatosis and fatty liver associated with several hepatic
pathological states.

PMCID: PMC2816217
PMID: 20140224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Reprod Biomed Online. 2009;19 Suppl 3:57-62.

Role of Oct-4 during acquisition of developmental competence in mouse oocyte.

Zuccotti M(1), Merico V, Redi CA, Bellazzi R, Adjaye J, Garagna S.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Istologia ed Embriologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale,
Universita' degli Studi di Parma, Parma, Italy.

Knowledge of what determines the developmental competence of oocytes during
folliculogenesis is poor. This review, through the analysis of the expression
profile of developmentally competent or incompetent mouse oocytes, summarizes the
results of recent studies showing that the Oct-4 transcription factor regulating 
the expression of Stella and Foxj2 at the Nanog locus could play a pivotal role
in the establishment of the oocyte's developmental competence.

PMID: 20034424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Hum Reprod. 2009 Sep;24(9):2225-37. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dep191. Epub 2009 May 28.

Oct-4 regulates the expression of Stella and Foxj2 at the Nanog locus:
implications for the developmental competence of mouse oocytes.

Zuccotti M(1), Merico V, Sacchi L, Bellone M, Brink TC, Stefanelli M, Redi CA,
Bellazzi R, Adjaye J, Garagna S.

Author information: 
(1)Sezione di Istologia ed Embriologia, Dipartimento di Medicina Sperimentale,
Universita' degli Studi di Parma, Via Volturno 39, 43100 Parma, Italy.
maurizio.zuccotti@unipr.it

BACKGROUND: Our knowledge of what determines the mammalian oocyte developmental
competence is meagre. By comparing the transcriptional profiles of
developmentally competent surrounded nucleolus (SN) and incompetent not
surrounded nucleolus (NSN) mouse MII oocytes, we recently demonstrated that Oct-4
and Stella are key factors in the establishment of the oocytes' developmental
competence.
METHODS: Using RT-PCR, microarray and immunocytochemistry assays, we analysed
expression of genes and proteins in oocytes isolated throughout folliculogenesis 
and classified based on their SN- or NSN-type of chromatin organization.
RESULTS: We show that: (1) Oct-4 and Stella are expressed concurrently at the
beginning of oocytes' growth and only in SN oocytes; (2) Germ Cell Nuclear Factor
is a putative regulator of Oct-4 expression in MII oocytes; (3) the function of
Oct-4 is directed at the Nanog locus, regulating the expression of Stella and
Foxj2.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) A number of factors that act upstream and downstream of Oct-4
emerge as candidate players in the acquisition of the oocyte's developmental
competence; (2) we define molecular markers that identify a specific group of
ovarian oocytes (SN) that have a potential to acquire developmental competence;
(3) the presence of SN and NSN oocytes in human ovaries extends the interest of
these results to the field of human reproduction.

PMID: 19477878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Jun 1;107(3):548-56. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22156.

MicroRNAs are involved in erythroid differentiation control.

Yang GH(1), Wang F, Yu J, Wang XS, Yuan JY, Zhang JW.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, 5
Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing 100005, People's Republic of China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of 17-25 nucleotides non-coding RNA molecules that
regulate gene expression by either translational inhibition or mRNAs degradation.
We used miRNA array to characterize miRNA variation of K562 cells before and
after hemin treatment. The differential expression of five miRNAs was validated
by Northern blot analysis. Among them, miR-126 exhibited up-regulation while
miR-103, miR-130a, miR-210, and miR-18b exhibited down-regulation after hemin
induction. The same expression tendency of the five miRNAs was observed following
erythroid induction of CD34+ cells derived from human cord blood. miR-103 was
selected and examined for its role in erythroid differentiation. Over-expression 
of miR-103 in K562 could inhibit hemin-induced K562 erythroid differentiation,
which suggests this miRNA may take part in erythropoiesis. We confirmed that
miR-103 targeting mRNA of forkhead box J2 (FOXJ2), a transcription factor that
was involved in the development of many tissues. Our results delineated the
expression of miRNAs during erythroid differentiation and suggested regulatory
roles of miRNAs in this process by targeting mRNAs related to erythropoiesis.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19350553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Transgenic Res. 2008 Dec;17(6):1131-41. doi: 10.1007/s11248-008-9214-3. Epub 2008
Aug 26.

Biological effects of FoxJ2 over-expression.

Martín-de-Lara F(1), Sánchez-Aparicio P, Arias de la Fuente C, Rey-Campos J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, CSIC, Madrid, Spain. fmlara@orgc.csic.es

As reported previously, we have extensively studied FoxJ2, a member of the Fork
Head transcription factors family. While the biochemical and functional
structures of this transcription factor are well understood, its biological
function remains unknown. Here, we present data that address this point using
transgenic mouse technology. We found that the birth rate and the number of
transgenic animals obtained when transferring embryos over-expressing the FoxJ2
protein were lower than those obtained with embryos over-expressing a control
protein, suggesting FoxJ2 overexpression has a negative effect on embryonic
development. Transient FoxJ2 transgenesis experiments have confirmed that FoxJ2
over-expression has a lethal effect on embryonic development from E10.5.
Moreover, in vitro culture of FoxJ2-microinjected embryos demonstrated a
significant developmental blockage, indicating that FoxJ2 could also have an
effect on pre-implantation stages. Most probably, these negative effects of FoxJ2
over-expression during development also explain the low percentage of adult
transgenic mice obtained. Furthermore, most of the transgenic mice that lived to 
adulthood did not show transgene expression. In fact, the only two adult
transgenic animals (one male and one female) in which FoxJ2 transgene expression 
was detected showed a mosaic expression and died prematurely as a result of
cardio-respiratory failure. Postmortem analysis of these animals revealed a
hypertrophic heart and abnormal testes in the male. In order to identify genes
regulated by FoxJ2 consistent with the phenotypes observed for FoxJ2 transgenic
mice, EMSA assays and co-transfection experiments were carried out. Our data
indicate that the genes coding for the gap junction protein Connexin-43 and the
cell-cell contact protein E-Cadherin, may be good candidates for FoxJ2-regulated 
genes. Interestingly, Connexin-43 and E-Cadherin show expression patterns similar
to FoxJ2, and the phenotypes of Connexin-43 and E-Cadherin mutants resemble those
of our FoxJ2 transgenic animals. These data suggest that the lethal effect on
embryonic development of FoxJ2 overexpression, as well as the alterations
observed in the heart and testes of adult transgenic mice, could be determined by
changes in the transcription of genes such as Connexin-43 and/or E-Cadherin.

PMID: 18726704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Jun;6(5):443-7. Epub 2006 Feb 7.

Developmental expression of FoxJ1.2, FoxJ2, and FoxQ1 in Xenopus tropicalis.

Choi VM(1), Harland RM, Khokha MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley,
142 Life Sciences Addition, Berkeley, CA 94720-3200, USA.

Members of the Fox gene family exhibit remarkably restricted patterns of
expression where they have interesting, required functions during development. We
have analyzed the developmental expression patterns of three members of the Fox
gene family, FoxJ1.2, FoxJ2, and FoxQ1, which have not been previously described 
in Xenopus. FoxJ1.2 is expressed in the otic vesicle during late neurula stages
and is then also expressed in the presumptive nephrostomes of the pronephros
during tailbud stages. FoxJ2 is expressed in the notochord and ventral portion of
the neural tube. FoxQ1 is expressed specifically in the pharyngeal pouches as
early as neurula stages and remains on in pharyngeal tissue throughout the
tailbud stages. At later stages, FoxQ1 is also expressed in the anterior gut.
FoxJ1.2, FoxJ2, and FoxQ1 may prove to be useful tissue-specific markers of these
embryonic structures.

PMID: 16461016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Brain Res. 2006 Jan 12;1068(1):23-33. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Identification of forkhead transcription factors in cortical and dopaminergic
areas of the adult murine brain.

Wijchers PJ(1), Hoekman MF, Burbach JP, Smidt MP.

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, Department of Pharmacology and
Anatomy, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The murine forkhead family of transcription factors consists of over 30 members, 
the vast majority of which is important in embryonic development. Implicated in
processes such as proliferation, differentiation and survival, forkhead factors
show highly restricted expression patterns. In search for forkhead genes
expressed in specific neural systems, we identified multiple family members. We
performed a detailed expression analysis for Foxj2, Foxk1 and the murine
orthologue of the human ILF1 gene, which show a remarkable preference for complex
cortical structures. In addition, a comprehensive examination of forkhead gene
expression in dopamine neurons of the ventral tegmental area and substantia nigra
pars compacta, revealed Ilf1 as a novel transcriptional regulator in midbrain
dopamine neurons. These forkhead transcription factors may play a role in
maintenance and survival of developing and adult neurons.

PMID: 16376864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Oncol Rep. 2005 Nov;14(5):1351-5.

Comparative genomics on SLIT1, SLIT2, and SLIT3 orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

SLIT1 gene at human chromosome 10q24.1, SLIT2 gene at 4p15.31, and SLIT3 gene at 
5q34-q35.1 encode large secreted proteins functioning as ligands for Roundabout
(Robo) receptors. SLIT-ROBO signaling pathway is implicated in neurogenesis,
angiogenesis, and immune response through the regulation of axonal guidance,
endothelial cell migration, and denderitic cell migration, respectively. GREMLIN 
(CKTSF1B1 or GREM1) and DANTE (CKTSF1B3 or GREM3) are secreted antagonists for
BMPs and SLITs. Here, comparative integromics analyses on SLIT1, SLIT2, and SLIT3
orthologs were performed by using bioinformatics. Rat Slit2 gene, consisting of
36 exons, was located within rat genome sequences AC098362.4 and AC111627.6.
Mouse Slit3 complete coding sequence was determined by assembling BB634238 EST,
AF144629 cDNA, and AK129223 cDNA. Leucine-rich repeats with nine conserved
cysteine (LRRCC) domains and SLIT C-terminal cysteine-rich (SLITCCR) domain were 
identified in this study. CPxxCxCxxxxVxCxxxxLxxxPxxxPx(10~58)
Nx(19,20)LxxNx(9)Fx(8)LxLxxNxxxCxxxxxFxxLxxx
xxLxLxxNx(9)Fx(13)NxxxCxCxxxWLx(15)CxxPx(17)C was the consensus sequence of LRRCC
domain. Mammalian SLIT1, SLIT2 and SLIT3 orthologs were large secreted proteins
with four LRRCC domains, nine EGF domains, Laminin G (LamG) domain, and SLITCCR
domain. SLIT1 mRNA was expressed in fetal brain, infant brain, anaplastic
oligodendroglioma, and Jurkat T cells. SLIT2 and SLIT3 mRNAs were co-expressed in
embryonic stem (ES) cells with embryoid body formation, and diffuse type gastric 
cancer with signet ring cell features. Double TCF/LEF and bHLH-binding sites were
conserved among mammalian SLIT1 promoters. FOXJ2, E47, ETS1, and FOXA2-binding
sites and CCAAT box were conserved among mammalian SLIT3 promoters. Mammalian
SLIT1 orthologs were identified as evolutionarily conserved targets of the
WNT/beta-catenin signaling pathway.

PMID: 16211308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Int J Oncol. 2005 Jul;27(1):275-9.

Comparative genomics on Dkk1 orthologs.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo, Japan.

WNT family proteins bind to transmembrane proteins FZD1, FZD2, FZD3, FZD4, FZD5, 
FZD6, FZD7, FZD8, FZD9, FZD10, LRP5, LRP6, ROR1, ROR2, RYK, and also secreted
proteins SFRP1, SFRP2, SFRP3, SFRP4, SFRP5, and DAND4 (CER1). DKK family members 
antagonize WNT binding to LRPs, while SFRP family members antagonize WNT binding 
to FZDs. Here, we identified and characterized rat Dkk1 gene and cow Dkk1 gene by
using bioinformatics. Rat and cow Dkk1 genes, consisting of four exons, were
located within AC095296.4 and AC157142.1 genome sequences, respectively. Dkk1
gene at rat chromosome 1q52 was found to encode a 270-aa protein, showing 94.1,
81.5, 78.9, 53.7 and 48.1% total-amino-acid identity with mouse Dkk1, human DKK1,
cow Dkk1, Xenopus dkk1 and zebrafish dkk1, respectively. Vertebrate Dkk1
orthologs were secreted proteins with two Cys rich regions, each containing ten
conserved Cys residues. The C-terminal Cys rich region was well conserved among
vertebrate Dkk1 orthologs. Nucleotide position 148898-147860 of AC009986.10 human
genome sequence was identified as evolutionarily conserved human DKK1 promoter,
and nucleotide position 55266-56301 of AC095296.4 rat genome sequence as
evolutionarily conserved rat Dkk1 promoter. Human DKK1 promoter and rat Dkk1
promoter, showing 66.2% total nucleotide identity, were well conserved. TCF/LEF, 
CP2, POU2F1 (OCT1), HNF1 and FOXJ2-binding sites and TATA-box were conserved
among human DKK1, rat Dkk1, mouse Dkk1, and cow Dkk1 promoters. Double
TCF/LEF-binding sites within the proximal promoter region of mammalian Dkk1
orthologs are implicated in the negative feed back mechanism of WNT/beta-catenin 
signaling pathway.

PMID: 15942669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Dev Dyn. 2004 Oct;231(2):396-401.

FoxJ3, a novel mammalian forkhead gene expressed in neuroectoderm, neural crest, 
and myotome.

Landgren H(1), Carlsson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Göteborg University, Göteborg,
Sweden.

Forkhead transcription factors are important regulators of animal development.
Here, we describe the embryonic expression pattern for one of the novel forkhead 
genes that were discovered as a result of the mouse and human genome projects. It
is most closely related to FoxJ2 and has been assigned the name FoxJ3. The
100-kb, 13-exon mouse Foxj3 gene on chromosome 4 encodes a 623 amino acid (aa)
protein from an mRNA of at least 4.8 kb (Human FOXJ3: Chr 1, 627 aa, 5.3-kb
mRNA). During the stages of mouse development investigated (embryonic day [E]
8.5-E12.5) Foxj3 is expressed in neuroectoderm, in neural crest, and in many
structures derived from neural crest cells, such as facioacoustic, trigeminal,
and dorsal root ganglia. Stripes of expression appear at E10.5 in the location of
myotomes and expand ventrally in a pattern similar to the developing body wall
musculature. Developing limbs have a complex pattern of Foxj3 expression that at 
E12.5 colocalizes with the condensed mesenchyme of the skeletal primordia.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15366017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Mol Biol. 2003 Jun 13;329(4):631-44.

Functional domains of FOXJ2.

Gómez-Ferrería MA(1), Rey-Campos J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Celular y Desarrollo, Centro de Investigaciones
Biológicas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Velázquez
144, 28006, Madrid, Spain.

FOXJ2 is a fork head transcriptional activator, the expression of which starts
very early in embryonic development and it is distributed widely in the adult.
Here, we describe the characterization of domains that are important for its
function. FOXJ2 is localized constitutively at the nucleus of the cell. Two
tyrosine residues and a stretch of basic amino acid residues at the N and
C-terminal ends of the fork head domain, respectively, are important for its
nuclear targeting. These residues are conserved strongly among all members of the
fork head family, suggesting that they could be involved in the nuclear
translocation mechanism of all fork head factors. In addition to the AB domain,
we have found, at least, two other transactivation domains: Domain I, at the N
terminus, and the H/P domain, rich in histidine and proline residues. Although
the AB domain shows the strongest transactivation capacity, all three domains are
required for full FOXJ2 transcriptional activity. Furthermore, a fourth region
rich in proline and glutamine residues and with no intrinsic transactivation
function, the P/Q domain, appears to play an important role in the FOXJ2-mediated
transactivation mechanism. Although FOXJ2 can be phosphorylated in two serine
residues, this post-translational modification did not appear to be essential for
transactivation. Finally, we have found that the W2 wing of the fork head domain 
of FOXJ2 is dispensable for specific DNA binding, although it could have a weak
stabilizing role for the DNA-FOXJ2 complex.

PMID: 12787665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Mol Biol. 2002 Jun 7;319(3):593-602.

Human genome search in celiac disease: mutated gliadin T-cell-like epitope in two
human proteins promotes T-cell activation.

Kumar R(1), Eastwood AL, Brown ML, Laurie GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA
22908-0732, USA.

Discovery of a number of novel and known human genes whose protein products bear 
striking similarity to two or more wheat gliadin domains raised the possibility
that human intestinal non-HLA peptides homologous to celiac T-cell epitopes could
play a role in non-HLA gene specification in celiac disease. Database searching
of the entire human genome identified only 11 gut-expressed proteins with high
T-cell epitope homology, particularly to the DQ2-gamma-I-gliadin epitope (i.e.
TFIIA, FOXJ2 and IgD; mean BestFit quality score=40 versus random value of 24).
Others were similar to DQ2-alpha-I-gliadin (i.e. PAX9; BestFit quality 46 versus 
20 for random), or DQ2-alpha-II-gliadin (PHLDA1, known in mice as the T-cell
death-associated gene; BestFit quality 43 versus 30 for random) epitopes. Among
proteins previously screened for gliadin homology, noteworthy was achaete scute
homologous protein (DQ2-alpha-I-gliadin; BestFit quality 41 versus 22 for
random). With the exception of IgD, all are nuclear factors. Paying particular
attention to the position of potential major histocompatibility complex (MHC)
anchor residues, several were selected for testing in a
DQ2-gamma-I-gliadin-restricted T-cell system. All native 10-mer peptides were
inactive, even when deamidated, but V96F substitution of deamidated TFIIA amino
acid residues 91-100 stimulated IL-2 release at levels exceeding the wheat
gliadin positive control. Also active, but only slightly, was L1009F substitution
of AIB3 amino acid residues 1004-1013. PlotSimilarity alignment of TFIIAs from
eight species revealed subthreshold similarity score in the peptide region, in
contrast to the highly conserved amino and carboxy termini. Molecular modeling of
TFIIA[V96F] peptide points to an important juxtaposition of an upwardly
projecting phenylalanine residue at peptide position 6 that likely contacts a
receptor complementarity-determining region, and a downwardly projecting glutamic
acid residue that fits into the shallow MHC P7 pocket. These observations
tentatively point to a new multi-gene hypothesis for the initiation of celiac
disease in which deamidated free human peptides with T-cell epitope homology
(particularly those made more homologous by mutation) escape negative selection, 
as per deamidation of the HEL(48-62) peptide in the hen egg lysozyme model of
autoimmunity. Deamidation following peptide release due to injury triggers
inflammation, thereafter repeatedly provoked by dietary gliadin immunodominant
peptides concentrated in the proximal small intestine.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd.

PMID: 12054857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mech Dev. 2000 Oct;97(1-2):157-60.

Fhx (Foxj2) expression is activated during spermatogenesis and very early in
embryonic development.

Granadino B(1), Arias-de-la-Fuente C, Pérez-Sánchez C, Párraga M, López-Fernández
LA, del Mazo J, Rey-Campos J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, CSIC, Velazquez 144, 28006, Madrid,
Spain.

FHX (FOXJ2) is a recently characterized human fork head transcriptional activator
that binds DNA with a dual sequence specificity. We have cloned the cDNA for the 
mouse orthologue Foxj2 and characterized its expression in the gonads and along
the early pre-implantation development of the mouse. In the testis, Foxj2 is
expressed from pachytene spermatocytes to round spermatids, but not in
spermatogonia. In addition to the germ lineage, only Sertoli cells of the testis 
showed expression of Foxj2. In the ovary, only granulosa cells of the follicles
express the factor. Neither mature spermatozoa nor oocytes showed expression of
Foxj2. Foxj2 expression is early activated in zygotic development, being detected
since as early as 8-cell stage embryos. Both cell layers of the blastocyst: the
trophectoderm (TE) and the inner cell mass (ICM), express Foxj2.

PMID: 11025217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Mol Biol. 2000 Aug 25;301(4):795-806.

FHX.L and FHX.S, two isoforms of the human fork-head factor FHX (FOXJ2) with
differential activity.

Pérez-Sánchez C(1), Arias-de-la-Fuente C, Gómez-Ferrería MA, Granadino B,
Rey-Campos J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, CSIC, Velázquez 144, Madrid, 28006,
Spain.

Many biological phenomena are dependent on mechanisms that fine-tune the
expression levels of particular genes. This can be achieved by altering the
relative activity of a single transcription factor, by post-translational
modifications or by interaction with regulatory molecules. An alternative
mechanism is based on competition between two or more differently active isoforms
of the same transcription factor. We found that FHX, a recently characterized
human fork-head transcriptional activator, may show such a mechanism for
balancing its activity by expressing two differently sized isoforms, FHX.S and
FHX.L, encoded by a single gene located on human chromosome 12. FHX. L and FHX.S 
showed different transcriptional capacities, the larger form, FHX.L, behaving as 
the more potent transactivator. A transactivation domain of the acidic type
present only in FHX.L would account for this functional difference. The relative 
concentrations of these two FHX isoforms appear to vary in a number of cell
types, a circumstance that may regulate the final activity of this transcription 
factor.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10966786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 28;275(17):12909-16.

FHX, a novel fork head factor with a dual DNA binding specificity.

Pérez-Sánchez C(1), Gómez-Ferrería MA, de La Fuente CA, Granadino B, Velasco G,
Esteban-Gamboa A, Rey-Campos J.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, CSIC, Velázquez 144, 28006 Madrid,
Spain.

The HNF3/fork head family includes a large number of transcription factors that
share a structurally related DNA binding domain. Fork head factors have been
shown to play important roles both during development and in the adult. We now
describe the cloning of a novel mammalian fork head factor that we have named FHX
(fork head homologous X (FHX), which is expressed in many adult tissues. In the
embryo, FHX expression showed a very early onset during the cleavage stages of
preimplantation development. Polymerase chain reaction-assisted site selection
experiments showed that FHX bound DNA with a dual sequence specificity. Sites
recognized by FHX could be classified into two different types according to their
sequences. Binding of FHX to sequences of each type appeared to occur
independently. Our data suggest that either different regions of the fork head
domain or different molecular forms of this domain could be involved in binding
of FHX to each type of site. In transfection assays, FHX was capable of
activating transcription from promoters containing FHX sites of either type.

PMID: 10777590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


