
1. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2016 Mar;46(3):209-21. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyv185. Epub 2016 Jan 
4.

Forkhead box protein k1 recruits TET1 to act as a tumor suppressor and is
associated with MRI detection.

Sun T(1), Wang H(2), Li Q(3), Qian Z(4), Shen C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, International Peace Maternity and Child Health
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai. (2)Department of Rheumatology, 
Gansu Provincial Hospital, Lanzhou, Gansu. (3)Department of Cardiology, Ningbo
NO.7 Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang. (4)Department of Radiology, International Peace 
Maternity and Child Health Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai
shenzihai1101@126.com zhaoxiaqian002@126.com. (5)Department of Cardiology, Ningbo
NO.7 Hospital, Ningbo, Zhejiang shenzihai1101@126.com zhaoxiaqian002@126.com.

OBJECTIVE: Today, more and more evidence suggests that Foxk proteins (Foxk1 and
Foxk2) work as transcriptional repressors in different kinds of cancer, but
whether Foxk1 has a role in mediating tumorigenesis in breast cancer, the
evidence is rare.
METHODS: MCF-7 cells transfected with shFoxk1 displayed a mesenchymal morphology 
and reduced the expression of E-cadherin, and increased the expression of
N-cadherin. Transwell invasion assay and living imaging assay show that the
overexpression of Foxk1 could inhibit metastasis in vitro and in vivo.
Ribonucleic acid sequencing revealed that the knockdown of Foxk1 resulted in the 
up-regulation of different oncogenes, which was implicated in metastasis and
tumor angiopoiesis. Quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation, chromatin
immunoprecipitation and Luciferase reporter assays suggested that Foxk1 could
bind to the promoter of epithelial-mesenchymal transition inducer Twist and
vascular endothelial growth factor, VEGF. Mass Spectrometry,
co-immunoprecipitation assays and glutathione-S-transferase pull-down assay
detected that Foxk1 was physically associated with Ten-eleven translocation 1,
TET1, in vivo and in vitro.
RESULTS: We reported that the mean expression level of Foxk1 in breast cancer was
significantly lower than the adjacent noncarcinoma tissue. The higher Foxk1
expression was associated with better prognosis. Endothelial tube formation
assays indicated that Foxk1 might regulate breast cancer angiogenesis through
transcriptional repression of vascular endothelial growth factor. Furthermore, in
vivo magnetic resonance imaging revealed the overexpression of Foxk1 could
enhance the detection of the tumors. Further, a strong negative correlation was
observed between Foxk1 and Twsit or between Foxk1 and vascular endothelial growth
factor, and the higher Foxk1 expression is correlated with better over all
survivals and better relapse-free survivals.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our data indicated the function of Foxk1 as a tumor
suppressor in facilitating angiogenesis and metastasis in breast cancer.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26732382  [PubMed - in process]


2. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 4;290(49):29617-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.664649. Epub 2015
Oct 14.

JNK-associated Leucine Zipper Protein Functions as a Docking Platform for
Polo-like Kinase 1 and Regulation of the Associating Transcription Factor
Forkhead Box Protein K1.

Ramkumar P(1), Lee CM(1), Moradian A(2), Sweredoski MJ(2), Hess S(2), Sharrocks
AD(3), Haines DS(4), Reddy EP(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount
Sinai, New York, New York 10029. (2)the Proteome Exploration Laboratory, Beckman 
Institute, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125, and.
(3)the Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PL,
United Kingdom. (4)the Fels Institute for Cancer Research and Molecular Biology, 
Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19122. (5)From the Department of
Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York
10029, ep.reddy@mssm.edu.

JLP (JNK-associated leucine zipper protein) is a scaffolding protein that
interacts with various signaling proteins associated with coordinated regulation 
of cellular process such as endocytosis, motility, neurite outgrowth, cell
proliferation, and apoptosis. Here we identified PLK1 (Polo-like kinase 1) as a
novel interaction partner of JLP through mass spectrometric approaches. Our
results indicate that JLP is phospho-primed by PLK1 on Thr-351, which is
recognized by the Polo box domain of PLK1 leading to phosphorylation of JLP at
additional sites. Stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture and
quantitative LC-MS/MS analysis was performed to identify PLK1-dependent
JLP-interacting proteins. Treatment of cells with the PLK1 kinase inhibitor
BI2536 suppressed binding of the Forkhead box protein K1 (FOXK1) transcriptional 
repressor to JLP. JLP was found to interact with PLK1 and FOXK1 during mitosis.
Moreover, knockdown of PLK1 affected the interaction between JLP and FOXK1. FOXK1
is a known transcriptional repressor of the CDK inhibitor p21/WAF1, and knockdown
of JLP resulted in increased FOXK1 protein levels and a reduction of p21
transcript levels. Our results suggest a novel mechanism by which FOXK1 protein
levels and activity are regulated by associating with JLP and PLK1.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4705960 [Available on 2016-12-04]
PMID: 26468278  [PubMed - in process]


3. MBio. 2015 Apr 7;6(2). pii: e02509-14. doi: 10.1128/mBio.02509-14.

The transcription factor FoxK participates with Nup98 to regulate antiviral gene 
expression.

Panda D(1), Gold B(1), Tartell MA(1), Rausch K(1), Casas-Tinto S(2), Cherry S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Neurobiology
Department, Instituto Cajal, Madrid, Spain. (3)Department of Microbiology,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
cherrys@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Upon infection, pathogen recognition leads to a rapidly activated gene expression
program that induces antimicrobial effectors to clear the invader. We recently
found that Nup98 regulates the expression of a subset of rapidly activated
antiviral genes to restrict disparate RNA virus infections in Drosophila by
promoting RNA polymerase occupancy at the promoters of these antiviral genes. How
Nup98 specifically targets these loci was unclear; however, it is known that
Nup98 participates with transcription factors to regulate developmental-gene
activation. We reasoned that additional transcription factors may facilitate the 
Nup98-dependent expression of antiviral genes. In a genome-wide RNA interference 
(RNAi) screen, we identified a relatively understudied forkhead transcription
factor, FoxK, as active against Sindbis virus (SINV) in Drosophila. Here we find 
that FoxK is active against the panel of viruses that are restricted by Nup98,
including SINV and vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). Mechanistically, we show
that FoxK coordinately regulates the Nup98-dependent expression of antiviral
genes. Depletion of FoxK significantly reduces Nup98-dependent induction of
antiviral genes and reduces the expression of a forkhead response
element-containing luciferase reporter. Together, these data show that
FoxK-mediated activation of gene expression is Nup98 dependent. We extended our
studies to mammalian cells and found that the mammalian ortholog FOXK1 is
antiviral against two disparate RNA viruses, SINV and VSV, in human cells.
Interestingly, FOXK1 also plays a role in the expression of antiviral genes in
mammals: depletion of FOXK1 attenuates virus-inducible interferon-stimulated
response element (ISRE) reporter expression. Overall, our results demonstrate a
novel role for FOXK1 in regulating the expression of antiviral genes, from
insects to humans.IMPORTANCE: Innate immunity is characterized by rapid gene
expression programs, from insects to mammals. Furthermore, we find that Nup98,
known for its roles in the nuclear pore, plays a noncanonical role in binding the
promoters and poising a subset of loci for rapid antiviral gene induction. It was
unclear how Nup98 accesses these specific genes, and we here demonstrate that
Nup98 cooperates with the transcription factor FoxK to regulate this gene
expression program. Depletion of FoxK specifically reduces the induction of
Nup98-dependent genes. Further, we find that the antiviral function of FoxK is
conserved, as the human ortholog FOXK1 is also antiviral and regulates gene
expression from virus-induced promoters. Although other forkhead transcription
factors have been implicated in immunity, a role for FoxK in antiviral defense
was previously unappreciated. Our findings reveal a conserved and novel role for 
FoxK in coordinating with Nup98 to promote a robust and complex antiviral
transcriptional response.

Copyright © 2015 Panda et al.

PMCID: PMC4453567
PMID: 25852164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Dev Cell. 2015 Mar 23;32(6):707-18. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2015.01.031.

FOXKs promote Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by translocating DVL into the nucleus.

Wang W(1), Li X(1), Lee M(2), Jun S(1), Aziz KE(1), Feng L(1), Tran MK(1), Li
N(1), McCrea PD(2), Park JI(1), Chen J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(2)Department of Genetics, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Department of Experimental
Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515
Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address:
jchen8@mdanderson.org.

Dishevelled (DVL) proteins serve as crucial regulators that transduce canonical
Wnt signals to the GSK3ß-destruction complex, resulting in the stabilization of
ß-catenin. Emerging evidence underscores the nuclear functions of DVLs, which are
critical for Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. However, the mechanism underlying DVL
nuclear localization remains poorly understood. Here we discovered two Forkhead
box (FOX) transcription factors, FOXK1 and FOXK2, as bona fide DVL-interacting
proteins. FOXK1 and FOXK2 positively regulate Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by
translocating DVL into the nucleus. Moreover, FOXK1 and FOXK2 protein levels are 
elevated in human colorectal cancers and correlate with DVL nuclear localization.
Conditional expression of Foxk2 in mice induced intestinal hyper-proliferation
that featured enhanced DVL nuclear localization and upregulated Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling. Together, our results not only reveal a mechanism by which DVL is
translocated into the nucleus but also suggest unexpected roles of FOXK1 and
FOXK2 in regulating Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4374128
PMID: 25805136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 16;290(3):1580-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.609834. Epub 2014 
Dec 1.

BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1) deubiquitinase antagonizes the
ubiquitin-mediated activation of FoxK2 target genes.

Okino Y(1), Machida Y(1), Frankland-Searby S(2), Machida YJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Oncology and. (2)Molecular Pharmacology and
Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905. (3)From the
Departments of Oncology and Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905 machida.yuichi@mayo.edu.

BRCA1-associated protein 1 (BAP1), which is frequently mutated in cancer,
functions as a deubiquitinase (DUB) for histone H2A. Although BAP1 interacts with
a transcriptional regulator, HCF-1, and transcription factors FoxK1 and FoxK2,
how BAP1 controls gene expression remains unclear. This study investigates the
importance of BAP1 DUB activity and the interactions with FoxK2 and HCF-1 in the 
regulation of FoxK2 target genes. We show that FoxK2 recruits BAP1 to the target 
genes through the forkhead-associated domain, which interacts with Thr(P)-493 on 
BAP1. BAP1, in turn, recruits HCF-1, thereby forming a ternary complex in which
BAP1 bridges FoxK2 and HCF-1. BAP1 represses FoxK2 target genes, and this effect 
requires BAP1 DUB activity but not interaction with HCF-1. Importantly, BAP1
depletion causes up-regulation of FoxK2 target genes only in the presence of the 
Ring1B-Bmi1 complex, an E3 ubiquitin ligase for histone H2A, indicating an
antagonizing role of BAP1 against Ring1B-Bmi1. Our findings suggest that BAP1
deficiency causes increased expression of target genes in a Ring1B-Bmi1-dependent
manner.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4340404
PMID: 25451922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Dec;16(12):1202-14. doi: 10.1038/ncb3062. Epub 2014 Nov 17.

Foxk proteins repress the initiation of starvation-induced atrophy and autophagy 
programs.

Bowman CJ(1), Ayer DE(2), Dynlacht BD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University Cancer Institute, New York
University School of Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA. (2)Department of
Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84112, USA.

Autophagy is the primary catabolic process triggered in response to starvation.
Although autophagic regulation within the cytosolic compartment is well
established, it is becoming clear that nuclear events also regulate the induction
or repression of autophagy. Nevertheless, a thorough understanding of the
mechanisms by which sequence-specific transcription factors modulate expression
of genes required for autophagy is lacking. Here, we identify Foxk proteins
(Foxk1 and Foxk2) as transcriptional repressors of autophagy in muscle cells and 
fibroblasts. Interestingly, Foxk1/2 serve to counter-balance another forkhead
transcription factor, Foxo3, which induces an overlapping set of autophagic and
atrophic targets in muscle. Foxk1/2 specifically recruits Sin3A-HDAC complexes to
restrict acetylation of histone H4 and expression of critical autophagy genes.
Remarkably, mTOR promotes the transcriptional activity of Foxk1 by facilitating
nuclear entry to specifically limit basal levels of autophagy in nutrient-rich
conditions. Our study highlights an ancient, conserved mechanism whereby
nutritional status is interpreted by mTOR to restrict autophagy by repressing
essential autophagy genes through Foxk-Sin3-mediated transcriptional control.

PMCID: PMC4250422
PMID: 25402684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Ovarian Res. 2014 Jan 21;7:9. doi: 10.1186/1757-2215-7-9.

Risk miRNA screening of ovarian cancer based on miRNA functional synergistic
network.

Ying H(1), Lyu J, Ying T, Li J, Jin S, Shao J, Wang L, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, No,36, Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang, Liaoning Province
110004, China. huanchunying2@hotmail.com.

Retraction in
    J Ovarian Res. 2015;8(1):17.

BACKGROUND: miRNAs are proved to have causal roles in tumorgenesis involving
various types of human cancers, but the mechanism is not clear. We aimed to
explore the effect of miRNAs on the development of ovarian cancer and the
underlying mechanism.
METHODS: The miRNA expression profile GSE31801 was downloaded from GEO (Gene
Expression Omnibus) database. Firstly, the differentially expressed miRNAs were
screened. Target genes of the miRNAs were collected from TargetScan, PicTar,
miRanda, and DIANA-microT database, then the miRNA-miRNA co-regulating network
was constructed using miRNA pairs with common regulated target genes. Next, the
functional modules in the network were studied, the miRNA pairs regulated at
least one modules were enriched to form the miRNA functional synergistic network 
(MFSN).
RESULTS: Risk miRNA were selected in MFSN according to the topological structure.
Transcript factors (TFs) in MFSN were identified, followed by the
miRNA-transcript factor networks construction. Totally, 42 up- and 61
down-regulated differentially expressed miRNAs were identified, of which 68
formed 2292 miRNA pairs in the miRNA-miRNA co-regulating network. GO: 0007268
(synaptic transmission) and GO: 0019226 (transmission of nerve impulse) were the 
two common functions of miRNAs in MFSN, and hsa-miR-579 (36), hsa-miR-942 (31),
hsa-miR-105 (31), hsa-miR-150 (34), and hsa-miR-27a* (32) were selected as the
hub nodes in MFSN.
CONCLUSIONS: In all, 17 TFs, including CREM, ERG, and CREB1 were screened as the 
cancer related TFs in MFSN. Other TFs, such as BIN1, FOXN3, FOXK1, FOXP2, and
ESRRG with high degrees may be inhibited in ovarian cancer. MFSN gave us a new
shed light on the mechanism studies in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3902002
PMID: 24444095  [PubMed]


8. Genome Biol. 2013;14(10):R119.

A screen for hydroxymethylcytosine and formylcytosine binding proteins suggests
functions in transcription and chromatin regulation.

Iurlaro M, Ficz G, Oxley D, Raiber EA, Bachman M, Booth MJ, Andrews S,
Balasubramanian S, Reik W.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation (5mC) plays important roles in epigenetic regulation 
of genome function. Recently, TET hydroxylases have been found to oxidise 5mC to 
hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC), formylcytosine (5fC) and carboxylcytosine (5caC) in
DNA. These derivatives have a role in demethylation of DNA but in addition may
have epigenetic signaling functions in their own right. A recent study identified
proteins which showed preferential binding to 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and its
oxidised forms, where readers for 5mC and 5hmC showed little overlap, and
proteins bound to further oxidation forms were enriched for repair proteins and
transcription regulators. We extend this study by using promoter sequences as
baits and compare protein binding patterns to unmodified or modified cytosine
using DNA from mouse embryonic stem cell extracts.
RESULTS: We compared protein enrichments from two DNA probes with different CpG
composition and show that, whereas some of the enriched proteins show specificity
to cytosine modifications, others are selective for both modification and target 
sequences. Only a few proteins were identified with a preference for 5hmC (such
as RPL26, PRP8 and the DNA mismatch repair protein MHS6), but proteins with a
strong preference for 5fC were more numerous, including transcriptional
regulators (FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXP1, FOXP4 and FOXI3), DNA repair factors (TDG and
MPG) and chromatin regulators (EHMT1, L3MBTL2 and all components of the NuRD
complex).
CONCLUSIONS: Our screen has identified novel proteins that bind to 5fC in genomic
sequences with different CpG composition and suggests they regulate transcription
and chromatin, hence opening up functional investigations of 5fC readers.

PMCID: PMC4014808
PMID: 24156278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Virology. 2013 Sep 1;443(2):313-20. doi: 10.1016/j.virol.2013.05.018. Epub 2013
Jun 5.

Interaction of CtBP with adenovirus E1A suppresses immortalization of primary
epithelial cells and enhances virus replication during productive infection.

Subramanian T(1), Zhao LJ, Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University Health Sciences
Center, Doisy Research Center, 1100 South Grand Blvd., Saint Louis, MO 63104,
USA.

Adenovirus E1A induces cell proliferation, oncogenic transformation and promotes 
viral replication through interaction with p300/CBP, TRRAP/p400 multi-protein
complex and the retinoblastoma (pRb) family proteins through distinct domains in 
the E1A N-terminal region. The C-terminal region of E1A suppresses E1A/Ras
co-transformation and interacts with FOXK1/K2, DYRK1A/1B/HAN11 and CtBP1/2 (CtBP)
protein complexes. To specifically dissect the role of CtBP interaction with E1A,
we engineered a mutation (DL<U+2192>AS) within the CtBP-binding motif, PLDLS, and
investigated the effect of the mutation on immortalization and Ras cooperative
transformation of primary cells and viral replication. Our results suggest that
CtBP-E1A interaction suppresses immortalization and Ras co-operative
transformation of primary rodent epithelial cells without significantly
influencing the tumorigenic activities of transformed cells in immunodeficient
and immunocompetent animals. During productive infection, CtBP-E1A interaction
enhances viral replication in human cells. Between the two CtBP family proteins, 
CtBP2 appears to restrict viral replication more than CtBP1 in human cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3732182
PMID: 23747199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Gene Expr Patterns. 2013 Oct;13(7):280-6. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2013.05.003. Epub
2013 May 25.

The transcription factor Foxk1 is expressed in developing and adult mouse
neuroretina.

Sel S(1), Münzenberg C, Nass N, Kalinski T, Datan M, Auffarth GU, Töteberg-Harms 
M, Zenkel M, Kruse FE, Paulsen F, Schicht M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany.
saadettinsel@googlemail.com

The forkhead transcription factor Foxk1 is an important regulator of myogenic
progenitor cells. Since our previous data from mouse retina revealed that Foxk1
is upregulated in Ptf1a-deficient mice we investigated the spatial and temporal
expression of Foxk1 during development of mouse retina. Expression of Foxk1 was
analyzed on both mRNA and protein level. To identify Foxk1 transcripts, retina
and cerebrum (positive control) of adult animals (postnatal day 90 (P90)) was
subjected to reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
sequencing of the amplified cDNA. The Foxk1 protein was analyzed in adult retina 
by Western blotting and in developing eyes at embryonic day (E) 13, 15, E17, P0, 
P4, P7, P10 and P90 by immunohistochemistry. Localization of Foxk1 expression was
determined using cell-specific markers by double labelling. Foxk1 transcripts
were detected in adult retina by RT-PCR and confirmed by sequencing. Western blot
analysis confirmed the expression of Foxk1 protein in the adult retina.
Immunohistochemical examination of developing eyes localized the protein to
bipolar, amacrine and ganglion cells with an onset of Foxk1 expression from E15
onwards. The expression pattern during development suggests that Foxk1 may have
an important role in retinal cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23714736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Cell Sci. 2012 Nov 15;125(Pt 22):5329-37. doi: 10.1242/jcs.105239. Epub 2012
Sep 6.

Foxk1 promotes cell proliferation and represses myogenic differentiation by
regulating Foxo4 and Mef2.

Shi X(1), Wallis AM, Gerard RD, Voelker KA, Grange RW, DePinho RA, Garry MG,
Garry DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA.

In response to severe injury, adult skeletal muscle exhibits a remarkable
regenerative capacity due to a resident muscle stem/progenitor cell population.
While a number of factors are expressed in the muscle progenitor cell (MPC)
population, the molecular networks that govern this cell population remain an
area of active investigation. In this study, utilizing knockdown techniques and
overexpression of Foxk1 in the myogenic lineage, we observed dysregulation of
Foxo and Mef2 downstream targets. Utilizing an array of technologies, we
establish that Foxk1 represses the transcriptional activity of Foxo4 and Mef2 and
physically interacts with Foxo4 and Mef2, thus promoting MPC proliferation and
antagonizing the myogenic lineage differentiation program, respectively.
Correspondingly, knockdown of Foxk1 in C2C12 myoblasts results in cell cycle
arrest, and Foxk1 overexpression in C2C12CAR myoblasts retards muscle
differentiation. Collectively, we have established that Foxk1 promotes MPC
proliferation by repressing Foxo4 transcriptional activity and inhibits myogenic 
differentiation by repressing Mef2 activity. These studies enhance our
understanding of the transcriptional networks that regulate the MPC population
and muscle regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3561855
PMID: 22956541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Aug;23(16):3079-93. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-02-0170. Epub 2012
Jun 27.

Live-cell monitoring of periodic gene expression in synchronous human cells
identifies Forkhead genes involved in cell cycle control.

Grant GD(1), Gamsby J, Martyanov V, Brooks L 3rd, George LK, Mahoney JM, Loros
JJ, Dunlap JC, Whitfield ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
03755, USA.

We developed a system to monitor periodic luciferase activity from cell
cycle-regulated promoters in synchronous cells. Reporters were driven by a
minimal human E2F1 promoter with peak expression in G1/S or a basal promoter with
six Forkhead DNA-binding sites with peak expression at G2/M. After cell cycle
synchronization, luciferase activity was measured in live cells at 10-min
intervals across three to four synchronous cell cycles, allowing unprecedented
resolution of cell cycle-regulated gene expression. We used this assay to screen 
Forkhead transcription factors for control of periodic gene expression. We
confirmed a role for FOXM1 and identified two novel cell cycle regulators, FOXJ3 
and FOXK1. Knockdown of FOXJ3 and FOXK1 eliminated cell cycle-dependent
oscillations and resulted in decreased cell proliferation rates. Analysis of
genes regulated by FOXJ3 and FOXK1 showed that FOXJ3 may regulate a network of
zinc finger proteins and that FOXK1 binds to the promoter and regulates DHFR,
TYMS, GSDMD, and the E2F binding partner TFDP1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by high-throughput sequencing analysis identified 4329 genomic loci
bound by FOXK1, 83% of which contained a FOXK1-binding motif. We verified that a 
subset of these loci are activated by wild-type FOXK1 but not by a FOXK1 (H355A) 
DNA-binding mutant.

PMCID: PMC3418304
PMID: 22740631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Biochem J. 2012 Sep 15;446(3):349-57. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120563.

Foxk1 recruits the Sds3 complex and represses gene expression in myogenic
progenitors.

Shi X(1), Seldin DC, Garry DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, Minneapolis, MN
55455, USA.

Previous studies have established that Foxk1 (forkhead box k1) plays an important
role in skeletal muscle regeneration. Foxk1 regulates the cell-cycle progression 
of myogenic progenitors by repressing the cell-cycle inhibitor gene p21. However,
the underlying mechanism is not well understood. In the present study, we report 
the identification of Sds3 (suppressor of defective silencing 3) as an adaptor
protein that recruits the Sin3 [SWI (switch)-independent 3]-HDAC (histone
deacetylase) repression complex and binds Foxk1. Using GST (glutathione
transferase) pull-down assays, we defined the interaction between the Foxk1 FHA
(forkhead-associated domain) domain and phospho-Thr(49) in Sds3. We demonstrated 
that the transcriptional repression of Foxk1 is dependent on the Sin3-Sds3
repression complex, and knockdown of Sds3 results in cell-cycle arrest. We
further identified the protein kinase CK2 as the protein kinase for Sds3 Thr(49) 
and demonstrated that the protein kinase activity of CK2 is required for proper
cell-cycle progression. Analysis of CK2 mutant mice reveals perturbation of
skeletal muscle regeneration due to the dysregulation of cell-cycle kinetics.
Overall, these studies define a CK2-Sds3-Foxk1 cascade that modulates gene
expression and regulates skeletal muscle regeneration.

PMCID: PMC4494662
PMID: 22716292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell Biochem. 2012 Jul;366(1-2):251-8. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1302-2. Epub
2012 Apr 4.

Sin3 interacts with Foxk1 and regulates myogenic progenitors.

Shi X(1), Garry DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, 4-108 NHH, 312 
Church St SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

We have previously reported Foxk1 as an important transcription factor in the
myogenic progenitors. SWI-independent-3 (Sin3) has been identified as a Foxk1
binding candidate using a yeast two-hybrid screen. In the present study, we have 
identified the Foxk1 N-terminal (1-40) region as the Sin3 interacting domain
(SID), and the PAH2 of Sin3 as the Foxk1 binding domain utilizing yeast
two-hybrid and GST pull-down assays. Further studies revealed that knockdown of
Sin3a or Sin3b results in cell cycle arrest and upregulation of cell cycle
inhibitor genes. In summary, our present studies have shown that Foxk1 interacts 
with Sin3 through the SID and that Sin3 has an important role in the regulation
of cell cycle kinetics of the MPC population. The results of these studies
continue to define and assemble the networks that regulate the MPCs and muscle
regeneration.

PMCID: PMC4494651
PMID: 22476904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Biochem Cell Biol. 2012 Apr;90(2):153-63. doi: 10.1139/o11-080. Epub 2012 Jan 31.

The C-terminal region of E1A: a molecular tool for cellular cartography.

Yousef AF(1), Fonseca GJ, Cohen MJ, Mymryk JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, The University of Western Ontario, London Regional
Cancer Program, London, ON N6A 4L6, Canada.

The adenovirus E1A proteins function via protein-protein interactions. By making 
many connections with the cellular protein network, individual modules of this
virally encoded hub reprogram numerous aspects of cell function and behavior.
Although many of these interactions have been thoroughly studied, those mediated 
by the C-terminal region of E1A are less well understood. This review focuses on 
how this region of E1A affects cell cycle progression, apoptosis, senescence,
transformation, and conversion of cells to an epithelial state through
interactions with CTBP1/2, DYRK1A/B, FOXK1/2, and importin-a. Furthermore, novel 
potential pathways that the C-terminus of E1A influences through these
connections with the cellular interaction network are discussed.

PMID: 22292450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Hum Hypertens. 2011 Sep;25(9):560-4. doi: 10.1038/jhh.2010.93. Epub 2010 Oct 7.

Further study of chromosome 7p22 to identify the molecular basis of familial
hyperaldosteronism type II.

Carss KJ(1), Stowasser M, Gordon RD, O'Shaughnessy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, UK.

Familial hyperaldosteronism type II (FH-II) is an inherited form of
hyperaldosteronism associated with hypertension in most patients. The mutations
that cause FH-II are unknown, but linkage analysis has mapped them to chromosome 
7p22. As FH-II is clinically indistinguishable from sporadic primary
aldosteronism, a common and treatable condition, unravelling the cause of FH-II
has important implications for these sporadic cases. To investigate whether FH-II
is caused by large deletions or insertions, we examined the virtual karyotype of 
four pairs of affected and unaffected individuals using high-density bead chips. 
We also sequenced the coding regions of five 7p22 candidate genes that were
prioritized because of their putative role in cell growth. We found no evidence
of single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) copy number variation between pairs, and 
from the widest gap on the chip, chromosome 7p22 deletions or insertions
exceeding ~50 kb in these pedigrees can be excluded. We found 15 SNPs (two of
which were novel), but none of them were non-synonymous and segregated with the
disease in the FH-II pedigrees. We have been able to exclude large genomic
deletions or insertions at 7p22 and refine the candidate gene list for this
locus, but the mutations causing FH-II remain elusive.

PMID: 20927129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Hum Genet. 2010 Aug;128(2):213-20. doi: 10.1007/s00439-010-0847-y. Epub 2010 Jun 
11.

Genetic mapping of a novel hypotrichosis locus to chromosome 7p21.3-p22.3 in a
Pakistani family and screening of the candidate genes.

Basit S(1), Ali G, Wasif N, Ansar M, Ahmad W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Quaid-i-Azam
University, Islamabad, Pakistan.

Hereditary hypotrichosis is a heterogeneous group of inherited hair loss
disorders characterized by diffused or localized thinning or absence of hair
affecting scalp, eyebrows and eyelashes, and other body parts. Over the past few 
years, at least four autosomal dominant and six autosomal recessive forms of
hypotrichosis have been described. All these ten forms of hypotrichosis have been
mapped on different human chromosomes and the corresponding genes have been
identified in most of these cases. In the present study, we have described a
six-generation Pakistani consanguineous family with an autosomal recessive
transmission of hereditary hypotrichosis. All the five affected individuals of
the family showed complete absence of scalp hair and sparse eyebrows and
eyelashes. They were born with complete absence of scalp hairs. Facial hair of
beard and mustaches were present in all the affected adult male individuals.
Papules were observed only on scalp of the affected individuals. A scalp biopsy
from an affected individual showed markedly reduced number of hair follicles.
Human genome scan using polymorphic microsatellite markers mapped the disease
locus on chromosome 7p21.3-p22.3, flanked by markers D7S1532 and D7S3047. A
maximum two-point LOD score of 4.74 (theta = 0.00) was obtained at marker D7S481.
The linkage interval spans 15.69 cM, which corresponds to 6.59 Mb according to
the sequence-based physical map (Build 36.2). Mutation analysis of five potential
candidate genes (GNA12, FOXK1, DAGLB, ZNF12, ACTB), located in the linkage
interval, did not reveal any functional sequence variant.

PMID: 20544222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Virol. 2010 Mar;84(6):2719-31. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02119-09. Epub 2010 Jan 6.

Adenovirus type 5 E1A and E6 proteins of low-risk cutaneous beta-human
papillomaviruses suppress cell transformation through interaction with FOXK1/K2
transcription factors.

Komorek J(1), Kuppuswamy M, Subramanian T, Vijayalingam S, Lomonosova E, Zhao LJ,
Mymryk JS, Schmitt K, Chinnadurai G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Virology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine,
Doisy Research Center, 1100 South Grand Boulevard, Saint Louis, Missouri 63104,
USA.

The adenovirus (Adv) oncoprotein E1A stimulates cell proliferation and inhibits
differentiation. These activities are primarily linked to the N-terminal region
(exon 1) of E1A, which interacts with multiple cellular protein complexes. The C 
terminus (exon 2) of E1A antagonizes these processes, mediated in part through
interaction with C-terminal binding proteins 1 and 2 (CtBP1/2). To identify
additional cellular E1A targets that are involved in the modulation of E1A
C-terminus-mediated activities, we undertook tandem affinity purification of
E1A-associated proteins. Through mass spectrometric analysis, we identified
several known E1A-interacting proteins as well as novel E1A targets, such as the 
forkhead transcription factors, FOXK1/K2. We identified a Ser/Thr-containing
sequence motif in E1A that mediated interaction with FOXK1/K2. We demonstrated
that the E6 proteins of two beta-human papillomaviruses (HPV14 and HPV21)
associated with epidermodysplasia verruciformis also interacted with FOXK1/K2
through a motif similar to that of E1A. The E1A mutants deficient in interaction 
with FOXK1/K2 induced enhanced cell proliferation and oncogenic transformation.
The hypertransforming activity of the mutant E1A was suppressed by HPV21 E6. An
E1A-E6 chimeric protein containing the Ser/Thr domain of the E6 protein in E1A
interacted efficiently with FOXK1/K2 and inhibited cell transformation. Our
results suggest that targeting FOXK1/K2 may be a common mechanism for certain
beta-HPVs and Adv5. E1A exon 2 mutants deficient in interaction with the
dual-specificity kinases DYRK1A/1B and their cofactor HAN11 also induced
increased cell proliferation and transformation. Our results suggest that the E1A
C-terminal region may suppress cell proliferation and oncogenic transformation
through interaction with three different cellular protein complexes: FOXK1/K2,
DYRK(1A/1B)/HAN11, and CtBP1/2.

PMCID: PMC2826030
PMID: 20053746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Stem Cells. 2010 Mar 31;28(3):462-9. doi: 10.1002/stem.274.

Fhl2 interacts with Foxk1 and corepresses Foxo4 activity in myogenic progenitors.

Shi X(1), Bowlin KM, Garry DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities, Minneapolis,
Minnesota 55455, USA.

Adult skeletal muscle has a remarkable regenerative capacity because of a
myogenic progenitor cell population. Using a gene disruption strategy, we
determined that Foxk1 regulates myogenic progenitor cell activation and muscle
regeneration. In this study, we undertook a yeast two hybrid screen to identify
Foxk1 interacting proteins. We identified the LIM-only protein, Fhl2, as a Foxk1 
interacting protein. Using transcriptional assays, we observed that Fhl2, in a
dose-dependent fashion, promotes Foxk1 transcriptional repression of Foxo4
activity. Using histochemical and immunohistochemical assays, we further
established that Fhl2 is expressed in the myogenic progenitor cell population.
Fhl2 knockdown results in cell cycle arrest, and mice lacking Fhl2 have perturbed
skeletal muscle regeneration. Collectively, these studies define a Fhl2-Foxk1
cascade that regulates the myogenic progenitor cell activity in adult skeletal
muscle and enhances our understanding of muscle regeneration.

PMID: 20013826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Feb 15;289(1-2):119-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.026. Epub
2009 Sep 22.

Immunohistochemical, volumetric, and functional neuroimaging studies in patients 
with idiopathic Parkinson's disease.

Hummel T(1), Witt M, Reichmann H, Welge-Luessen A, Haehner A.

Author information: 
(1)Smell & Taste Clinic, Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Dresden
Medical School, Dresden, Germany. thummel@mail.zih.tu-dresden.de

Idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) is closely associated with olfactory loss.
Deficits in the sense of smell may precede clinical motor symptoms by years.
Although there is more and more evidence from recent studies to support this
view, it remains unclear which substrates would cause the olfactory deficit.
Studies based on biopsies from the olfactory epithelium did not reveal specific
changes in the nasal mucosa of PD patients compared to patients who were hyposmic
for other reasons. Thus, PD-related olfactory impairment seems not to be directly
associated with specific changes in the olfactory epithelium. With regard to
volumetrics of the olfactory bulb (OB) results indicated that there is little or 
no difference between PD patients and healthy controls in terms of OB volume.
Again, these data support the idea that olfactory loss in PD is not a consequence
of damage to the olfactory epithelium but rather results from central-nervous
changes. Finally, studies based on functional MRI suggested that neuronal
activity in the amygdala and hippocampus is reduced in PD patients compared to
controls which may specifically impact on olfactory function. In addition,
neuronal activity in components of cortico-striatal loops appears to be
up-regulated indicating compensatory processes involving the dopaminergic system.
Thus, it seems that cerebral changes, and not changes at the level of the
olfactory epithelium, are the basis of the olfactory loss observed in PD
patients.

PMID: 19775703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Mov Disord. 2009 Apr 30;24(6):906-14. doi: 10.1002/mds.22464.

Biopsies of olfactory epithelium in patients with Parkinson's disease.

Witt M(1), Bormann K, Gudziol V, Pehlke K, Barth K, Minovi A, Hähner A, Reichmann
H, Hummel T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, University of Rostock, Gertrudenstrasse 9, Rostock,
Germany. martin.witt@med.uni-rostock.de

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder involving several
neuronal systems. Impaired olfactory function may constitute one of the earliest 
symptoms of PD. However, it is still unclear to what degree changes of the
olfactory epithelium may contribute to dysosmia and if these changes are
different from those of other hyposmic or anosmic patients. This study aimed to
investigate the hypothesis that olfactory loss in PD is a consequence of specific
PD-related damage of olfactory epithelium. Biopsies of 7 patients diagnosed with 
PD were taken. Six patients with PD were hyposmic, one anosmic. As non-PD
controls served 9 patients with hyposmia, 9 with anosmia, and 7 normosmic
individuals. Further, nasal mucosa of 4 postmortem individuals was investigated. 
Immunohistochemical examinations were performed with antibodies against olfactory
marker protein (OMP), protein gene product 9.5 (PGP 9.5), beta-tubulin, (BT),
proliferation-associated antigen (Ki 67), the stem cell marker nestin,
cytokeratin, p75NGFr, and alpha-synuclein. Most of the biopsy specimens exhibited
irregular areas of olfactory-like, dysplastic epithelium positive for either PGP 
9.5 or BT, but negative for OMP. No major histochemical differences in either the
expression or distribution of these proteins were observed in the olfactory
epithelium of patients with PD compared with controls. Reverse transcription PCR 
(RT-PCR) data indicated mRNA for OMP in almost all subjects, independently of
their olfactory performance. These data support the idea that olfactory loss in
Parkinson's disease is not a consequence of damage to the olfactory epithelium
but rather results from distinct central-nervous abnormalities.

(c) 2009 Movement Disorder Society.

PMID: 19205070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Mol Cells. 2008 Oct 31;26(4):338-43. Epub 2008 Jul 23.

Gene discovery analysis from mouse embryonic stem cells based on time course
microarray data.

Suh YJ(1), Cho SA, Shim JH, Yook YJ, Yoo KH, Kim JH, Park EY, Noh JY, Lee SH,
Yang MH, Jeong HS, Park JH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, The Research Institute of Natural Sciences,
Sookmyung Women's University, Seoul, Korea.

An embryonic stem cell is a powerful tool for investigation of early development 
in vitro. The study of embryonic stem cell mediated neuronal differentiation
allows for improved understanding of the mechanisms involved in embryonic
neuronal development. We investigated expression profile changes using time
course cDNA microarray to identify clues for the signaling network of neuronal
differentiation. For the short time course microarray data, pattern analysis
based on the quadratic regression method is an effective approach for
identification and classification of a variety of expressed genes that have
biological relevance. We studied the expression patterns, at each of 5 stages,
after neuronal induction at the mRNA level of embryonic stem cells using the
quadratic regression method for pattern analysis. As a result, a total of 316
genes (3.1%) including 166 (1.7%) informative genes in 8 possible expression
patterns were identified by pattern analysis. Among the selected genes associated
with neurological system, all three genes showing linearly increasing pattern
over time, and one gene showing decreasing pattern over time, were verified by
RT-PCR. Therefore, an increase in gene expression over time, in a linear pattern,
may be associated with embryonic development. The genes: Tcfap2c, Ttr, Wnt3a,
Btg2 and Foxk1 detected by pattern analysis, and verified by RT-PCR
simultaneously, may be candidate markers associated with the development of the
nervous system. Our study shows that pattern analysis, using the quadratic
regression method, is very useful for investigation of time course cDNA
microarray data. The pattern analysis used in this study has biological
significance for the study of embryonic stem cells.

PMID: 18648220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Exp Biol. 2007 Oct;210(Pt 19):3461-72.

FoxK1 splice variants show developmental stage-specific plasticity of expression 
with temperature in the tiger pufferfish.

Fernandes JM(1), MacKenzie MG, Kinghorn JR, Johnston IA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biology, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife KY16 8LB, UK.

FoxK1 is a member of the highly conserved forkhead/winged helix (Fox) family of
transcription factors and it is known to play a key role in mammalian muscle
development and myogenic stem cell function. The tiger pufferfish (Takifugu
rubripes) orthologue of mammalian FoxK1 (TFoxK1) has seven exons and is located
in a region of conserved synteny between pufferfish and mouse. TFoxK1 is
expressed as three alternative transcripts: TFoxK1-alpha, TFoxK1-gamma and
TFoxK1-delta. TFoxK1-alpha is the orthologue of mouse FoxK1-alpha, coding for a
putative protein of 558 residues that contains the forkhead and
forkhead-associated domains typical of Fox proteins and shares 53% global
identity with its mammalian homologue. TFoxK1-gamma and TFoxK1-delta arise from
intron retention events and these transcripts translate into the same 344-amino
acid protein with a truncated forkhead domain. Neither are orthologues of mouse
FoxK1-beta. In adult fish, the TFoxK1 splice variants were differentially
expressed between fast and slow myotomal muscle, as well as other tissues, and
the FoxK1-alpha protein was expressed in myogenic progenitor cells of fast
myotomal muscle. During embryonic development, TFoxK1 was transiently expressed
in the developing somites, heart, brain and eye. The relative expression of
TFoxK1-alpha and the other two alternative transcripts varied with the incubation
temperature regime for equivalent embryonic stages and the differences were
particularly marked at later developmental stages. The developmental expression
pattern of TFoxK1 and its localisation to mononuclear myogenic progenitor cells
in adult fast muscle indicate that it may play an essential role in myogenesis in
T. rubripes.

PMID: 17873000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Nucleic Acids Res. 2007;35(15):5203-12. Epub 2007 Aug 1.

Functional interactions between the Forkhead transcription factor FOXK1 and the
MADS-box protein SRF.

Freddie CT(1), Ji Z, Marais A, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.

The combinatorial control of gene expression by the association of members of
different families of transcription factors is a common theme in eukaryotic
transcriptional control. The MADS-box transcription factors SRF and Mcm1
represent paradigms for such regulation through their interaction with numerous
partner proteins. For example, in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Mcm1 interacts with
the forkhead transcription factor Fkh2. Here, we identify a novel interaction
between SRF and the Forkhead transcription factor FOXK1 in human cells. The
importance of this interaction is shown for the regulation of the SRF target
genes SM alpha-actin and PPGB. The binding of FOXK1 to the SM alpha-actin and
PPGB promoters requires the presence of SRF on the promoter. FOXK1 acts as a
transcriptional repressor and it represses SM alpha-actin and PPGB expression.
Thus FOXK1 represents an additional member of the growing repertoire of
transcription factors that can interact with SRF and modulate the transcriptional
output from SRF-regulated promoters.

PMCID: PMC1976435
PMID: 17670796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. EMBO J. 2007 Apr 4;26(7):1902-12. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Sox15 and Fhl3 transcriptionally coactivate Foxk1 and regulate myogenic
progenitor cells.

Meeson AP(1), Shi X, Alexander MS, Williams RS, Allen RE, Jiang N, Adham IM,
Goetsch SC, Hammer RE, Garry DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The regulation of myogenic progenitor cells during muscle regeneration is not
clearly understood. We have previously shown that the Foxk1 gene, a member of the
forkhead/winged helix family of transcription factors, is expressed in myogenic
progenitor cells in adult skeletal muscle. In the present study, we utilize
transgenic technology and demonstrate that the 4.6 kb upstream fragment of the
Foxk1 gene directs beta-galactosidase expression to the myogenic progenitor cell 
population. We further establish that Sox15 directs Foxk1 expression to the
myogenic progenitor cell population, as it binds to an evolutionarily conserved
site and recruits Fhl3 to transcriptionally coactivate Foxk1 gene expression.
Knockdown of endogenous Sox15 results in perturbed cell cycle kinetics and
decreased Foxk1 expression. Furthermore, Sox15 mutant mice display perturbed
skeletal muscle regeneration, due in part to decreased numbers of satellite cells
and decreased Foxk1 expression. These studies demonstrate that Sox15, Fhl3 and
Foxk1 function to coordinately regulate the myogenic progenitor cell population
and skeletal muscle regeneration.

PMCID: PMC1847663
PMID: 17363903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Stem Cell Rev. 2006;2(1):37-42.

Molecular signatures define myogenic stem cell populations.

Martin CM(1), Russell JL, Ferdous A, Garry DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390, USA.

Developmental and regenerative mechanisms are directed by stem cell populations. 
Skeletal muscle is a dynamic tissue that is capable of adapting to stress and
severe injury due to a resident somatic stem cell population. In response to a
severe injury that destroys upward of 90% of the tissue, skeletal muscle
efficiently and reproducibly regenerates damaged tissue and restores the cellular
architecture within a 2-wk period. Recent studies have localized and examined the
molecular regulation of skeletal muscle stem cell populations using emerging
molecular biological technologies. These studies enhance the understanding of the
regulatory mechanisms that direct the somatic stem cell populations and the role 
they play in development and regeneration. Furthermore, these basic science
studies will serve as a platform for future therapies directed toward patients
with myopathic diseases.

PMID: 17142885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Brain Res. 2006 Jan 12;1068(1):23-33. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Identification of forkhead transcription factors in cortical and dopaminergic
areas of the adult murine brain.

Wijchers PJ(1), Hoekman MF, Burbach JP, Smidt MP.

Author information: 
(1)Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, Department of Pharmacology and
Anatomy, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The murine forkhead family of transcription factors consists of over 30 members, 
the vast majority of which is important in embryonic development. Implicated in
processes such as proliferation, differentiation and survival, forkhead factors
show highly restricted expression patterns. In search for forkhead genes
expressed in specific neural systems, we identified multiple family members. We
performed a detailed expression analysis for Foxj2, Foxk1 and the murine
orthologue of the human ILF1 gene, which show a remarkable preference for complex
cortical structures. In addition, a comprehensive examination of forkhead gene
expression in dopamine neurons of the ventral tegmental area and substantia nigra
pars compacta, revealed Ilf1 as a novel transcriptional regulator in midbrain
dopamine neurons. These forkhead transcription factors may play a role in
maintenance and survival of developing and adult neurons.

PMID: 16376864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Stem Cells. 2004;22(7):1305-20.

Cellular and molecular regulation of skeletal muscle side population cells.

Meeson AP(1), Hawke TJ, Graham S, Jiang N, Elterman J, Hutcheson K, Dimaio JM,
Gallardo TD, Garry DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Muscle progenitor cells (satellite cells) function in the maintenance and repair 
of adult skeletal muscle. Side population (SP) cells are enriched in repopulating
activity and also reside in adult skeletal muscle. In this study, we observed
that Abcg2 is a determinant of the SP cell phenotype. Using reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction and immunohistochemical techniques, we localized
Abcg2-expressing cells in the interstitium and in close approximation to the
vasculature of adult skeletal muscle. Muscle SP cells are able to differentiate
into myotubes and increase in number after cardiotoxin-induced muscle injury.
Similar to myogenic progenitor cells, muscle SP cells express Foxk1 and are
decreased in number in Foxk1 mutant skeletal muscle. Using emerging technologies,
we examine the molecular signature of muscle SP cells from normal, injured, and
Foxk1 mutant skeletal muscle to define common and distinct molecular programs. We
propose that muscle SP cells are progenitor cells that participate in repair and 
regeneration of adult skeletal muscle.

PMID: 15579648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Exp Biol. 2004 Dec;207(Pt 25):4343-60.

Rapid evolution of muscle fibre number in post-glacial populations of Arctic
charr Salvelinus alpinus.

Johnston IA(1), Abercromby M, Vieira VL, Sigursteindóttir RJ, Kristjánsson BK,
Sibthorpe D, Skúlason S.

Author information: 
(1)Gatty Marine Laboratory, School of Biology, University of St Andrews, St
Andrews, Fife, KY16 8LB, Scotland, UK. iaj@st-andrews.ac.uk

Thingvallavatn, the largest and one of the oldest lakes in Iceland, contains four
morphs of Arctic charr Salvelinus alpinus. Dwarf benthic (DB), large benthic
(LB), planktivorous (PL) and piscivorous (PI) morphs can be distinguished and
differ markedly in head morphology, colouration and maximum fork length
(FL(max)), reflecting their different resource specialisations within the lake.
The four morphs in Thingvallavatn are thought to have been isolated for
approximately 10 000 years, since shortly after the end of the last Ice Age. We
tested the null hypothesis that the pattern of muscle fibre recruitment was the
same in all morphs, reflecting their recent diversification. The cross-sectional 
areas of fast and slow muscle fibres were measured at 0.7 FL in 46 DB morphs, 23 
LB morphs, 24 PL morphs and 22 PI morphs, and the ages of the charr were
estimated using sacculus otoliths. In fish larger than 10 g, the maximum fibre
diameter scaled with body mass (M(b))(0.18) for both fibre types in all morphs.
The number of myonuclei per cm fibre length increased with fibre diameter, but
was similar between morphs. On average, at 60 mum diameter, there were 2264
nuclei cm(-1) in slow fibres and 1126 nuclei cm(-1) in fast fibres. The absence
of fibres of diameter 4-10 mum was used to determine the FL at which muscle fibre
recruitment stopped. Slow fibre number increased with body length in all morphs, 
scaling with M(b)(0.45). In contrast, the recruitment of fast muscle fibres
continued until a clearly identifiable FL, corresponding to 18-19 cm in the dwarf
morph, 24-26 cm in the pelagic morph, 32-33 cm in the large benthic morph and
34-35 cm in the piscivorous morph. The maximum fast fibre number (FN(max)) in the
dwarf morph (6.97x10(4)) was 56.5% of that found in the LB and PI morphs combined
(1.23x10(5)) (P<0.001). Muscle fibre recruitment continued until a threshold body
size and occurred at a range of ages, starting at 4+ years in the DB morph and 7+
years in the LB and PI morphs. Our null hypothesis was therefore rejected for
fast muscle and it was concluded that the dwarf condition was associated with a
reduction in fibre number. We then investigated whether variations in development
temperature associated with different spawning sites and periods were responsible
for the observed differences in muscle cellularity between morphs. Embryos from
the DB, LB and PL morphs were incubated at temperature regimes simulating cold
subterranean spring-fed sites (2.2-3.2 degrees C) and the general lakebed (4-7
degrees C). Myogenic progenitor cells (MPCs) were identified using specific
antibodies to Paired box protein 7 (Pax 7), Forkhead box protein K1-alpha
(FoxK1-alpha), MyoD and Myf-5. The progeny showed no evidence of developmental
plasticity in the numbers of either MPCs or muscle fibres. Juveniles and adult
stages of the DB and LB morphs coexist and have a similar diet. We therefore
conclude that the reduction in FN(max) in the dwarf morph probably has a genetic 
basis and that gene networks regulating myotube production are under high
selection pressure. To explain these findings we propose that there is an optimal
fibre size, and hence number, which varies with maximum body size and reflects a 
trade-off between diffusional constraints on fibre diameter and the energy costs 
of maintaining ionic gradients. The predictions of the optimal fibre size
hypothesis and its consequences for the adaptive evolution of muscle architecture
in fishes are briefly discussed.

PMID: 15557021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Int J Oncol. 2004 Sep;25(3):751-7.

Identification and characterization of a novel human FOXK1 gene in silico.

Huang JT(1), Lee V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Babraham Institute, Cambridge CB2 4AT, UK.
jeffrey.huang@bbsrc.ac.uk

We describe here the identification and characterization of a human forkhead box 
gene, FOXK1, that encodes predicted proteins most homologous to the mouse myocyte
nuclear factor (MNF)/forkhead box K1 (FoxK1). Human FOXK1 is located at the
chromosomal position 7p22. Two transcript variants, FOXK1a and FOXK1b, containing
the divergent 5'-ends are identified. Sequence comparison indicated that the
human FOXK1 proteins share 66-74% amino acid identity (99% identity in the
forkhead domain) with their mouse ortholog. The in silico expression analysis
showed FOXK1 expression in immature tissues of brain, eye, heart, lung and
thymus. In adults, FOXK1 was predominantly expressed in many malignant tissues,
in particular in the tumors of brain, colon and lymph node. This gene is
therefore implicated in the process of both normal and neoplastic development.

PMID: 15289879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Int J Mol Med. 2004 Jul;14(1):127-32.

Identification and characterization of human FOXK1 gene in silico.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Narashino 275-0022, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Forkhead-box (FOX) family transcription factors are implicated in carcinogenesis 
and embryogenesis. Here, we identified and characterized the human FOXK1 gene by 
using bioinformatics. Complete coding sequence of human FOXK1 cDNA was determined
by assembling CB959941 EST, AW206906 EST, and 5'-truncated FLJ16099 (AK122663.1) 
cDNA. FOXK1 gene, consisting of nine exons, was mapped to human chromosome
7p22.1. Mouse Foxk1 (NM_199068.1) was an aberrant cDNA with frame shifts due to
multiple insertions and deletions, while mouse IMAGE6853263 (BC060238.1) was a
Foxk1 cDNA with a frame shift due to two base deletions. Complete coding sequence
of mouse Foxk1 cDNA was determined by inserting CA nucleotides between nucleotide
position 1628 and 1629 of BC060238.1. Foxk1 gene, consisting of nine exons, was
mapped to mouse chromosome 5G2. Because interleukin enhancer-binding factor 1
(ILF1) gene at human chromosome 17q25.3 was the paralog of FOXK1 gene, ILF1 gene 
was designated the FOXK2 gene. Xenopus BC046369.1 cDNA was Foxk2 ortholog rather 
than Foxk1 ortholog. Human FOXK1 (733 aa) showed 88.7% total amino-acid identity 
with mouse Foxk1 (719 aa), 48.7% total amino-acid identity with human FOXK2, and 
47.5% total amino-acid identity with Xenopus Foxk2. Forkhead associated (FHA)
domain and FOX domain were conserved among human FOXK1, FOXK2, mouse FoxK1, and
Xenopus Foxk2. At least 42 FOX family genes, including FOXK1, FOXN5 (FOXR1) and
FOXN6 (FOXR2), have been identified within the human genome.

PMID: 15202027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Dev Genes Evol. 2004 Apr;214(4):200-5. Epub 2004 Feb 18.

Isolation and developmental expression of Xenopus FoxJ1 and FoxK1.

Pohl BS(1), Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Ulm, Albert Einstein-Allee 11,
89081, Ulm, Germany.

xFoxJ1 and xFoxK1, two novel members of the fork head/winged helix family of
transcription factors in Xenopus, have been identified by sequence homology to
their mammalian orthologues. We here report the complete amino acid sequences of 
xFoxJ1, its pseudo-allelic version xFoxJ1', and of xFoxK1, the latter also
comprising a fork-head-associated (FHA) domain. We have further analysed the
temporal and spatial expression of both genes. xFoxJ1 transcripts were detected
during gastrulation in the dorsal blastopore lip and in the animal half. A
predominant feature of xFoxJ1 expression until the tailbud stage is its spotty
pattern within the epidermis. xFoxK1 is maternally expressed and localized within
the animal half during early cleavage stages. Zygotic transcription starts during
neurulation and is initially restricted to neuroectoderm. As development
proceeds, xFoxK1 is expressed in ectoderm- and mesoderm-derived tissues, like the
branchial arches, brain, eye, otic vesicle, pronephros, somites and abdominal
muscle precursors.

Copyright 2004 Springer-Verlag

PMID: 14986136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. J Biomol NMR. 2002 Sep;24(1):75-6.

1H, 15N and 13C resonance assignments for the DNA-binding domain of myocyte
nuclear factor (Foxk1).

Chuang WJ, Yeh IJ, Hsieh YH, Liu PP, Chen SW, Jeng WY.

PMID: 12449423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 7;278(6):4015-20. Epub 2002 Nov 21.

Absence of p21CIP rescues myogenic progenitor cell proliferative and regenerative
capacity in Foxk1 null mice.

Hawke TJ(1), Jiang N, Garry DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Internal Medicine and Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas 75390-8573, USA.

Foxk1 is a forkhead/winged helix transcription factor that is restricted to
myogenic progenitor cells in adult skeletal muscle. Mice lacking Foxk1 (Foxk1-/-)
display growth retardation and a severe impairment in skeletal muscle
regeneration following injury. Here we show that myogenic progenitor cells from
Foxk1-/- mice are reduced in number and have perturbed cell cycle progression
(G(0)/G(1) arrest). Molecular analysis of Foxk1-/- myogenic progenitor cells
revealed increased expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p21(CIP),
independent of changes in other cell cycle inhibitors, including p53.
Combinatorial mating of Foxk1-/- mice with p21(CIP)-/- mice, to generate double
mutant progeny, resulted in a complete restoration of the growth deficit,
skeletal muscle regeneration, myogenic progenitor cell number, and cell cycle
progression that characterized the Foxk1-/- mice. We conclude that Foxk1 is
essential for regulating cell cycle progression in the myogenic progenitor cell
and that the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p21(CIP), may be a downstream
target of Foxk1.

PMID: 12446708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Cell Biol. 2000 Sep 4;150(5):1085-100.

Clonal isolation of muscle-derived cells capable of enhancing muscle regeneration
and bone healing.

Lee JY(1), Qu-Petersen Z, Cao B, Kimura S, Jankowski R, Cummins J, Usas A, Gates 
C, Robbins P, Wernig A, Huard J.

Author information: 
(1)Growth and Development Laboratory, Department of Orthopaedic Surgery,
Children's Hospital and University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15261,
USA.

Several recent studies suggest the isolation of stem cells in skeletal muscle,
but the functional properties of these muscle-derived stem cells is still
unclear. In the present study, we report the purification of muscle-derived stem 
cells from the mdx mouse, an animal model for Duchenne muscular dystrophy. We
show that enrichment of desmin(+) cells using the preplate technique from mouse
primary muscle cell culture also enriches a cell population expressing CD34 and
Bcl-2. The CD34(+) cells and Bcl-2(+) cells were found to reside within the basal
lamina, where satellite cells are normally found. Clonal isolation and
characterization from this CD34(+)Bcl-2(+) enriched population yielded a putative
muscle-derived stem cell, mc13, that is capable of differentiating into both
myogenic and osteogenic lineage in vitro and in vivo. The mc13 cells are c-kit
and CD45 negative and express: desmin, c-met and MNF, three markers expressed in 
early myogenic progenitors; Flk-1, a mouse homologue of KDR recently identified
in humans as a key marker in hematopoietic cells with stem cell-like
characteristics; and Sca-1, a marker for both skeletal muscle and hematopoietic
stem cells. Intramuscular, and more importantly, intravenous injection of mc13
cells result in muscle regeneration and partial restoration of dystrophin in mdx 
mice. Transplantation of mc13 cells engineered to secrete osteogenic protein
differentiate in osteogenic lineage and accelerate healing of a skull defect in
SCID mice. Taken together, these results suggest the isolation of a population of
muscle-derived stem cells capable of improving both muscle regeneration and bone 
healing.

PMCID: PMC2175240
PMID: 10973997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 May 9;97(10):5416-21.

Myogenic stem cell function is impaired in mice lacking the forkhead/winged helix
protein MNF.

Garry DJ(1), Meeson A, Elterman J, Zhao Y, Yang P, Bassel-Duby R, Williams RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. garry@ryburn.swmed.edu

Myocyte nuclear factor (MNF) is a winged helix transcription factor that is
expressed selectively in myogenic stem cells (satellite cells) of adult animals. 
Using a gene knockout strategy to generate a functional null allele at the Mnf
locus, we observed that mice lacking MNF are viable, but severely runted.
Skeletal muscles of Mnf-/- animals are atrophic, and satellite cell function is
impaired. Muscle regeneration after injury is delayed and incomplete, and the
normal timing of expression of cell cycle regulators and myogenic determination
genes is dysregulated. Mnf mutant mice were intercrossed with mdx mice that lack 
dystrophin and exhibit only a subtle myopathic phenotype. In contrast, mdx mice
that also lack MNF die in the first few weeks of life with a severe myopathy.
Haploinsufficiency at the Mnf locus (Mnf+/-) also exacerbates the mdx phenotype
to more closely resemble Duchenne's muscular dystrophy in humans. We conclude
that MNF acts to regulate genes that coordinate the proliferation and
differentiation of myogenic stem cells after muscle injury. Animals deficient in 
MNF may prove useful for evaluation of potential therapeutic interventions to
promote muscle regeneration for patients having Duchenne's muscular dystrophy.

PMCID: PMC25843
PMID: 10792059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biochem J. 2000 Jan 15;345 Pt 2:335-43.

The winged-helix/forkhead protein myocyte nuclear factor beta (MNF-beta) forms a 
co-repressor complex with mammalian sin3B.

Yang Q(1), Kong Y, Rothermel B, Garry DJ, Bassel-Duby R, Williams RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., NB11.200, Dallas, TX 75390-8573, USA.

Winged-helix/forkhead proteins regulate developmental events in both invertebrate
and vertebrate organisms, but biochemical functions that establish a mechanism of
action have been defined for only a few members of this extensive gene family.
Here we demonstrate that MNF (myocyte nuclear factor)-beta, a winged-helix
protein expressed selectively and transiently in myogenic precursor cells of the 
heart and skeletal muscles, collaborates with proteins of the mammalian Sin3
(mSin3) family to repress transcription. Mutated forms of MNF-beta that fail to
bind mSin3 are defective in transcriptional repression and in negative growth
regulation, an overexpression phenotype revealed in oncogenic transformation
assays. These data extend the known repertoire of transcription factors with
which mSin3 proteins can function as co-repressors to include members of the
winged-helix gene family. Transcriptional repression by MNF-beta-mSin3 complexes 
may contribute to the co-ordination of cellular proliferation and terminal
differentiation of myogenic precursor cells.

PMCID: PMC1220762
PMID: 10620510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Gene Expr. 1999;8(2):85-103.

Dual tandem promoter elements containing CCAC-like motifs from the
tetrodotoxin-resistant voltage-sensitive Na+ channel (rSkM2) gene can
independently drive muscle-specific transcription in L6 cells.

Zhang H(1), Maldonado MN, Barchi RL, Kallen RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104-6059, USA.

cis-Elements in the -129/+124 promoter segment of the rat tetrodotoxin-resistant 
voltage-gated sodium channel (rSkM2) gene that are responsible for reporter gene 
expression in cultured muscle cells were identified by deletion and scanning
mutations. Nested 5' deletion constructs, assayed in L6 myotubes and NIH3T3
cells, revealed that the minimum promoter allowing muscle-specific expression is 
contained within the -57 to +1 segment relative to the major transcription
initiation site. In the context of the -129/+1 construct, however, scanning
mutations in the -69/+1 segment failed to identify any critical promoter
elements. In contrast, identical mutations in a minimal promoter (-57/+124)
showed that all regions except -29/-20 are essential for expression, especially
the -57/-40 segment, consistent with the 5' deletion analysis. Further
experiments showed that the distal (-129/-58) and proximal promoter (-57/+1)
elements can independently drive reporter expression in L6 myotubes, but not in
NIH3T3 fibroblasts. This pair of elements is similar in sequence and contains Sp1
sites (CCGCCC), CCAC-like motifs, but no E-boxes or MEF-2 sites. The two segments
form similarly migrating complexes with L6 myotube nuclear extracts in gel-shift 
assays. Critical elements within the distal promoter element were defined by 10
base pair scanning mutations in the -119 to -60 region in the context of the
-129/+1 segment containing a mutated -59/-50 segment that inactivates the
proximal promoter. Nucleotides in the -119/-90 region, especially -109/-100, were
the most important regions for distal promoter function. We conclude that the
-129/+1 segment contains two tandem promoter elements, each of which can
independently drive muscle-specific transcription. Supershifts with antibodies to
Sp1 and myocyte nuclear factor (MNF) implicate the involvement of Sp1, MNF, and
other novel factors in the transcriptional regulation of rSkM2 gene expression.

PMID: 10551797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):5236-43.

Transient expression of a winged-helix protein, MNF-beta, during myogenesis.

Yang Q(1), Bassel-Duby R, Williams RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235-8573, USA.

A novel winged-helix transcription factor, MNF-beta, is expressed coincidentally 
with cell cycle withdrawal and differentiation of skeletal myogenic cells.
MNF-beta is closely related to the myocyte nuclear factor (MNF) protein
previously described (now termed MNF-alpha), but expression of the two isoforms
is differentially regulated, and they exhibit distinctive functional properties
with respect to DNA binding in vitro and transcriptional regulatory activity in
transient-transfection assays. A DNA sequence motif binding MNF-beta with high
affinity was selected from a library of random oligonucleotides and was found to 
be similar to but distinct from the cognate binding site for HNF-3beta, a more
distantly related winged-helix protein. The temporal pattern of MNF-beta
expression and the presence of MNF binding motifs within conserved promoter
elements of several genes that modulate cell cycle progression support a working 
hypothesis that MNF proteins may modulate proliferation of myogenic precursor
cells during development and muscle regeneration.

PMCID: PMC232374
PMID: 9271401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Dev Biol. 1997 Aug 15;188(2):280-94.

Persistent expression of MNF identifies myogenic stem cells in postnatal muscles.

Garry DJ(1), Yang Q, Bassel-Duby R, Williams RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, Texas, 75235, USA.

Skeletal muscles contain an undifferentiated myogenic stem cell pool (satellite
cells) that can be mobilized to regenerate myofibers in response to injury. We
have determined that the winged helix transcription factor MNF is expressed
selectively in quiescent satellite cells, which do not express known regulators
of the myogenic program. Following muscle injury, MNF is present transiently in
proliferating satellite cells and in centralized nuclei of regenerating
myofibers, but expression declines as these fibers mature, until only the
residual stem cell pool continues to express detectable levels of MNF. MNF also
is expressed selectively but transiently at embryonic stages of myogenesis in the
developing myotome, limb bud precursors, and heart tube, but by late fetal stages
of development, MNF is down-regulated within differentiated cardiac and skeletal 
myocytes, and persistently high expression is observed only in satellite cells.
These data identify MNF as a marker of quiescent satellite cells and suggest that
downstream genes controlled by MNF serve to modulate proliferative growth or
differentiation in this unique cell population.

PMID: 9268575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;14(7):4596-605.

Myocyte nuclear factor, a novel winged-helix transcription factor under both
developmental and neural regulation in striated myocytes.

Bassel-Duby R(1), Hernandez MD, Yang Q, Rochelle JM, Seldin MF, Williams RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas 75235.

A sequence motif (CCAC box) within an upstream enhancer region of the human
myoglobin gene is essential for transcriptional activity in both cardiac and
skeletal muscle. A cDNA clone, myocyte nuclear factor (MNF), was isolated from a 
murine expression library on the basis of sequence-specific binding to the
myoglobin CCAC box motif and was found to encode a novel member of the
winged-helix or HNF-3/fork head family of transcription factors. Probes based on 
this sequence identify two mRNA species that are upregulated during myocyte
differentiation, and antibodies raised against recombinant MNF identify proteins 
of approximately 90, 68, and 65 kDa whose expression is regulated following
differentiation of myogenic cells in culture. In addition, the 90-kDa form of MNF
is phosphorylated and is upregulated in intact muscles subjected to chronic motor
nerve stimulation, a potent stimulus to myoglobin gene regulation. Amino acid
residues 280 to 389 of MNF demonstrate 35 to 89% sequence identity to the
winged-helix domain from other known members of this family, but MNF is otherwise
divergent. A proline-rich amino-terminal region (residues 1 to 206) of MNF
functions as a transcriptional activation domain. These studies provide the first
evidence that members of the winged-helix family of transcription factors have a 
role in myogenic differentiation and in remodeling processes of adult muscles
that occur in response to physiological stimuli.

PMCID: PMC358832
PMID: 8007964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


