
1. Sci Total Environ. 2016 Mar 17;557-558:204-211. doi:
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2016.03.030. [Epub ahead of print]

Diploid and triploid African catfish (Clarias gariepinus) differ in biomarker
responses to the pesticide chlorpyrifos.

Karami A(1), Goh YM(2), Jahromi MF(3), Lazorchak JM(4), Abdullah M(5), Courtenay 
SC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Selangor, Malaysia. Electronic address:
alikaramiv@gmail.com. (2)Department of Veterinary Preclinical Sciences, Faculty
of Veterinary Medicine, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Selangor, Malaysia.
(3)Laboratory of Animal Production, Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Universiti
Putra Malaysia, 43400 Selangor, Malaysia. (4)Office of Research and Development, 
National Exposure Research Laboratory, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
Cincinnati, OH, United States. (5)Laboratory of Immunology, Faculty of Medicine
and Health Sciences, Universiti Putra Malaysia, 43400 Selangor, Malaysia.
(6)School of Environment, Resources and Sustainability, Canadian Water Network,
Canadian Rivers Institute, University of Waterloo, Canada.

The impacts of environmental stressors on polyploid organisms are largely
unknown. This study investigated changes in morphometric, molecular, and
biochemical parameters in full-sibling diploid and triploid African catfish
(Clarias gariepinus) in response to chlorpyrifos (CPF) exposures. Juvenile fish
were exposed to three concentrations of CPF (mean measured µg/L (SD): 9.71
(2.27), 15.7 (3.69), 31.21 (5.04)) under a static-renewal condition for 21days.
Diploid control groups had higher hepatosomatic index (HSI), plasma testosterone 
(T), and brain GnRH and cyp19a2 expression levels than triploids. In CPF-exposed 
groups, changes in HSI, total weight and length were different between the
diploid and triploid fish. In contrast, condition factor did not alter in any of 
the treatments, while visceral-somatic index (VSI) changed only in diploids. In
diploid fish, exposure to CPF did not change brain 11ß-hsd2, ftz-f1, foxl2, GnRH 
or cyp19a2 mRNA levels, while reduced tph2 transcript levels compared to the
control group. In contrast, 11ß-hsd2 and foxl2 expression levels were changed in 
triploids following CPF exposures. In diploids, plasma T levels showed a linear
dose-response reduction across CPF treatments correlating with liver weight and
plasma total cholesterol concentrations. In contrast, no changes in plasma
cholesterol and T concentrations were observed in triploids. Plasma cortisol and 
17-ß estradiol (E2) showed no response to CPF exposure in either ploidy. Results 
of this first comparison of biomarker responses to pesticide exposure in diploid 
and polyploid animals showed substantial differences between diploid and triploid
C. gariepinus.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26994807  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 4. pii: S0303-7207(16)30050-8. doi:
10.1016/j.mce.2016.03.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Synergistic role of ß-catenin1 and 2 in ovarian differentiation and maintenance
of female pathway in Nile tilapia.

Wu L(1), Wu F(2), Xie L(1), Wang D(3), Zhou L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of Education), Key
Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life Science, Southwest
University, Chongqing 400715, China; School of Biological and Food Engineering,
Fuyang Teachers College, Key Laboratory of Embryo Development and Reproductive
Regulation, Anhui Province, Fuyang 236000, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Freshwater
Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of Education), Key Laboratory of
Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life Science, Southwest University,
Chongqing 400715, China. Electronic address: wdeshou@swu.edu.cn. (4)Key
Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China. Electronic address:
yanlinzhou916@126.com.

Two ß-catenin (ß-cat) genes exist in teleosts but little is known about their
expression and function in ovarian development. We identified ß-cat1 and ß-cat2
from the Nile tilapia. ß-cat1 and ß-cat2 displayed a similar expression pattern
in the ovary during development, and were mainly expressed in the oogonia and
oocytes. In luciferase assays, ß-cat1 activated the TOPFlash reporter
dose-dependently, whereas ß-cat2 failed to do so. Cotransfection of ß-cat1 and
ß-cat2 synergistically enhanced the expression of the reporter. A specific
interaction between ß-cat1 and ß-cat2 was also observed in a mammalian two-hybrid
assay. Furthermore, tilapia recombinant Dkk1, an inhibitor of the ß-cat pathway, 
decreased ß-cat1 and ß-cat2, while increased sox9, dmrt1, cyp11b2 and foxl2
expression in the in vitro cultured tilapia ovary, which could be abolished by
simultaneous treatment with Bio, an agonist of ß-cat. Consistently, ß-cat1 or
ß-cat2 knockdown in XX fish by TALENs caused the retardation of ovarian
differentiation and masculinization, as reflected by the upregulation of dmrt1,
cyp11b2, sox9, and serum 11-KT level. On the contrary, serum E2 level was
unchanged even though foxl2 transcription was upregulated. These data suggestes
that both ß-cat1 and ß-cat2 are important members and play synergistic roles in
the canonical Wnt signal pathway in fish. Independent of Foxl2-leading estrogen
pathway, they might be involved in ovarian differentiation and repression of the 
male pathway gene expression in tilapia.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26948949  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Dev Biol. 2016 Mar 3. pii: S0012-1606(15)30286-4. doi:
10.1016/j.ydbio.2016.02.024. [Epub ahead of print]

WNT/ß-catenin and p27/FOXL2 differentially regulate supporting cell proliferation
in the developing ovary.

Gustin SE(1), Hogg K(1), Stringer JM(1), Rastetter RH(2), Pelosi E(3), Miles
DC(1), Sinclair AH(4), Wilhelm D(2), Western PS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genetic Diseases, Hudson Institute of Medical Research and
Department of Molecular and Translational Science, Monash University, Clayton,
Victoria, Australia. (2)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash
University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, National
Institute on Aging, NIH-IRP, Baltimore, USA. (4)Murdoch Childrens Research
Institute, Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Royal Children's
Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. (5)Centre for Genetic Diseases, Hudson 
Institute of Medical Research and Department of Molecular and Translational
Science, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia. Electronic address:
patrick.western@hudson.org.au.

Sexual development is initiated through differentiation of testicular Sertoli
cells or ovarian granulosa cells. Although these supporting cells are considered 
to develop from common bipotential precursors, recent evidence suggests that
distinct supporting cell populations are present in the ovary, with one providing
granulosa cells of the medullary follicles and the other providing granulosa
cells of the cortical follicles, the latter of which support lifelong fertility. 
Here, we demonstrate that XX fetal gonads contain GATA4 expressing supporting
cells that either enter mitotic arrest, or remain proliferative. Blocking WNT
signalling reduces XX supporting cell proliferation, while stabilising ß-catenin 
signalling promotes proliferation, indicating that the renewal of pre-granulosa
cells is dependent on WNT/ß-catenin signalling in the proliferative supporting
cell population. In contrast, XX supporting cells express p27 and FOXL2 and are
maintained in mitotic arrest. Although FOXL2 is required for maintaining high
levels of p27 expression, it is dispensable for entry and maintenance of mitotic 
arrest in XX supporting cells. Combined our data suggest that both medullary and 
cortical precursors arise from a common GATA4 expressing cell type. In addition, 
this work indicates that a balance between supporting cell self-renewal and
differentiation is maintained in the developing ovary by relative WNT/ß-catenin
and p27/FOXL2 activities. This study provides significant new insights into the
origin and formation of ovarian follicles and evidence supporting a common fetal 
origin of medullary and cortical granulosa cells.

Crown Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26939755  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Gynecol Oncol Rep. 2015 Dec 28;15:20-1. doi: 10.1016/j.gore.2015.12.004.
eCollection 2016.

Retreatment with aromatase inhibitor therapy in the management of granulosa cell 
tumor.

Schwartz M(1), Huang GS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology and Women's Health, Division of
Gynecologic Oncology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Montefiore Medical
Center, 1695 Eastchester Road, Suite 601, Bronx, NY 10461, United States.

•Over 90% of granulosa cell tumors have a FOXL2 mutation that contributes to
aromatase upregulation.•Chemotherapy has demonstrated limited efficacy in the
treatment of granulosa cell tumors.•A patient with recurrent granulosa cell tumor
responded briefly to anastrazole treatment.•Retreatment with another aromatase
inhibitor letrozole led to a durable response of 24 months.

PMCID: PMC4750011
PMID: 26937482  [PubMed]


5. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 16. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7422. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptomic analysis of stage 1 versus advanced adult granulosa cell tumors.

Alexiadis M(1), Chu S(1,)(2), Leung D(1,)(2), Gould JA(1,)(3), Jobling T(4),
Fuller PJ(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Hudson Institute of Medical Research (formerly Prince Henry's Institute of
Medical Research) Monash Health, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia. (2)Monash
University Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Monash Health,
Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia. (3)MHTP Medical Genomics Facility, Clayton,
Victoria 3168, Australia. (4)Department of Gynecology Oncology, Monash Health,
Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia.

Ovarian granulosa cell tumors (GCT) are hormonally-active neoplasms
characterized, in the adult-subtype, by a mutation in the FOXL2 gene (C134W).
They exhibit an indolent course with an unexplained propensity for late
recurrence; ~80% of patients with aggressive, advanced stage tumors die from
their disease; aside from surgery, therapeutic options are limited. To identify
the molecular basis of advanced stage disease we have used whole transcriptome
analysis of FOXL2 C134W mutation positive adult (a)GCT to identify genes that are
differentially expressed between early (stage 1) and advanced (stage 3) aGCT.
Transcriptome profiles for early (n = 6) and stage 3 (n = 6) aGCT, and for the
aGCT-derived KGN, cell line identified 24 genes whose expression significantly
differs between the early and stage 3 aGCT. Of these, 16 were more abundantly
expressed in the stage 3 aGCT and 8 were higher in the stage 1 tumors. These
changes were further examined for the genes which showed the greatest fold
change: the cytokine CXCL14, microfibrillar-associated protein 5, insulin-like 3 
and desmin. Gene Set Enrichment Analysis identified overexpression of genes on
chromosome 7p15 which includes the homeobox A gene locus. The analysis therefore 
identifies a small number of genes with clearly discriminate patterns of
expression arguing that the clinicopathological-derived distinction of the tumor 
stage is robust, whilst confirming the relative homogeneity of expression for
many genes across the cohort and hence of aGCT. The expression profiles do
however identify several overexpressed genes in both stage 1 and/or stage 3 aGCT 
which warrant further study as possible therapeutic targets.

PMID: 26893359  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. BMC Genomics. 2016 Jan 25;17(1):77. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2396-9.

RNA-seq analysis of the gonadal transcriptome during Alligator mississippiensis
temperature-dependent sex determination and differentiation.

Yatsu R(1), Miyagawa S(2,)(3), Kohno S(4), Parrott BB(5), Yamaguchi K(6), Ogino
Y(7,)(8), Miyakawa H(9), Lowers RH(10), Shigenobu S(11,)(12), Guillette LJ
Jr(13), Iguchi T(14,)(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Biology, Faculty of Life Science, SOKENDAI (Graduate
University for Advanced Studies), 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi,
444-8787, Japan. ryoheiy@nibb.ac.jp. (2)Department of Basic Biology, Faculty of
Life Science, SOKENDAI (Graduate University for Advanced Studies), 5-1
Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. miyagawa@nibb.ac.jp.
(3)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic
Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji,
Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. miyagawa@nibb.ac.jp. (4)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, Medical University of South Carolina, and Marine Biomedicine and 
Environmental Science Center, Hollings Marine Laboratory, Charleston, SC, 29412, 
USA. kohnos@gmail.com. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical
University of South Carolina, and Marine Biomedicine and Environmental Science
Center, Hollings Marine Laboratory, Charleston, SC, 29412, USA.
benbparrott@gmail.com. (6)National Institute for Basic Biology, National
Institutes of Natural Sciences, 38 Nishigonaka, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi,
444-8585, Japan. kyamaguc@nibb.ac.jp. (7)Department of Basic Biology, Faculty of 
Life Science, SOKENDAI (Graduate University for Advanced Studies), 5-1
Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. ogino@nibb.ac.jp.
(8)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National Institute for Basic
Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji,
Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. ogino@nibb.ac.jp. (9)Center for Bioscience
Research and Education, Utsunomiya University, 350 Mine-machi, Utsunomiya,
Tochigi, 321-8505, Japan. h-miya@cc.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp. (10)Innovative Health
Applications, Kennedy Space Center, Merritt Island, FL, 32899, USA.
Russell.h.lowers@nasa.gov. (11)Department of Basic Biology, Faculty of Life
Science, SOKENDAI (Graduate University for Advanced Studies), 5-1 Higashiyama,
Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. shige@nibb.ac.jp. (12)National
Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 38
Nishigonaka, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8585, Japan. shige@nibb.ac.jp.
(13)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of South
Carolina, and Marine Biomedicine and Environmental Science Center, Hollings
Marine Laboratory, Charleston, SC, 29412, USA. kohno@musc.edu. (14)Department of 
Basic Biology, Faculty of Life Science, SOKENDAI (Graduate University for
Advanced Studies), 5-1 Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan.
taisen@nibb.ac.jp. (15)Okazaki Institute for Integrative Bioscience, National
Institute for Basic Biology, National Institutes of Natural Sciences, 5-1
Higashiyama, Myodaiji, Okazaki, Aichi, 444-8787, Japan. taisen@nibb.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: The American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) displays
temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD), in which incubation temperature
during embryonic development determines the sexual fate of the individual.
However, the molecular mechanisms governing this process remain a mystery,
including the influence of initial environmental temperature on the comprehensive
gonadal gene expression patterns occurring during TSD.
RESULTS: Our characterization of transcriptomes during alligator TSD allowed us
to identify novel candidate genes involved in TSD initiation. High-throughput RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) was performed on gonads collected from A. mississippiensis
embryos incubated at both a male and a female producing temperature (33.5 °C and 
30 °C, respectively) in a time series during sexual development. RNA-seq yielded 
375.2 million paired-end reads, which were mapped and assembled, and used to
characterize differential gene expression. Changes in the transcriptome occurring
as a function of both development and sexual differentiation were extensively
profiled. Forty-one differentially expressed genes were detected in response to
incubation at male producing temperature, and included genes such as Wnt
signaling factor WNT11, histone demethylase KDM6B, and transcription factor
C/EBPA. Furthermore, comparative analysis of development- and sex-dependent
differential gene expression revealed 230 candidate genes involved in alligator
sex determination and differentiation, and early details of the suspected
male-fate commitment were profiled. We also discovered sexually dimorphic
expression of uncharacterized ncRNAs and other novel elements, such as unique
expression patterns of HEMGN and ARX. Twenty-five of the differentially expressed
genes identified in our analysis were putative transcriptional regulators, among 
which were MYBL2, MYCL, and HOXC10, in addition to conventional sex
differentiation genes such as SOX9, and FOXL2. Inferred gene regulatory network
was constructed, and the gene-gene and temperature-gene interactions were
predicted.
CONCLUSIONS: Gonadal global gene expression kinetics during sex determination has
been extensively profiled for the first time in a TSD species. These findings
provide insights into the genetic framework underlying TSD, and expand our
current understanding of the developmental fate pathways during vertebrate sex
determination.

PMCID: PMC4727388
PMID: 26810479  [PubMed - in process]


7. Gynecol Oncol Rep. 2015 Aug 13;14:6-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gore.2015.08.001.
eCollection 2015.

Poorly differentiated Sertoli-Leydig tumor with heterologous, high-grade,
sarcomatoid features: A case report.

Brightwell R(1), Grzankowski K(1), Kasznica J(2), Frederick PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecologic Oncology,Roswell Park Cancer InstituteBuffalo,NY,
USA. (2)Department of Pathology,Roswell Park Cancer Institute,Buffalo,NY, USA.

•Treatment of sex-cord stromal tumors with carboplatin and taxane is both
feasible and safe.•FOXL2 mutations account for approximately 50% of these
tumors.•Carboplatin and taxane may afford a favorable outcome.

PMCID: PMC4688826
PMID: 26793762  [PubMed]


8. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2016 Mar;72:51-4. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2016.01.003.
Epub 2016 Jan 11.

Impact of FOXL2 mutations on signaling in ovarian granulosa cell tumors.

Leung DT(1), Fuller PJ(2), Chu S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Hudson Institute of Medical Research, 27-31 Wright Street, Clayton, VIC 3168, 
Australia; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
Nursing and Health Sciences, Monash University, Bldg. 77, 23 Innovation Walk,
Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia. Electronic address: dilys.leung@hudson.org.au.
(2)Hudson Institute of Medical Research, 27-31 Wright Street, Clayton, VIC 3168, 
Australia. Electronic address: peter.fuller@hudson.org.au. (3)Hudson Institute of
Medical Research, 27-31 Wright Street, Clayton, VIC 3168, Australia. Electronic
address: simon.chu@hudson.org.au.

Granulosa cell tumors (GCT) are unique sex-cord stromal tumors which account for 
~8% of all ovarian malignancies. They exhibit morphological, biochemical and
hormonal features similar to proliferating granulosa cells of the preovulatory
follicle, including estrogen and inhibin synthesis. A somatic missense mutation
in the forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) gene (C134W) is unique to adult GCT, and absent in
other ovarian cancers. FOXL2 is a transcription factor that plays a critical role
in ovarian function, in particular, proliferation and differentiation of
granulosa cells. The molecular mechanisms underlying the pathogenicity of the
mutant FOXL2 remain unresolved. Here we review the molecular alterations known to
be associated with mutant FOXL2 and the potential signaling implications. Several
studies suggest that dysregulated FOXL2 function may alter cell cycle progression
and apoptosis. Further insights into the molecular mechanism of GCT
pathophysiology may identify therapeutic targets for the treatment of these
tumors.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26791928  [PubMed - in process]


9. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 19;6:19543. doi: 10.1038/srep19543.

Rspo1-activated signalling molecules are sufficient to induce ovarian
differentiation in XY medaka (Oryzias latipes).

Zhou L(1,)(2), Charkraborty T(2,)(3), Zhou Q(4), Mohapatra S(3), Nagahama
Y(2,)(3,)(5), Zhang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P.R. China. (2)SORST, Japan
Science Technology Corporation, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan. (3)South
Ehime Fisheries Research Center, Ehime University, Ainan, Ehime, 798-4206, Japan.
(4)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
305-8577, Ibaraki, Japan. (5)Institution for Collaborative Relations, Ehime
University, 790-8577, Matsuyama, Japan.

In contrast to our understanding of testicular differentiation, ovarian
differentiation is less well understood in vertebrates. In mammals, R-spondin1
(Rspo1), an activator of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, is located upstream of 
the female sex determination pathway. However, the functions of Rspo1 in ovarian 
differentiation remain unclear in non-mammalian species. In order to elucidate
the detailed functions of Rspo/Wnt signaling pathway in fish sex
determination/differentiation, the ectopic expression of the Rspo1 gene was
performed in XY medaka (Oryzias latipes). The results obtained demonstrated that 
the gain of Rspo1 function induced femininity in XY fish. The overexpression of
Rspo1 enhanced Wnt4b and ß-catenin transcription, and completely suppressed the
expression of male-biased genes (Dmy, Gsdf, Sox9a2 and Dmrt1) as well as
testicular differentiation. Gonadal reprograming of Rspo1-over-expressed-XY
(Rspo1-OV-XY) fish, induced the production of female-biased genes (Cyp19a1a and
Foxl2), estradiol-17ß production and further female type secondary sexuality.
Moreover, Rspo1-OV-XY females were fertile and produced successive generations.
Promoter analyses showed that Rspo1 transcription was directly regulated by DM
domain genes (Dmy, the sex-determining gene, and Dmrt1) and remained unresponsive
to Foxl2. Taken together, our results strongly suggest that Rspo1 is sufficient
to activate ovarian development and plays a decisive role in the ovarian
differentiation in medaka.

PMCID: PMC4726049
PMID: 26782368  [PubMed - in process]


10. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 29;10(12):e0145438. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0145438.
eCollection 2015.

Sexual Fate Reprogramming in the Steroid-Induced Bi-Directional Sex Change in the
Protogynous Orange-Spotted Grouper, Epinephelus coioides.

Wu GC(1,)(2), Tey WG(1), Li HW(1), Chang CF(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung 20224,
Taiwan. (2)Center of Excellence for the Oceans, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung 20224, Taiwan.

Androgen administration has been widely used for masculinization in fish. The
mechanism of the sex change in sexual fate regulation is not clear. Oral
administration or pellet implantation was applied. We orally applied an aromatase
inhibitor (AI, to decrease estrogen levels) and 17a-methyltestosterone (MT, to
increase androgen levels) to induce masculinization to clarify the mechanism of
the sex change in the protogynous orange-spotted grouper. After 3 mo of AI/MT
administration, male characteristics were observed in the female-to-male sex
change fish. These male characteristics included increased plasma
11-ketotestosterone (11-KT), decreased estradiol (E2) levels, increased
male-related gene (dmrt1, sox9, and cyp11b2) expression, and decreased
female-related gene (figla, foxl2, and cyp19a1a) expression. However, the reduced
male characteristics and male-to-female sex change occurred after
AI/MT-termination in the AI- and MT-induced maleness. Furthermore, the MT-induced
oocyte-depleted follicle cells (from MT-implantation) had increased proliferating
activity, and the sexual fate in a portion of female gonadal soma cells was
altered to male function during the female-to-male sex change. In contrast, the
gonadal soma cells were not proliferative during the early process of the
male-to-female sex change. Additionally, the male gonadal soma cells did not
alter to female function during the male-to-female sex change in the
AI/MT-terminated fish. After MT termination in the male-to-female sex-changed
fish, the differentiated male germ cells showed increased proliferating
activities together with dormancy and did not show characteristics of both sexes 
in the early germ cells. In conclusion, these findings indicate for the first
time in a single species that the mechanism involved in the replacement of soma
cells is different between the female-to-male and male-to-female sex change
processes in grouper. These results also demonstrate that sexual fate
determination (secondary sex determination) is regulated by endogenous sex
steroid levels.

PMCID: PMC4694621
PMID: 26714271  [PubMed - in process]


11. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 Nov 23. [Epub ahead of print]

Uterine Tumor Resembling Ovarian Sex Cord Tumor (UTROSCT) Commonly Exhibits
Positivity With Sex Cord Markers FOXL2 and SF-1 but Lacks FOXL2 and DICER1
Mutations.

Croce S(1), de Kock L, Boshari T, Hostein I, Velasco V, Foulkes WD, McCluggage
WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology (S.C., I.H., V.V.), Centre Regional de Lutte Contre Le
Cancer, Bordeaux, France Department of Human Genetics (L.d.K., W.D.F.), McGill
University Segal Cancer Centre (L.d.K., W.D.F.), Lady Davis Institute, Jewish
General Hospital Department of Medical Genetics (T.B., W.D.F.), Research
Institute of the McGill University Health Centre Program in Cancer Genetics
(W.D.F.), Department of Oncology and Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal,
QC, Canada Department of Pathology (W.G.M.C.), Belfast Health and Social Care
Trust, Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK.

Uterine tumor resembling ovarian sex cord tumor (UTROSCT) is a rare neoplasm
which morphologically and immunohistochemically exhibits overlap with an ovarian 
sex cord tumor. Although many of these neoplasms are positive with markers of
ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors, staining is often limited and the pathogenesis
of UTROSCT is unknown. To further explore the sex cord lineage of UTROSCT, we
studied 19 of these neoplasms and examined the expression of 2 recently described
markers of ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors, FOXL2, and steroidogenic factor-1. We
also undertook FOXL2 and DICER1 mutation analysis in these cases; a somatic
missense mutation in codon C134W (402C<U+2192>G) of FOXL2 gene has been demonstrated in 
the vast majority (>95%) of ovarian adult granulosa cell tumors and somatic
DICER1 mutations are found in approximately 60% of ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell
tumors. Ten of 19 cases (53%) exhibited nuclear immunoreactivity with FOXL2 and
11 of 19 (58%) exhibited nuclear staining with steroidogenic factor-1. Neither
FOXL2 nor DICER1 mutations were identified in any case where there was sufficient
tumor tissue for analysis (18 and 9 cases, respectively). Despite exhibiting an
immunophenotype characteristic of a sex cord-stromal tumor, mutations in FOXL2
and DICER1, the 2 most common mutations hitherto reported in ovarian sex
cord-stromal tumors, are not a feature of UTROSCT.

PMID: 26598979  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Feb 15;422:132-49. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.11.006. Epub
2015 Nov 14.

Comprehensive transcriptomic analysis of the process of gonadal sex
differentiation in the turbot (Scophthalmus maximus).

Ribas L(1), Robledo D(2), Gómez-Tato A(3), Viñas A(2), Martínez P(2), Piferrer
F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Ciències del Mar, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas 
(CSIC), 08003, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Departamento de Genética. Facultad de
Veterinaria, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, 27002, Lugo, Spain.
(3)Departamento de Matemática Aplicada, Facultad de Matemáticas, Universidad de
Santiago de Compostela, 15781, Santiago de Compostela, Spain. (4)Institut de
Ciències del Mar, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), 08003, 
Barcelona, Spain. Electronic address: piferrer@icm.csic.es.

The turbot is a flatfish with a ZW/ZZ sex determination system but with a still
unknown sex determining gene(s), and with a marked sexual growth dimorphism in
favor of females. To better understand sexual development in turbot we sampled
young turbot encompassing the whole process of gonadal differentiation and
conducted a comprehensive transcriptomic study on its sex differentiation using a
validated custom oligomicroarray. Also, the expression profiles of 18 canonical
reproduction-related genes were studied along gonad development. The expression
levels of gonadal aromatase cyp19a1a alone at three months of age allowed the
accurate and early identification of sex before the first signs of histological
differentiation. A total of 56 differentially expressed genes (DEG) that had not 
previously been related to sex differentiation in fish were identified within the
first three months of age, of which 44 were associated with ovarian
differentiation (e.g., cd98, gpd1 and cry2), and 12 with testicular
differentiation (e.g., ace, capn8 and nxph1). To identify putative sex
determining genes, ~4.000 DEG in juvenile gonads were mapped and their positions 
compared with that of previously identified sex- and growth-related quantitative 
trait loci (QTL). Although no genes mapped to the previously identified
sex-related QTLs, two genes (foxl2 and 17ßhsd) of the canonical
reproduction-related genes mapped to growth-QTLs in linkage group (LG) 15 and
LG6, respectively, suggesting that these genes are related to the growth
dimorphism in this species.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26586209  [PubMed - in process]


13. Yi Chuan. 2015 Nov;37(11):1105-15. doi: 10.16288/j.yczz.15-124.

[Progress in the molecular genetic mechanism of gonadoblastoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Lili Y(1), Wanru D(2), Minghui C(1), Xiangyang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, Faculty of Medicine,
Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China. (2)1.
Department of Medical Genetics and Pharmacogenomics, Faculty of Medicine, Kunming
University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650500, China; 2. College of Life
Science and Technology ,Faculty of Medicine, Kunming University of Science and
Technology, Kunming 650500, China;

Gonadoblastoma (GB), a rare in situ germ cell tumor derived from sex cord and
germ cells, is closely associated with gonadal dysgenesis. About 80% of GB
individuals exhibit 46, XY female phenotype while the others are 45, XY and 46,
XX with disorders of sex development. Moreover, 35% of GB can eventually develop 
into malignant tumors, such as seminoma and dysgerminoma tumors. The molecular
genetic mechanism of GB remains to be fully uncovered due to phenotypic and
genetic heterogeneity. Increasing studies show that the formation of GB is
closely related to genes regulating sexual differentiation and determination
(e.g., SRY, WT1, SOX9, Foxl2, TSPY, etc), and is affected by the interaction of
genetic and epigenetic regulation. Here we describe the clinical and pathological
features, diagnosis and treatment of GB, and also summarize the molecular genetic
and epigenetic mechanisms underlying the gonadal abnormalities that lead to GB.
We analyze and construct the common gene regulatory networks related to the
development of GB, and describe some obstacles and deficiencies in current
studies to provide innovative perspectives on further studying the pathological
and molecular mechanisms of GB.

PMID: 26582524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Reproduction. 2016 Feb;151(2):105-15. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0282. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Gap junctions are essential for murine primordial follicle assembly immediately
before birth.

Teng Z(1), Wang C(2), Wang Y(1), Huang K(1), Xiang X(1), Niu W(1), Feng L(1),
Zhao L(1), Yan H(1), Zhang H(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agro-BiotechnologyCollege of Biological Science, China
Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Agro-BiotechnologyCollege of Biological Science, China Agricultural University,
Beijing 100193, China wangcam@cau.edu.cn.

The reserve of primordial follicles determines the reproductive ability of the
female mammal over its reproductive life. The primordial follicle is composed of 
two types of cells: oocytes and surrounding pre-granulosa cells. However, the
underlying mechanism regulating primordial follicle assembly is largely
undefined. In this study, we found that gap junction communication (GJC)
established between the ovarian cells in the perinatal mouse ovary may be
involved in the process. First, gap junction structures between the oocyte and
surrounding pre-granulosa cells appear at about 19.0<U+200A>dpc (days post coitum). As
many as 12 gap junction-related genes are upregulated at birth, implying that a
complex communication may exist between ovarian cells, because specifically
silencing the genes of individual gap junction proteins, such as Gja1, Gja4 or
both, has no influence on primordial follicle assembly. On the other hand,
non-specific blockers of GJC, such as carbenoxolone (CBX) and 18a-glycyrrhetinic 
acid (AGA), significantly inhibit mouse primordial follicle assembly. We proved
that the temporal window for establishment of GJC in the fetal ovary is from
19.5<U+200A>dpc to 1<U+200A>dpp (days postpartum). In addition, the expression of ovarian
somatic cell (OSC)-specific genes, such as Notch2, Foxl2 and Irx3, was negatively
affected by GJC blockers, whereas oocyte-related genes, such as Ybx2, Nobox and
Sohlh1, were hardly affected, implying that the establishment of GJC during this 
period may be more important to OSCs than to oocytes. In summary, our results
indicated that GJC involves in the mouse primordial follicle assembly process at 
a specific temporal window that needs Notch signaling cross-talking.

© 2016 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 26554027  [PubMed - in process]


15. PLoS One. 2015 Oct 23;10(10):e0141062. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0141062.
eCollection 2015.

Cooperative Effects of FOXL2 with the Members of TGF-ß Superfamily on FSH
Receptor mRNA Expression and Granulosa Cell Proliferation from Hen
Prehierarchical Follicles.

Qin N(1), Fan XC(1), Xu XX(2), Tyasi TL(1), Li SJ(2), Zhang YY(1), Wei ML(1), Xu 
RF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal
Science and Technology, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun, People's
Republic of China. (2)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction,
College of Animal Science and veterinary medicine, Huazhong Agricultural
University, Wuhan, People's Republic of China.

Forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) is a member of the forkhead nuclear factor 3 gene family 
and plays an essential role in ovarian growth and maturation in mammals. However,
its potential effects and regulative mechanism in development of chicken ovarian 
prehierarchical follicles remain unexplored. In this study, the cooperative
effects of FOXL2 with activin A, growth differentiation factor-9 (GDF9) and
follistatin, three members of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-ß)
superfamily that were previously suggested to exert a critical role in follicle
development was investigated. We demonstrated herein, using in-situ
hybridization, Northern blot and immunohistochemical analyses of oocytes and
granulosa cells in various sizes of prehierarchical follicles that both FOXL2
transcripts and FOXL2 proteins are predominantly expressed in a highly similar
expression pattern to that of GDF9 gene. In addition, the FOXL2 transcript was
found at lower levels in theca cells in the absence of GDF9. Furthermore, culture
of granulosa cells (GCs) from the prehierarchical follicles (6-8 mm) in
conditioned medium revealed that in the pcDNA3.0-FOXL2 transfected GCs, there was
a more dramatic increase in FSHR mRNA expression after treatment with activin A
(10 ng/ml) or GDF9 (100 ng/ml) for 24 h which caused a stimulatory effect on the 
GC proliferation. In contrast, a significant decrease of FSHR mRNA was detected
after treatment with follistatin (50 ng/ml) and resulted in an inhibitory effect 
on the cell proliferation. The results of this suggested that FOXL2 plays a
bidirectional modulating role involved in the intracellular FSHR transcription
and GC proliferation via an autocrine regulatory mechanism in a positive or
negative manner through cooperation with activin A and/or GDF9, and follistatin
in the hen follicle development. This cooperative action may be mediated by the
examined Smad signals and simultaneously implicated in modulation of the StAR,
CCND2, and CYP11A1 expression.

PMCID: PMC4619702
PMID: 26496659  [PubMed - in process]


16. J Exp Zool A Ecol Genet Physiol. 2016 Jan;325(1):13-24. doi: 10.1002/jez.1992.
Epub 2015 Oct 20.

Effect of temperature, food availability, and estradiol injection on
gametogenesis and gender in the pearl oyster Pinctada margaritifera.

Teaniniuraitemoana V(1), Leprêtre M(1), Levy P(1), Vanaa V(1), Parrad S(1),
Gaertner-Mazouni N(2), Gueguen Y(3), Huvet A(4), Le Moullac G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ifremer, UMR 241 Ecosystèmes Insulaires Océaniens (EIO), Labex CORAIL, Centre 
du Pacifique, Taravao, Tahiti, French Polynesia. (2)Université de la Polynésie
Française, UMR 241 Ecosystèmes Insulaires Océaniens (EIO), Labex CORAIL, Faa'a,
Tahiti, French Polynesia. (3)Ifremer, UMR 5244 Interactions
Hôtes-Pathogènes-Environnement (IHPE), Université de Montpellier, Montpellier
Cedex 5, France. (4)Ifremer, UMR 6539 Laboratoire des sciences de l'Environnement
Marin (LEMAR), ZI de la Pointe du Diable, Plouzané, France.

The black-lip pearl oyster Pinctada margaritifera is a protandrous hermaphrodite 
species. Its economic value has led to the development of controlled hatchery
reproduction techniques, although many aspects remain to be optimized. In order
to understand reproductive mechanisms and their controlling factors, two
independent experiments were designed to test hypotheses of gametogenesis and sex
ratio control by environmental and hormonal factors. In one, pearl oysters were
exposed under controlled conditions at different combinations of temperature (24 
and 28°C) and food level (10,000 and 40,000 cells mL(-1) ); whereas in the other,
pearl oysters were conditioned under natural conditions into the lagoon and
subjected to successive 17ß-estradiol injections (100<U+2009>µg per injection).
Gametogenesis and sex ratio were assessed by histology for each treatment. In
parallel, mRNA expressions of nine marker genes of the sexual pathway
(pmarg-foxl2, pmarg-c43476, pmarg-c45042, pmarg-c19309, pmarg-c54338, pmarg-vit6,
pmarg-zglp1, pmarg-dmrt, and pmarg-fem1-like) were investigated. Maximum
maturation was observed in the treatment combining the highest temperature (28°C)
and the highest microalgae concentration (40,000 cells mL(-1) ), where the female
sex tended to be maintained. Injection of 17ß-estradiol induced a significant
increase of undetermined stage proportion 2 weeks after the final injection.
These results suggest that gametogenesis and gender in adult pearl oysters can be
controlled by environmental factors and estrogens. While there were no
significant effects on relative gene expression, the 3-gene-pair expression ratio
model of the sexual pathway of P. margaritifera, suggest a probable dominance of 
genetic sex determinism without excluding a mixed sex determination mode
(genetic<U+2009>+<U+2009>environmental). J. Exp. Zool. 325A:13-24, 2016. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26482470  [PubMed - in process]


17. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2015 Sep;45:59-67. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2015.10.021. Epub
2015 Oct 19.

Ovarian development and disease: The known and the unexpected.

Biason-Lauber A(1), Chaboissier MC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Fribourg, Chemin du Musée 5, CH-1700
Fribourg, Switzerland. Electronic address: anna.lauber@unifr.ch. (2)Institute of 
Biology Valrose, Université de Nice-Sophia, F-06108 Nice, France; Inserm,
UMR1091, F-06108, France; CNRS, UMR7277, F-06108, France. Electronic address:
Marie-Christine.Chaboissier@unice.fr.

The idea that the female sexual development happens by default was born in the
middle of the last century after Jost carried out his innovative experiments to
study the bases of differentiation of the reproductive tract, and found that the 
female reproductive tract develops even in the absence of any gonad. The term
default (passive) attributed to the whole female developmental pathway therefore 
established itself, even if it was not originally so intended. However, recent
developments have demonstrated that ovarian development is an active process.
WNT4, one of a few factors with a demonstrated function in the
ovarian-determination pathway, has been found to be involved in sexual
differentiation by suppressing male sexual differentiation, promoting Müllerian
ducts differentiation and maintaining oocyte health. WNT4 expression in the ovary
seems to be regulated by R-spondin 1 (RSPO1), a thrombospondin family member
protein. The role and interactions of WNT4, RSPO1 and other factors, such as
FOXL2 as well as the possible role of chromatin modifiers such as the polycomb
protein CBX2 in ovarian development and function will be discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26481972  [PubMed - in process]


18. Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 1;408(1):79-89. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.05.022. Epub 2015
Oct 23.

Exogenous estradiol alters gonadal growth and timing of temperature sex
determination in gonads of sea turtle.

Díaz-Hernández V(1), Marmolejo-Valencia A(2), Merchant-Larios H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Embriología, Facultad de Medicina. Universidad Nacional
Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico. Electronic address:
roveazdih@yahoo.com.mx. (2)Departamento de Biología Celular y Fisiología,
Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas. Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México,
Mexico City, Mexico. Electronic address: alemarmol@biomedicas.unam.mx.
(3)Departamento de Biología Celular y Fisiología, Instituto de Investigaciones
Biomédicas; Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México. Ciudad Universitaria, CP.
04510, México DF, Mexico City, Mexico. Electronic address: merchant@unam.mx.

Temperature sex determining species offer a model for investigating how
environmental cues become integrated to the regulation of patterning genes and
growth, among bipotential gonads. Manipulation of steroid hormones has revealed
the important role of aromatase in the regulation of the estrogen levels involved
in temperature-dependent sex determination. Estradiol treatment counteracts the
effect of male-promoting temperature, but the resulting ovarian developmental
pattern differs from that manifested with the female-promoting temperature.
Hypoplastic gonads have been reported among estradiol-treated turtles; however
the estradiol effect on gonadal size has not been examined. Here we focused on
the sea turtle Lepidochelys olivacea, which develops hypoplastic gonads with
estradiol treatment. We studied the effect of estradiol on cell proliferation and
on candidate genes involved in ovarian pattern. We found this effect is organ
specific, causing a dramatic reduction in gonadal cell proliferation during the
temperature-sensitive period. Although the incipient gonads resembled tiny
ovaries, remodeling of the medullary cords and down-regulation of testicular
factor Sox9 were considerably delayed. Contrastingly, with ovarian promoting
temperature as a cue, exogenous estradiol induced the up-regulation of the ovary 
factor FoxL2, prior to the expression of aromatase. The strong expression of
estrogen receptor alpha at the time of treatment suggests that it mediates
estradiol effects. Overall results indicate that estradiol levels required for
gonadal growth and to establish the female genetic network are delicately
regulated by temperature.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26465360  [PubMed - in process]


19. Biosci Rep. 2015 Oct 1;35(6). pii: e00278. doi: 10.1042/BSR20150151.

FOXL2 down-regulates vitellogenin expression at mature stage in Eriocheir
sinensis.

Li Q(1), Xie J(2), He L(2), Wang Y(2), Yang H(2), Duan Z(2), Wang Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunological Defense & Reproduction, School of Life Science,
East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China qwang@bio.ecnu.edu.cn.
(2)Laboratory of Immunological Defense & Reproduction, School of Life Science,
East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China.

Ovarian development in crustaceans is characterized by rapid production of egg
yolk protein in a process called vitellogenesis. In the present study, we
investigated the involvement of a DEAD (Asp-Glu-Ala-Asp) box RNA helicase 20
(DDX20), forkhead transcription factor (FOXL)2 and fushi tarazu factor
(FTZ-F)1 in the regulation of vitellogenesis. Based on ESTs from the testis and
accessory gland of Eriocheir sinensis, we cloned the full-length cDNAs of foxl2
and fushitarazu factor 1 (ftz-f1), which include the conserved structural
features of the forkhead family and nuclear receptor 5A (NR5A) family
respectively. The expression of foxl2 mRNA surged at the mature stage of the
ovary, when vtg mRNA swooped, suggesting that foxl2 negatively affects the
vitellogenin (VTG) synthesis at this developmental stage. Etoposide (inducing
germ cell apoptosis) treatment up-regulated FOXL2 and DDX20 at both the mRNA and 
the protein levels, primarily in the follicular cells as shown by
immunofluorescence analysis. Furthermore, foxl2, ddx20 and ftz-f1 mRNA levels
increased significantly with right-eyestalk ablation. Interactions between FOXL2 
and DDX20 or FTZ-F1 were confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation and the forkhead
domain of FOXL2 was identified as the specific structure interacting with FTZ-F1.
In conclusion, FOXL2 down-regulates VTG expression by binding with DDX20 in
regulation of follicular cell apoptosis and with FTZ-F1 to repress the synthesis 
of VTG at the mature stage. This report is the first to describe the molecular
mechanism of VTG synthesis in E. sinensis and may shed new light on the
regulation of cytochrome P450 enzyme by FOXL2 and FTZ-F1 in vitellogenesis.

© 2015 Authors.

PMCID: PMC4708011
PMID: 26430246  [PubMed - in process]


20. Mod Pathol. 2015 Dec;28(12):1603-12. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.115. Epub 2015
Oct 2.

A survey of DICER1 hotspot mutations in ovarian and testicular sex cord-stromal
tumors.

Conlon N(1), Schultheis AM(1), Piscuoglio S(1), Silva A(2), Guerra E(2), Tornos
C(3), Reuter VE(1), Soslow RA(1), Young RH(2), Oliva E(2), Weigelt B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY,
USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, Stony Brook University Medical Center, New York, NY, 
USA.

Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors are characterized by the presence of somatic DICER1
hotspot mutations. In this study, we sought to define the association between
DICER1 hotspot mutations and different morphologic subtypes of ovarian
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors. Furthermore, we aimed to assess whether DICER1
hotspot mutations occur in other ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors, testicular sex 
cord-stromal tumors, or other female genital tract tumors with
rhabdomyosarcomatous differentiation. We subjected a series of ovarian
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors (n=32), Sertoli cell tumors (n=5) and
gynandroblastomas (n=5), testicular sex cord-stromal tumors (n=15) and a diverse 
group of female genital tract tumors with rhabdomyosarcomatous morphology (n=10) 
to DICER1 hotspot mutation analysis using Sanger sequencing. We also tested two
gynandroblastomas for the presence of FOXL2 hotspot mutations (p.C134W;
c.402C>G). Twenty of 32 (63%) Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors harbored a DICER1
hotspot mutation, of which 80% had the p.E1705K mutation. No association was
found between DICER1 mutation status and the presence of heterologous or retiform
differentiation in Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors. DICER1 mutations were found at
similar frequencies in gynandroblastoma (2/5; 40%) and ovarian Sertoli cell
tumors (5/8; 63%; P>0.1), and all mutated tumors harbored a p.E1705K mutation.
DICER1 hotspot mutations were also identified in a single cervical
rhabdomyosarcoma and in the rhabdomyosarcomatous component of a uterine
carcinosarcoma. No DICER1 mutations were detected in testicular sex cord-stromal 
tumors. Two DICER1 wild-type gynandroblastomas harbored a p.C134W FOXL2 hotspot
mutation in both tumor components. In this study we confirmed that DICER1 hotspot
mutations occur in over half of ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors, and are
unrelated to tumor differentiation. We also widened the spectrum of ovarian sex
cord-stromal tumors with sertoliform differentiation, in which DICER1 mutations
are known to occur, to include Sertoli cell tumors and gynandroblastomas. Our
results suggest that DICER1 mutations may not have a role in testicular sex
cord-stromal tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4666775 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26428316  [PubMed - in process]


21. Sex Dev. 2015;9(4):190-204. doi: 10.1159/000440689. Epub 2015 Sep 25.

From Sex Determination to Initial Folliculogenesis in Mammalian Ovaries:
Morphogenetic Waves along the Anteroposterior and Dorsoventral Axes.

Suzuki H(1), Kanai-Azuma M, Kanai Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Animal Model for Human Disease, Graduate School of 
Medical and Dental Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

Gonadal sex in most mammals is determined based on sex differentiation of the
supporting cell lineages. In mouse XY gonads, SRY induces SOX9 upregulation and
subsequent FGF9 expression by embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5), leading to the
differentiation of Sertoli cells. XX gonads, lacking SRY action, start on the
ovarian program through the actions of WNT4 and FOXL2 from around E11.5-12.0.
These 2 ovarian factors, together with retinoic acid (RA) action, promote
feminization partially through the repression of the masculinizing activities of 
SOX9, FGF9 and DMRT1. RA initiates meiosis in female germ cell cysts, in which
intercellular bridges between interconnected germ cells rapidly undergo cyst
breakdown by E17.5. Ovarian morphogenesis is characterized by continuous
recruitment of pre-granulosa progenitor cells from the coelomic epithelia during 
the embryonic stage, which results in the formation of ovigerous cords and tight 
packing of non-interconnected oocytes (i.e. oocyte nests) at the perinatal
stages. At birth, the oocyte nests break down into single oocytes surrounded by
granulosa cells, leading to the assembly of primordial follicles. This review
focuses on recent advances in the molecular and cellular events of initial
ovarian differentiation, meiotic initiation, germ cell nest breakdown, and
primordial follicle formation based on anatomical and morphogenetic aspects.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26401661  [PubMed - in process]


22. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2016 Feb;42(1):193-202. doi: 10.1007/s10695-015-0129-7.
Epub 2015 Sep 15.

Morphology, sex steroid level and gene expression analysis in gonadal sex
reversal of triploid female (XXX) rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss).

Xu G(1), Huang T(1), Jin X(2), Cui C(2), Li D(2), Sun C(2), Han Y(3), Mu Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Technology, Northeast Agricultural
University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China. (2)Harbin Academy of Agricultural
Science, Harbin, China. (3)Department of Animal Science and Technology, Northeast
Agricultural University, Harbin, Heilongjiang, China. hanying_606@163.com.
(4)National and Local Joint Engineering Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Breeding,
Heilongjiang Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences,
Harbin, China. muzhenbo@163.com.

In non-mammalian vertebrates, estrogens and expressions of cyp19a1 and foxl2 play
critical roles in maintaining ovary differentiation and development, while dmrt1 
and sox9 are male-specific genes in testicular differentiation and are highly
conserved. In order to deeply understand the morphological change, sex steroids
level and molecular mechanism of triploid female gonadal reversal in rainbow
trout, we studied the ovary morphology, tendency of estradiol-17ß (E2) and
testosterone (T) levels and the relative expressions of dmrt1, cyp19a1, sox9 and 
foxl2 in juvenile and adult fish. Our results demonstrated that the development
of triploid female gonads in rainbow trout went through arrested development,
oocytes dedifferentiation, ovary reconstruction and sex reversal finally. During 
early gonadal development (154-334 days post-fertilization), the expressions of
foxl2 and cyp19a1 increased linearly, while expressions of dmrt1 and sox9 were
extremely suppressed, and E2 level was higher, while T level was lower. During
the mid-to-late period of triploid female gonadal development (574-964 days
post-fertilization), the expressions of dmrt1 and sox9 remained high and were
very close to the quantity of diploid male genes, and T levels were even reaching
diploid male plasma concentrations, while expressions of cyp19a1 and foxl2 were
decreased, leading to decrease in E2 level. We realized that the development
model of rainbow trout triploid female gonads was extremely rare, and the
regulatory mechanism was very special. Genes involved in gonadal development and 
endogenous estrogens are pivotal factors in fish natural sex reversal.

PMID: 26373423  [PubMed - in process]


23. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Dec 1;24(23):6687-98. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv373. Epub 2015 Sep 
11.

Molecular analyses of juvenile granulosa cell tumors bearing AKT1 mutations
provide insights into tumor biology and therapeutic leads.

Auguste A(1), Bessière L(1), Todeschini AL(2), Caburet S(1), Sarnacki S(3), Prat 
J(4), D'angelo E(4), De La Grange P(5), Ariste O(5), Lemoine F(5), Legois B(1),
Sultan C(6), Zider A(1), Galmiche L(3), Kalfa N(6), Veitia RA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Université Paris Diderot, CNRS UMR7592, Paris 75013,
France, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Université Paris Diderot-Paris VII, 75205
Paris, France. (2)Institut Jacques Monod, Université Paris Diderot, CNRS UMR7592,
Paris 75013, France, Faculty of Biological Sciences, Université Paris
Diderot-Paris VII, 75205 Paris, France, veitia.reiner@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr
todeschini@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr. (3)Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris,
France, Faculty of Medicine, Université Paris Descartes-Paris V, 75015 Paris,
France. (4)Department of Pathology, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,
Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (5)GenoSplice, Ltd, Paris, 
France. (6)Deparment of Pediatic Endocrinology, University Hospital of
Montpellier, Montpellier, France and Deparment of Pediatic Surgery, Hôpital
Lapeyronie, CHU Montpellier et Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

Juvenile granulosa cell tumors (JGCTs) of the ovary are pediatric neoplasms
representing 5% of all granulosa cell tumors (GCTs). Most GCTs are of adult type 
(AGCTs) and bear a mutation in the FOXL2 gene. The molecular basis of JGCTs is
poorly understood, although mutations in the GNAS gene have been reported. We
have detected in-frame duplications within the oncogene AKT1 in >60% of the JGCTs
studied. Here, to evaluate the functional impact of these duplications and the
existence of potential co-driver alterations, we have sequenced the transcriptome
of four JGCTs and compared them with control transcriptomes. A search for gene
variants detected only private alterations probably unrelated with tumorigenesis,
suggesting that tandem duplications are the best candidates to underlie tumor
formation in the absence of GNAS alterations. We previously showed that the
duplications were specific to JGCTs. However, the screening of eight AGCTs
samples without FOXL2 mutation showed the existence of an AKT1 duplication in one
case, also having a stromal luteoma. The analysis of RNA-Seq data pinpointed a
series of differentially expressed genes, involved in cytokine and hormone
signaling and cell division-related processes. Further analyses pointed to the
existence of a possible dedifferentiation process and suggested that most of the 
transcriptomic dysregulation might be mediated by a limited set of transcription 
factors perturbed by AKT1 activation. Finally, we show that commercially
available AKT inhibitors can modulate the in vitro activity of various mutated
forms. These results shed light on the pathogenesis of JGCTs and provide
therapeutic leads for a targeted treatment.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26362254  [PubMed - in process]


24. Gene. 2016 Jan 10;575(2 Pt 1):321-30. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.09.006. Epub 2015 
Sep 4.

DNA methylation level of cyp19a1a and Foxl2 gene related to their expression
patterns and reproduction traits during ovary development stages of Japanese
flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus).

Si Y(1), Ding Y(1), He F(2), Wen H(1), Li J(1), Zhao J(1), Huang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Mariculture,Ministry of Education,Ocean University of
China,Qingdao 266003,China; Fisheries College,Ocean University of China,Qingdao
266003,China. (2)The Key Laboratory of Mariculture,Ministry of Education,Ocean
University of China,Qingdao 266003,China; Fisheries College,Ocean University of
China,Qingdao 266003,China. Electronic address: hefengouc@ouc.edu.cn.

Foxl2 and cyp19a1a genes are crucial for the ovarian development, and Foxl2 could
play a direct regulatory role on cyp19a1a transcription. In this study, we aimed 
to study DNA methylation status and mRNA expression patterns of Foxl2 and
cyp19a1a genes during ovarian development of female Japanese flounder. The
relative expression level of cyp19a1a and Foxl2 gene during the gonadal
development stages was measured by quantitative PCR. Moreover, DNA methylation
status in the promoter and coding regions of the two genes was detected by
bisulfite sequencing. The estradiol-17ß (E2) was measured by radioimmunoassay.
The results showed low expression levels of cyp19a1a and Foxl2 genes in stages II
and V, while the highest expression levels were detected in stage IV. The
variation trend of the methylation level of all CpG sites in promoter and exon 1 
of cyp19a1a gene and three CpG rich regions in coding region of Foxl2 gene was
negatively associated with their expression levels during the ovarian
development. In addition, two CpG sites in promoter and seven CpG sites in exon 1
of cyp19a1a were on the putative transcription factors binding sequence. Further 
studies showed that the forkhead domain, which is important for Foxl2 binding to 
cyp19a1a was located in the F1 and F2 region. These results provide a powerful
theoretical basis for the regulatory mechanism on Foxl2 regulating cyp19a1a and
promoting gonadal differentiation towards the female pathway, and further reveal 
that Foxl2 and cyp19a1a play a vital role in the female Japanese flounder gonad
development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26343797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. BMC Med Genet. 2015 Sep 1;16:73. doi: 10.1186/s12881-015-0217-7.

Novel FOXL2 mutations in two Chinese families with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Xue M(1,)(2), Zheng J(3), Zhou Q(4), Hejtmancik JF(5), Wang Y(6), Li S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China. flyxuemin@163.com. (2)Department of Ophthalmology,
Anhui NO.2 Provincial people's hospital, Hefei, China. flyxuemin@163.com.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China. 174390607@qq.com. (4)National MOE Key Laboratory of
Gene Resource Utilization for Important Genetic Disease, Anhui Key Laboratory of 
Genetic Research, Hefei, China. 369511550@qq.com. (5)Ophthalmic Genetics and
Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA. hejtmancikj@nei.nih.gov. (6)National MOE Key Laboratory of
Gene Resource Utilization for Important Genetic Disease, Anhui Key Laboratory of 
Genetic Research, Hefei, China. aydesm-1@163.com. (7)Department of Ophthalmology,
the First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China.
shoulingli@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a rare
autosomal dominant disease. Mutations in the forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) gene cause
two types of BPES distinguished by the presence (type I) and absence (type II) of
premature ovarian failure (POF). The purpose of this study was to identify
possible mutations in FOXL2 in two Chinese families with BPES.
METHODS: Two large autosomal dominant Chinese BPES families were enrolled in this
study. Genomic DNA was obtained from the leukocytes in peripheral venous blood.
Four overlapping sets of primers were used to amplify the entire coding region
and nearby intron sequences of the FOXL2 gene for mutations detection using
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and sequencing analyses. The sequencing results
were analyzed using DNAstar software.
RESULTS: All patients of the two families demonstrated typical features of BPES
type II, including small palpebral fissures, ptosis, telecanthus, and epicanthus 
inversus without female infertility (POF). A novel FOXL2 heterozygous indel
mutation c.675_690delinsT, including a 16-bp deletion and a 1-bp(T) insertion
(p.Ala226_Ala230del), which would result in deletion of 5 alanine residues of a
poly-alanine (poly-Ala) tract in the protein, was identified in all affected
members of family A. A novel heterozygous missense mutation (c.223C<U+2009>><U+2009>T,
p.Leu75Phe) was identified in family B.
CONCLUSIONS: Two novel FOXL2 mutations were identified in Chinese families with
BPES. Our results expand the spectrum of FOXL2 mutations and provide additional
structure-function insights into the FOXL2 protein.

PMCID: PMC4593235
PMID: 26323275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Environ Sci Pollut Res Int. 2015 Dec;22(24):20234-44. doi:
10.1007/s11356-015-5245-5. Epub 2015 Aug 26.

Effects of tamoxifen on autosomal genes regulating ovary maintenance in adult
mice.

Yu M(1), Liu W(1), Wang J(2), Qin J(3), Wang Y(1), Wang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE),
School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, 
No. 2 Linggong Road, 116024, Dalian, Liaoning, China. (2)School of Life Science
and Biotechnology, Dalian University of Technology, No. 2 Linggong Road, 116024, 
Dalian, Liaoning, China. wangjingyun67@dlut.edu.cn. (3)Department of
Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine 
(MOE), Jinan University, No. 601 West Huangpu Road, 510632, Guangzhou, Guangdong,
China.

Environmental endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs), known to bind to
estrogen/androgen receptors and mimic native estrogens, have been implicated as a
main source for increasing human reproductive and developmental deficiencies and 
diseases. Tamoxifen (TAM) is one of the most well-known antiestrogens with
defined adverse effects on the female reproductive tract, but the mechanisms
related to autosomal gene regulation governing ovary maintenance in mammals
remain unclear. The expression pattern and levels of key genes and proteins
involved in maintaining the ovarian phenotype in mice were analyzed. The results 
showed that TAM induced significant upregulation of Sox9, which is the
testis-determining factor gene. The results showed that TAM induced significant
upregulation of Sox9, the testis-determining factor gene, and the expression
level of Sox9 mRNA in the ovaries of mice exposed to 75 or 225 mg/kg bw TAM was
2- and 10-fold that in the control group, respectively (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). Furthermore, 
the testicular fibroblast growth factor gene, Fgf9, was also elevated in
TAM-treated ovaries. Accordingly, expression of the ovary development marker,
forkhead transcription factor (FOXL2), and WNT4/FST signaling, were depressed.
The levels of protein expression changed consistently with the target genes.
Moreover, the detection of platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1
(PECAM-1) in TAM-treated ovaries suggested the formation of vascular endothelial 
cells, which is a further evidence for the differentiation of the ovaries to a
testis-like phenotype. During this period, the level of 17ß-estradiol,
progesterone, and luteinizing hormone decreased, while that of testosterone
increased by 3.3-fold (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.013). The activation of a testis-specific molecular 
signaling cascade was a potentially important mechanism contributing to the
gender disorder induced by TAM, which resulted in the differentiation of the
ovaries to a testis-like phenotype in adult mice. Limited with a relatively
higher exposure, the present study provided preliminary molecular insights into
the sexual disorder induced by antiestrogens and compounds that interrupted
estrogen signaling by other modes of action.

PMID: 26304810  [PubMed - in process]


27. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 10;10(8):e0134280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0134280.
eCollection 2015.

Transcriptomics Analysis of Crassostrea hongkongensis for the Discovery of
Reproduction-Related Genes.

Tong Y(1), Zhang Y(1), Huang J(1), Xiao S(1), Zhang Y(1), Li J(1), Chen J(2), Yu 
Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Bio-resource Sustainable Utilization, Laboratory of
Applied Marine Biology, South China Sea Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Guangzhou, China; South China Sea Bio-Resource Exploitation and
Utilization Collaborative Innovation Center, Guangzhou, China. (2)Qingyuan
Polytechnic, Qingyuan, China.

BACKGROUND: The reproductive mechanisms of mollusk species have been interesting 
targets in biological research because of the diverse reproductive strategies
observed in this phylum. These species have also been studied for the development
of fishery technologies in molluscan aquaculture. Although the molecular
mechanisms underlying the reproductive process have been well studied in animal
models, the relevant information from mollusks remains limited, particularly in
species of great commercial interest. Crassostrea hongkongensis is the dominant
oyster species that is distributed along the coast of the South China Sea and
little genomic information on this species is available. Currently,
high-throughput sequencing techniques have been widely used for investigating the
basis of physiological processes and facilitating the establishment of adequate
genetic selection programs.
RESULTS: The C.hongkongensis transcriptome included a total of 1,595,855 reads,
which were generated by 454 sequencing and were assembled into 41,472 contigs
using de novo methods. Contigs were clustered into 33,920 isotigs and further
grouped into 22,829 isogroups. Approximately 77.6% of the isogroups were
successfully annotated by the Nr database. More than 1,910 genes were identified 
as being related to reproduction. Some key genes involved in germline
development, sex determination and differentiation were identified for the first 
time in C.hongkongensis (nanos, piwi, ATRX, FoxL2, ß-catenin, etc.). Gene
expression analysis indicated that vasa, nanos, piwi, ATRX, FoxL2, ß-catenin and 
SRD5A1 were highly or specifically expressed in C.hongkongensis gonads.
Additionally, 94,056 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and 1,699 simple
sequence repeats (SSRs) were compiled.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study significantly increased C.hongkongensis genomic
information based on transcriptomics analysis. The group of reproduction-related 
genes identified in the present study constitutes a new tool for research on
bivalve reproduction processes. The large group of molecular markers discovered
in this study will be useful for population screening and marker assisted
selection programs in C.hongkongensis aquaculture.

PMCID: PMC4530894
PMID: 26258576  [PubMed - in process]


28. Hum Reprod. 2015 Oct;30(10):2351-63. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dev194. Epub 2015 Aug 6.

Ex vivo culture of human fetal gonads: manipulation of meiosis signalling by
retinoic acid treatment disrupts testis development.

Jørgensen A(1), Nielsen JE(2), Perlman S(3), Lundvall L(3), Mitchell RT(4), Juul 
A(2), Rajpert-De Meyts E(2).

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Growth and Reproduction and EDMaRC, Rigshospitalet,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark aj@rh.regionh.dk. (2)University
Department of Growth and Reproduction and EDMaRC, Rigshospitalet, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Department of Gynaecology, Rigshospitalet,
University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 9, Copenhagen DK-2100, Denmark. (4)MRC
Centre for Reproductive Health, The University of Edinburgh, The Queen's Medical 
Research Institute, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK Edinburgh
Royal Hospital for Sick Children, 9 Sciennes Road, Edinburgh EH9 1LF, UK.

STUDY QUESTION: What are the effects of experimentally manipulating meiosis
signalling by addition of retinoic acid (RA) in cultured human fetal gonads?
SUMMARY ANSWER: RA-treatment accelerated meiotic entry in cultured fetal ovary
samples, while addition of RA resulted in a dysgenetic gonadal phenotype in fetal
testis cultures.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: One of the first manifestations of sex differentiation is 
the initiation of meiosis in fetal ovaries. In contrast, meiotic entry is
actively prevented in the fetal testis at this developmental time-point. It has
previously been shown that RA-treatment mediates initiation of meiosis in human
fetal ovary ex vivo.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: This was a controlled ex vivo study of human fetal 
gonads treated with RA in 'hanging-drop' tissue cultures. The applied
experimental set-up preserves germ cell-somatic niche interactions and the
investigated outcomes included tissue integrity and morphology, cell
proliferation and survival and the expression of markers of meiosis and sex
differentiation.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Tissue from 24 first trimester human
fetuses was included in this study, all from elective terminations at gestational
week (GW) 7-12. Gonads were cultured for 2 weeks with and without addition of 1
µM RA. Samples were subsequently formalin-fixed and investigated by
immunohistochemistry and cell counting. Proteins investigated and quantified
included; octamer-binding transcription factor 4 (OCT4), transcription factor
AP-2 gamma (AP2<U+03B3>) (embryonic germ cell markers), SRY (sex determining region
Y)-box 9 (SOX9), anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) (immature Sertoli cell markers),
COUP transcription factor 2 (COUP-TFII) (marker of interstitial cells), forkhead 
box L2 (FOXL2) (granulosa cell marker), H2A histone family, member X (<U+03B3>H2AX)
(meiosis marker), doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1 (DMRT1)
(meiosis regulator), cleaved poly ADP ribose polymerase (PARP), cleaved Caspase 3
(apoptosis markers) and Ki-67 antigen (Ki-67) (proliferation marker). Also,
proliferation was determined using a 5'-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU)
incorporation assay.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: A novel ex vivo 'hanging-drop' culture model
for human fetal gonads was successfully established. Continued proliferation of
cells without signs of increased apoptosis was observed after 2 weeks of culture.
In cultured fetal ovaries treated with RA, an increased number of meiotic germ
cells (P < 0.05) and DMRT1-positive oogonia initiating meiosis (P < 0.05) was
observed, which is in agreement with a previous study. In fetal testes,
RA-treatment resulted in a decreased number of gonocytes (P < 0.05), a reduced
percentage of proliferating gonocytes (P < 0.05), altered expression pattern of
the somatic cell markers AMH and COUP-TFII, as well as disrupted seminiferous
cord structure and testis morphology.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The number of samples included in this study
was relatively small due to the limited availability of human fetal tissue.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The hanging-drop culture, similarly to other 
organ culture approaches, allows studies of germ cell-somatic niche interactions 
and determination of effects after manipulating specific signalling pathways. Our
novel finding of disrupted fetal testis development after treatment with RA
indicates that abnormal meiosis regulation can potentially cause gonadal
dysgenesis. Further studies will elucidate the exact mechanisms and timing of
observed effects.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: This work was supported in part by an ESPE
Research Fellowship, sponsored by Novo Nordisk A/S to A.Jø. Additional funding
for this project was obtained from The Research Council of the Capital Region of 
Denmark (E.R.-D.M.), The Research Fund at Rigshospitalet (A.Ju. and J.E.N.),
Familien Erichssens Fund (A.Jø.), Dagmar Marshalls Fund (A.Jø.) and Aase & Ejnar 
Danielsens Fund (A.Jø.). The authors have no conflicts of interest.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26251460  [PubMed - in process]


29. Toxicology. 2015 Oct 2;336:10-6. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2015.07.009. Epub 2015 Jul
26.

Di (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate exposure during pregnancy disturbs temporal sex
determination regulation in mice offspring.

Wang Y(1), Liu W(2), Yang Q(3), Yu M(1), Zhang Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE),
School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian, Liaoning 116024, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and
Environmental Engineering (MOE), School of Environmental Science and Technology, 
Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning 116024, China. Electronic
address: liu_wei@dlut.edu.cn. (3)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Dalian
University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning 116024, China. Electronic address:
qingyang@dlut.edu.cn.

Animal researches and clinical studies have supported the relevance between
phthalates exposure and testicular dysgenesis syndrome (TDS). These disorders may
comprise common origin in fetal life, especially during sex determination and
differentiation, where the mechanism remains unclear. The present study evaluated
the disturbances in gene regulatory networks of sex determination in fetal mouse 
by in utero Di (2-ethylhexyl) phthalate (DEHP) exposure. Temporal expression of
key sex determination genes were examined during the critical narrow time window,
using whole-mount in situ hybridization and quantitative-PCR. DEHP exposure
resulted in significant reduction in mRNA of Sry during sex determination from
gestation day (GD) 11.0 to 11.5 in male fetal mice, and the increasing of Sry
expression to threshold level on GD 11.5 was delayed. Meanwhile, Gadd45g and
Gata4, the upstream genes of Sry, and downstream gene Sox9 were also
significantly downregulated in expression. In fetal females, the expression of
Wnt4 and beta-catenin were up-regulated by DEHP exposure. Taken together, the
results suggest that the potential mechanism of gonadal development disorder by
DEHP may origin from repression of important male sex determination signaling
pathway, involving Gadd45g <U+2192> Gata4 <U+2192> Sry <U+2192> Sox9. The results would promote a
better understanding of the association between phthalate esters (PAEs) exposure 
and the reductive disorder.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26219507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Oct;39(10):1420-6. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000482.

Microcystic Stromal Tumor: A Distinctive Ovarian Sex Cord-Stromal Neoplasm
Characterized by FOXL2, SF-1, WT-1, Cyclin D1, and ß-catenin Nuclear Expression
and CTNNB1 Mutations.

Irving JA(1), Lee CH, Yip S, Oliva E, McCluggage WG, Young RH.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pathology, and Medical Genetics, Royal
Jubilee Hospital, Victoria †Department of Pathology, University of British
Columbia §Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Vancouver General
Hospital, Vancouver, BC ‡Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
University of Alberta and Royal Alexandra Hospital, Edmonton, AB, Canada <U+2225>James
Homer Wright Pathology Laboratories of the Massachusetts General Hospital, and
the Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA ¶Department of
Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, Northern Ireland,
United Kingdom.

Since our first description of the microcystic stromal tumor (MST) of the ovary, 
a rare and distinctive neoplasm with a definitional, usually striking microcystic
pattern and a CD10+/vimentin+/inhibin-/calretinin- immunophenotype, 3 examples
with ß-catenin nuclear localization, and CTNNB1 mutation have been reported. We
undertook a detailed immunohistochemical study and molecular analysis of CTNNB1
and FOXL2 of 15 cases of MST to further characterize this neoplasm and establish 
its histogenesis. Diffuse nuclear staining for FOXL2, WT-1, cyclin D1, and
ß-catenin was present in all tumors tested, and 12/15 were positive for
steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1). Heterozygous missense point mutations in exon 3 of
CTNNB1 were detected in 8 of 14 cases, resulting in amino acid changes at codons 
32, 34, 35, and 37. There was no correlation between CTNNB1 exon 3 mutation
status and tumor immunophenotype. All 14 cases tested showed wild-type FOXL2. Our
study establishes that MST of the ovary exhibits a characteristic
FOXL2/SF-1/WT-1/cyclin D1/nuclear ß-catenin-positive immunohistochemical profile,
which may be useful in diagnosis and in the exclusion of histologic mimics. The
presence of diffuse nuclear FOXL2 and WT-1 immunostaining in all cases and SF-1
in most supports the classification of MST within the sex cord-stromal category. 
Aberrant nuclear ß-catenin expression, detected in all MSTs, appears to be the
result of stabilizing CTNNB1 mutations in 57% of cases, providing further
evidence that dysregulation of the Wnt/B-catenin pathway is involved in the
tumorigenesis of MST and may involve activation of ß-catenin with upregulation of
cyclin D1.

PMID: 26200099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Aquat Toxicol. 2015 Sep;166:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2015.06.013. Epub 2015
Jun 30.

The progestin levonorgestrel affects sex differentiation in zebrafish at
environmentally relevant concentrations.

Hua J(1), Han J(2), Guo Y(3), Zhou B(4).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China; University of
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (2)Biology Institute of
Shangdong Academy of Sciences, Jinan 250014, China. (3)State Key Laboratory of
Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Wuhan 430072, China. (4)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology
and Biotechnology, Institute of Hydrobiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Wuhan 
430072, China. Electronic address: bszhou@ihb.ac.cn.

Synthetic progestins have become widespread environmental contaminants and may
cause adverse effects on fish. In the present study, we investigated the effects 
of levonorgestrel (LNG) on sex differentiation in zebrafish (Danio rerio).
Embryos were exposed to LNG at environmentally relevant concentrations (0, 1, 10,
33, and 100ng/L) and allowed to develop until sexual maturity. Histological
examination at 63 days post fertilization (dpf) caused complete sex reversal and 
100% males were observed in the 10, 33 and 100ng/L treatments; gross
morphological and histological examination of gonads at 142dpf further confirmed 
100% males at these exposure concentrations. The results indicate androgenic
activity of LNG, and masculinization during zebrafish gonadal differentiation.
The mRNA expression levels of genes involved in fish sex differentiation and
gonadal development were examined at 28 and 42dpf. Down-regulation of the mRNA
expression of aromatase (e.g., cyp19a1a, cyp19a1b), the forkhead transcription
factor gene L2 (foxl2) and the Fushi tarazu factor-1d (nr5a1b) were observed. In 
contrast, transcription of the doublesex and mab-3-related transcription factor 1
(dmrt1) gene was up-regulated. Androgen receptor (ar) mRNA expression was
significantly down-regulated at 28 and 42dpf. Co-exposure to flutamide (an
androgen antagonist) and LNG, led to a decrease in the sex inversion potency of
LNG. Our study has demonstrated that environmentally relevant concentrations of
LNG could alter sex differentiation and gonadal development in zebrafish. Our
results also suggest a potentially high ecological risk of LNG to fish
populations in LNG-contaminated aquatic environments.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26163149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2015 Dec;41(6):1419-33. doi: 10.1007/s10695-015-0096-z.
Epub 2015 Jul 10.

Molecular identification and expression of the Foxl2 gene during gonadal sex
differentiation in northern snakehead Channa argus.

Wang DD(1,)(2), Zhang GR(1,)(2), Wei KJ(3,)(4), Ji W(1,)(2), Gardner
JP(1,)(2,)(5), Yang RB(1,)(2), Chen KC(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, College
of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic 
of China. (2)Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation Center of Hubei
Province, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic of China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, College of Fisheries,
Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic of China.
kjwei@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (4)Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation Center
of Hubei Province, Wuhan, 430070, People's Republic of China.
kjwei@mail.hzau.edu.cn. (5)School of Biological Sciences, Victoria University of 
Wellington, PO Box 600, Wellington, 6140, New Zealand. (6)Key Laboratory of
Tropical and Subtropical Fishery Resource Application and Cultivation, Ministry
of Agriculture, Pearl River Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of
Fishery Sciences, Guangzhou, 510380, People's Republic of China.

Channa argus is one of the most commercially important fish species in China.
Studies show that males of C. argus grow faster than females at the same age. In 
order to explore the sex differentiation mechanism of C. argus, we isolated the
full length of the sex-related gene Foxl2 cDNA and analysed its expression
patterns during gonadal sex differentiation. Alignment of known Foxl2 amino acid 
sequences from vertebrates confirmed the conservation of the Foxl2 open reading
frame, especially the forkhead domain and C-terminal region. Quantitative RT-PCR 
revealed that Foxl2 is predominantly expressed in brain, pituitary, gill and
ovary, with its highest level in ovary but low levels in testis and other
tissues, reflecting a potential role for Foxl2 in the brain-pituitary-gonad axis 
in C. argus. Our ontogenetic stage data showed that C. argus Foxl2 expression was
significantly upregulated from 1 to 11 days posthatching (dph) and that the
initiation of expression preceded the first anatomical ovarian differentiation
(27 dph), suggesting that Foxl2 might play a potential role in early gonadal sex 
differentiation in C. argus. In addition, the Foxl2 protein was primarily located
in granulosa cells surrounding the oocytes of mature C. argus, implying that
Foxl2 may have a basic function in granulosa cell differentiation and the
maintenance of oocytes.

PMID: 26159319  [PubMed - in process]


33. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Jul 2;15:27. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0072-y.

FOXL2 modulates cartilage, skeletal development and IGF1-dependent growth in
mice.

Marongiu M(1), Marcia L(2,)(3), Pelosi E(4), Lovicu M(5), Deiana M(6), Zhang
Y(7), Puddu A(8,)(9), Loi A(10), Uda M(11), Forabosco A(12), Schlessinger D(13), 
Crisponi L(14).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 
Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrato, SS 554 km 4500, Monserrato, 09042, Italy.
mara.marongiu@irgb.cnr.it. (2)Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio
Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrato, SS 554 km 4500,
Monserrato, 09042, Italy. loredana.marcia@irgb.cnr.it. (3)Università degli Studi 
di Sassari, Sassari, Italy. loredana.marcia@irgb.cnr.it. (4)Laboratory of
Genetics, NIA-IRP, NIH, Baltimore, MD, USA. pelosie@grc.nia.nih.gov. (5)Istituto 
di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cittadella
Universitaria di Monserrato, SS 554 km 4500, Monserrato, 09042, Italy.
mario.lovicu@irgb.cnr.it. (6)Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio 
Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrato, SS 554 km 4500,
Monserrato, 09042, Italy. manila.deiana@irgb.cnr.it. (7)Laboratory of Genetics,
NIA-IRP, NIH, Baltimore, MD, USA. zhangyon@mail.nih.gov. (8)Istituto di Ricerca
Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cittadella
Universitaria di Monserrato, SS 554 km 4500, Monserrato, 09042, Italy.
alepud@gmail.com. (9)Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
alepud@gmail.com. (10)Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio
Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cittadella Universitaria di Monserrato, SS 554 km 4500,
Monserrato, 09042, Italy. angela.loi@irgb.cnr.it. (11)Istituto di Ricerca
Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cittadella
Universitaria di Monserrato, SS 554 km 4500, Monserrato, 09042, Italy.
manuela.uda@irgb.cnr.it. (12)Cante di Montevecchio Association, Genomic Research 
Center, Fano, Italy. bordiga34@gmail.com. (13)Laboratory of Genetics, NIA-IRP,
NIH, Baltimore, MD, USA. SchlessingerD@grc.nia.nih.gov. (14)Istituto di Ricerca
Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Cittadella
Universitaria di Monserrato, SS 554 km 4500, Monserrato, 09042, Italy.
laura.crisponi@irgb.cnr.it.

BACKGROUND: Haploinsufficiency of the FOXL2 transcription factor in humans causes
Blepharophimosis/Ptosis/Epicanthus Inversus syndrome (BPES), characterized by
eyelid anomalies and premature ovarian failure. Mice lacking Foxl2 recapitulate
human eyelid/forehead defects and undergo female gonadal dysgenesis. We report
here that mice lacking Foxl2 also show defects in postnatal growth and embryonic 
bone and cartilage formation.
METHODS: Foxl2 (-/-) male mice at different stages of development have been
characterized and compared to wild type. Body length and weight were measured and
growth curves were created. Skeletons were stained with alcian blue and/or
alizarin red. Bone and cartilage formation was analyzed by Von Kossa staining and
immunofluorescence using anti-FOXL2 and anti-SOX9 antibodies followed by confocal
microscopy. Genes differentially expressed in skull vaults were evaluated by
microarray analysis. Analysis of the GH/IGF1 pathway was done evaluating the
expression of several hypothalamic-pituitary-bone axis markers by RT-qPCR.
RESULTS: Compared to wild-type, Foxl2 null mice are smaller and show skeletal
abnormalities and defects in cartilage and bone mineralization, with
down-regulation of the GH/IGF1 axis. Consistent with these effects, we find FOXL2
expressed in embryos at 9.5 dpc in neural tube epithelium, in head mesenchyme
near the neural tube, and within the first branchial arch; then, starting at 12.5
dpc, expressed in cartilaginous tissue; and at PO and P7, in hypothalamus.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support FOXL2 as a master transcription factor in a
spectrum of developmental processes, including growth, cartilage and bone
formation. Its action overlaps that of SOX9, though they are antagonistic in
female vs male gonadal sex determination but conjoint in cartilage and skeletal
development.

PMCID: PMC4489133
PMID: 26134413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2015 Sep 1;220:33-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2015.06.003. Epub
2015 Jun 23.

"Brain sex differentiation" in teleosts: Emerging concepts with potential
biomarkers.

Senthilkumaran B(1), Sudhakumari CC(2), Mamta SK(2), Raghuveer K(2), Swapna I(2),
Murugananthkumar R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, P.O. Central University, Hyderabad 500046, Telangana, India.
Electronic address: bsksl@uohyd.ernet.in. (2)Department of Animal Biology, School
of Life Sciences, University of Hyderabad, P.O. Central University, Hyderabad
500046, Telangana, India.

"Brain sex differentiation" in teleosts is a contentious topic of research as
most of the earlier reports tend to suggest that gonadal sex differentiation
drives brain sex differentiation. However, identification of sex-specific marker 
genes in the developing brain of teleosts signifies brain-gonadal interaction
during early sexual development in lower vertebrates. In this context, the
influence of gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)-gonadotropin (GTH) axis on
gonadal sex differentiation, if any requires in depth analysis. Presence of
seabream (sb) GnRH immunoreactivity (ir-) in the brain of XY Nile tilapia was
found as early as 5days post hatch (dph) followed by qualitative reduction in the
preoptic area-hypothalamus region. In contrast, in the XX female brain a steady
ir- of sbGnRH was evident from 15dph. Earlier studies using sea bass already
implied the importance of hypothalamic gonadotropic axis completion during sex
differentiation period. Such biphasic pattern of localization was also seen in
pituitary GTHs using heterologous antisera in tilapia. However, more recent
analysis in the same species could not detect any sexually dimorphic pattern
using homologous antisera for pituitary GTHs. Detailed studies on the development
of hypothalamo-hypophyseal-gonadal axis in teleosts focusing on hypothalamic
monoamines (MA) and MA-related enzymes demonstrated sex-specific differential
expression of tryptophan hydroxylase (Tph) in the early stages of developing male
and female brains of tilapia and catfish. The changes in Tph expression was in
agreement with the levels of serotonin (5-HT) and 5-hydroxytryptophan in the
preoptic area-hypothalamus. Considering the stimulatory influence of 5-HT on GnRH
and GTH release, it is possible to propose a network association between these
correlates during early development, which may bring about brain sex dimorphism
in males. A recent study from our laboratory during female brain sex development 
demonstrated high expression of tyrosine hydroxylase in correlation with
catecholamine levels, brain aromatase and its related transcription factors such 
as fushi tarazu factor 1, Ftz-f1 and fork head box protein L2, foxl2. Taken
together, gender differences in the levels of various transcripts provide new
perspectives on brain sex differentiation in lower vertebrates. Sexually
dimorphic or differentially expressing genes may play an essential role at the
level of brain in response to gonadal differentiation, which might
consequentially or causatively respond to gonadal sex.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26116093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Folia Biol (Krakow). 2015;63(1):57-62.

Polymorphism of the CTNNB1 and FOXL2 Genes is not Associated with Canine XX
Testicular/Ovotesticular Disorder of Sex Development.

Salamon S, Nowacka-Woszuk J, Switonski M.

78,XX testicular or ovotesticular disorder of sex development (DSD) is the most
common sex anomaly in dogs, but its molecular background remains unknown. It was 
hypothesized that the causative mutation may reside in canine chromosome 23
(CFA23), where two genes playing a pivotal role in ovarian development (CTNNB1
and FOXL2) are located. The aim of our study was to search for polymorphism in
both candidate genes in 15 DSD dogs (78,XX and a lack of the SRYgene) and 29
normal females. Altogether, 7 novel polymorphic variants were identified: 5 SNPs 
in CTNNB1 and 2 indels in the FOXL2 gene. The distribution of the identified
variants was similar in the DSD and control dogs. Therefore, we concluded that
the conducted research did not prove an association between these polymorphisms
and canine testicular or ovotesticular XX DSD.

PMID: 26103686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Endocrinol Invest. 2016 Feb;39(2):227-33. doi: 10.1007/s40618-015-0334-3. Epub 
2015 Jun 23.

Characterization of endocrine features and genotype-phenotypes correlations in
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome type 1.

Nuovo S(1), Passeri M(2), Di Benedetto E(2), Calanchini M(2), Meldolesi I(3), Di 
Giacomo MC(4), Petruzzi D(5), Piemontese MR(6), Zelante L(6), Sangiuolo F(1,)(7),
Novelli G(1,)(7), Fabbri A(8), Brancati F(9,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Unità di Genetica Medica, Policlinico Universitario Tor Vergata, 00133, Rome, 
Italy. (2)Unità di Endocrinologia, Dipartimento di Medicina dei Sistemi, Polo
Ospedaliero Sant'Eugenio & CTO A. Alesini, Università Tor Vergata, 00145, Rome,
Italy. (3)Ginecologia, Consultorio Giovani, ASL RM/H, 00045, Rome, Italy.
(4)U.O.C Anatomia Patologica AOR Ospedale San Carlo, 85100, Potenza, Italy.
(5)U.O. Ostetricia e Ginecologia AOR Ospedale San Carlo, 85100, Potenza, Italy.
(6)Genetica Medica, Ospedale Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, 71013, San Giovanni 
Rotondo, Italy. (7)Dipartimento di Biomedicina e Prevenzione, Università Tor
Vergata, 00133, Rome, Italy. (8)Unità di Endocrinologia, Dipartimento di Medicina
dei Sistemi, Polo Ospedaliero Sant'Eugenio & CTO A. Alesini, Università Tor
Vergata, 00145, Rome, Italy. andrea.fabbri@uniroma2.it. (9)Unità di Genetica
Medica, Policlinico Universitario Tor Vergata, 00133, Rome, Italy.
f.brancati@igenetica.com. (10)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche, Orali e
Biotecnologiche, Università D'Annunzio, 66013, Chieti, Italy.
f.brancati@igenetica.com.

OBJECTIVE: Blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal dominant genetic
condition resulting from heterozygous mutations in the FOXL2 gene and clinically 
characterized by an eyelid malformation associated (type I) or not (type II) with
premature ovarian failure. The distinction between the two forms is critical for 
female patients, as it may allow to predict fertility and to plan an appropriate 
therapy. Identifying an underlying causative mutation is not always predictive of
the clinical type of BPES since genotype-phenotype correlations are not yet fully
delineated. Here, we describe the clinical and hormonal phenotypes of three
female patients with BPES type 1 from two novel families, correlate their
phenotypes with identified mutations, and investigate the effects of hormone
replacement therapy (HRT).
METHODS: Clinical, biochemical, and genetic evaluation were undertaken in all the
patients and genotype-phenotype correlation was analyzed. The effects of
substitutive hormonal therapy on secondary sexual characteristics development and
induction of menarche were evaluated.
RESULTS: All patients presented with primary amenorrhea or other signs of ovarian
dysfunction. Two distinct mutations, a missense p.H104R change and an in-frame
p.A222_A231dup10 duplication in the FOXL2 gene were identified. Observed
phenotypes were not in accordance with the prediction based on the current
genotype-phenotype correlations. HRT significantly improved secondary sexual
characteristics development, as well as the induction of menarche.
CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights the importance of early recognition of BPES
and emphasizes the need of personalized therapy and follow-up in female patients 
carrying distinct FOXL2 mutations.

PMID: 26100530  [PubMed - in process]


37. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Sep;39(9):1159-69. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000450.

Juvenile granulosa cell tumors of the testis: a clinicopathologic study of 70
cases with emphasis on its wide morphologic spectrum.

Kao CS(1), Cornejo KM, Ulbright TM, Young RH.

Author information: 
(1)*James Homer Wright Pathology Laboratories, Massachusetts General Hospital
†Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA ‡Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, IN.

The clinical and pathologic features of 70 juvenile granulosa cell tumors (JGCTs)
of the testis are presented. The patients were from 30 weeks gestational age to
10 years old; 60 of 67 (90%) whose ages are known to us were 6 months old or
younger. Sixty-two underwent gonadectomy, 6 wedge excision, and 2 only biopsy.
Twenty-six tumors were left sided and 22 right sided. Six occurred in an
undescended testis and 2 in dysgenetic gonads. The most common presentation was a
testicular mass (65%), followed by an "enlarging testis" (25%). Six of 14
patients in whom it was measured had "elevated" serum a-fetoprotein (AFP), likely
physiologically, and 1 had gynecomastia. The tumors measured 0.5 to 5 cm (mean,
1.7 cm; median, 1.5 cm) and were most commonly well circumscribed and typically
yellow-tan; approximately 2/3 had a cystic component, whereas 1/3 were entirely
solid. Microscopic examination typically showed a lobular growth, punctuated in
67 cases by variably sized and shaped follicles containing material that was
basophilic (21%), eosinophilic (44%), or of both characters (35%); 3 lacked
follicles. In nonfollicular areas, the tumor cells typically grew diffusely but
occasionally had a corded arrangement (26%) or reticular appearance (29%). The
stroma was either fibrous or fibromyxoid; hemorrhage associated with
hemosiderin-laden macrophages was focally seen in 16%. The tumor cells were
mostly small to medium sized with round to oval nuclei containing inconspicuous
nucleoli and moderate to abundant, but occasionally scant, pale to lightly
eosinophilic, sometimes vacuolated, cytoplasm; nuclear grooves were infrequent
(6%). Focal columnar morphology was seen in 27% of the tumors. Mitoses were
plentiful in 37%, and apoptosis was prominent in 46%. Intratubular tumor was seen
in 43% and entrapped seminiferous tubules in 70%. Lymphovascular invasion was
present in 2 cases, rete testis involvement in 4, and necrosis in 1. Rare
features/patterns included: regressed tumor with hyalinization and prominent
blood vessels (13%), papillary growth (4%), basaloid morphology (1%), spindle
cell predominance (1%), microcystic foci (1%), adult granulosa cell-like (1%)
patterns, and hyaline globules (1%). Inhibin (16/18), calretinin (8/9), WT1
(6/7), FOXL2 (12/12), SF-1 (12/12), and SOX9 (6/11) were positive, whereas SALL4 
and glypican-3 were consistently negative in the neoplastic granulosa cells. Only
1 of 10 tumors was focally positive for a-fetoprotein. JGCT is a rare neoplasm
with a wide morphologic spectrum that also occurs rarely in undescended testes
and dysgenetic gonads. The solid and reticular patterns may pose diagnostic
challenges, but the lobular appearance and follicular differentiation are
characteristic. Immunohistochemical stains may aid in its distinction from other 
tumors of young male individuals, particularly yolk sac tumor, a neoplasm that
peaks at a somewhat later age. Twenty-four patients with follow-up, including 4
of 6 patients treated with wedge resection/biopsy, had no evidence of disease (2 
to 348 mo; mean, 83 mo; median, 61 mo). One additional patient was alive at 260
months, but the disease status is unknown. The benign clinical course of all
cases of JGCT with follow-up, despite often frequent mitotic activity, supports
testis sparing surgery when technically feasible.

PMID: 26076062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Jul;29(7):1006-24. doi: 10.1210/me.2015-1103. Epub 2015 Jun 
10.

FOXO1/3 and PTEN Depletion in Granulosa Cells Promotes Ovarian Granulosa Cell
Tumor Development.

Liu Z(1), Ren YA(1), Pangas SA(1), Adams J(1), Zhou W(1), Castrillon DH(1),
Wilhelm D(1), Richards JS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular and Cellular Biology (Z.L., Y.A.R., S.A.P., J.A.,
J.S.R.), Pathology and Immunology (S.A.P.), and Obstetrics and Gynecology (J.A.),
Baylor College of Medicine, and Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology
(W.Z.), The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
77030; Department of Pathology (D.H.C.), The University of Texas Southwestern
Medical School, Dallas, Texas 75390; and Department of Anatomy and Developmental 
Biology (D.W.), Monash University, Clayton VIC 3800, Australia.

The forkhead box (FOX), FOXO1 and FOXO3, transcription factors regulate multiple 
functions in mammalian cells. Selective inactivation of the Foxo1 and Foxo3 genes
in murine ovarian granulosa cells severely impairs follicular development and
apoptosis causing infertility, and as shown here, granulosa cell tumor (GCT)
formation. Coordinate depletion of the tumor suppressor Pten gene in the Foxo1/3 
strain enhanced the penetrance and onset of GCT formation. Immunostaining and
Western blot analyses confirmed FOXO1 and phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)
depletion, maintenance of globin transcription factor (GATA) 4 and nuclear
localization of FOXL2 and phosphorylated small mothers against decapentaplegic
(SMAD) 2/3 in the tumor cells, recapitulating results we observed in human adult 
GCTs. Microarray and quantitative PCR analyses of mouse GCTs further confirmed
expression of specific genes (Foxl2, Gata4, and Wnt4) controlling granulosa cell 
fate specification and proliferation, whereas others (Emx2, Nr0b1, Rspo1, and
Wt1) were suppressed. Key genes (Amh, Bmp2, and Fshr) controlling follicle
growth, apoptosis, and differentiation were also suppressed. Inhbb and Grem1 were
selectively elevated, whereas reduction of Inha provided additional evidence that
activin signaling and small mothers against decapentaplegic (SMAD) 2/3
phosphorylation impact GCT formation. Unexpectedly, markers of Sertoli/epithelial
cells (SRY [sex determining region Y]-box 9/keratin 8) and alternatively
activated macrophages (chitinase 3-like 3) were elevated in discrete
subpopulations within the mouse GCTs, indicating that Foxo1/3/Pten depletion not 
only leads to GCTs but also to altered granulosa cell fate decisions and immune
responses. Thus, analyses of the Foxo1/3/Pten mouse GCTs and human adult GCTs
provide strong evidence that impaired functions of the FOXO1/3/PTEN pathways lead
to dramatic changes in the molecular program within granulosa cells, chronic
activin signaling in the presence of FOXL2 and GATA4, and tumor formation.

PMCID: PMC4484779 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26061565  [PubMed - in process]


39. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 4;10(6):e0128659. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128659.
eCollection 2015.

De novo Transcriptome Analysis of Portunus trituberculatus Ovary and Testis by
RNA-Seq: Identification of Genes Involved in Gonadal Development.

Meng XL(1), Liu P(1), Jia FL(1), Li J(1), Gao BQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Sustainable Development of Marine Fisheries, Yellow Sea
Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Qingdao,
Shandong, People's Republic of China.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0133659.

The swimming crab Portunus trituberculatus is a commercially important crab
species in East Asia countries. Gonadal development is a physiological process of
great significance to the reproduction as well as commercial seed production for 
P. trituberculatus. However, little is currently known about the molecular
mechanisms governing the developmental processes of gonads in this species. To
open avenues of molecular research on P. trituberculatus gonadal development,
Illumina paired-end sequencing technology was employed to develop deep-coverage
transcriptome sequencing data for its gonads. Illumina sequencing generated
58,429,148 and 70,474,978 high-quality reads from the ovary and testis cDNA
library, respectively. All these reads were assembled into 54,960 unigenes with
an average sequence length of 879 bp, of which 12,340 unigenes (22.45% of the
total) matched sequences in GenBank non-redundant database. Based on our
transcriptome analysis as well as published literature, a number of candidate
genes potentially involved in the regulation of gonadal development of P.
trituberculatus were identified, such as FAOMeT, mPR<U+03B3>, PGMRC1, PGDS, PGER4,
3ß-HSD and 17ß-HSDs. Differential expression analysis generated 5,919
differentially expressed genes between ovary and testis, among which many genes
related to gametogenesis and several genes previously reported to be critical in 
differentiation and development of gonads were found, including Foxl2, Wnt4, Fst,
Fem-1 and Sox9. Furthermore, 28,534 SSRs and 111,646 high-quality SNPs were
identified in this transcriptome dataset. This work represents the first
transcriptome analysis of P. trituberculatus gonads using the next generation
sequencing technology and provides a valuable dataset for understanding molecular
mechanisms controlling development of gonads and facilitating future
investigation of reproductive biology in this species. The molecular markers
obtained in this study will provide a fundamental basis for population genetics
and functional genomics in P. trituberculatus and other closely related species.

PMCID: PMC4456094
PMID: 26042806  [PubMed - in process]


40. Histopathology. 2016 Jan;68(2):279-85. doi: 10.1111/his.12747. Epub 2015 Jul 21.

DICER1 and FOXL2 mutations in ovarian sex cord-stromal tumours: a GINECO Group
study.

Goulvent T(1,)(2), Ray-Coquard I(3), Borel S(1), Haddad V(4),
Devouassoux-Shisheboran M(5), Vacher-Lavenu MC(6), Pujade-Laurraine E(7), Savina 
A(8), Maillet D(3), Gillet G(1), Treilleux I(4), Rimokh R(1).

Author information: 
(1)U1052 Inserm, UMR CNRS 5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon,
Université de Lyon, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France. (2)Institut Roche de
Recherche et Médecine Translationnelle, Boulogne Billancourt, France.
(3)Department of Medical Oncology, Université de Lyon, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, 
France. (4)Pathology Department, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France. (5)Pathology
Department, Hôpital de la Croix-Rousse, Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France.
(6)Hôpital Cochin, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
(7)Hôtel-Dieu, Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. (8)RocheSAS 
Scientific Partnerships, Boulogne Billancourt, France.

AIMS: FOXL2 mutation has been consistently identified in adult granulosa cell
tumours (A-GCTs). DICER1 mutations have been described predominantly in
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumours (SLCTs). The prognostic implication of these
mutations remains uncertain, as moderately sized studies have yielded variable
outcomes. Our aim was to determine the implications of DICER1 and FOXL2 mutations
in 156 ovarian sex cord-stromal tumours (SCSTs).
METHODS AND RESULTS: FOXL2 mutations were found in 94% of pathologically
confirmed A-GCTs (95/101), in one of eight juvenile granulosa cell tumours
(J-GCTs), and in two of 19 SLCTs. DICER1 mutations in the RNase IIIb domain were 
found in six of 19 SLCTs, two of eight J-GCTs, and one of 12 undifferentiated
SCSTs (Und-SCSTs). Comparison of DICER1-mutated SLCTs with DICER1-non-mutated
SLCTs showed that patient age at diagnosis was lower and oestrogen receptor
expression was more frequent in DICER1-mutated tumours. With a median follow-up
of 22 months, two of five DICER1-mutated SLCTs relapsed, in contrast to none of
eight DICER1-non-mutated tumours.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that, in contrast to FOXL2 mutations in A-GCT,
DICER1 mutations in SLCT might be more useful for prognosis than for diagnosis.
However, study of a larger cohort of patients is necessary to establish this.
Identification of genetic alterations in SCST offers promising therapeutic
options.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26033501  [PubMed - in process]


41. Gynecol Oncol. 2015 Aug;138(2):285-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2015.05.011. Epub
2015 May 21.

Stage I granulosa cell tumours: A management conundrum? Results of long-term
follow up.

Wilson MK(1), Fong P(2), Mesnage S(2), Chrystal K(2), Shelling A(3), Payne K(4), 
Mackay H(5), Wang L(6), Laframboise S(7), Rouzbahman M(8), Levin W(9), Oza
AM(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre, Canada; Department of Medical Oncology, Auckland City Hospital, New
Zealand. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Auckland City Hospital, New Zealand. 
(3)Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)Department of Pathology, Auckland City Hospital, New Zealand. (5)Department of
Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Canada.
(6)Department of Statistics, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Canada.
(7)Department of Surgical Oncology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Canada.
(8)Department of Pathology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Canada.
(9)Department of Radiation Oncology, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Canada.
(10)Department of Medical Oncology and Hematology, Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre, Canada. Electronic address: amit.oza@uhn.ca.

Optimal management of women with early stage granulosa cell tumours (GCT)
presents a management conundrum - they have excellent prognosis but a third will 
relapse. Advances uncovering the molecular characteristics of GCT have not been
matched by improvements in our understanding and treatment.METHODS: Stage I GCT
patients referred to Auckland City Hospital (1955-2012) and Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre (1992-2012) were identified. Baseline characteristics,
histopathology and outcomes were recorded retrospectively.
RESULTS: One hundred and sixty stage I GCT patients were identified with a median
age of 49 years. Median follow-up was 7.0 years (range 0.1-44.2 years). Fifty-one
patients (32%) relapsed with a median time to relapse (TTR) of 12.0 years
(1.3-17.7 years) - 20 initial relapses occurred 10 years post-diagnosis. Higher
relapse rates (43% vs. 24% p=0.02) and shorter TTR (10.2 vs. 16.2 years p=0.007) 
were seen with stage Ic versus stage Ia disease. Cyst rupture was associated with
increased relapse (p=0.03). Surgery was the main therapeutic modality at relapse.
Eighty six percent of patients received non-surgical management at least once
post-relapse. Clinical benefit rate was 43% with chemotherapy, 61% with hormonal 
therapy and 86% with radiation. Five- and 10-year overall survival (OS) were 98.5
and 91.6%, respectively. Median OS was similar in patients with (24.3 years) and 
without relapse (22.3 years).
CONCLUSION: Surgery remains fundamental at diagnosis and relapse. Caution should 
be exercised in recommending adjuvant chemotherapy at initial diagnosis given
median OS was greater than 20 years even with relapse. Hormonal therapy at
relapse appears encouraging but needs further assessment. Novel treatment
strategies need exploration with international collaboration essential for this.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26003143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Menopause. 2015 Nov;22(11):1264-8. doi: 10.1097/GME.0000000000000473.

A novel FOXL2 gene mutation and BMP15 variants in a woman with primary ovarian
insufficiency and blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Settas N(1), Anapliotou M, Kanavakis E, Fryssira H, Sofocleous C,
Dacou-Voutetakis C, Chrousos GP, Voutetakis A.

Author information: 
(1)1First Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, University of Athens,
"Aghia Sophia" Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece 2Department of Medical
Genetics, School of Medicine, University of Athens, "Aghia Sophia" Children's
Hospital, Athens, Greece 3Private Practice, Athens, Greece 4Research Institute
for the Study of Genetic and Malignant Diseases of Childhood, "Aghia Sophia"
Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to search for mutations in relevant genes in a woman
with primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) and blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus
inversus syndrome (BPES).
METHODS: This study reports on the case of a woman with POI, BPES, and autoimmune
endocrine disorder. Bidirectional sequencing of the coding regions and
intron/exon boundaries of FOXL2 and BMP15 genes and hormonal assays for the
measurement of follicle-stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone, estradiol,
testosterone, <U+0394>4-androstenedione, and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate were
employed.
RESULTS: A novel de novo heterozygous deletion (p.K150Rfs*121) in the FOXL2 gene 
was identified to coexist with two BMP15 gene variants located in the same allele
(c.-9C>G; p.N103S).
CONCLUSIONS: The novel, de novo FOXL2 gene mutation (p.K150Rfs*121) expands the
spectrum of molecular defects identified in women with BPES. Coexisting gene
variants in POI-related genes, such as BMP15, may act synergistically and explain
the observed phenotypic variability in women with BPES (ie, BPES with or without 
POI). The concept of digenic inheritance suggested herein has been previously
introduced for other nosologies such as hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism. Endocrine
autoimmunity might also contribute to the POI phenotype.

PMID: 25988799  [PubMed - in process]


43. PLoS One. 2015 May 8;10(5):e0126527. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126527.
eCollection 2015.

Maximal expression of Foxl2 in pituitary gonadotropes requires ovarian hormones.

Herndon MK(1), Nilson JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Molecular Biosciences, Washington State University, Pullman,
Washington, United States of America.

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) and activin regulate synthesis of FSH and
ultimately fertility. Recent in vivo studies cast SMAD4 and FOXL2 as master
transcriptional mediators of activin signaling that act together and
independently of GnRH to regulate Fshb gene expression and female fertility.
Ovarian hormones regulate GnRH and its receptor (GNRHR) through negative and
positive feedback loops. In contrast, the role of ovarian hormones in regulating 
activin, activin receptors, and components of the activin signaling pathway,
including SMAD4 and FOXL2, remains understudied. The widespread distribution of
activin and many of its signaling intermediates complicates analysis of the
effects of ovarian hormones on their synthesis in gonadotropes, one of five
pituitary cell types. We circumvented this complication by using a transgenic
model that allows isolation of polyribosomes selectively from gonadotropes of
intact females and ovariectomized females treated with or without a GnRH
antagonist. This paradigm allows assessment of ovarian hormonal feedback and
distinguishes responses that are either independent or dependent on GnRH.
Surprisingly, our results indicate that Foxl2 levels in gonadotropes decline
significantly in the absence of ovarian input and independently of GnRH.
Expression of the genes encoding other members of the activin signaling pathway
are unaffected by loss of ovarian hormonal feedback, highlighting their selective
effect on Foxl2. Expression of Gnrhr, a known target of FOXL2, also declines upon
ovariectomy consistent with reduced expression of Foxl2 and loss of ovarian
hormones. In contrast, Fshb mRNA increases dramatically post-ovariectomy due to
increased compensatory input from GnRH. Together these data suggest that ovarian 
hormones regulate expression of Foxl2 thereby expanding the number of genes
controlled by the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis that ultimately dictate
reproductive fitness.

PMCID: PMC4425675
PMID: 25955311  [PubMed - in process]


44. J Cell Physiol. 2015 Dec;230(12):2998-3008. doi: 10.1002/jcp.25032.

S100A8, An Oocyte-Specific Chemokine, Directs the Migration of Ovarian Somatic
Cells During Mouse Primordial Follicle Assembly.

Teng Z(1), Wang C(1), Wang Y(1), Huang K(1), Xiang X(1), Niu W(1), Feng L(1),
Zhao L(1), Yan H(1), Zhang H(1), Xia G(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Agro-biotechnology, College of Biological Science,
China Agricultural University, Beijing,, China.

In the mammalian ovaries, the primordial follicle pool determines the
reproductive capability over the lifetime of a female. The primordial follicle is
composed of two cell members, namely the oocyte and the pre-granulosa cells that 
encircle the oocyte. However, it is unclear what factors are involved in the
reorganization of the two distinct cells into one functional unit. This study was
performed to address this issue. Firstly, in an in vitro reconstruction system,
dispersed ovarian cells from murine fetal ovaries at 19.0 days post coitum (dpc) 
reassembled into follicle-like structures, independent of the physical distance
between the cells, implying that either oocytes or ovarian somatic cells (OSCs)
were motile. We then carried out a series of transwell assay experiments, and
determined that it was in fact 19.0 dpc OSCs (as opposed to oocytes), which
exhibited a significant chemotactic response to both fetal bovine serum and
oocytes themselves. We observed that S100A8, a multi-functional chemokine, may
participate in the process as it is mainly expressed in oocytes within the
cysts/plasmodia. S100A8 significantly promoted the number of migrating OSCs by
2.5 times in vitro, of which 66.9% were FOXL2 protein-positive cells, implying
that the majority of motile OSCs were pre-granulosa cells. In addition, an
S100A8-specific antibody inhibited the formation of follicle-like reconstruction 
cell mass in vitro. And, the primordial follicle formation was reduced when
S100a8-specific siRNA was applied onto in vitro cultured 17.5 dpc ovary.
Therefore, S100A8 could be a chemokine of oocyte origin, which attracts OSCs to
form the primordial follicles.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25953201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Jul;29(7):963-77. doi: 10.1210/me.2015-1004. Epub 2015 May
5.

Minireview: Activin Signaling in Gonadotropes: What Does the FOX say… to the
SMAD?

Fortin J(1), Ongaro L(1), Li Y(1), Tran S(1), Lamba P(1), Wang Y(1), Zhou X(1),
Bernard DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics (J.F., L.O., Y.L., S.T., P.L.,
Y.W., X.Z., D.J.B.), McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada H3G 1Y6; The
Campbell Family Cancer Research Institute (J.F.), Ontario Cancer Institute,
University Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 2C1; Diabetes Center
(S.T.), Department of Medicine, University of California-San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143; and Psychiatry (P.L.), St Mary Mercy Hospital,
Livonia, Michigan 48154.

The activins were discovered and named based on their abilities to stimulate FSH 
secretion and FSHß (Fshb) subunit expression by pituitary gonadotrope cells.
According to subsequent in vitro observations, activins also stimulate the
transcription of the GnRH receptor (Gnrhr) and the activin antagonist,
follistatin (Fst). Thus, not only do activins stimulate FSH directly, they have
the potential to regulate both FSH and LH indirectly by modulating gonadotrope
sensitivity to hypothalamic GnRH. Moreover, activins may negatively regulate
their own actions by stimulating the production of one of their principal
antagonists. Here, we describe our current understanding of the mechanisms
through which activins regulate Fshb, Gnrhr, and Fst transcription in vitro. The 
activin signaling molecules SMAD3 and SMAD4 appear to partner with the
winged-helix/forkhead transcription factor, forkhead box L2 (FOXL2), to regulate 
expression of all 3 genes. However, in vivo data paint a different picture.
Although conditional deletion of Foxl2 and/or Smad4 in murine gonadotropes
produces impairments in FSH synthesis and secretion as well as in pituitary Fst
expression, Gnrhr mRNA levels are either unperturbed or increased in these
animals. Surprisingly, gonadotrope-specific deletion of Smad3 alone or with Smad2
does not impair FSH production or fertility; however, mice harboring these
mutations may express a DNA binding-deficient, but otherwise functional, SMAD3
protein. Collectively, the available data firmly establish roles for FOXL2 and
SMAD4 in Fshb and Fst expression in gonadotrope cells, whereas SMAD3's role
requires further investigation. Gnrhr expression, in contrast, appears to be
FOXL2, SMAD4, and, perhaps, activin independent in vivo.

PMID: 25942106  [PubMed - in process]


46. Nihon Rinsho. 2015 Apr;73(4):686-92.

[Sexual dimorphism in developmental genetics].

[Article in Japanese]

Muroya K, Hasegawa T.

We review the current knowledge about the molecular mechanism of sex
determination and differentiation. The first sex-specific differentiation starts 
at the gonad, which in turns influences the development of sexual duct systems
and the external genitalia. The secondary sexual characteristics in puberty
complete sexual dimorphism. Recent studies have provided compelling evidence for 
the presence of an alternative "backdoor pathway" to produce
dihydrotestosterone(DHT: the most potent androgen) directly without testosterone 
intermediary. This pathway primarily is operated in the normal fetal testis to
produce a sufficient amount of DHT for male sex development. As for ovary
development, which had formerly been regarded as a static "default" pathway,
recent studies have unequivocally demonstrated that RSPO1, WNT4, and FOXL2 have
important roles.

PMID: 25936163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Feb 15;8(2):2766-71. eCollection 2015.

SNP rs1511412 in FOXL2 gene as a risk factor for keloid by meta analysis.

Lu W(1), Zheng X(2), Liu S(3), Ding M(4), Xie J(4), Yao X(1), Zhang L(1), Hu
B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Anhui Provincial Hospital Hefei 230001, China.
(2)Department of Dermatology, Anhui Medical University Hefei 230032, China.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Anhui Provincial Hospital Hefei 230001, China ;
Department of Dermatology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Wan Nan Medical
College China. (4)Nanjing Municipal Government Hospital Nanjing 210018, China.

OBJECTIVE: Determine whether SNP rs1511412 is associated with keloid.
DESIGN AND METHODS: One large-scale GWAS identified association between SNP
rs1511412 in the FOXL2 gene and keloid disease in the Japanese population.
However, researchers didn't observe significant association for keloid in Chinese
Han population (PBonferroni>0.05). It's probable that the frequency of this
variant in Chinese Han population was relatively low and the sample size was not 
very large in this study (power =45.5). We performed an independent case control 
association study in the Chinese Han population and a follow-up large scale
meta-analysis for SNP rs1511412.
RESULTS: Our study included 309 keloid patients and 1080 controls of the Chinese 
Han population. A significant association was found between SNP and keloid
(P=0.02, OR=2.23). Meta-analysis included 1847 keloid patients and 7229 controls 
combined from five Asian populations. The association between SNP rs1511412 and
keloid became highly significant (P<1×10(-8) OR=1.89).
CONCLUSION: We conclude that SNP rs1511412 in FOXL2 is indeed a genetic risk
factor for keloid across different ethnic populations.

PMCID: PMC4402879
PMID: 25932232  [PubMed]


48. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2015 Apr 9;13:26. doi: 10.1186/s12958-015-0022-3.

Molecular mechanisms of enhancing porcine granulosa cell proliferation and
function by treatment in vitro with anti-inhibin alpha subunit antibody.

Cai L(1), Sun A(2), Li H(3), Tsinkgou A(4), Yu J(5), Ying S(6), Chen Z(7), Shi
Z(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding and Reproduction, Institute of Animal Science,
Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, 210014, China.
cailiupingclp@163.com. (2)Laboratory of Animal Breeding and Reproduction,
Institute of Animal Science, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing,
210014, China. sunad2002@163.com. (3)Laboratory of Animal Breeding and
Reproduction, Institute of Animal Science, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Nanjing, 210014, China. lhlydk@126.com. (4)Department of Life Science, 
Xijiao-Liverpool University, Suzhou, 215123, China.
anastasia.tsigkou@xjtlu.edu.cn. (5)Laboratory of Animal Breeding and
Reproduction, Institute of Animal Science, Jiangsu Academy of Agricultural
Sciences, Nanjing, 210014, China. 26460136@qq.com. (6)Laboratory of Animal
Breeding and Reproduction, Institute of Animal Science, Jiangsu Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, 210014, China. 251501650@qq.com. (7)Laboratory of
Animal Breeding and Reproduction, Institute of Animal Science, Jiangsu Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, 210014, China. chenzzju@163.com. (8)Laboratory of
Animal Breeding and Reproduction, Institute of Animal Science, Jiangsu Academy of
Agricultural Sciences, Nanjing, 210014, China. zdshi@jaas.ac.cn.

BACKGROUND: This study was conducted to clarify the effect of the inhibiting
action of inhibin on porcine granulosa cell proliferation and function, and to
investigate the underlying intracellular regulatory molecular mechanisms.
METHODS: Porcine granulosa cells were cultured in vitro, and were treated with an
anti-inhibin alpha subunit antibody, with or without co-treatment of
follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) in the culture medium.
RESULTS: Treatment with anti-inhibin alpha subunit antibody led to a significant 
increase in estradiol (E2) secretion and cell proliferation. Anti-inhibin alpha
subunit antibody worked synergistically with FSH at low concentrations (25
microg/mL) to stimulate E2 secretion, but attenuated FSH action at high
concentrations (50 microg/mL). Immunoneutralization of inhibin bioactivity
increased FOXL2, Smad3, and PKA phosphorylation, and mRNA expression of the
transcription factors CEBP and c-FOS. The expression of genes encoding
gonadotropin receptors, FSHR and LHR, and of those involved in steroidogenesis,
as well as IGFs and IGFBPs, the cell cycle progression factors cyclinD1 and
cyclinD2, and the anti-apoptosis and anti-atresia factors Bcl2, TIMP, and ADAMTS 
were upregulated following anti-inhibin alpha-subunit treatment. Treatment with
anti-inhibin alpha subunit down regulated expression of the pro-apoptotic gene
encoding caspase3. Although expression of the pro-angiogenesis genes FN1, FGF2,
and VEGF was upregulated, expression of the angiogenesis-inhibiting factor THBS1 
was downregulated following anti-inhibin alpha subunit treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that immunoneutralization of inhibin
bioactivity, through augmentation of the activin and gonadotropin receptor
signaling pathways and regulation of gene expression, permits the development of 
healthy and viable granulosa cells. These molecular mechanisms help to explain
the enhanced ovarian follicular development observed following inhibin
immunization in animal models.

PMCID: PMC4395973
PMID: 25889399  [PubMed - in process]


49. BMC Cancer. 2015 Apr 10;15:251. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1283-0.

Combined comparative genomic hybridization and transcriptomic analyses of ovarian
granulosa cell tumors point to novel candidate driver genes.

Caburet S(1,)(2,)(3), Anttonen M(4,)(5), Todeschini AL(6,)(7), Unkila-Kallio
L(8), Mestivier D(9,)(10), Butzow R(11,)(12), Veitia RA(13,)(14,)(15).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.
caburet.sandrine@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr. (2)Université Paris Diderot/Paris,
Paris, France. caburet.sandrine@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr. (3)Université
Paris-Diderot & Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS-UMR 7592, Bâtiment Buffon, 15 Rue
Hélène Brion, Paris, Cedex 13, France.
caburet.sandrine@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr. (4)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland. mikko.anttonen@helsinki.fi. (5)Children's Hospital, University
of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
mikko.anttonen@helsinki.fi. (6)Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.
todeschini@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr. (7)Université Paris Diderot/Paris, Paris,
France. todeschini@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr. (8)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital,
Helsinki, Finland. leila.unkila-kallio@hus.fi. (9)Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, 
France. denis.mestivier@gmail.com. (10)Université Paris Diderot/Paris, Paris,
France. denis.mestivier@gmail.com. (11)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland. Ralf.Butzow@hus.fi. (12)Department of pathology, University of Helsinki,
and HUSLAB, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
Ralf.Butzow@hus.fi. (13)Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.
veitia.reiner@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr. (14)Université Paris Diderot/Paris,
Paris, France. veitia.reiner@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr. (15)Université
Paris-Diderot & Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS-UMR 7592, Bâtiment Buffon, 15 Rue
Hélène Brion, Paris, Cedex 13, France. veitia.reiner@ijm.univ-paris-diderot.fr.

BACKGROUND: Ovarian granulosa cell tumors (GCTs) are the most frequent sex
cord-stromal tumors. Several studies have shown that a somatic mutation leading
to a C134W substitution in the transcription factor FOXL2 appears in more than
95% of adult-type GCTs. Its pervasive presence suggests that FOXL2 is the main
cancer driver gene. However, other mutations and genomic changes might also
contribute to tumor formation and/or progression.
METHODS: We have performed a combined comparative genomic hybridization and
transcriptomic analyses of 10 adult-type GCTs to obtain a picture of the genomic 
landscape of this cancer type and to identify new candidate co-driver genes.
RESULTS: Our results, along with a review of previous molecular studies, show the
existence of highly recurrent chromosomal imbalances (especially, trisomy 14 and 
monosomy 22) and preferential co-occurrences (i.e. trisomy 14/monosomy 22 and
trisomy 7/monosomy 16q). In-depth analyses showed the presence of recurrently
broken, amplified/duplicated or deleted genes. Many of these genes, such as AKT1,
RUNX1 and LIMA1, are known to be involved in cancer and related processes.
Further genomic explorations suggest that they are functionally related.
CONCLUSIONS: Our combined analysis identifies potential candidate genes, whose
alterations might contribute to adult-type GCT formation/progression together
with the recurrent FOXL2 somatic mutation.

PMCID: PMC4407711
PMID: 25884336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Proteome Res. 2015 Jun 5;14(6):2446-56. doi: 10.1021/pr501230b. Epub 2015 Apr
28.

Identification and Validation of Differential Phosphorylation Sites of the
Nuclear FOXL2 Protein as Potential Novel Biomarkers for Adult-Type Granulosa Cell
Tumors.

Suh DS(1), Oh HK, Kim JH, Park S, Shin E, Lee K, Kim YH, Bae J.

Author information: 
(1)†Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Asan Medical Center, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul 138-736, Korea.

Granulosa cell tumor (GCT) is a rare form of ovarian cancer classified as a sex
cord-stromal tumor. The c.402C<U+2192>G missense mutation in the FOXL2 gene that changes
cysteine 134 to tryptophan (C134W) is found in more than 97% of adult-type GCTs, 
and the C134W FOXL2 mutant is hyperphosphorylated. We identified three
differential phosphorylation sites, at serine 33 (S33), tyrosine 186 (Y186), and 
serine 238 (S238), of the C134W mutant by tandem mass spectrometry. Among these
sites, antibodies were raised against the pS33 and pY186 epitopes using specific 
peptides, and they were tested by immunostaining tissue microarrays of archival
adult-type GCT specimens, other tumors, and normal tissues. The pS33 antibody
showed greater sensitivity and specificity for the detection of adult-type GCTs
than that of the other phospho and nonphospho antibodies. The specificity of the 
pS33 antibody to the pS33 epitope was further confirmed by enriching the pS33
peptide by affinity chromatography using the immobilized antibody, followed by
mass spectrometric and western blot analyses from whole cell lysates of the
adult-type GCT cell line, KGN. pS33 FOXL2 immunostaining levels were
significantly higher in adult-type GCTs than those in other tumors and tissues.
The receiver operating characteristic curve analysis of pS33 FOXL2 showed high
sensitivity (1.0) and specificity (0.76) to adult-type GCTs with a cutoff score
of >30% positive cells, and the area under the curve was 0.96. This suggests the 
potential of pS33 FOXL2 to serve as a new biomarker for the diagnosis of
adult-type GCT.

PMID: 25871347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Apr;94(14):e720. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000720.

Identification of X monosomy cells from a gonad of mixed gonadal dysgenesis with 
a 46,XY karyotype: case report.

Nishina-Uchida N(1), Fukuzawa R, Hasegawa Y, Morison IM.

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular and Developmental Pathology Research Group (NN-U, RF);
Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism (NN-U, YH); Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Tokyo Metropolitan Children's Medical Center, 2-8-29
Musashidai, Fuchu, Tokyo, Japan (RF); and Department of Pathology, Dunedin School
of Medicine, University of Otago, P.O. Box 913, Dunedin, New Zealand (RF, IMM).

Mixed gonadal dysgenesis (MGD) is a disorder of sexual development that typically
has a mosaic 45,X/46,XY karyotype. A 1-year-old infant with 46,XY identified by
peripheral blood karyotype demonstrated clinical manifestations and gonadal
pathologic features of MGD. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for X and Y
chromosomes and immunofluorescence for SRY along with testicular and ovarian
lineage markers SOX9 and FOXL2, respectively, were performed on paraffin sections
from the gonad to ascertain the somatic mosaic state for 45,X monosomy and 46,XY 
cells. The gonad consisted of cells with X and XY signals, which were further
quantified in comparison with a normal control testis by a digital image analysis
program. The average percentages of 45,X cells of this patient's gonad and a
control testis were 39.0% and 5.7%, respectively (<U+03C7>2 test, P<U+200A><<U+200A>0.001). SRY
expression was absent in approximately 10% of precursor granulosa cells (FOXL2
positive) and precursor Sertoli/granulosa cells (both SOX9 and FOXL2 positive)
within gonadoblastomas, confirming the involvement of 45,X cells. A combination
of analysis of FISH and immunofluorescence for SRY in the gonadal tissue could
identify 45,X cells in MGD with 46,XY.

PMCID: PMC4554039
PMID: 25860218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2015;79(8):1257-65. doi:
10.1080/09168451.2015.1025690. Epub 2015 Apr 7.

De novo transcriptome sequencing to identify the sex-determination genes in
Hyriopsis schlegelii.

Shi J(1), Hong Y, Sheng J, Peng K, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)a School of Life Sciences , Nanchang University , Nanchang , China.

This study presents the first analysis of expressed transcripts in the spermary
and ovary of Hyriopsis schlegelii (H. schlegelii). A total of 132,055 unigenes
were obtained and 31,781 of these genes were annotated. In addition, 19,511
upregulated and 25,911 downregulated unigenes were identified in the spermary.
Ten sex-determination genes were selected and further analyzed by real-time PCR. 
In addition, mammalian genes reported to govern sex-determination pathways,
including Sry, Dmrt1, Dmrt2, Sox9, GATA4, and WT1 in males and Wnt4, Rspo1,
Foxl2, and ß-catenin in females, were also identified in H. schlegelii. These
results suggest that H. schlegelii and mammals use similar gene regulatory
mechanisms to control sex determination. Moreover, genes associated with dosage
compensation mechanisms, such as Msl1, Msl2, and Msl3, and hermaphrodite
phenotypes, such as Tra-1, Tra-2a, Tra-2ß, Fem1A, Fem1B, and Fem1C, were also
identified in H. schlegelii. The identification of these genes indicates that
diverse regulatory mechanisms regulate sexual polymorphism in H. schlegelii.

PMID: 25848829  [PubMed - in process]


53. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2015 May;34(3):266-74. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0000000000000150.

Ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors in patients with probable or confirmed germline
DICER1 mutations.

Oost EE(1), Charles A, Choong CS, Leung YC, Salfinger S, Sonnendecker H, Tan J,
Townshend S, Witkowski L, Foulkes WD, Stewart CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Histopathology (E.E.O., H.S.), SJOG Pathology King Edward
Memorial Hospital (C.J.R.S.) Schools for Paediatrics and Child Health (A.C.,
C.S.C.) School for Women's and Infants' Health (Y.L., S.S., J.T., C.J.R.S.),
University of Western Australia Department of Medical Genetics (S.T.), King
Edward Memorial Hospital, Perth, WA Program in Cancer Genetics (L.W., W.D.F.),
Departments of Oncology and Human Genetics, McGill University Department of
Medical Genetics (L.W., W.D.F.), Segal Cancer Centre and Lady Davis Institute,
McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, QC, Canada.

The DICER1 gene encodes an endoribonuclease involved in the production of mature 
microRNAs which regulates gene expression through several mechanisms. Recent
studies have demonstrated somatic mutations in DICER1 in approximately 60% of
ovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors. Furthermore, patients with germline mutations
in DICER1 are predisposed to developing a range of rare neoplasms including
ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors most of which have been classified as
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor. However, the histologic features of these tumors have 
not been reported in detail. We describe the morphologic and immunophenotypic
findings of 4 sex cord-stromal tumors arising in patients with proven or likely
germline DICER1 mutations including 3 individuals from 1 family. Three tumors
showed similar appearances characterized by marked architectural and cytologic
heterogeneity including sertoliform, juvenile granulosa cell tumor-like, and
unclassifiable elements. The remaining case mainly showed heterologous mucinous
epithelial and neuroendocrine differentiation with only a minor
intermediate-grade Sertoli cell component. This tumor and one of the 3 former
cases arose in related patients with identical germline DICER1 mutations
indicating that additional factors influence tumor morphology. All tumors were
positive for steroidogenic factor-1 and FOXL2 on immunohistochemical analysis,
whereas there was more variable expression of inhibin, calretinin, CD56, CD99,
and hormone receptors. The present small series suggests that some ovarian
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor associated with germline DICER1 mutations may show
distinctive histologic features in particular admixed Sertoli cell and juvenile
granulosa cell tumor-like features. Larger studies are required to establish
whether heterologous elements are also a more common feature of these tumors.

PMID: 25844550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2015 Jun;54(6):353-60. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22233. Epub
2015 Mar 28.

Ovarian microcystic stromal tumor: A novel extracolonic tumor in familial
adenomatous polyposis.

Lee SH(1), Koh YW, Roh HJ, Cha HJ, Kwon YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Ulsan College of
Medicine, Ulsan University Hospital, Ulsan, Korea.

Ovarian microcystic stromal tumor (MCST) is a very rare neoplasm; hence, its
nomenclature was recently designated as "Distinctive morphologic and
immunohistochemical features" in 2009. Its exact origin, etiological genetic
alterations, and background are not yet clearly known. Familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP) is an autosomal dominant disease that leads to development of
colorectal polyps via germ-line mutations of the APC gene on chromosome 5q21~22. 
In this study, we report a 40-year-old female patient who had ovarian MCST and
FAP. On sequencing the APC gene in ovarian MSCT, we detected a novel somatic
mutation of the APC gene in exon 11, with a heterozygous deletion at nucleotide
position c.1540delG (p.Ala514 Profs*9). Mutations of ß-catenin (CTNNB1) and FOXL2
were not detected. Although one case demonstrating involvement of Wnt/ß-catenin
in ovarian MCST associated with FAP has been presented previously, no detailed
information was provided. Thus, this is the ovarian MCST with a somatic mutation 
of APC in a patient with FAP.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25820106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 27;10(3):e0122819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122819.
eCollection 2015.

Molecular signatures discriminating the male and the female sexual pathways in
the pearl oyster Pinctada margaritifera.

Teaniniuraitemoana V(1), Huvet A(2), Levy P(1), Gaertner-Mazouni N(3), Gueguen
Y(4), Le Moullac G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ifremer, UMR 241 Ecosystèmes Insulaires Océaniens (EIO), Labex Corail, Centre 
du Pacifique, BP 7004, 98719 Taravao, Tahiti, French Polynesia. (2)Ifremer, UMR
6539 Laboratoire des sciences de l'Environnement Marin (LEMAR), ZI de la Pointe
du Diable, CS 10070, F-29280 Plouzané, France. (3)Université de la Polynésie
Française, UMR 241 Ecosystèmes Insulaires Océaniens (EIO), Labex Corail, BP 6570,
98702 Faa'a, Tahiti, French Polynesia. (4)Ifremer, UMR 241 Ecosystèmes Insulaires
Océaniens (EIO), Labex Corail, Centre du Pacifique, BP 7004, 98719 Taravao,
Tahiti, French Polynesia; Ifremer, UMR 5119 Ecologie des Systèmes Marins Côtiers 
(ECOSYM), Labex Corail, Université de Montpellier, Place Eugène Bataillon, CC 80,
F-34095 Montpellier Cedex 5, France.

The genomics of economically important marine bivalves is studied to provide
better understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying their different
reproductive strategies. The recently available gonad transcriptome of the
black-lip pearl oyster Pinctada margaritifera is a novel and powerful resource to
study these mechanisms in marine mollusks displaying hermaphroditic features. In 
this study, RNAseq quantification data of the P. margaritifera gonad
transcriptome were analyzed to identify candidate genes in
histologically-characterized gonad samples to provide molecular signatures of the
female and male sexual pathway in this pearl oyster. Based on the RNAseq data
set, stringent expression analysis identified 1,937 contigs that were
differentially expressed between the gonad histological categories. From the
hierarchical clustering analysis, a new reproduction model is proposed, based on 
a dual histo-molecular analytical approach. Nine candidate genes were identified 
as markers of the sexual pathway: 7 for the female pathway and 2 for the male
one. Their mRNA levels were assayed by real-time PCR on a new set of gonadic
samples. A clustering method revealed four principal expression patterns based on
the relative gene expression ratio. A multivariate regression tree realized on
these new samples and validated on the previously analyzed RNAseq samples showed 
that the sexual pathway of P. margaritifera can be predicted by a 3-gene-pair
expression ratio model of 4 different genes: pmarg-43476, pmarg-foxl2,
pmarg-54338 and pmarg-fem1-like. This 3-gene-pair expression ratio model strongly
suggests only the implication of pmarg-foxl2 and pmarg-fem1-like in the sex
inversion of P. margaritifera. This work provides the first histo-molecular model
of P. margaritifera reproduction and a gene expression signature of its sexual
pathway discriminating the male and female pathways. These represent useful tools
for understanding and studying sex inversion, sex differentiation and sex
determinism in this species and other related species for aquaculture purposes
such as genetic selection programs.

PMCID: PMC4376701
PMID: 25815473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Development. 2015 Mar 15;142(6):1083-8. doi: 10.1242/dev.122184. Epub 2015 Feb
27.

Female-to-male sex reversal in mice caused by transgenic overexpression of Dmrt1.

Zhao L(1), Svingen T(1), Ng ET(1), Koopman P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane QLD
4072, Australia. (2)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of
Queensland, Brisbane QLD 4072, Australia p.koopman@imb.uq.edu.au.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2015 Jun;92(6):134.

Genes related to Dmrt1, which encodes a DNA-binding DM domain transcription
factor, act as triggers for primary sex determination in a broad range of
metazoan species. However, this role is fulfilled in mammals by Sry, a newly
evolved gene on the Y chromosome, such that Dmrt1 has become dispensable for
primary sex determination and instead maintains Sertoli cell phenotype in
postnatal testes. Here, we report that enforced expression of Dmrt1 in XX mouse
fetal gonads using a Wt1-BAC transgene system is sufficient to drive testicular
differentiation and male secondary sex development. XX transgenic fetal gonads
showed typical testicular size and vasculature. Key ovarian markers, including
Wnt4 and Foxl2, were repressed. Sertoli cells expressing the hallmark
testis-determining gene Sox9 were formed, although they did not assemble into
normal testis cords. Other bipotential lineages differentiated into testicular
cell types, including steroidogenic fetal Leydig cells and non-meiotic germ
cells. As a consequence, male internal and external reproductive organs developed
postnatally, with an absence of female reproductive tissues. These results reveal
that Dmrt1 has retained its ability to act as the primary testis-determining
trigger in mammals, even though this function is no longer normally required.
Thus, Dmrt1 provides a common thread in the evolution of sex determination
mechanisms in metazoans.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25725066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Mar;29(3):484. doi: 10.1210/me.2015-1023.

Corrigendum. Impaired fertility and FSH synthesis in gonadotrope-specific Foxl2
knockout mice.

[No authors listed]

Erratum for
    Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Mar;27(3):407-21.

PMCID: PMC4347285
PMID: 25723485  [PubMed]


58. Mod Pathol. 2015 Jun;28(6):836-44. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.43. Epub 2015 Feb 
27.

Refining prognosis and identifying targetable pathways for high-risk endometrial 
cancer; a TransPORTEC initiative.

Stelloo E(1), Bosse T(1), Nout RA(2), MacKay HJ(3), Church DN(4), Nijman HW(5),
Leary A(6), Edmondson RJ(7), Powell ME(8), Crosbie EJ(7), Kitchener HC(7),
Mileshkin L(9), Pollock PM(10), Smit VT(1), Creutzberg CL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Clinical Oncology, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (3)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Princess Margaret Hospital/University Health
Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (4)Molecular and Population 
Genetics Laboratory, The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, UK. (5)Department of Gynecology, University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (6)Department of
Medicine, Gynecology Unit, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France. (7)Institute of
Cancer Sciences, University of Manchester, St Marys Hospital, Manchester, UK.
(8)Department of Clinical Oncology, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, UK.
(9)Division of Cancer Medicine, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne,
VIC, Australia. (10)Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland
University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

This study aimed to investigate whether molecular analysis can be used to refine 
risk assessment, direct adjuvant therapy, and identify actionable alterations in 
high-risk endometrial cancer. TransPORTEC, an international consortium related to
the PORTEC3 trial, was established for translational research in high-risk
endometrial cancer. In this explorative study, routine molecular analyses were
used to detect prognostic subgroups: p53 immunohistochemistry, microsatellite
instability and POLE proofreading mutation. Furthermore, DNA was analyzed for
hotspot mutations in 13 additional genes (BRAF, CDKNA2, CTNNB1, FBXW7, FGFR2,
FGFR3, FOXL2, HRAS, KRAS, NRAS, PIK3CA, PPP2R1A, and PTEN) and protein expression
of ER, PR, PTEN, and ARID1a was analyzed. Rates of distant metastasis,
recurrence-free, and overall survival were calculated using the Kaplan-Meier
method and log-rank test. In total, samples of 116 high-risk endometrial cancer
patients were included: 86 endometrioid; 12 serous; and 18 clear cell. For
endometrioid, serous, and clear cell cancers, 5-year recurrence-free survival
rates were 68%, 27%, and 50% (P=0.014) and distant metastasis rates 23%, 64%, and
50% (P=0.001), respectively. Four prognostic subgroups were identified: (1) a
group of p53-mutant tumors; (2) microsatellite instable tumors; (3) POLE
proofreading-mutant tumors; and (4) a group with no specific molecular profile
(NSMP). In group 3 (POLE-mutant; n=14) and group 2 (microsatellite instable;
n=19) patients, no distant metastasis occurred, compared with 50% distant
metastasis rate in group 1 (p53-mutant; n=36) and 39% in group 4 (NSMP; P<0.001).
Five-year recurrence-free survival was 93% and 95% for group 3 (POLE-mutant) and 
group 2 (microsatellite instable) vs 42% (group 1, p53-mutant) and 52% (group 4, 
NSMP; P<0.001). Targetable FBXW7 and FGFR2 mutations (6%), alterations in the
PI3K-AKT pathway (60%) and hormone receptor positivity (45%) were frequently
found. In conclusion, molecular analysis of high-risk endometrial cancer
identifies four distinct prognostic subgroups, with potential therapeutic
implications. High frequencies of targetable alterations were identified and may 
serve as targets for individualized treatment.

PMID: 25720322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jun 1;24(11):3092-103. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv061. Epub 2015 Feb
15.

Role of Foxl2 in uterine maturation and function.

Bellessort B(1), Bachelot A(1), Heude É(1), Alfama G(1), Fontaine A(1), Le
Cardinal M(1), Treier M(2), Levi G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Évolution des Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum National
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris 75005, France and. (2)Max-Delbrück Center for
Molecular Medicine (MDC), Genetics of Metabolic and Reproductive Disorders,
Robert-Rössle-Str. 10, Berlin 13125, Germany. (3)Évolution des Régulations
Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris 75005,
France and glevi@mnhn.fr.

Foxl2 codes for a forkhead/HNF3 transcription factor essential for follicular
maturation and maintenance of ovarian identity. FOXL2 mutations are associated
with Blepharophimosis, Ptosis and Epicanthus inversus Syndrome (BPES)
characterized by eyelid malformations (types I and II) and premature ovarian
insufficiency (type I). We show that Foxl2 is not only expressed by the ovary,
but also by other components of the mouse female reproductive tract, including
the uterus, the cervix and the oviduct. In the uterus, Foxl2 expression is first 
observed in the neonatal mesenchyme and, during uterine maturation, persists in
the stroma and in the deep inner myometrial layer (IML). In the adult, Foxl2 is
expressed in the differentiated stromal layer, but no longer in the myometrium.
Conditional deletion of Foxl2 in the postnatal (PN) uterus using Progesterone
Receptor-cre (Pgr(cre/+)) mice results in infertility. During PN uterine
maturation Pgr(cre/+); Foxl2(flox/flox) mice present a severely reduced thickness
of the stroma layer and an hypertrophic, disorganized IML. In adult Pgr(cre/+);
Foxl2(flox/flox) mice a supplementary muscular layer is present at the
stroma/myometrium border and vascular smooth muscle cells fail to form a coherent
layer around uterine arteries. Wnt signalling pathways play a central role in
uterine maturation; in Pgr(cre/+); Foxl2(flox/flox) mice, Wnt genes are
deregulated suggesting that Foxl2 acts through these signals. In humans,
thickening of the IML (also called "junctional zone") is associated with reduced 
fertility, endometriosis and adenomyosis. Our data suggest that Foxl2 has a
crucial role in PN uterine maturation and could help to understand sub-fertility 
predisposition in women.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25687138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Curr Biol. 2015 Mar 16;25(6):764-71. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.01.034. Epub 2015
Feb 12.

Sexual cell-fate reprogramming in the ovary by DMRT1.

Lindeman RE(1), Gearhart MD(1), Minkina A(1), Krentz AD(1), Bardwell VJ(1),
Zarkower D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, Developmental Biology
Center, and Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, 6-160 Jackson Hall,
321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA. (2)Department of Genetics, Cell 
Biology, and Development, Developmental Biology Center, and Masonic Cancer
Center, University of Minnesota, 6-160 Jackson Hall, 321 Church Street SE,
Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA. Electronic address: zarko001@umn.edu.

Transcription factors related to the insect sex-determination gene doublesex
(DMRT proteins) control sex determination and/or sexual differentiation in
diverse metazoans and are implicated in transitions between sex-determining
mechanisms during vertebrate evolution [1]. In mice, Dmrt1 is required for male
gonadal differentiation in somatic cells and germ cells [2-4]. DMRT1 also
maintains male gonadal sex: its loss, even in adults, can trigger sexual
cell-fate reprogramming in which male Sertoli cells transdifferentiate into their
female equivalents-granulosa cells-and testicular tissue reorganizes to a more
ovarian morphology [5]. Here we use a conditional Dmrt1 transgene to show that
Dmrt1 is not only necessary but also sufficient to specify male cell identity in 
the mouse gonad. DMRT1 expression in the ovary silenced the female
sex-maintenance gene Foxl2 and reprogrammed juvenile and adult granulosa cells
into Sertoli-like cells, triggering formation of structures resembling male
seminiferous tubules. DMRT1 can silence Foxl2 even in the absence of the
testis-determining genes Sox8 and Sox9. mRNA profiling found that DMRT1 activates
many testicular genes and downregulates ovarian genes and single-cell RNA
sequencing in transdifferentiating cells identified dynamically expressed
candidate mediators of this process. Strongly upregulated genes were highly
enriched on chromosome X, consistent with sexually antagonistic functions. This
study provides an in vivo example of single-gene reprogramming of cell sexual
identity. Our findings suggest a reconsideration of mechanisms involved in human 
disorders of sex development (DSDs) and empirically support evolutionary models
in which loss or gain of Dmrt1 function promotes establishment of new vertebrate 
sex-determination systems.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4366330
PMID: 25683803  [PubMed - in process]


61. Oncol Lett. 2015 Feb;9(2):967-971. Epub 2014 Nov 20.

MiR-30a upregulates BCL2A1, IER3 and cyclin D2 expression by targeting FOXL2.

Wang T(1), Li F(1), Tang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plastic Surgery, Weifang Medical College, Weifang, Shandong
261041, P.R. China.

FOXL2 is a transcription factor that is essential for ovarian development.
Somatic mutations of FOXL2 are associated with ovarian granulosa cell
tumorigenesis. In the present study, the expression of FOXL2 was suppressed by
microRNAs using the Ago2 knockdown method in COV434 cells. Online bioinformatics 
tools were utilized to predict that FOXL2 expression may be repressed by miR-30
family members, and dual luciferase assay and western blotting were performed to 
demonstrate that FOXL2 is a target gene of miR-30a, which is relatively abundant 
in COV434 cells. Furthermore, miR-30a overexpression upregulates BCL2A1, IER3 and
cyclin D2 expression by inhibiting FOXL2. miR-30a is known to function as a tumor
suppressor in breast cancer, small cell lung cancer and colorectal carcinoma;
however, the present study revealed an opposing function of miR-30a as an
oncogene.

PMCID: PMC4301489
PMID: 25621074  [PubMed]


62. J Reprod Immunol. 2015 Apr;108:105-13. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2014.12.005. Epub 2015 
Jan 7.

Maternal organism and embryo biosensoring: insights from ruminants.

Sandra O(1), Constant F(2), Vitorino Carvalho A(2), Eozénou C(2), Valour D(2),
Mauffré V(2), Hue I(2), Charpigny G(2).

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR1198 Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, F-78352
Jouy-en-Josas, France; ENVA, UMR1198 Biologie du Développement et Reproduction,
F-94704 Maisons Alfort, France. Electronic address: olivier.sandra@jouy.inra.fr. 
(2)INRA, UMR1198 Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, F-78352
Jouy-en-Josas, France; ENVA, UMR1198 Biologie du Développement et Reproduction,
F-94704 Maisons Alfort, France.

In terms of contribution to pregnancy, the mother not only produces gametes, but 
also hosts gestation, whose progression in the uterus is conditioned by early
events during implantation. In ruminants, this period is associated with
elongation of the extra-embryonic tissues, gastrulation of the embryonic disk and
cross-talk with the endometrium. Recent data have prompted the need for accurate 
staging of the bovine conceptus and shown that asynchrony between elongation and 
gastrulation processes may account for pregnancy failure. Data mining of
endometrial gene signatures has allowed the identification of molecular pathways 
and new factors regulated by the conceptus (e.g. FOXL2, SOCS6). Interferon-tau
has been recognised to be the major signal of pregnancy recognition, but
prostaglandins and lysophospholipids have also been demonstrated to be critical
players at the conceptus-endometrium interface. Interestingly, up-regulation of
interferon-regulated gene expression has been identified in circulating immune
cells during implantation, making these factors a potential source of
non-invasive biomarkers for early pregnancy. Distinct endometrial responses have 
been shown to be elicited by embryos produced by artificial insemination, in
vitro fertilisation or somatic cell nuclear transfer. These findings have led to 
the concept that endometrium is an early biosensor of embryo quality. This
biological property first demonstrated in cattle has been recently extended and
associated with embryo selection in humans. Hence, compromised or suboptimal
endometrial quality can subtly or deeply affect embryo development, with visible 
and sometimes severe consequences for placentation, foetal development, pregnancy
outcome and the long-term health of the offspring.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25617112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 May;39(5):618-23. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000367.

FOXL2 mutation is absent in uterine tumors resembling ovarian sex cord tumors.

Chiang S(1), Staats PN, Senz J, Kommoss F, De Nictolis M, Huntsman DG, Gilks CB, 
Oliva E.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
†Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore,
MD **Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA <U+2225>Institute of Pathology, Mannheim, Germany ¶Department of
Pathology, San Salvatore Hospital, Pesaro, Italy ‡Center for Translational and
Applied Genomics §Genetic Pathology Evaluation Center #Department of Pathology,
Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Uterine tumors resembling ovarian sex cord tumors (UTROSCTs) are rare uterine
neoplasms characterized by pure or predominant epithelial-like patterns that
share morphologic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural features with ovarian
sex cord tumors. FOXL2 immunoexpression has recently been found in sex cord
stromal tumors of the ovary, including granulosa cell tumors, Sertoli-Leydig cell
tumors, thecomas, and fibromas, but mutations have been identified mostly in
adult granulosa cell tumors. In this study, we investigated FOXL2 mutation status
and protein expression in UTROSCTs. Mutational analysis using a TaqMan real-time 
polymerase chain reaction-based allelic discrimination assay was performed on
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue from 15 UTROSCTs. FOXL2 mutation was
absent in all tumors. FOXL2 immunoexpression was tested in all 15 tumors.
Intensity of staining was scored as weak, moderate, or strong. Percentage of
tumor cells with nuclear staining was recorded as follows: 0 (negative); 1+ (1%
to 25%); 2+ (26% to 50%); 3+ (51% to 75%); and 4+ (76% to 100%). Nuclear
expression of FOXL2 was present in 6 of 15 (40%) UTROSCTs. One tumor demonstrated
strong 4+ staining. Moderate expression was seen in 3 cases, including 2 and 1
showing 2+ and 1+ staining, respectively. Weak expression was observed in 2
tumors demonstrating 3+ and 1+ staining. Although UTROSCTs show overlapping
morphologic, immunohistochemical, and ultrastructural features with sex cord
stromal tumors of the ovary, they do not harbor FOXL2 mutation despite focal
immunoreactivity in a subset of these tumors.

PMID: 25581731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Poult Sci. 2015 Jan;94(1):88-95. doi: 10.3382/ps/peu023.

Association of novel polymorphisms of forkhead box L2 and growth differentiation 
factor-9 genes with egg production traits in local Chinese Dagu hens.

Qin N(1), Liu Q(1), Zhang YY(1), Fan XC(1), Xu XX(2), Lv ZC(1), Wei ML(1), Jing
Y(1), Mu F(1), Xu RF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of Animal
Science and Technology, Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun 130118, Jilin,
China. (2)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction, College of
Animal Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 130118,
Hubei, China. (3)Department of Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction,
College of Animal Science and Technology, Jilin Agricultural University,
Changchun 130118, Jilin, China poultryjlau@163.com;

Transcription factor forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) and growth differentiation factor-9 
(GDF9) genes have critical roles in the regulation of hen ovarian development. In
the present study, these genes were explored as possible molecular markers
associated with BW, hen-housed egg production, and egg weight in Chinese Dagu
hens. Samples were analyzed using the PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism
(PCR-SSCP) technique followed by sequencing analysis, and two novel single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified within these candidate genes.
Among them, an A/G transition at base position 238 in the coding region of the
FOXL2 gene and a G/T transversion at base position 1609 in exon 2 of the GDF9
gene were found to be polymorphic and named SNPs A238G and G1609T, respectively. 
The SNP A238G (FOXL2) leads to a nonsynonymous substitution
(isoleucine77-to-valine), and when the 360 Dagu hen samples were divided into
genotypes AA and AB, allele A was found to be present at a higher frequency.
Furthermore, the AA genotype correlated with significantly higher hen-housed egg 
production at 30, 43, 57, and 66 wk of age and with a higher egg weight at 43 wk 
(P<0.05). For the SNP G1609T (GDF9), the hens were typed into TT and TC
genotypes, with the T allele shown to be dominant. The TC genotype was also
markedly correlated with higher hen-housed egg production and a higher egg weight
(P<0.05). Moreover, four haplotypes were reconstructed based on these two SNPs,
with the AATC haplotype found to be correlated with the highest hen-housed egg
production at 30 to 66 wk of age and with higher egg weights at 43 wk (P<0.05).
Collectively, the two SNPs identified in this study might be used as possible
genetic molecular markers to aid in the improvement of egg production traits in
chicken breeding.

© 2015 Poultry Science Association Inc.

PMID: 25577797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Gene. 2015 Apr 25;561(1):6-14. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.12.060. Epub 2014 Dec 27.

Characterization and gonadal expression of FOXL2 relative to Cyp19a genes in
spotted scat Scatophagus argus.

Liu H(1), Mu X(1), Gui L(1), Su M(1), Li H(1), Zhang G(1), Liu Z(1), Zhang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Exploration and Utilization of Aquatic Genetic Resources,
Ministry of Education, College of Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai Ocean
University, Shanghai 201306, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Exploration and
Utilization of Aquatic Genetic Resources, Ministry of Education, College of
Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai Ocean University, Shanghai 201306, China.
Electronic address: jb-zhang@shou.edu.cn.

In the present study, we cloned the full-length cDNAs of FOXL2, Cyp19a1a and
Cyp19a1b and analyzed their expression patterns during gonadal development in
spotted scat, Scatophagus argus. All three genes were expressed in ovaries and
testes but showed sexual dimorphism. At early stages of gonadal development, the 
expression of FOXL2 in ovaries was higher than testes. FOXL2 expression deceased 
gradually as gonadal development continued, and reached the lowest level at the
mature stage. Cyp19a1a and Cyp19a1b were expressed coordinately with FOXL2,
except at the early vitellogenic stage in the ovary. The expression of FOXL2,
Cyp19a1a and Cyp19a1b was mainly localized in granulosa cells of ovaries. In S.
argus testes, strong expression of FOXL2 gene was observed in the interstitial
cells including tubules and Leydig cells, while Cyp19a1a and Cyp19a1b were mainly
expressed in Sertoli cells throughout gametogenesis. These results show that
FOXL2 plays an essential role in sexual development, and imply that it may
regulate Cyp19a1a and Cyp19a1b expression in S. argus.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25550048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Aquat Toxicol. 2015 Feb;159:302-16. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2014.11.022. Epub 2014
Dec 4.

Molecular pathways associated with the intersex condition in rainbow darter
(Etheostoma caeruleum) following exposures to municipal wastewater in the Grand
River basin, ON, Canada. Part B.

Bahamonde PA(1), McMaster ME(2), Servos MR(3), Martyniuk CJ(4), Munkittrick
KR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Rivers Institute and Department of Biology, University of New
Brunswick, Saint John, NB, Canada E2L 4L5. Electronic address:
p.bahamondec@gmail.com. (2)Emerging Methods Branch, Aquatic Contaminant Research 
Division, Water Science and Technology Directorate, Environment Canada,
Burlington, ON, Canada L7R 4A6. (3)Canadian Rivers Institute and University of
Waterloo, Department of Biology, Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1. (4)Canadian Rivers
Institute and Department of Biology, University of New Brunswick, Saint John, NB,
Canada E2L 4L5.

Rainbow darter (Etheostoma caeruleum; RBD) is a small benthic fish found in North
America. This species is sensitive to sewage effluent, and intersex is found in
up to 80% of males in near-field areas in the Grand River, Ontario, Canada. To
learn more about the molecular signaling cascades associated with intersex, a
developed customized oligonucleotide microarray (4×180 K) using next generation
sequencing was developed to characterize the transcriptome in the gonad of male
and female RBD. Gene expression profiling was performed in males and females from
both a reference site and a polluted site. Males with and without intersex
condition from the areas closest to effluent outfalls were compared to males and 
females from a reference site. Microarray analysis revealed that there was
increased mRNA abundance for genes associated with oogenesis in intersex males
(i.e. the presence of eggs within the testis), and a decrease in mRNA abundance
for genes associated with spermatid development. In females exposed to effluent, 
cell processes related with hatching and ovulation were down-regulated, and genes
involved in immune responses were increased in abundance. In the non-intersex
males exposed to effluent, cell processes such as sperm cell adhesion were
decreased at the transcript level relative to males from the reference site.
Microarray analysis revealed that heat shock proteins (HSP) were significantly
increased in non-intersex males exposed to effluent; however, HSPs were not
differentially expressed in intersex males exposed to the effluent. Genes
involved in sex differentiation (sox9, foxl2 and dmrt1) and reproduction (esr1,
esrb, ar, vtg, cyp19a1 and cyp11a) were measured in males, females, and intersex 
individuals. Consistent with the intersex condition, many transcripts showed an
intermediate expression level in intersex males when compared to phenotypic males
and females. This study improves our knowledge regarding the molecular pathways
that underlie the intersex condition and develops a suite of qPCR bioassays in
RBD that are able to discriminate pollutant-exposed males without intersex from
those males with intersex. Part A of this study reports on the effects of
municipal wastewater effluents (MWWEs) on RBD in the Grand River and demonstrates
that there are disruptions in higher level endpoints that include altered steroid
levels. Here we develop a new tool for assessing and monitoring the intersex
condition in RBD in polluted natural environments and begin to characterize gene 
networks that are associated with the condition.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25542366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. BMC Genet. 2014 Dec 14;15:140. doi: 10.1186/s12863-014-0140-5.

Genetics and timing of sex determination in the East African cichlid fish
Astatotilapia burtoni.

Heule C(1), Göppert C(2), Salzburger W(3), Böhne A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Zoological Institute, University of Basel, Vesalgasse 1, 4051, Basel,
Switzerland. co.heule@unibas.ch. (2)Zoological Institute, University of Basel,
Vesalgasse 1, 4051, Basel, Switzerland. c.goeppert@stud.unibas.ch. (3)Zoological 
Institute, University of Basel, Vesalgasse 1, 4051, Basel, Switzerland.
walter.salzburger@unibas.ch. (4)Zoological Institute, University of Basel,
Vesalgasse 1, 4051, Basel, Switzerland. astrid.boehne@unibas.ch.

BACKGROUND: The factors determining sex are diverse in vertebrates and especially
so in teleost fishes. Only a handful of master sex-determining genes have been
identified, however great efforts have been undertaken to characterize the
subsequent genetic network of sex differentiation in various organisms. East
African cichlids offer an ideal model system to study the complexity of sexual
development, since many different sex-determining mechanisms occur in closely
related species of this fish family. Here, we investigated the sex-determining
system and gene expression profiles during male development of Astatotilapia
burtoni, a member of the rapidly radiating and exceptionally species-rich
haplochromine lineage.
RESULTS: Crossing experiments with hormonally sex-reversed fish provided evidence
for an XX-XY sex determination system in A. burtoni. Resultant all-male broods
were used to assess gene expression patterns throughout development of a set of
candidate genes, previously characterized in adult cichlids only.
CONCLUSIONS: We could identify the onset of gonad sexual differentiation at 11-12
dpf. The expression profiles identified wnt4B and wt1A as the earliest gonad
markers in A. burtoni. Furthermore we identified late testis genes (cyp19a1A,
gsdf, dmrt1 and gata4), and brain markers (ctnnb1A, ctnnb1B, dax1A, foxl2, foxl3,
nanos1A, nanos1B, rspo1, sf-1, sox9A and sox9B).

PMCID: PMC4278230
PMID: 25494637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Mol Reprod Dev. 2014 Dec;81(12):1146-58. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22436. Epub 2014 Dec 5.

The sensitive period for male-to-female sex reversal begins at the embryonic
stage in the Nile tilapia and is associated with the sexual genotype.

Gennotte V(1), Mélard C, D'Cotta H, Baroiller JF, Rougeot C.

Author information: 
(1)Aquaculture Research and Education Center (CEFRA), AFFISH-RC, University of
Liège, Tihange, Belgium.

In this study, we sought to determine the mechanism of early sex reversal in a
teleost by applying 4<U+2009>hr feminization treatments to XY (17a-ethynylestradiol
2000<U+2009>µg<U+2009>L(-1) ) and YY (6500<U+2009>µg<U+2009>L(-1) ) Nile tilapia embryos on the first day
post-fertilization (dpf). We then searched for changes in the expression profiles
of some sex-differentiating genes in the brain (cyp19a1b, foxl2, and amh) and in 
sex steroids (testosterone, 17ß-estradiol, and 11-ketotestosterone)
concentrations during embryogenesis and gonad differentiation. No sex reversal
was observed in YY individuals, whereas sex-reversal rates in XY progeny ranged
from 0-60%. These results, together with the clearance profile of
17a-ethynylestradiol, confirmed the existence of an early sensitive period for
sex determination that encompasses embryonic and larval development and is active
prior to any sign of gonad differentiation. Estrogen treatment induced elevated
expression of cyp19a1b and higher testosterone and 17ß-estradiol concentrations
at 4 dpf in both XY and YY individuals. foxl2 and amh were repressed at 4 dpf and
their expression levels were not different between treated and control groups at 
14 dpf, suggesting that foxl2 did not control cyp19a1b in the brains of tilapia
embryos. Increased cyp19a1b expression in treated embryos could reflect early
brain sexualization, although this difference alone cannot account for the
observed sex reversal as the treatment was ineffective in YY individuals. The
differential sensitivity of XY and YY genotypes to embryonic induced-feminization
suggests that a sex determinant on the sex chromosomes, such as a Y repressor or 
an X activator, may influence sex reversal during the first steps of tilapia
embryogenesis.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25482380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Dec 16;111(50):17983-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1421047111. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Life-long in vivo cell-lineage tracing shows that no oogenesis originates from
putative germline stem cells in adult mice.

Zhang H(1), Liu L(2), Li X(1), Busayavalasa K(1), Shen Y(1), Hovatta O(3),
Gustafsson JÅ(4), Liu K(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg,
SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden; (2)Cancer Center, Qilu Hospital of Shandong
University, 250012 Shandong, China; (3)Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Department of Clinical Sciences, Intervention and Technology, Karolinska
Institute and Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, SE-141 86 Stockholm,
Sweden; and. (4)Center for Nuclear Receptors and Cell Signaling, University of
Houston, Houston, TX 77204 jgustafs@central.uh.edu kui.liu@gu.se. (5)Department
of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg, SE-405 30
Gothenburg, Sweden; jgustafs@central.uh.edu kui.liu@gu.se.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2015;14(7):935-6.

Whether or not oocyte regeneration occurs in adult life has been the subject of
much debate. In this study, we have traced germ-cell lineages over the life spans
of three genetically modified mouse models and provide direct evidence that
oogenesis does not originate from any germline stem cells (GSCs) in adult mice.
By selective ablation of all existing oocytes in a Gdf9-Cre;iDTR mouse model, we 
have demonstrated that no new germ cells were ever regenerated under pathological
conditions. By in vivo tracing of oocytes and follicles in the
Sohlh1-CreER(T2);R26R and Foxl2-CreER(T2);mT/mG mouse models, respectively, we
have shown that the initial pool of oocytes is the only source of germ cells
throughout the life span of the mice and that no adult oogenesis ever occurs
under physiological conditions. Our findings clearly show that there are no GSCs 
that contribute to adult oogenesis in mice and that the initial pool of oocytes
formed in early life is the only source of germ cells throughout the entire
reproductive life span.

PMCID: PMC4273382
PMID: 25453063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Sex Dev. 2014;8(6):387-98. doi: 10.1159/000369181. Epub 2014 Nov 25.

Characterization and differential expression patterns of conserved microRNAs and 
mRNAs in three genders of the rice field eel (Monopterus albus).

Gao Y(1), Guo W, Hu Q, Zou M, Tang R, Chi W, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, and Key Laboratory of 
Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan, PR China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small RNAs that can regulate target mRNAs by
binding to their sequences in the 3' untranslated region. The expression of
miRNAs and their biogenetic pathway are involved in sexual differentiation and in
the regulation of the development of germ cells and gonadal somatic cells. The
rice field eel (Monopterus albus) undergoes a natural sexual transformation from 
female to male via an intersex stage during its life cycle. To investigate the
molecular mechanisms of this sexual transformation, miRNAs present in the
different sexual stages of the rice field eel were identified by high-throughput 
sequencing technology. A significantly differential expression among the 3
genders (p < 0.001) was observed for 48 unique miRNAs and 3 miRNAs*. Only 9
unique miRNAs showed a more than 8-fold change in their expression among the 3
genders, including mal-miR-430a and mal-miR-430c which were higher in females
than in males. However, mal-miR-430b was only detected in males. Several
potential miRNA target genes (cyp19a, cyp19b, nr5a1b, foxl2 amh, and vasa) were
also investigated. Real-time RT-PCR demonstrated highly specific expression
patterns of these genes in the 3 genders of the rice field eel. Many of these
genes are targets of mal-miR-430b according to the TargetScan and miRTarBase.
These results suggest that the miR-430 family may be involved in the sexual
transformation of the rice field eel.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25427634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Sex Dev. 2014;8(6):364-75. doi: 10.1159/000369116. Epub 2014 Nov 25.

Chronology, magnitude and duration of expression of putative
sex-determining/differentiation genes in a turtle with temperature-dependent sex 
determination.

Bieser KL(1), Wibbels T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Ala., 
USA.

The red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta) possesses temperature-dependent
sex determination (TSD) in which the incubation temperature determines gonadal
sex. Although a number of mammalian gene homologues have been identified in
reptiles with TSD, the exact sex-determining trigger(s) is not known. To date,
the current study represents the most comprehensive simultaneous evaluation of
the chronology of mRNA expression profiles of putative
sex-determining/differentiation genes (Dmrt1, Sox9, Amh, Lhx9, and Foxl2) from
gonads incubated at male- and female-producing temperatures in T. scripta.
Additionally, sex-reversing treatments with 17ß-estradiol and letrozole were
examined. At a male-producing temperature, Dmrt1 expression was sexually
dimorphic by stage 17, Sox9 by 19 and Amh by 21. In contrast, Foxl2 did not
significantly increase until after the thermosensitive period at a
female-producing temperature. Treatment with 17ß-estradiol resulted in reduced
gonad size and/or inhibited gonadal development and differentiation. Gene
expression was subsequently low in this group. Sex reversal utilizing letrozole
failed to produce testes at a female-producing temperature and as such, gene
expression was comparable to ovary. These results indicate that Dmrt1 and Sox9
are potential triggers for testis differentiation and Amh, Lhx9 and Foxl2
represent a conserved core set of genes in the sex-determining/differentiation
pathway of TSD species.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25427533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Fish Biol. 2015 Jan;86(1):248-60. doi: 10.1111/jfb.12578. Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Effects of temperature and fish oil supplementation on ovarian development and
foxl2 mRNA expression in spotted scat Scatophagus argus.

Li GL(1), Zhang MZ, Deng SP, Chen HP, Zhu CH.

Author information: 
(1)Fisheries College, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang, 524088, China; Key
Laboratory of Aquaculture in South China Sea for Aquatic Economic Animal of
Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Guangdong Ocean University, Zhanjiang,
524088, China.

In this study, the complete foxl2 complementary (c)DNA sequence was isolated by
simple modular-architecture research tool (SMART)er rapid amplification of cDNA
ends (RACE). Two year-old female spotted scat, Scatophagus argus, were reared at 
different temperatures (23, 26 and 29° C) for 6 weeks, or fed with different
concentrations of dietary fish oil (0, 2 or 6%) for 8 weeks. Ovarian development,
serum oestradiol-17ß (E2 ) levels, as well as ovarian foxl2 expression were
measured. At the end of experiment, ovarian foxl2 messenger (m)RNA expression in 
fish reared at 23 and 26° C was significantly higher than that in fish reared at 
29° C, and that in 2 and 6% fish oil groups was also significantly higher than
that in control group (P < 0·05). Serum E2 levels exhibited the same trend with
foxl2 mRNA expression in temperature treatment groups and fish oil fed groups.
There was a significant positive correlation between stage of oocytes and foxl2
expressions. Results showed that from 23 to 29° C, the optimal temperature for
ovarian development in S. argus was 23-26° C, and 6% fish oil supplementation
could effectively promote ovarian development. Optimal temperature and fish oil
supplement might increase ovarian foxl2 mRNA expressions to promote ovarian
development in S. argus.

© 2014 The Fisheries Society of the British Isles.

PMID: 25425050  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 25;9(11):e113839. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113839.
eCollection 2014.

Constitutively active FOXO1 diminishes activin induction of Fshb transcription in
immortalized gonadotropes.

Park CH(1), Skarra DV(1), Rivera AJ(1), Arriola DJ(1), Thackray VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine and the Center for Reproductive Science
and Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, United States of 
America.

In the present study, we investigate whether the FOXO1 transcription factor
modulates activin signaling in pituitary gonadotropes. Our studies show that
overexpression of constitutively active FOXO1 decreases activin induction of
murine Fshb gene expression in immortalized LßT2 cells. We demonstrate that FOXO1
suppression of activin induction maps to the -304/-95 region of the Fshb promoter
containing multiple activin response elements and that the suppression requires
the FOXO1 DNA-binding domain (DBD). FOXO1 binds weakly to the -125/-91 region of 
the Fshb promoter in a gel-shift assay. Since this region of the promoter
contains a composite SMAD/FOXL2 binding element necessary for activin induction
of Fshb transcription, it is possible that FOXO1 DNA binding interferes with SMAD
and/or FOXL2 function. In addition, our studies demonstrate that FOXO1 directly
interacts with SMAD3/4 but not SMAD2 in a FOXO1 DBD-dependent manner. Moreover,
we show that SMAD3/4 induction of Fshb-luc and activin induction of a
multimerized SMAD-binding element-luc are suppressed by FOXO1 in a DBD-dependent 
manner. These results suggest that FOXO1 binding to the proximal Fshb promoter as
well as FOXO1 interaction with SMAD3/4 proteins may result in decreased activin
induction of Fshb in gonadotropes.

PMCID: PMC4244159
PMID: 25423188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Mar 15;24(6):1670-81. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu579. Epub 2014 Nov 
21.

Etiology of craniofacial malformations in mouse models of blepharophimosis,
ptosis and epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Heude É(1), Bellessort B(1), Fontaine A(1), Hamazaki M(2), Treier AC(3), Treier
M(3), Levi G(1), Narboux-Nême N(4).

Author information: 
(1)Évolution des Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum National
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris 75005, France. (2)Department of Physiological
Chemistry and Metabolism, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan. (3)Max-Delbrück Center for
Molecular Medicine (MDC) - Genetics of Metabolic and Reproductive Disorders,
Robert-Rössle-Str. 10, 13125 Berlin, Germany. (4)Évolution des Régulations
Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris 75005,
France, nnarboux-neme@mnhn.fr.

Blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus-inversus syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal
dominant genetic disorder characterized by narrow palpebral fissures and eyelid
levator muscle defects. BPES is often associated to premature ovarian
insufficiency (BPES type I). FOXL2, a member of the forkhead transcription factor
family, is the only gene known to be mutated in BPES. Foxl2 is essential for
maintenance of ovarian identity, but the developmental origin of the facial
malformations of BPES remains, so far, unexplained. In this study, we provide the
first detailed account of the developmental processes leading to the craniofacial
malformations associated to Foxl2. We show that, during development, Foxl2 is
expressed both by Cranial Neural Crest Cells (CNCCs) and by Cranial Mesodermal
Cells (CMCs), which give rise to skeletal (CNCCs and CMCs) and muscular (CMCs)
components of the head. Using mice in which Foxl2 is selectively inactivated in
either CNCCs or CMCs, we reveal that expression of Foxl2 in CNCCs is essential
for the development of extraocular muscles. Indeed, inactivation of Foxl2 in CMCs
has only minor effects on muscle development, whereas its inactivation in CNCCs
provokes a severe hypoplasia of the levator palpabrae superioris and of the
superior and inferior oblique muscles. We further show that Foxl2 deletion in
either CNCCs or CMCs prevents eyelid closure and induces subtle skeletal
developmental defects. Our results provide new insights in the complex
developmental origin of human BPES and could help to understand the origin of
other ocular anomalies associated to this syndrome.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25416281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Biol Reprod. 2014 Dec;91(6):153. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.114.122796. Epub 2014
Nov 13.

High-throughput sequencing analyses of XX genital ridges lacking FOXL2 reveal
DMRT1 up-regulation before SOX9 expression during the sex-reversal process in
goats.

Elzaiat M(1), Jouneau L(1), Thépot D(1), Klopp C(2), Allais-Bonnet A(1), Cabau
C(3), André M(1), Chaffaux S(4), Cribiu EP(4), Pailhoux E(1), Pannetier M(5).

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR 1198, Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, Jouy-en-Josas,
France. (2)INRA, Sigenae UR875 BIA, Castanet-Tolosan Cedex, France. (3)INRA,
Sigenae GenPhySE (Génétique, Physiologie et Systèmes d'Elevage),
Castanet-Tolosan, France. (4)INRA, UMR1313 Génétique Animale et Biologie
Intégrative, Jouy-en-Josas, France. (5)INRA, UMR 1198, Biologie du Développement 
et Reproduction, Jouy-en-Josas, France maelle.pannetier@jouy.inra.fr.

FOXL2 loss of function in goats leads to the early transdifferentiation of
ovaries into testes, then to the full sex reversal of XX homozygous mutants. By
contrast, Foxl2 loss of function in mice induces an arrest of follicle formation 
after birth, followed by complete female sterility. In order to understand the
molecular role of FOXL2 during ovarian differentiation in the goat species,
putative FOXL2 target genes were determined at the earliest stage of gonadal
sex-specific differentiation by comparing the mRNA profiles of XX gonads
expressing the FOXL2 protein or not. Of these 163 deregulated genes, around
two-thirds corresponded to testicular genes that were up-regulated when FOXL2 was
absent, and only 19 represented female-associated genes, down-regulated in the
absence of FOXL2. FOXL2 should therefore be viewed as an antitestis gene rather
than as a female-promoting gene. In particular, the key testis-determining gene
DMRT1 was found to be up-regulated ahead of SOX9, thus suggesting in goats that
SOX9 primary up-regulation may require DMRT1. Overall, our results equated to
FOXL2 being an antitestis gene, allowing us to propose an alternative model for
the sex-determination process in goats that differs slightly from that
demonstrated in mice.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 25395674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Elife. 2014 Nov 4;3. doi: 10.7554/eLife.04207.

The transcription factor FOXL2 mobilizes estrogen signaling to maintain the
identity of ovarian granulosa cells.

Georges A(1), L'Hôte D(1), Todeschini AL(1), Auguste A(1), Legois B(1), Zider
A(1), Veitia RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.

FOXL2 is a lineage determining transcription factor in the ovary, but its direct 
targets and modes of action are not fully characterized. In this study, we
explore the targets of FOXL2 and five nuclear receptors in murine primary
follicular cells. We found that FOXL2 is required for normal gene regulation by
steroid receptors, and we show that estrogen receptor beta (ESR2) is the main
vector of estradiol signaling in these cells. Moreover, we found that FOXL2
directly modulates Esr2 expression through a newly identified intronic element.
Interestingly, we found that FOXL2 repressed the testis-determining gene Sox9
both independently of estrogen signaling and through the activation of ESR2
expression. Altogether, we show that FOXL2 mobilizes estrogen signaling to
establish a coherent feed-forward loop repressing Sox9. This sheds a new light on
the role of FOXL2 in ovarian maintenance and function.

PMCID: PMC4356143
PMID: 25369636  [PubMed - in process]


77. Sci Rep. 2014 Nov 3;4:6884. doi: 10.1038/srep06884.

Molecular cloning and analysis of gonadal expression of Foxl2 in the rice-field
eel Monopterus albus.

Hu Q(1), Guo W(1), Gao Y(1), Tang R(1), Li D(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China
[2] Freshwater Aquaculture Collaborative Innovation Center of Hubei Province,
Wuhan 430070, China [3] Key Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of
Agriculture, Wuhan 430070, China. (2)1] College of Fisheries, Huazhong
Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, China [2] Life Science College, Hunan
University of Arts and Science, Changde 415000, China [3] Freshwater Aquaculture 
Collaborative Innovation Center of Hubei Province, Wuhan 430070, China [4] Key
Laboratory of Freshwater Animal Breeding, Ministry of Agriculture, Wuhan 430070, 
China.

We isolated the complete Foxl2 (Foxl2a) cDNA from the Monopterus albus ovary. An 
alignment of known Foxl2 amino-acid sequences confirmed the conservation of the
Foxl2 open reading frame, especially the forkhead domain and C-terminal region.
The expression of Foxl2 was detected in the brain, eyes, and gonads. A high level
of Foxl2 expression in the ovary before sex reversal, but its transcripts
decreased sharply when the gonad developed into the ovotestis and testis. The
correlation between the Foxl2 expression and the process of sex development
revealed the important function of Foxl2 during the sex reversal of M. albus.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed that Foxl2 was expressed abundantly in
granulosa cells and in the interstitial cells of the ovotestis and testis. These 
results suggest that Foxl2 plays a pivotal role in the development and
maintenance of ovarian function. Foxl2 may be also involved in the early
development of testis and the development of ocular structures of M. albus.

PMCID: PMC4217102
PMID: 25363394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Sex Dev. 2014;8(6):356-63. doi: 10.1159/000368664. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Anatomical and molecular analyses of XY ovaries from the African pygmy mouse Mus 
minutoides.

Rahmoun M(1), Perez J, Saunders PA, Boizet-Bonhoure B, Wilhelm D, Poulat F,
Veyrunes F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution de Montpellier, Université Montpellier 2,
CNRS, IRD, Montpellier, France.

The African pygmy mouse Mus minutoides is characterized by the presence of a high
proportion of fertile XY females in natural populations. This species displays 2 
morphologically different X chromosomes: the ancestral X and a shorter one
designated as X*, feminizing the X*Y individuals. This strongly suggests that in 
the presence of an X* chromosome, the male differentiation program is not
activated despite a functional Y chromosome. In this study, we compared the
histology of the adult ovaries of the 3 female genotypes (XX, XX* and X*Y) and
investigated the expression of some of the main genes involved in male and female
differentiation. We found that X*Y gonads display a typical ovarian structure
without any testicular organization. Moreover, the ovarian somatic marker FOXL2
is detected in X*Y follicle cells and exhibits the same pattern as in XX and XX* 
ovaries, whereas SOX9 and DMRT1 are absent at all stages of follicular
differentiation. However, surprisingly, X*Y ovaries display a higher level of Sry
transcripts compared to testes. Our findings confirm the complete sex reversal in
X*Y individuals with no apparent sign of masculinization, providing an attractive
model to unravel new gene interactions involved in the mammalian sex
determination system.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25359508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Fish Biol. 2015 Jan;86(1):46-59. doi: 10.1111/jfb.12535. Epub 2014 Oct 31.

Establishment and characterization of an ovarian cell line from half-smooth
tongue sole Cynoglossus semilaevis.

Sun A(1), Wang TZ, Wang N, Liu XF, Sha ZX, Chen SL.

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Sustainable Development of Marine Fisheries, Ministry of
Agriculture, Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery 
Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China.

A new ovarian cell line, CSO, was established from half-smooth tongue sole
Cynoglossus semilaevis. Primary culture of CSO cells was initiated from digestion
of ovarian tissues pieces by trypsin solution and cultured at 24° C in Dulbecco's
modified Eagle's medium-F12 medium (DMEM-F12, 1:1) (pH 7·0), supplemented with
20% foetal bovine serum, basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF), epidermal growth 
factor (EGF), insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) and human chorionic
gonadotropin (HCG). The cultured CSO cells, fibroblastic in morphology,
proliferated to 100% confluency 3 days later and had been subcultured to passage 
80. Chromosome analyses indicated that the CSO cells exhibited chromosomal
aneuploidy with a modal chromosome number of 42 that displayed the normal diploid
karyotype of C. semilaevis [2n<U+2009>=<U+2009>42<U+2009>t, fundamental number (NF ) = 42]. Reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction revealed that CSO cells could express
ovarian somatic cell functional genes p450armo, foxl2 and sox9a but not ovary
germ cell marker gene vasa and male-specific gene dmrt1. Transfection experiment 
demonstrated that CSO cells transfected with pEGFP-N3 plasmid could express green
fluorescence protein (GFP) with higher transfection efficiency. The CSO cell line
might serve as a valuable tool for studies on the mechanism of sex determination 
and oogenesis of ovary in flatfish.

© 2014 The Fisheries Society of the British Isles.

PMID: 25359438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Am J Clin Pathol. 2014 Nov;142(5):675-82. doi: 10.1309/AJCPGSCD1DGNZ0QO.

Myoid gonadal stromal tumor: a clinicopathologic study of three cases of a
distinctive testicular tumor.

Kao CS(1), Ulbright TM(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis. (2)From the Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis.
tulbrigh@iupui.edu.

OBJECTIVES: To report three new cases of testicular myoid gonadal stromal tumor
to better characterize its features.
METHODS: The clinicopathologic findings (including follow-up) were evaluated and 
a review of the literature was performed.
RESULTS: The patients were 38, 43, and 59 years old, and tumor sizes were 1.2,
1.3, and 3.2 cm. All were unilateral, well circumscribed, adjacent to the rete
testis, and composed exclusively of spindled cells with elongated nuclei and
occasional nuclear grooves arranged in fascicles with admixed variably ectatic
blood vessels. Nucleoli were inconspicuous, and the cytoplasm was scant,
ill-defined, and pale/lightly eosinophilic. No sex cord component was present.
Mitotic figures ranged from zero to five per 10 high-power fields. Significant
atypia, lymphovascular invasion, and necrosis were absent. All were consistently 
positive for smooth muscle actin, S100 protein, FOXL2, and steroidogenic factor 1
but negative for h-caldesmon, calretinin, and SOX9. Inhibin and calponin were
focally positive. All patients were alive and well at 5, 31, and 58 months
postorchiectomy. Combining our cases with those previously reported (n = 6) shows
that this neoplasm occurs mostly in younger men (mean, 37 years), and all
follow-up thus far (mean, 25 months) has been benign.
CONCLUSIONS: Myoid gonadal stromal tumors are small (<4 cm) indolent testicular
tumors distinctly different from other sex cord-stromal tumors and are adequately
managed by orchiectomy.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology.

PMID: 25319984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. DNA Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;34(1):29-36. doi: 10.1089/dna.2014.2522.

microRNA133a targets Foxl2 and promotes differentiation of C2C12 into myogenic
progenitor cells.

Luo Y(1), Wu X, Ling Z, Yuan L, Cheng Y, Chen J, Xiang C.

Author information: 
(1)1 State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Disease, The 
First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University , Hangzhou,
People's Republic of China .

microRNAs are endogenous noncoding RNA molecules of ~22 nucleotides that regulate
gene function by modification of target mRNAs. Due to tissue specific of miR-133a
and miR-1/206 for skeletal muscles, we investigated the role of miR-133a and
miR-1/206 in promoting the differentiation of the C2C12 cells. The results show
that directly transfecting mature miR-133a, miR-1/206, or combinations (miR-1 and
miR-206, miR-1 and miR-133a, and miR-133a and miR-206) into C2C12 cells,
respectively, for 5 days induces formation of myogenic progenitor cells.
Overexpression of miR-133a and miR-206 in C2C12 cells greatly improved
multinucleated myotube formation. microRNA-133a (miR-133a) is highly expressed
during human muscle development. Using bioinformatics, we identified one putative
miR-133a binding site within the 3'-untranslated region of the mouse Foxl2 mRNA. 
The expression of Foxl2 was shown to be downregulated by subsequent western blot 
analysis.

PMCID: PMC4281840
PMID: 25317675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Histopathology. 2015 Mar;66(4):555-64. doi: 10.1111/his.12580. Epub 2014 Dec 22.

Microscopic extraovarian sex cord proliferations: an undescribed phenomenon.

McCluggage WG(1), Stewart CJ, Iacobelli J, Soma A, Cho KR, Heatley MK, Boyde A,
Clarke BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast, UK.

AIMS: To report a previously undescribed phenomenon of incidentally detected
microscopic proliferations of sex cord cells, often mimicking adult granulosa
cell tumour or sex cord tumour with annular tubules, in extraovarian locations.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The six cases were in patients aged 23-58 years. The
proliferations were located in the fallopian tube in three cases, and in
paraovarian connective tissues, the pelvic side wall, and appendiceal serosa (one
case each). Microscopically, they were typically composed of well-demarcated
nests of regular cells with round/ovoid vesicular nuclei, some containing
grooves. Microfollicular and/or cribriform arrangements were present in three
cases. In five cases, the sex cord lineage was confirmed by positive staining
with inhibin and/or calretinin and other sex cord markers. FOXL2 mutation
analysis was performed in one case, but was inconclusive. Bilateral
oophorectomies and bilateral cystectomies were performed in three cases and one
case respectively; there was no sex cord-stromal neoplasm in the removed ovaries.
In the two cases in which the ovaries were not removed, imaging showed no
suspicious features. Follow-up in four cases (11 months-6 years) has been
uneventful.
CONCLUSIONS: The pathogenesis of these microscopic extraovarian sex cord
proliferations is unknown, but they may represent non-neoplastic proliferations
of embryonic remnants.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25308194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Ovarian Res. 2014 Sep 6;7:88. doi: 10.1186/s13048-014-0088-0.

Molecular pathogenesis in granulosa cell tumor is not only due to somatic FOXL2
mutation.

Wang WC, Lai YC.

Granulosa cell tumors are rare ovarian malignancies. Their characteristics
include unpredictable late recurrent and malignant behavior. Recent molecular
studies have characterized the FOXL2 402C<U+2009>><U+2009>G mutation in adult-type granulosa
cell tumor. In this study, we report an 80-year-old woman with a granulosa cell
tumor arising from ovary. She presented with a huge pelvic mass with
postmenopausal bleeding. No obvious intraperitoneal tumor implants were observed 
during operation. Final diagnosis was granulosa-theca cell tumor without capsule 
invasion. No recurrent disease was noted during 3-year post-operation follow-up
period. Molecular studies showed a heterozygous FOXL2 402C<U+2009>><U+2009>G mutation in the
tumor by direct gene sequencing. In addition, DNA replication error, on analysis 
of the lengths of CAG repeats in androgen receptor gene, revealed defective DNA
mismatch repair system in the granulosa cell tumor. We propose that the 402C<U+2009>><U+2009>G 
mutation in FOXL2 is critical to the development of adult granulosa cell tumor.
However, the malignant behavior of this tumor is driven by DNA mismatch repair
deficiency. Unequal DNA copy numbers were noted on array comparative genomic
hybridization. This implies that there is malignant potential even in the early
stage of the granulosa cell tumor. Late malignant recurrence may be a late event 
of DNA repair function disability, not directly related to pathognomonic FOXL2
mutation.

PMCID: PMC4172858
PMID: 25297715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jan 5;399:122-30. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.09.029. Epub 
2014 Oct 5.

Novel markers of gonadectomy-induced adrenocortical neoplasia in the mouse and
ferret.

Schillebeeckx M(1), Pihlajoki M(2), Gretzinger E(3), Yang W(1), Thol F(3), Hiller
T(3), Löbs AK(3), Röhrig T(3), Schrade A(2), Cochran R(4), Jay PY(5), Heikinheimo
M(2), Mitra RD(1), Wilson DB(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis
Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St.
Louis, MO 63110, USA; Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Central Hospital, Helsinki 00290, Finland. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's
Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Hochschule Mannheim, University of Applied
Sciences, Mannheim 68163, Germany. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA. (5)Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of
Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's
Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (6)Department of Pediatrics, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA; Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic
address: wilson_d@wustl.edu.

Gonadectomy (GDX) induces sex steroid-producing adrenocortical tumors in certain 
mouse strains and in the domestic ferret. Transcriptome analysis and DNA
methylation mapping were used to identify novel genetic and epigenetic markers of
GDX-induced adrenocortical neoplasia in female DBA/2J mice. Markers were
validated using a combination of laser capture microdissection, quantitative
RT-PCR, in situ hybridization, and immunohistochemistry. Microarray expression
profiling of whole adrenal mRNA from ovariectomized vs. intact mice demonstrated 
selective upregulation of gonadal-like genes including Spinlw1 and Insl3 in
GDX-induced adrenocortical tumors of the mouse. A complementary candidate gene
approach identified Foxl2 as another gonadal-like marker expressed in GDX-induced
neoplasms of the mouse and ferret. That both "male-specific" (Spinlw1) and
"female-specific" (Foxl2) markers were identified is noteworthy and implies that 
the neoplasms exhibit mixed characteristics of male and female gonadal somatic
cells. Genome-wide methylation analysis showed that two genes with hypomethylated
promoters, Igfbp6 and Foxs1, are upregulated in GDX-induced adrenocortical
neoplasms. These new genetic and epigenetic markers may prove useful for studies 
of steroidogenic cell development and for diagnostic testing.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4262703
PMID: 25289806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Nov;10(11):673-83. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.163. Epub
2014 Sep 23.

Genetic regulation of mammalian gonad development.

Eggers S(1), Ohnesorg T(1), Sinclair A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Department of Paediatrics, The
University of Melbourne, The Royal Children's Hospital, 50 Flemington Road,
Melbourne, VIC 3052, Australia.

Sex-specific gonadal development starts with formation of the bipotential gonad, 
which then differentiates into either a mature testis or an ovary. This process
is dependent on activation of either the testis-specific or the ovary-specific
pathway while the opposite pathway is continuously repressed. A network of
transcription factors tightly regulates initiation and maintenance of these
distinct pathways; disruption of these networks can lead to disorders of sex
development in humans and male-to-female or female-to-male sex reversal in mice. 
Sry is the Y-linked master switch that is both required and sufficient to drive
the testis-determining pathway. Another key component of the testis pathway is
Sox9, which acts immediately downstream of Sry. In contrast to the testis
pathway, no single sex-determining factor has been identified in the ovary
pathway; however, multiple genes, such as Foxl2, Rspo1, Ctnnb1, and Wnt4, seem to
work synergistically and in parallel to ensure proper ovary development. Our
understanding of the regulatory networks that underpin testis and ovary
development has grown substantially over the past two decades.

PMID: 25246082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. G3 (Bethesda). 2014 Sep 11;4(11):2207-17. doi: 10.1534/g3.114.013904.

Genomic analysis of the Pacific oyster (Crassostrea gigas) reveals possible
conservation of vertebrate sex determination in a mollusc.

Zhang N(1), Xu F(2), Guo X(3).

Author information: 
(1)National & Local Joint Engineering Laboratory of Ecological Mariculture,
Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao, Shandong 266071,
China Haskin Shellfish Research Laboratory, Institute of Marine and Coastal
Sciences, Rutgers University, Port Norris, New Jersey 08349 University of Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China. (2)National & Local Joint Engineering
Laboratory of Ecological Mariculture, Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Qingdao, Shandong 266071, China. (3)Haskin Shellfish Research
Laboratory, Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers University, Port
Norris, New Jersey 08349 xguo@hsrl.rutgers.edu.

Despite the prevalence of sex in animal kingdom, we have only limited
understanding of how sex is determined and evolved in many taxa. The mollusc
Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas exhibits complex modes of sexual reproduction
that consists of protandric dioecy, sex change, and occasional hermaphroditism.
This complex system is controlled by both environmental and genetic factors
through unknown molecular mechanisms. In this study, we investigated genes
related to sex-determining pathways in C. gigas through transcriptome sequencing 
and analysis of female and male gonads. Our analysis identified or confirmed
novel homologs in the oyster of key sex-determining genes (SoxH or Sry-like and
FoxL2) that were thought to be vertebrate-specific. Their expression profile in
C. gigas is consistent with conserved roles in sex determination, under a
proposed model where a novel testis-determining CgSoxH may serve as a primary
regulator, directly or indirectly interacting with a testis-promoting CgDsx and
an ovary-promoting CgFoxL2. Our findings plus previous results suggest that key
vertebrate sex-determining genes such as Sry and FoxL2 may not be inventions of
vertebrates. The presence of such genes in a mollusc with expression profiles
consistent with expected roles in sex determination suggest that sex
determination may be deeply conserved in animals, despite rapid evolution of the 
regulatory pathways that in C. gigas may involve both genetic and environmental
factors.

Copyright © 2014 Zhang et al.

PMCID: PMC4232546
PMID: 25213692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Endocrinology. 2014 Dec;155(12):4975-85. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1501. Epub 2014 Sep
11.

C19MC microRNAs regulate the migration of human trophoblasts.

Xie L(1), Mouillet JF, Chu T, Parks WT, Sadovsky E, Knöfler M, Sadovsky Y.

Author information: 
(1)Magee-Womens Research Institute (L.X., J.-F.M., T.C., W.T.P., E.S., Y.S.),
Department of OBGYN and Reproductive Sciences, University of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania 15213; Medical Systems Biology Research Center (L.X.), Department of
Biomedical Engineering, Tsinghua University School of Medicine, Beijing 100084
China; Department of Obstetrics and Fetal-Maternal Medicine (M.K.), Reproductive 
Biology Unit, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, A-1090 Austria; and
Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics (Y.S.), University of
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213.

Early in pregnancy, trophoblast invasion into the decidua and inner myometrium is
essential for establishment of proper implantation, maternal-fetal exchange, and 
immunological tolerance of the feto-placental allograft. Unlike villous
trophoblasts (VTs), extravillous trophoblasts (EVTs) are unique in their capacity
to invade the maternal decidua and myometrium. The largest human microRNA (miRNA)
gene cluster, the chromosome 19 miRNA cluster (C19MC), is expressed almost
exclusively in the placenta and, rarely, in certain tumors and undifferentiated
cells. In the work reported here, we found that the expression of C19MC miRNAs is
higher in VTs than in EVTs. Using a bacterial artificial chromosome
(BAC)-mediated overexpression of C19MC miRNAs in an EVT-derived cell line, which 
does not naturally express these miRNAs, we found that C19MC miRNAs selectively
attenuate cell migration without affecting cell proliferation or apoptosis. A
microarray analysis revealed that C19MC miRNAs regulate target transcripts
related to cellular movement. Our data also implicated a specific C19MC member,
miR-519d, indirectly regulating the EVT invasive phenotype by targeting CXCL6,
NR4A2 and FOXL2 transcripts through a 3'UTR miRNA-responsive element. Together,
our data suggest a role for C19MC miRNAs in modulating the migration of EVTs.

PMCID: PMC4239420
PMID: 25211593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2014 Nov-Dec;177-178:36-45. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2014.08.006. Epub 2014 Sep 6.

Differential expression analysis of genes involved in high-temperature induced
sex differentiation in Nile tilapia.

Li CG(1), Wang H(1), Chen HJ(1), Zhao Y(1), Fu PS(2), Ji XS(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shandong Agricultural University,
Taian 271018, China. (2)Shandong Institute of Freshwater Fisheries, Jinan 250117,
China. (3)College of Animal Science and Technology, Shandong Agricultural
University, Taian 271018, China. Electronic address: xsji@sdau.edu.cn.

Nowadays, high temperature effects on the molecular pathways during sex
differentiation in teleosts need to be deciphered. In this study, a systematic
differential expression analysis of genes involved in high temperature-induced
sex differentiation was done in the Nile tilapia gonad and brain. Our results
showed that high temperature caused significant down-regulation of CYP19A1A in
the gonad of both sexes in induction group, and FOXL2 in the ovary of the
induction group. The expressions of GTHa, LHß and ERa were also significantly
down-regulated in the brain of both sexes in the induction and recovery groups.
On the contrary, the expression of CYP11B2 was significantly up-regulated in the 
ovary, but not in the testis in both groups. Spearman rank correlation analysis
showed that there are significant correlations between the expressions of
CYP19A1A, FOXL2, or DMRT1 in the gonads and the expression of some genes in the
brain. Another result in this study showed that high temperature up-regulated the
expression level of DNMT1 in the testis of the induction group, and DNMT1 and
DNMT3A in the female brain of both groups. The expression and correlation
analysis of HSPs showed that high temperature action on tilapia HSPs might
indirectly induce the expression changes of sex differentiation genes in the
gonads. These findings provide new insights on TSD and suggest that sex
differentiation related genes, heat shock proteins, and DNA methylation genes are
new candidates for studying TSD in fish species.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25199961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Eur J Med Genet. 2014 Oct;57(10):576-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2014.08.004. Epub
2014 Sep 2.

Co-occurrence of congenital hydronephrosis and FOXL2-associated blepharophimosis,
ptosis, epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES).

Gulati R(1), Verdin H(2), Halanaik D(3), Bhat BV(4), De Baere E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical
Education and Research, Pondicherry, India. Electronic address:
g97rina@gmail.com. (2)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent
University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium. (3)Department of Nuclear Medicine,
Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, Pondicherry,
India. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical 
Education and Research, Pondicherry, India.

Blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal
dominantly inherited congenital malformation of the eyelids. Diagnostic criteria 
include blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus and telecanthus. Type <U+0406>
BPES has additional features of premature ovarian failure and female infertility,
while type <U+0406><U+0406> occurs isolated. We report a two-year old male child with typical
features of BPES and bilateral congenital hydronephrosis. The child, first-born
to non-consanguineous parents, presented to us with hypertension. Congenital
hydronephrosis and reduced renal function were confirmed by renal dynamic scan.
Pyeloplasty and stent placement were performed with subsequent resolution of
hypertension. On follow up, growth and development are appropriate for age. His
father has similar but less severe features of BPES. Sequencing of the FOXL2 gene
revealed a heterozygous FOXL2 mutation c.672_701dup, which is a recurrent 30-bp
duplication leading to expansion of the polyalanine tract (p.Ala225_Ala234dup),
in both father and son. Additional atypical clinical features have been reported 
previously in BPES patients with this mutation. However, this is the first report
of a renal congenital anomaly in a BPES patient with this or other mutations.
Although a pleiotropic effect of the FOXL2 mutation cannot be excluded, the
co-occurrence of congenital hydronephrosis and BPES may represent two different
entities.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25192944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Dev Biol. 2014 Oct 15;394(2):242-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.08.013. Epub 2014 
Aug 23.

Marker genes identify three somatic cell types in the fetal mouse ovary.

Rastetter RH(1), Bernard P(1), Palmer JS(2), Chassot AA(3), Chen H(2), Western
PS(4), Ramsay RG(5), Chaboissier MC(3), Wilhelm D(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash University, Clayton,
VIC 3800, Australia. (2)Division of Molecular Genetics and Development, Institute
for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD 4075,
Australia. (3)University of Nice-Sophia Antipolis, UFR Sciences, Nice, France;
INSERM U1091, CNRS UMR7277, IBV, Nice, France. (4)MIMR-PHI Institute of Medical
Research, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia. (5)Sir Peter MacCallum, Department of
Oncology and the Pathology Department, The University of Melbourne, Parkville,
VIC, Australia; Department of Pathology, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
VIC, Australia. (6)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, Monash
University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia. Electronic address:
dagmar.wilhelm@monash.edu.

The two main functions of the ovary are the production of oocytes, which allows
the continuation of the species, and secretion of female sex hormones, which
control many aspects of female development and physiology. Normal development of 
the ovaries during embryogenesis is critical for their function and the health of
the individual in later life. Although the adult ovary has been investigated in
great detail, we are only starting to understand the cellular and molecular
biology of early ovarian development. Here we show that the adult stem cell
marker Lgr5 is expressed in the cortical region of the fetal ovary and this
expression is mutually exclusive to FOXL2. Strikingly, a third somatic cell
population can be identified, marked by the expression of NR2F2, which is
expressed in LGR5- and FOXL2 double-negative ovarian somatic cells. Together,
these three marker genes label distinct ovarian somatic cell types. Using lineage
tracing in mice, we show that Lgr5-positive cells give rise to adult cortical
granulosa cells, which form the follicles of the definitive reserve. Moreover,
LGR5 is required for correct timing of germ cell differentiation as evidenced by 
a delay of entry into meiosis in Lgr5 loss-of-function mutants, demonstrating a
key role for LGR5 in the differentiation of pre-granulosa cells, which ensure the
differentiation of oogonia, the formation of the definitive follicle reserve, and
long-term female fertility.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25158167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Fish Biol. 2014 Nov;85(5):1381-94. doi: 10.1111/jfb.12488. Epub 2014 Aug 13.

Differentiation and morphogenesis of the ovary and expression of gonadal
development-related genes in the protogynous hermaphroditic ricefield eel
Monopterus albus.

He Z(1), Li Y, Wu Y, Shi S, Sun C, Deng Q, Xie J, Wang T, Zhang W, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R.
China; College of Animal Sciences and Technology, Sichuan Agricultural
University, Ya'an 625014, Sichuan, P. R. China.

The ovarian differentiation, morphogenesis and expression of some putative
gonadal development-related genes were analysed in the ricefield eel Monopterus
albus, a protogynous hermaphroditic teleost with a single elongate ovary. At c. 1
day post-hatching (dph), the gonadal ridge was colonized with primordial germ
cells (PGCs) at the periphery and transformed into the gonadal primordium, which 
appeared to contain two germinal epithelia. At c. 7 dph, four ovarian cavities
appeared in the gonadal tissue with two in each germinal epithelial compartment, 
and the indifferent gonad might have begun to differentiate into the ovary. The
oocytes at the leptotene stage in meiosis I appeared at c. 14 dph, and oocytes at
the diplotene stage at c. 30 dph. As development proceeded, the connective tissue
separating the two germinal epithelia disappeared, and two of the four ovarian
cavities collapsed into one. At 60 dph, the gonad had already taken the shape as 
observed in the adults. One outer and two inner ovarian cavities could be easily 
recognized, with slightly basophilic primary growth oocytes usually residing
close to the outer ovarian cavity. The expression of cyp19a1a and erb in the
early gonad was detected at 6 dph. The abundant expression of foxl2 coincided
with the up-regulation of cyp19a1a at 8 dph onwards. The expression of dmrt1
isoforms was not detectable until 8 dph for dmrt1a and dmrt1b and until 33 dph
for dmrt1d. The earlier appearance of cyp19a1a compared to dmrt1 transcripts in
the indifferent gonad may contribute to the initial differentiation of the gonad 
towards the ovary in M. albus.

© 2014 The Fisheries Society of the British Isles.

PMID: 25123578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Endocrinology. 2014 Nov;155(11):4168-77. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1404. Epub 2014 Aug
8.

Embryonic PCB exposure alters phenotypic, genetic, and epigenetic profiles in
turtle sex determination, a biomarker of environmental contamination.

Matsumoto Y(1), Hannigan B, Crews D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin,
Texas 78712.

In species with temperature-dependent sex determination, embryonic gonadal
differentiation can be modified by exposure to exogenous chemicals such as
environmental contaminants. Although phenotypic outcomes of such events are well 
documented, the underlying molecular mechanisms are rarely described. Here we
examine the genetic and epigenetic effect of the embryonic exposure to
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) on gonad differentiation in red-eared slider
turtles (Trachemys scripta). Some PCB congeners are without effect whereas others
synergize to alter sex determination in this species. Application of two potent
PCB congeners alter the physiological processes of gonad development normally
dictated by the male-producing temperature (MPT), resulting sex ratios
significantly biased toward female hatchlings. Of these PCB-induced females,
oviduct formation is prominently distorted regardless of ovary development.
Further, gonadal expression of ovarian markers, aromatase, FoxL2, and Rspo1, is
activated whereas testicular markers, Dmrt1 and Sox9, are suppressed compared
with typical expression patterns observed at MPT. DNA methylation profiles of the
aromatase promoter in PCB-treated gonads do not follow the typical methylation
pattern observed in embryos incubating at female-producing temperature. Rather,
the MPT-typical methylation profiles is retained despite the induced ovarian
formation. Overall, our studies demonstrate that PCB exposure alters the
transcriptional profiles of genes responsible for gonadal differentiation but
does not re-establish the epigenetic marks of the aromatase promoter normally set
by incubation temperatures in embryonic gonads.

PMID: 25105783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Oct;28(10):1640-55. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1008. Epub 2014 Aug
8.

Roles of binding elements, FOXL2 domains, and interactions with cJUN and SMADs in
regulation of FSHß.

Roybal LL(1), Hambarchyan A, Meadows JD, Barakat NH, Pepa PA, Breen KM, Mellon
PL, Coss D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine (L.L.R., A.H., J.D.M., P.A.P., K.M.B.,
P.L.M., D.C.), Center for Reproductive Science and Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0674; Division of Biomedical
Sciences (N.H.B., D.C.), School of Medicine, University of California, Riverside;
Riverside, California 92521.

We previously identified FOXL2 as a critical component in FSHß gene
transcription. Here, we show that mice deficient in FOXL2 have lower levels of
gonadotropin gene expression and fewer LH- and FSH-containing cells, but the same
level of other pituitary hormones compared to wild-type littermates, highlighting
a role of FOXL2 in the pituitary gonadotrope. Further, we investigate the
function of FOXL2 in the gonadotrope cell and determine which domains of the
FOXL2 protein are necessary for induction of FSHß transcription. There is a
stronger induction of FSHß reporter transcription by truncated FOXL2 proteins,
but no induction with the mutant lacking the forkhead domain. Specifically, FOXL2
plays a role in activin induction of FSHß, functioning in concert with
activin-induced SMAD proteins. Activin acts through multiple promoter elements to
induce FSHß expression, some of which bind FOXL2. Each of these FOXL2-binding
sites is either juxtaposed or overlapping with a SMAD-binding element. We
determined that FOXL2 and SMAD4 proteins form a higher order complex on the most 
proximal FOXL2 site. Surprisingly, two other sites important for activin
induction bind neither SMADs nor FOXL2, suggesting additional factors at work.
Furthermore, we show that FOXL2 plays a role in synergistic induction of FSHß by 
GnRH and activin through interactions with the cJUN component of the AP1 complex 
that is necessary for GnRH responsiveness. Collectively, our results demonstrate 
the necessity of FOXL2 for proper FSH production in mice and implicate FOXL2 in
integration of transcription factors at the level of the FSHß promoter.

PMCID: PMC4179627
PMID: 25105693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Genomics. 2014 Sep;104(3):170-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2014.07.010. Epub 2014 Jul 
30.

Intragenic and extragenic disruptions of FOXL2 mapped by whole genome
low-coverage sequencing in two BPES families with chromosome reciprocal
translocation.

Yang Y(1), Yang C(2), Zhu Y(3), Chen H(2), Zhao R(4), He X(4), Tao L(5), Wang
P(5), Zhou L(5), Zhao L(4), Tu M(4), Dong Z(2), Chen H(2), Xie Z(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Lab. of Genetics and Metabolism, Hunan Children's Research Institute
(HCRI), Hunan Children's Hospital, The Paediatric Academy of University of South 
China, Changsha, China. Electronic address: yongjia727@aliyun.com. (2)The Lab. of
Genetics and Metabolism, Hunan Children's Research Institute (HCRI), Hunan
Children's Hospital, The Paediatric Academy of University of South China,
Changsha, China; BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. (3)The Lab. of Genetics and
Metabolism, Hunan Children's Research Institute (HCRI), Hunan Children's
Hospital, The Paediatric Academy of University of South China, Changsha, China;
The People's Hospital of Hunan Province, Changsha China. Electronic address:
xiangeryiym@aliyun.com. (4)The Lab. of Genetics and Metabolism, Hunan Children's 
Research Institute (HCRI), Hunan Children's Hospital, The Paediatric Academy of
University of South China, Changsha, China. (5)The Department of Ophthalmology,
Hunan Children's Hospital, The Paediatric Academy of University of South China,
Changsha, China. (6)Institute of Endocrinology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central 
South University, Changsha, China.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a rare autosomal
dominant disorder that affects craniofacial development and ovarian function.
FOXL2 is the only gene known to be responsible for BPES. The majority of BPES
patients show intragenic mutations of FOXL2. Recently, a 7.4 kb sequence
disruption, which was 283 kb upstream of FOXL2, was identified to independently
contribute to the BPES phenotype. Several breakpoints nearing FOXL2 (0 Mb to 1.2 
Mb, several of which were distant from the 7.4 kb sequence disruption) have been 
mapped or deduced through a traditional method in BPES patients with chromosome
reciprocal translocation. In this study, two BPES families with chromosome
reciprocal translocation were investigated. Intragenic mutations of FOXL2 or
pathogenic copy number variations were excluded for the two BPES families. All of
the four breakpoints were identified at a base-precise manner using Giemsa
banding and whole genome low-coverage sequencing (WGLCS). In family 01, the
breakpoints were found at chr1:95,609,998 and chr3:138,879, 114 (213,132 bp
upstream of FOXL2). In family 02, the breakpoints were located at
chr3:138,665,431 (intragenic disruptions of FOXL2) and chr20:56,924,609. Results 
indicate that the intragenic and extragenic interruptions of FOXL2 can be
accurately and rapidly detected using WGLCS. In addition, both the 213 kb
upstream and intragenic interruptions of FOXL2 can cause BPES phenotype.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25086333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Gynecol Oncol. 2014 Oct;135(1):149-55. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2014.07.094. Epub
2014 Jul 27.

CDKN2A(p16) and HRAS are frequently mutated in vulvar squamous cell carcinoma.

Trietsch MD(1), Spaans VM(2), ter Haar NT(3), Osse EM(3), Peters AA(4),
Gaarenstroom KN(4), Fleuren GJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: M.D.Trietsch@LUMC.nl. (2)Department of Pathology, Leiden
University Medical Center, The Netherlands; Department of Gynecology, Leiden
University Medical Center, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Pathology, Leiden
University Medical Center, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Gynecology, Leiden
University Medical Center, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Two etiologic pathways of vulvar cancer are known, a human
papillomavirus (HPV)- and a TP53-associated route, respectively, but other
genetic changes may also play a role. Studies on somatic mutations in vulvar
cancer other than TP53 are limited in number and size. In this study, we
investigated the prevalence of genetic mutations in 107 vulvar squamous cell
carcinomas (VSCCs).
METHODS: A total of 107 paraffin-embedded tissue samples of primarily surgically 
treated VSCCs were tested for HPV infection and screened for mutations in 14
genes (BRAF, CDKN2A(p16), CTNNB1, FBXW7, FGFR2, FGFR3, FOXL2, HRAS, KRAS, NRAS,
PIK3CA, PPP2R1A, PTEN, and TP53) using Sanger sequencing and mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: Mutations were detected in 7 genes. Of 107 VSCCs, 66 tumors (62%)
contained at least one mutation (TP53=58, CDKN2A(p16)=14, HRAS=10, PIK3CA=7,
PPP2R1A=3, KRAS=1, PTEN=1). Mutations occurred most frequently in HPV-negative
samples. Five-year survival was significantly worse for patients with a mutation 
(47% vs 59%, P=.035), with a large effect from patients carrying HRAS-mutations.
CONCLUSION: Somatic mutations were detected in 62% of VSCCs. As expected, HPV
infection and TP53-mutations play a key role in the development of VSCC, but
CDKN2A(p16), HRAS, and PIK3CA-mutations were also frequently seen in HPV-negative
patients. Patients with somatic mutations, especially HRAS-mutations, have a
significantly worse prognosis than patients lacking these changes, which could be
of importance for the development of targeted therapy.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 25072932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Protein Expr Purif. 2014 Oct;102:8-12. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.07.006. Epub 2014 
Jul 24.

Expression and purification of half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis)
CSDAZL protein.

Wang K(1), Zhang H(2), Hu Q(2), Shao C(2), Chen S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, 
Qingdao 266071, China; College of Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai Ocean
University, Shanghai 201306, China. (2)Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Qingdao 266071, China. (3)Yellow Sea
Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, Qingdao
266071, China. Electronic address: chensl@ysfri.ac.cn.

The csdazl gene is a sex related gene of half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus
semilaevis). Our research group have cloned full length cDNA of csdazl, and
studied its expression pattern. To get the further information of csdazl, we
constructed a prokaryotic expression plasmid, pET-32a-CSDAZL, expressed in
Escherichia coli BL21 and purified the fusion protein by His Trap. In order to
detect the biological activity of the fusion protein, we injected the protein
with liposome into fish, and detected other sex-related genes' mRNA expression.
The results showed that the expression levels of half-smooth tongue sole
female-related genes Cyp19a and Foxl2 significantly decreased between 6 and 24 h;
however, both genes' expressions returned to their normal levels 72 h after
injection, indicating that recombinant CSDAZL protein could down-regulated the
expression of female-related genes, Foxl2 and Cyp19a genes, implying that the
fusion protein has biological activity and csdazl plays a role in sex
differentiation by regulating sex related genes' expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25064428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Pediatr Ophthalmol Strabismus. 2014 Jul 16;51 Online:e51-4. doi:
10.3928/01913913-20140709-04.

Limited ocular motility in a child with 3q23 microdeletion ("blepharophimosis
syndrome plus").

Khan AO, Nagl S, Bergmann C, Bolz HJ.

Blepharophimosis syndrome is a recognizable ocular phenotype (blepharophimosis,
telecanthus, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus) caused by heterozygous (dominant)
intragenic mutation in FOXL2 (chromosome 3q23), which can also cause premature
ovarian failure. A deletion that involves not only FOXL2 but also adjacent genes 
can result in additional clinical features ("blepharophimosis syndrome plus").
Studies of such patients are useful because observed additional clinical features
suggest potential functions of genes adjacent to FOXL2. The authors describe a
boy with blepharophimosis syndrome plus from a de novo heterozygous 3q22.3-q24
11.2 Mb microdeletion. Among his additional clinical features was bilateral
limitation of abduction and supraduction, which suggests that the deleted area
includes a gene responsible for ocular motility.

Copyright 2014, SLACK Incorporated.

PMID: 25032695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Curr Opin Oncol. 2014 Sep;26(5):536-41. doi: 10.1097/CCO.0000000000000106.

Adult granulosa cell tumours of the ovary.

Mancari R(1), Portuesi R, Colombo N.

Author information: 
(1)aDivision of Gynecologic Oncology, European Institute of Oncology, Milan
bDepartment of Gynecology, University Campus Bio-Medico, Rome, Italy.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Adult ovarian granulosa cell tumours (AGCTs) are the most
common sex cord-stromal tumours. Although the prognosis is generally favourable, 
recurrent or advanced AGCT shows poor prognosis. An overview of the main findings
on the management of AGCT published recently is provided.
RECENT FINDINGS: Novel biomarkers, including FOXL2, SMAD3 and GATA4, have been
identified as potential diagnostic and therapeutic targets for this type of
tumour. Interesting therapeutic implications are also emerging from studies on
preclinical models, supporting the possible activity of anti-vascular endothelial
growth factor A therapy for the treatment of AGCTs. Further, potentially active
drugs could be targeting agents directed against epidermal growth factor receptor
and/or insulin growth factor receptor-1. Recent data confirmed the importance of 
surgery in the management of AGCTs, in which hysterectomy can be avoided in young
patients, as a recent study demonstrated that the risk of endometrial cancer
after salpingo-oophorectomy for AGCT, with negative endometrial evaluation, is
lower than the risk of endometrial cancer in the general population.
SUMMARY: The present review highlights current challenges and future directions
in the treatment of AGCTs.Optimization of existing treatment modalities and the
addition of novel drugs may hopefully lead to improved oncologic outcomes.

PMID: 25024052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Fertil Steril. 2014 Sep;102(3):847-855.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.05.031.
Epub 2014 Jun 25.

Positive cross talk between FOXL2 and antimüllerian hormone regulates ovarian
reserve.

Park M(1), Suh DS(2), Lee K(1), Bae J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, South Korea.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Asan Medical Center, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea. (3)School of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang
University, Seoul, South Korea. Electronic address: jeehyeon@cau.ac.kr.

OBJECTIVE: To demonstrate interregulation between FOXL2 and antimüllerian hormone
(AMH) in ovarian folliculogenesis.
DESIGN: Cell culture and animal study.
SETTING: University research laboratory.
ANIMAL(S): Five-week-old B6C3F1 mice.
INTERVENTIONS(S): Molecular analysis and in vivo mouse experiment were performed 
to demonstrate that AMH is a target gene of FOXL2 in the ovary.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): To determine whether FOXL2 transactivates AMH,
luciferase reporter assay, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and chromatin
immuniprecipitation were conducted. Using an in vivo nucleic acid delivery
system, the expression of AMH and/or FOXL2 was modulated in the mouse, and the
ovaries were histologically analyzed.
RESULT(S): AMH is an endogenous target gene of FOXL2. In contrast, mutated FOXL2s
found in premature ovarian failure patients were defective in their ability to
activate AMH transcription in human granulosa cells. In vivo mouse gene delivery 
experiments revealed that Amh-knockdown accelerated follicle growth; however, the
acceleration was prevented by ectopic expression of FOXL2.
CONCLUSION(S): AMH and FOXL2 collaboratively work to reserve ovarian follicles.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24973035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Environ Res. 2014 Aug;133:371-9. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2014.05.018. Epub 2014 Jun
18.

Complete feminization of catfish by feeding Limnodilus, an annelid worm collected
in contaminated streams.

Dong RR(1), Yang SJ(2), Feng RJ(1), Fang LL(1), Sun YL(1), Zhang YG(1), Xie
XJ(1), Wang DS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Freshwater 
Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of Education), Key Laboratory of
Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life Science, Southwest University,
Chongqing, China; Department of Hematology, Xinqiao Hospital, The Third Military 
Medical University, Xinqiao Street, Chongqing, China. (3)Key Laboratory of
Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of Education), Key
Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life Science, Southwest
University, Chongqing, China. Electronic address: wdeshou@swu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Feminization of animals derived from areas polluted by endocrine
disrupting chemicals (EDCs) has been observed in all classes of vertebrates.
However, feminization of artificially reared offspring by feeding of specific
living organisms has never been reported.
METHODS: Different food (including Limnodilus spp collected from the wild) and
time treatment were applied to southern catfish. In addition, EDCs in Limnodilus 
spp., an annelid worm collected from wild contaminated small streams, was
detected by LC-MS (Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry). Serum estradiol-17ß 
and vitellogenin (VTG) levels and gonadal Sf1, Dmrt1, Foxl2, Cyp19a1a expression 
levels in the catfish were measured through Estradiol/VTG EIA Kit and real-time
PCR.
RESULTS: Here we report that feeding of Limnodilus spp. resulted in complete
feminization of southern catfish, which has a 1:1 sex ratio in wild conditions.
Furthermore, HPLC analysis showed that the extraction of Limnodilus spp.
contained EDCs, including bisphenol A (BPA), diethylstilbestrol (DES),
4-tert-octylphenol (4-t-OP) and 4-nonylphenol (4-NP), which were further
confirmed by LC-MS. Feeding southern catfish using commercial diets sprayed with 
EDCs cocktail also resulted in 100% female, whereas the control fish displayed
approximate 1:1 sex ratio. Limnodilus spp. fed fish displayed similar serum
estradiol-17ß and VTG levels and gonadal Sf1, Dmrt1, Foxl2, Cyp19a1a expression
levels to those of female control.
CONCLUSION: These results demonstrated that EDCs in Limnodilus spp. cause
southern catfish feminization by affecting aromatase expression and endogenous
estrogen level. This is the first report showing that feeding of any living
organism resulted in complete feminization of a vertebrate.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24952460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. BMC Genomics. 2014 Jun 18;15:491. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-491.

Gonad transcriptome analysis of pearl oyster Pinctada margaritifera:
identification of potential sex differentiation and sex determining genes.

Teaniniuraitemoana V, Huvet A, Levy P, Klopp C, Lhuillier E, Gaertner-Mazouni N, 
Gueguen Y, Le Moullac G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ifremer, UMR 241 EIO, Labex CORAIL, BP 7004, 98719 Taravao, Tahiti, Polynésie 
Française. Gilles.Le.Moullac@ifremer.fr.

BACKGROUND: Black pearl farming is based on culture of the blacklip pearl oyster 
Pinctada margaritifera (Mollusca, lophotrochozoa), a protandrous hermaphrodite
species. At first maturation, all individuals are males. The female sex appears
progressively from two years old, which represents a limitation for broodstock
conditioning for aquaculture production. In marine mollusks displaying
hermaphroditic features, data on sexual determinism and differentiation,
including the molecular sex determining cascade, are scarce. To increase genomic 
resources and identify the molecular mechanisms whereby gene expression may act
in the sexual dimorphism of P. margaritifera, we performed gonad transcriptome
analysis.
RESULTS: The gonad transcriptome of P. margaritifera was sequenced from several
gonadic samples of males and females at different development stages, using a
Next-Generation-Sequencing method and RNAseq technology. After Illumina
sequencing, assembly and annotation, we obtained 70,147 contigs of which 62.2%
shared homologies with existing protein sequences, and 9% showed functional
annotation with Gene Ontology terms. Differential expression analysis identified 
1,993 differentially expressed contigs between the different categories of
gonads. Clustering methods of samples revealed that the sex explained most of the
variation in gonad gene expression. K-means clustering of differentially
expressed contigs showed 815 and 574 contigs were more expressed in male and
female gonads, respectively. The analysis of these contigs revealed the presence 
of known specific genes coding for proteins involved in sex determinism and/or
differentiation, such as dmrt and fem-1 like for males, or foxl2 and vitellogenin
for females. The specific gene expression profiles of pmarg-fem1-like, pmarg-dmrt
and pmarg-foxl2 in different reproductive stages (undetermined, sexual inversion 
and regression) suggest that these three genes are potentially involved in the
sperm-oocyte switch in P. margaritifera.
CONCLUSIONS: The study provides a new transcriptomic tool to study reproduction
in hermaphroditic marine mollusks. It identifies sex differentiation and
potential sex determining genes in P. margaritifera, a protandrous hermaphrodite 
species.

PMCID: PMC4082630
PMID: 24942841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Dev Cell. 2014 Jun 9;29(5):503-4. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.05.015.

DMRT1 keeps masculinity intact.

DeFalco T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Sciences, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. Electronic address: tony.defalco@cchmc.org.

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2014 Jun 9;29(5):511-20.

It is generally assumed that sexual phenotypes formed in utero are permanently
established and do not require maintenance. In this issue of Developmental Cell, 
Minkina et al. (2014) now show that the transcriptional regulator DMRT1 actively 
prevents postnatal male-to-female sex reversal by blocking the activation of
retinoid-signaling-dependent feminization genes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24914556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Biol Reprod. 2014 Jul;91(1):24. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.117002. Epub 2014 Jun
4.

Simultaneous gene deletion of gata4 and gata6 leads to early disruption of
follicular development and germ cell loss in the murine ovary.

Padua MB(1), Fox SC(1), Jiang T(1), Morse DA(1), Tevosian SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida. (2)Department of Physiological
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida stevosian@ufl.edu.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2014 Aug;91(2):38.

Granulosa cell formation and subsequent follicular assembly are important for
ovarian development and function. Two members of the GATA family of transcription
factors, GATA4 and GATA6, are expressed in ovarian somatic cells early in
development, and their importance in adult ovarian function has been recently
highlighted. In this study, we demonstrated that the embryonic loss of Gata4 and 
Gata6 expression within the ovary results in a strong down-regulation of genes
involved in the ovarian developmental pathway (Fst and Irx3) as well as
diminished expression of the pregranulosa and granulosa cell markers SPRR2 and
FOXL2, respectively. Postnatal ovaries deficient in both Gata genes show impaired
somatic cell proliferation and arrested follicular development at the primordial 
stage, where oocytes are either enclosed by one layer of squamous granulosa cells
or remain in germ cell nests/clusters. Furthermore, germ cell nests and
primordial follicles are predominantly localized to the central region of the
Sf1Cre; Gata4(flox/flox) Gata6(flox/flox) ovaries, where the boundary between the
medulla and cortex is almost nonexistent. Lastly, most of the oocytes are lost
early in development in conditional double mutant ovaries, which confirms the
importance of normally differentiated granulosa cells as supporting cells for
oocyte survival. Thus, both GATA4 and GATA6 proteins are fundamental regulators
of granulosa cell differentiation and proliferation, and consequently of proper
follicular assembly during normal ovarian development and function.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4434962
PMID: 24899573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Cell. 2014 Jun 9;29(5):511-20. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.04.017. Epub 2014
May 22.

DMRT1 protects male gonadal cells from retinoid-dependent sexual
transdifferentiation.

Minkina A(1), Matson CK(1), Lindeman RE(1), Ghyselinck NB(2), Bardwell VJ(3),
Zarkower D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Center and Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and
Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA. (2)Institut de
Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, CNRS (UMR7104), INSERM U964, 
Université de Strasbourg, 67404 Illkirch, France. (3)Developmental Biology Center
and Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA; University of Minnesota Masonic Cancer
Center, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. (4)Developmental Biology Center and
Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA; University of Minnesota Masonic Cancer Center,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. Electronic address: zarko001@umn.edu.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2014 Jun 9;29(5):503-4.

Mammalian sex determination initiates in the fetal gonad with specification of
bipotential precursor cells into male Sertoli cells or female granulosa cells.
This choice was long presumed to be irreversible, but genetic analysis in the
mouse recently revealed that sexual fates must be maintained throughout life.
Somatic cells in the testis or ovary, even in adults, can be induced to
transdifferentiate to their opposite-sex equivalents by loss of a single
transcription factor, DMRT1 in the testis or FOXL2 in the ovary. Here, we
investigate what mechanism DMRT1 prevents from triggering transdifferentiation.
We find that DMRT1 blocks testicular retinoic acid (RA) signaling from activating
genes normally involved in female sex determination and ovarian development and
show that inappropriate activation of these genes can drive sexual
transdifferentiation. By preventing activation of potential feminizing genes,
DMRT1 allows Sertoli cells to participate in RA signaling, which is essential for
reproduction, without being sexually reprogrammed.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4105363
PMID: 24856513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2014 Aug;31(8):935-46. doi: 10.1007/s10815-014-0257-5.
Epub 2014 May 20.

Genetic associations with diminished ovarian reserve: a systematic review of the 
literature.

Greene AD(1), Patounakis G, Segars JH.

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics & Gynecology Department, St Luke's Roosevelt Hospital Center, 1000 
Tenth Ave, Suite 10 C, New York, NY, 10019, USA.

PURPOSE: Diminished ovarian reserve (DOR) affects 10 % of women seeking fertility
treatment. Although it is much more prevalent than premature ovarian failure,
less is known about its etiology. The purpose of this article is to review the
possible genetic causes of, and associations with, pathologic DOR.
METHODS: A systematic review was conducted using PubMed from 1966 through
November 2013.
RESULTS: Twenty-one articles identified genes associated with DOR: one gene
mutation (FMR1), three polymorphisms (GDF9, FSHR, and ESR1), and seven genes
differentially expressed between women with DOR and controls (AMH, LHCGR, IGF1,
IGF2, IGF1R, IGF2R and GREM1). Six candidate genes were discovered in mice,
including Foxl2, Gdf9, Bmp15, Aire, Wnt4, and Gpr3. Two case reports of
chromosomal translocations were also identified.
CONCLUSIONS: While the etiology of pathologic DOR is likely multifactorial, it is
possible that many cases attributed to an idiopathic cause may have a genetic
component. Larger studies are needed to expose the impact gene mutations,
polymorphisms, and epigenetics have on pathologic DOR.

PMCID: PMC4130940
PMID: 24840722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Mar 15;7(4):1534-43. eCollection 2014.

FOXL2 suppresses proliferation, invasion and promotes apoptosis of cervical
cancer cells.

Liu XL(1), Meng YH(2), Wang JL(3), Yang BB(4), Zhang F(4), Tang SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Plastic Surgery Institute of Weifang Medical University Weifang, 261041,
Shandong Province, China ; Department of Traumatic Orthopedics, The 89th Hospital
of PLA Weifang, 261041, Shandong Province, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Peking University Third Hospital Beijing, 100191, China.
(3)Department of Traumatic Orthopedics, The 89th Hospital of PLA Weifang, 261041,
Shandong Province, China. (4)Plastic Surgery Institute of Weifang Medical
University Weifang, 261041, Shandong Province, China.

FOXL2 is a transcription factor that is essential for ovarian function and
maintenance, the germline mutations of which give rise to the blepharophimosis
ptosis epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES), often associated with premature
ovarian failure. Recently, its mutations have been found in ovarian granulosa
cell tumors (OGCTs). In this study, we measured the expression of FOXL2 in
cervical cancer by immunohistochemistry and its mRNA level in cervical cancer
cell lines Hela and Siha by RT-PCR. Then we overexpressed FOXL2 in Hela cells and
silenced it in Siha cells by plasmid transfection and verified using western
blotting. When FOXL2 was overexpressed or silenced, cells proliferation and
apoptosis were determined by Brdu assay and Annexin V/PI detection kit,
respectively. In addition, we investigated the effects of FOXL2 on the adhesion
and invasion of Hela and Siha cells. Finally, we analyzed the influences of FOXL2
on Ki67, PCNA and FasL by flow cytometry. The results showed that FOXL2 was
highly expressed in cervical squamous cancer. Overexpressing FOXL2 suppressed
Hela proliferation and facilitated its apoptosis. Silencing FOXL2 enhanced Siha
proliferation and inhibited its apoptosis. Meanwhile, silencing FOXL2 promoted
Siha invasion, but it had no effect on cells adhesion. In addition,
overexpressing FOXL2 decreased the expression of Ki67 in Hela and Siha cells.
Therefore, our results suggested that FOXL2 restrained cells proliferation and
enhanced cells apoptosis mainly through decreasing Ki67 expression.

PMCID: PMC4014233
PMID: 24817949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Ophthal Plast Reconstr Surg. 2015 May-Jun;31(3):e62. doi:
10.1097/IOP.0000000000000073.

Blepharophimosis syndrome with absent tear production.

Ng JK(1), Stout AU, Aaby AA, Ng JD.

Author information: 
(1)*Oregon Health and Science University, Casey Eye Institute; and †EyeHealth
Northwest, Portland, Oregon, U.S.A.

The purpose of this report was to present a case of congenital alacrima in a
patient with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES). A
9-month-old boy presented with characteristic clinical findings of BPES confirmed
by genetic testing. On further history taking and evaluation, the patient was
noted to have no tear production, despite clinically present palpebral lobes of
the lacrimal glands. BPES is an autosomal dominant condition characterized by
narrowed horizontal palpebral fissures, severe bilateral symmetric ptosis,
epicanthus inversus, and telecanthus. To the authors' knowledge, this represents 
the second reported case of congenital alacrima in this syndrome. The first case 
described in the literature was in a 9-month-old girl who had congenital absence 
of the lacrimal glands. BPES may present with alacrima requiring vigilant
lifelong lubrication and careful consideration in decisions for eyelid surgery
including ptosis repair.

PMID: 24777257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Toxicology. 2014 Jul 3;321:89-95. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2014.04.006. Epub 2014 Apr
24.

Effects of tamoxifen on the sex determination gene and the activation of sex
reversal in the developing gonad of mice.

Yu M(1), Wang J(2), Liu W(3), Qin J(4), Zhou Q(5), Wang Y(6), Huang H(7), Chen
W(8), Ma C(9).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE),
School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, 
Dalian, Liaoning 116024, China. Electronic address: yumingxi2003@aliyun.com.
(2)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Dalian University of Technology,
Dalian, Liaoning 116024, China. Electronic address: wangjingyun67@126.com. (3)Key
Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental Engineering (MOE), School of
Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian,
Liaoning 116024, China. Electronic address: liu_wei@dlut.edu.cn. (4)Department of
Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine 
(MOE), Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, China. Electronic address: 
junwen@ims.u-tokyo.ac.jp. (5)Medical Imaging Center, First Affiliated Hospital of
Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510630, China. Electronic address:
tzq@jnu.edu.cn. (6)Key Laboratory of Industrial Ecology and Environmental
Engineering (MOE), School of Environmental Science and Technology, Dalian
University of Technology, Dalian, Liaoning 116024, China. (7)Department of
Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Key Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine 
(MOE), Jinan University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510632, China. (8)College of
Biophotonics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510631, China. 
Electronic address: chenwl@scnu.edu.cn. (9)College of Life Science, South China
Normal University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510631, China. Electronic address:
macauhello@126.com.

Tamoxifen, as well as most endocrine-disrupting chemicals, affects the
reproductive system and sexual development, but little is known about its
disruption of the molecular pathways regulating mammalian sex determination. In
fetal mice, the expression levels and pattern of key genes involved in
controlling sexually dimorphic balance were analyzed both in vivo and in vitro by
using whole-mount in situ hybridization and quantitative-PCR. Developmental
tamoxifen exposure induced abnormal up-regulation of the testis differentiation
marker Pdfgra in Leydig cells and of Sox9 and Fgf9 in Sertoli cells in XX gonad. 
Immunohistochemistry analysis confirmed the over-expression of SOX9 protein.
Accordingly, the ovary development marker Foxl2 was depressed at both the mRNA
and protein levels. The increase in testosterone and the reduction in
17ß-estradiol and progesterone were observed by using the in vitro assay with
organotypic cultures. Taken together, results indicated that tamoxifen induced
the ectopic expression of well-established sex-specific genes during the critical
developmental period, thus resulting in abnormal testicular development in the XX
gonad of mammals. This study facilitates a better understanding of the molecular 
mechanisms of antiestrogens and possibly of compounds that interrupt estrogen
signaling by other modes of action, and the association with the pathogenesis of 
human sexual developmental disorders.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24769059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Histopathology. 2014 Dec;65(6):861-7. doi: 10.1111/his.12444. Epub 2014 Oct 8.

Gonadoblastoma: an immunohistochemical study and comparison to Sertoli cell
nodule with intratubular germ cell neoplasia, with pathogenetic implications.

Kao CS(1), Ulbright TM, Idrees MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

AIMS: To investigate the immunohistochemical properties of the sex cord cells of 
gonadoblastoma and Sertoli cell nodule with intratubular germ cell neoplasia
unclassified (IGCNU) as a means of objective distinction and to provide insight
into the pathogenesis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemical stains for SOX9, FoxL2 and SF-1 were
performed on 10 gonadoblastomas (all phenotypical females) and 14 Sertoli cell
nodules with IGCNU in normal phenotypical males with coexisting germ cell
tumours. The sex cord cells of gonadoblastomas showed strong, diffuse FoxL2 and
SF-1 positivity and focal weak to moderate SOX9 reactivity, whereas those of
Sertoli cell nodules with IGCNU were uniformly, strongly positive for SOX9 and
SF-1, while negative for FoxL2.
CONCLUSIONS: Coexpression of SOX9 and FoxL2 in the sex cord cells of
gonadoblastomas provides evidence that these morphologically ambiguous sex cord
cells are incompletely differentiated. The strong, diffuse SOX9 and SF-1
positivity and absence of FoxL2 reactivity in the Sertoli cell nodules with IGNCU
support full Sertoli cell differentiation of the sex cord cells and distinguish
them from gonadoblastomas. Deficient SOX9 expression in gonadoblastoma supports a
current model of pathogenesis where immature germ cells, in the absence of
well-formed Sertoli cells, retain a fetal phenotype and susceptibility to
malignant transformation.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24766183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Hum Pathol. 2014 May;45(5):1010-4. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.015. Epub 2014 
Jan 17.

The expression of FOXL2 in pancreatic, hepatobiliary, and renal tumors with
ovarian-type stroma.

Westerhoff M(1), Tretiakova M(2), Hart J(3), Gwin K(3), Liu X(4), Zhou M(5), Yeh 
MM(2), Antic T(3).

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, WA 98195. Electronic
address: mwest2@uw.edu. (2)University of Washington Medical Center, Seattle, WA
98195. (3)University of Chicago Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60637. (4)Cleveland
Clinic, Cleveland, OH 809835. (5)New York University, New York, NY 10012.

FOXL2, a gene encoding a member of the fork-head-winged-helix family of
transcription factors, is one of the earliest expressed genes during female
gonadal development. It is expressed in normal ovarian stroma and ovarian
neoplasms with granulosa cell lineage. Nonovarian tumors such as pancreatic
mucinous cystic neoplasms (PMCs), hepatobiliary cystadenomas (HBCs), and mixed
epithelial and stromal tumor of the kidney (MEST) have ovarian-type stroma.
Immunohistochemical staining with FOXL2, estrogen receptor, and progesterone
receptor was performed on 21 PMCs, 13 HBCs, and 10 MESTs and assessed for nuclear
immunohistochemical positivity in the tumor stroma. All cases of PMC and HBC
demonstrated nuclear reactivity for FOXL2 in the subepithelial stromal cells.
Ninety percent of MEST demonstrated nuclear FOXL2 positivity. Estrogen receptor
nuclear positivity was demonstrated in 57% of PMC, 77% of HBC, and 80% of MEST.
Progesterone receptor nuclear positivity was present in 67% of PMC, 100% of HBC, 
and 90% of MEST. Clinical information was available for 37 patients.
Seventy-eight percent of the patients had a history of obesity, heavy alcohol
use, or hormone-related therapy. The 2 male patients had histories significant
for morbid obesity and chronic alcoholism. FOXL2 is expressed from the early
stages of ovarian development and has been shown to be mandatory for normal
ovarian function. We have shown that it is also expressed in the aberrant
ovarian-type stroma characteristic of PMC, HBC, and MEST. Most of such patients, 
including the rare male patients, have risk factors for hormonal abnormalities
such as obesity and hormonal replacement therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24746205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. FASEB J. 2014 Aug;28(8):3396-410. doi: 10.1096/fj.14-249532. Epub 2014 Apr 16.

Follicle-stimulating hormone synthesis and fertility depend on SMAD4 and FOXL2.

Fortin J(1), Boehm U(2), Deng CX(3), Treier M(4), Bernard DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montréal,
Québec, Canada; jerome.fortin@mail.mcgill.ca daniel.bernard@mcgill.ca.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Saarland School of
Medicine, Homburg, Germany; (3)National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland, USA; and. (4)Max Delbrück Center for
Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany.

Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) is an essential regulator of gonadal function 
and fertility. Loss-of-function mutations in the FSHB/Fshb gene cause
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism in humans and mice. Both gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) and activins, members of the transforming growth factor ß (TGFß)
superfamily, stimulate FSH synthesis; yet, their relative roles and mechanisms of
action in vivo are unknown. Here, using conditional gene-targeting, we show that 
the canonical mediator of TGFß superfamily signaling, SMAD4, is absolutely
required for normal FSH synthesis in both male and female mice. Moreover, when
the Smad4 gene is ablated in combination with its DNA binding cofactor Foxl2 in
gonadotrope cells, mice make essentially no FSH and females are sterile. Indeed, 
the phenotype of these animals is remarkably similar to that of Fshb-knockout
mice. Not only do these results establish SMAD4 and FOXL2 as essential master
regulators of Fshb transcription in vivo, they also suggest that activins, or
related ligands, could play more important roles in FSH synthesis than GnRH.

© FASEB.

PMCID: PMC4101660
PMID: 24739304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Pediatr Neurol. 2014 Jun;50(6):636-9. doi: 10.1016/j.pediatrneurol.2014.01.055.
Epub 2014 Feb 10.

Acquired microcephaly in blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome
because of an interstitial 3q22.3q23 deletion.

Dean SJ(1), Holden KR(2), Dwivedi A(3), Dupont BR(3), Lyons MJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)College of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South
Carolina. Electronic address: s.joy.dean@vanderbilt.edu. (2)Neurosciences
(Neurology) and Pediatrics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston,
South Carolina; Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South Carolina. (3)Greenwood
Genetic Center, Greenwood, South Carolina.

BACKGROUND: Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome is an autosomal 
dominant condition because of mutations or deletions of the FOXL2 gene.
Microcephaly is not associated with FOXL2 mutations but has been reported in
individuals with chromosome 3q deletions, which include the FOXL2 gene and other 
contiguous genes. The ATR gene has been reported as a candidate gene for
microcephaly in individuals with contiguous deletion of chromosome 3q involving
the FOXL2 gene.
PATIENT: We describe a girl with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus
syndrome along with acquired microcephaly and intellectual disability.
RESULTS: Our patient had a deletion of chromosome 3q22.2q23, which does not
include the ATR gene but does include the PIK3CB gene as a candidate gene for
microcephaly.
CONCLUSION: We propose that the PIK3CB gene included in our patient's chromosome 
3q deletion may be the gene responsible for microcephaly and other patients with 
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome because of a chromosome 3q
deletion.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24725350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Genetics. 2014 Jun;197(2):591-9. doi: 10.1534/genetics.114.163667. Epub 2014 Apr 
7.

Efficient and heritable gene targeting in tilapia by CRISPR/Cas9.

Li M(1), Yang H(1), Zhao J(1), Fang L(1), Shi H(1), Li M(1), Sun Y(1), Zhang
X(1), Jiang D(1), Zhou L(1), Wang D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Sciences, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of Education), Key
Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life Sciences, Southwest
University, Chongqing 400715, China wdeshou@swu.edu.cn.

Studies of gene function in non-model animals have been limited by the approaches
available for eliminating gene function. The CRISPR/Cas9 ( C: lustered R:
egularly I: nterspaced S: hort P: alindromic R: epeats/ C: RISPR AS: sociated)
system has recently become a powerful tool for targeted genome editing. Here, we 
report the use of the CRISPR/Cas9 system to disrupt selected genes, including
nanos2, nanos3, dmrt1, and foxl2, with efficiencies as high as 95%. In addition, 
mutations in dmrt1 and foxl2 induced by CRISPR/Cas9 were efficiently transmitted 
through the germline to F1. Obvious phenotypes were observed in the G0 generation
after mutation of germ cell or somatic cell-specific genes. For example, loss of 
Nanos2 and Nanos3 in XY and XX fish resulted in germ cell-deficient gonads as
demonstrated by GFP labeling and Vasa staining, respectively, while
masculinization of somatic cells in both XY and XX gonads was demonstrated by
Dmrt1 and Cyp11b2 immunohistochemistry and by up-regulation of serum androgen
levels. Our data demonstrate that targeted, heritable gene editing can be
achieved in tilapia, providing a convenient and effective approach for generating
loss-of-function mutants. Furthermore, our study shows the utility of the
CRISPR/Cas9 system for genetic engineering in non-model species like tilapia and 
potentially in many other teleost species.

Copyright © 2014 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4063917
PMID: 24709635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Obstet Gynaecol Res. 2014 May;40(5):1197-204. doi: 10.1111/jog.12324. Epub 2014
Apr 2.

Mutational analysis of FOXL2 p.C134W and expression of bone morphogenetic protein
2 in Japanese patients with granulosa cell tumor of ovary.

Oseto K(1), Suzumori N, Nishikawa R, Nishikawa H, Arakawa A, Ozaki Y, Asai H,
Kawai M, Mizuno K, Takahashi S, Shirai T, Yamada-Namikawa C, Nakanishi M,
Kajiyama H, Kikkawa F, Sugiura-Ogasawara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nagoya City University Graduate
School of Medical Sciences, Nagoya, Japan.

AIM: To assess whether FOXL2 p.C134W mutation may play a role in the development 
of human ovarian tumors in the Japanese, we investigated the FOXL2 codon 134
mutation and protein expression of inhibin-a, bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2)
and follistatin (FST) in Japanese patients with granulosa cell tumor (GCT) of the
ovary and other ovarian tumors.
METHODS: We analyzed 114 tumor tissues from ovarian tumors, including 44
adult-type and two juvenile-type GCT of the ovary and 68 ovarian tumors by DNA
sequencing. Immunohistochemistry was also performed in the adult and juvenile GCT
tissues by immunostaining inhibin-a, BMP2 and FST.
RESULTS: We found the FOXL2 p.C134W mutation in 27 out of 44 (61.4%) adult-type
GCT of the ovary, but none in other ovarian tumors. Histologically, all of the
adult-type GCT sections were positive for inhibin-a, and the expression of BMP2
and FST was detected in 14 of 44 (31.8%) and zero of 47 (0%), respectively. No
significant differences regarding the diagnosed age, preoperative serum
carbohydrate antigen 125 levels, or BMP2 immunopositivity between the FOXL2
p.C134W mutation-positive and mutation-negative were found in the adult-type GCT 
patients.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that FOXL2 p.C134W mutation-positive adult-type 
GCT of the ovary may not be common in the Japanese as compared to the previous
data.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research © 2014 Japan
Society of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

PMID: 24689977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 26;9(3):e93451. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093451. eCollection
2014.

Designing a high-throughput somatic mutation profiling panel specifically for
gynaecological cancers.

Spaans VM(1), Trietsch MD(2), Crobach S(2), Stelloo E(2), Kremer D(3), Osse
EM(2), Haar NT(2), van Eijk R(2), Muller S(4), van Wezel T(2), Trimbos JB(5),
Bosse T(2), Smit VT(2), Fleuren GJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands; Department of Gynaecology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden,
The Netherlands. (2)Department of Pathology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Molecular Epidemiology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (4)Sequenom GmbH, Hamburg,
Germany. (5)Department of Gynaecology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 
The Netherlands.

Somatic mutations play a major role in tumour initiation and progression. The
mutation status of a tumour may predict prognosis and guide targeted therapies.
The majority of techniques to study oncogenic mutations require high quality and 
quantity DNA or are analytically challenging. Mass-spectrometry based mutation
analysis however is a relatively simple and high-throughput method suitable for
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tumour material. Targeted gene panels
using this technique have been developed for several types of cancer. These
current cancer hotspot panels are not focussed on the genes that are most
relevant in gynaecological cancers. In this study, we report the design and
validation of a novel, mass-spectrometry based panel specifically for
gynaecological malignancies and present the frequencies of detected mutations.
Using frequency data from the online Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer, we
selected 171 somatic hotspot mutations in the 13 most important genes for
gynaecological cancers, being BRAF, CDKN2A, CTNNB1, FBXW7, FGFR2, FGFR3, FOXL2,
HRAS, KRAS, NRAS, PIK3CA, PPP2R1A and PTEN. A total of 546 tumours (205 cervical,
227 endometrial, 89 ovarian, and 25 vulvar carcinomas) were used to test and
validate our panel, and to study the prevalence and spectrum of somatic mutations
in these types of cancer. The results were validated by testing duplicate samples
and by allele-specific qPCR. The panel presented here using mass-spectrometry
shows to be reproducible and high-throughput, and is usefull in FFPE material of 
low quality and quantity. It provides new possibilities for studying large
numbers of gynaecological tumour samples in daily practice, and could be useful
in guided therapy selection.

PMCID: PMC3966900
PMID: 24671188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 26;9(3):e93435. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093435. eCollection
2014.

Independent polled mutations leading to complex gene expression differences in
cattle.

Wiedemar N(1), Tetens J(2), Jagannathan V(1), Menoud A(1), Neuenschwander S(3),
Bruggmann R(4), Thaller G(2), Drögemüller C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland. (2)Institute of 
Animal Breeding and Husbandry, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel, Kiel,
Germany. (3)Interfaculty Bioinformatics Unit, University of Bern, Bern,
Switzerland; Vital-IT, Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne, Switzerland. 
(4)Interfaculty Bioinformatics Unit, University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.

The molecular regulation of horn growth in ruminants is still poorly understood. 
To investigate this process, we collected 1019 hornless (polled) animals from
different cattle breeds. High-density SNP genotyping confirmed the presence of
two different polled associated haplotypes in Simmental and Holstein cattle
co-localized on BTA 1. We refined the critical region of the Simmental polled
mutation to 212 kb and identified an overlapping region of 932 kb containing the 
Holstein polled mutation. Subsequently, whole genome sequencing of polled
Simmental and Holstein cows was used to determine polled associated genomic
variants. By genotyping larger cohorts of animals with known horn status we found
a single perfectly associated insertion/deletion variant in Simmental and other
beef cattle confirming the recently published possible Celtic polled mutation. We
identified a total of 182 sequence variants as candidate mutations for polledness
in Holstein cattle, including an 80 kb genomic duplication and three SNPs
reported before. For the first time we showed that hornless cattle with scurs are
obligate heterozygous for one of the polled mutations. This is in contrast to
published complex inheritance models for the bovine scurs phenotype. Studying
differential expression of the annotated genes and loci within the mapped region 
on BTA 1 revealed a locus (LOC100848215), known in cow and buffalo only, which is
higher expressed in fetal tissue of wildtype horn buds compared to tissue of
polled fetuses. This implicates that the presence of this long noncoding RNA is a
prerequisite for horn bud formation. In addition, both transcripts associated
with polledness in goat and sheep (FOXL2 and RXFP2), show an overexpression in
horn buds confirming their importance during horn development in cattle.

PMCID: PMC3966897
PMID: 24671182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Sex Dev. 2014;8(5):199-207. doi: 10.1159/000358402. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

Characterising novel pathways in testis determination using mouse genetics.

Carré GA(1), Greenfield A.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Unit, Medical Research Council, Harwell, UK.

Mammalian sex determination is the process by which the bipotential embryonic
genital ridge commits to either the testicular or ovarian fate. The existence of 
a gonad primordium with 2 possible developmental outcomes, depending on the
presence or absence of the Y chromosome, remains a fascinating paradigm for
examining the manner in which genes cooperate to establish cell fate and regulate
differentiation. Development of the mouse gonad offers a unique model for the
investigation of sex determination, characterised by powerful transgenic, genomic
and other experimental resources for the study of the molecular control of
organogenesis. This review focuses on recent progress in our understanding of
mouse testis determination, with an emphasis on multi-locus studies of mutant
alleles aimed at constructing pathways of interacting gene products. Studies in 2
broad areas have been especially revealing: (i) identification of pathways
required for the appropriate expression of Sry, and (ii) characterisation of the 
antagonistic interactions between the core testis- (SRY-SOX9-FGF9) and ovary-
(RSPO1-WNT4-CTNNB1-FOXL2) determining gene regulatory networks. We discuss these 
advances with an eye on emerging themes in mammalian sex determination.

PMID: 24643063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 18;9(3):e92202. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092202. eCollection
2014.

A microarray-based analysis of gametogenesis in two Portuguese populations of the
European clam Ruditapes decussatus.

de Sousa JT(1), Milan M(2), Bargelloni L(2), Pauletto M(2), Matias D(3), Joaquim 
S(3), Matias AM(3), Quillien V(4), Leitão A(3), Huvet A(4).

Author information: 
(1)IFREMER, UMR CNRS 6539, Laboratoire des Sciences de l'Environnement Marin,
Plouzané, France; IPMA, Olhão, Portugal. (2)Department of Comparative Biomedicine
and Food Science, University of Padova, Agripolis, Legnaro, Italy. (3)IPMA,
Olhão, Portugal. (4)IFREMER, UMR CNRS 6539, Laboratoire des Sciences de
l'Environnement Marin, Plouzané, France.

The European clam, Ruditapes decussatus is a species with a high commercial
importance in Portugal and other Southern European countries. Its production is
almost exclusively based on natural recruitment, which is subject to high annual 
fluctuations. Increased knowledge of the natural reproductive cycle of R.
decussatus and its molecular mechanisms would be particularly important in
providing new highly valuable genomic information for better understanding the
regulation of reproduction in this economically important aquaculture species. In
this study, the transcriptomic bases of R. decussatus reproduction have been
analysed using a custom oligonucleotide microarray representing 51,678 assembled 
contigs. Microarray analyses were performed in four gonadal maturation stages
from two different Portuguese wild populations, characterized by different
responses to spawning induction when used as progenitors in hatchery. A
comparison between the two populations elucidated a specific pathway involved in 
the recognition signals and binding between the oocyte and components of the
sperm plasma membrane. We suggest that this pathway can explain part of the
differences in terms of spawning induction success between the two populations.
In addition, sexes and reproductive stages were compared and a correlation
between mRNA levels and gonadal area was investigated. The lists of
differentially expressed genes revealed that sex explains most of the variance in
gonadal gene expression. Additionally, genes like Foxl2, vitellogenin, condensing
2, mitotic apparatus protein p62, Cep57, sperm associated antigens 6, 16 and 17, 
motile sperm domain containing protein 2, sperm surface protein Sp17, sperm
flagellar proteins 1 and 2 and dpy-30, were identified as being correlated with
the gonad area and therefore supposedly with the number and/or the size of the
gametes produced.

PMCID: PMC3958495
PMID: 24643002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mar Genomics. 2014 Jun;15:85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.margen.2014.02.005. Epub 2014 Mar
15.

Discovery of sex-related genes through high-throughput transcriptome sequencing
from the salmon louse Caligus rogercresseyi.

Farlora R(1), Araya-Garay J(1), Gallardo-Escárate C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biotechnology and Aquatic Genomics, Interdisciplinary Center for
Aquaculture Research (INCAR), University of Concepción, P.O. Box 160-C, Chile.
(2)Laboratory of Biotechnology and Aquatic Genomics, Interdisciplinary Center for
Aquaculture Research (INCAR), University of Concepción, P.O. Box 160-C, Chile.
Electronic address: crisgallardo@udec.cl.

Understanding the molecular underpinnings involved in the reproduction of the
salmon louse is critical for designing novel strategies of pest management for
this ectoparasite. However, genomic information on sex-related genes is still
limited. In the present work, sex-specific gene transcription was revealed in the
salmon louse Caligus rogercresseyi using high-throughput Illumina sequencing. A
total of 30,191,914 and 32,292,250 high quality reads were generated for females 
and males, and these were de novo assembled into 32,173 and 38,177 contigs,
respectively. Gene ontology analysis showed a pattern of higher expression in the
female as compared to the male transcriptome. Based on our sequence analysis and 
known sex-related proteins, several genes putatively involved in sex
differentiation, including Dmrt3, FOXL2, VASA, and FEM1, and other potentially
significant candidate genes in C. rogercresseyi, were identified for the first
time. In addition, the occurrence of SNPs in several differentially expressed
contigs annotating for sex-related genes was found. This transcriptome dataset
provides a useful resource for future functional analyses, opening new
opportunities for sea lice pest control.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24642131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2014 May 1;200:44-53. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.02.018. Epub
2014 Mar 11.

Responsiveness of four gender-specific genes, figla, foxl2, scp3 and sox9a to
17a-ethinylestradiol in adult rare minnow Gobiocypris rarus.

Yuan C(1), Wu T(1), Zhang Y(1), Gao J(1), Yang Y(1), Qin F(1), Liu S(1), Zheng
Y(1), Wang Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
China. (2)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University,
Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi
712100, China. Electronic address: zzwang@nwsuaf.edu.cn.

Proteins encoded by figla, foxl2, scp3 and sox9a play important roles in gonad
differentiation and reproduction. In the present study, we aimed to determine the
responsiveness of figla, foxl2, scp3 and sox9a to 17a-ethinylestradiol (EE2) in
the gonads of adult Gobiocypris rarus. Full-length cDNAs of figla, scp3 and sox9a
were cloned and characterized by RT-PCR and RACE methods. Expression patterns in 
adult tissues were investigated. Results indicated that figla was predominantly
expressed in adult ovaries and scp3 was restrictively expressed in the male
testes and sox9a was principally expressed in the brains of both genders and the 
testes of males. Gene expression profiles of figla, foxl2, scp3 and sox9a were
analyzed in the gonads of adult G. rarus exposed to EE2 at 1, 5, 25, and 125ng/L 
for 3 and 6days. Three-day EE2 treatment at 1-125ng/L all caused a significant
increase of figla transcript in testes and foxl2 transcript in ovaries. However, 
six-day EE2 exposure at 1-125ng/L repressed figla and scp3 transcript in testes
and foxl2 transcript in ovaries. The present study indicates that the testicular 
transcripts of figla and scp3 in males and the ovarian foxl2 transcript in
females have high responsiveness to EE2 and they can be used as sensitive
molecular biomarkers for early warning to monitor the environmental estrogenic
chemicals in fresh water environment. The present study also suggests that the
effective EE2 dosage for feminization in male G. rarus might be at least 25ng/L.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24631545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Apr;6(2):175-7. doi: 10.1093/jmcb/mju006. Epub 2014 Mar 11.

NOBOX is a key FOXL2 partner involved in ovarian folliculogenesis.

Bouilly J(1), Veitia RA, Binart N.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U693, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, F-94276, France.

PMID: 24620032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jul 15;23(14):3792-800. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu092. Epub 2014
Feb 23.

A piggyBac insertion disrupts Foxl2 expression that mimics BPES syndrome in mice.

Shi F(1), Ding S(2), Zhao S(1), Han M(3), Zhuang Y(4), Xu T(2), Wu X(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and National Center for
International Research of Development and Disease, Institute of Developmental
Biology and Molecular Medicine, Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and 
Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and National Center for
International Research of Development and Disease, Institute of Developmental
Biology and Molecular Medicine, Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and 
Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Genetics, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06536, USA. (3)State Key Laboratory of Genetic
Engineering and National Center for International Research of Development and
Disease, Institute of Developmental Biology and Molecular Medicine, Collaborative
Innovation Center for Genetics and Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200433, China Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of
Molecular, Cellular, Developmental Biology, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO
80309, USA. (4)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and National Center
for International Research of Development and Disease, Institute of Developmental
Biology and Molecular Medicine, Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and 
Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
Department of Immunology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. 
(5)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering and National Center for
International Research of Development and Disease, Institute of Developmental
Biology and Molecular Medicine, Collaborative Innovation Center for Genetics and 
Development, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
xiaohui_wu@fudan.edu.cn.

Blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal
dominant genetic disorder characterized by small palpebral fissures and other
craniofacial malformations, often with (type I) but could also without (type II) 
premature ovarian failure. While mutations of the forkhead transcription factor
FOXL2 are associated with and likely be responsible for many BPES cases, how
FOXL2 affects craniofacial development remain to be understood. Through a
large-scale piggyBac (PB) insertion mutagenesis, we have identified a mouse
mutant carrying a PB insertion ~160 kb upstream of the transcription start site
(TSS) of Foxl2. The insertion reduces, but not eliminates, the expression of
Foxl2. This mutant, but not its revertant, displays BPES-like conditions such as 
midface hypoplasia, eyelid abnormalities and female subfertility. Further
analysis indicates that the mutation does not affect mandible, but causes
premature fusion of the premaxilla-maxilla suture, smaller premaxilla and
malformed maxilla during midface development. We further identified an
evolutionarily conserved fragment near the insertion site and observed enhancer
activity of this element in tissue culture cells. Analyses using DNase I
hypersensitivity assay and chromosome conformation capture assay in developing
maxillary and periocular tissues suggest that the DNA region near the insertion
site likely interacts with Foxl2 TSS. Therefore, this mutant presents an
excellent animal model for mechanistic study of BPES and regulation of Foxl2.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24565867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;773:49-75. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4899-8032-8_3.

The diagnostic pathology of the nuclear envelope in human cancers.

Fischer AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Memorial Medical Center, 
RM 213, Biotech 3, 1 Innovation Dr, Worcester, MA, 01605, USA,
Fischa01@ummhc.org.

Cancer is still diagnosed on the basis of altered tissue and cellular morphology.
The criteria that pathologists use for diagnosis include many morphologically
distinctive alterations in the nuclear envelope (NE). With the expectation that
diagnostic NE changes will have biological relevance to cancer, a classification 
of the various types of NE structural changes into three groups is proposed. The 
first group predicts chromosomal instability. The changes in this group include
pleomorphism of lamina size and shape, as if constraints to maintain a spherical 
shape were lost. Also characteristic of chromosomal instability are the presence 
of micronuclei, a specific structural feature likely related to the newly
described physiology of chromothripsis. The second group is predicted to be
functionally important during clonal evolution, because the NE changes in this
group are conserved during the clonal evolution of genetically unstable tumors.
Two examples of this group include increased ratio of nuclear volume to
cytoplasmic volume and the relatively fragile nuclei of small-cell carcinomas.
The third and most interesting group develops in a near-diploid, genetically
stable background. Many of these (perhaps ultimately all) are directly related to
the activation of particular oncogenes. The changes in this group so far include 
long inward folds of the NE and spherical invaginations of cytoplasm projecting
partially into the nucleus ("intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions"). This group is
exemplified by papillary thyroid carcinoma in which RET and TRK tyrosine kinases,
and probably B-Raf mutations, directly lead to diagnostic longitudinal folds of
the lamina ("nuclear grooves") and intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions. B-Raf
activation may also be linked to intranuclear cytoplasmic inclusions in melanoma 
and to nuclear grooves in Langerhans cell histiocytosis. Nuclear grooves in
granulosa cell tumor may be related to mutations in the FOXL2 oncogene.
Uncovering the precise mechanistic basis for any of these lamina alterations
would provide a valuable objective means for improving diagnosis, and will likely
reflect new types of functional changes, relevant to particular forms of cancer.

PMID: 24563343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2014 Mar;24(3):468-77. doi: 10.1097/IGC.0000000000000089.

Epithelial ovarian cancer: rationale for changing the one-fits-all standard
treatment regimen to subtype-specific treatment.

Despierre E(1), Yesilyurt BT, Lambrechts S, Johnson N, Verheijen R, van der Burg 
M, Casado A, Rustin G, Berns E, Leunen K, Amant F, Moerman P, Lambrechts D,
Vergote I; EORTC GCG and EORTC GCG Translational Research Group.

Collaborators: Angioli R, Panici P, Bentley J, Berteloot P, Bessette P, Boman K, 
Buist M, Chan K, Chan S, Coronado Martín P, Counsell R, Cruickshank D, Davis J,
de Greve J, de Oliveira C, de Valk B, Dittrich C, Ehlen T, Elit L, Favalli G,
Floquet A, Gauthier P, Gerdin E, Ghatage P, Gilby E, Gleeson N, Gotlieb W, Green 
J, Grimshaw R, Heywood M, Hirsch V, Hoekman K, Honkoop A, Hoskins P, Kannisto P, 
Kaern J, Katsaros D, Kenter G, Kieser K, Kristeller T, Kristensen G, Lacave A,
Leblanc E, Ledermann J, Lotocki R, Maggino T, Marth C, Martin L, Massuger L,
Mendiola C, Miller D, Mosgaard B, Mota F, Neven P, Nooij M, Nordal R, Nordin A,
Ottevanger P, Papadopoulos A, Pecorelli S, Petru E, Plante M, Popadiuk C,
Provencher D, Reed N, Redman C, Roozendaal K, Sadozye A, Sandvei R, Seoane J,
Sereni M, Sert B, Siddiqui N, Speiser P, Stuart G, Tholander B, Tognon G, Trimbos
B, Tropé C, Trudeau M, van Baal M, van Doorn H, van der Velden J, van Eygen K,
Vermorken J, Vidart Aragon J, Wensveen C, Zola P, Anastosopoulou A, Bethe U,
Coens C, Dehaes K, Demeester A, Demonty G, de Heusch E, de Rouck M, Giurgea L,
Hoctin-Boes G, Teodorovic I, Ven K, Verleye L, van Luijk I, Bacon M, Eisenhauer
E.

OBJECTIVE: Epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs) are, although still treated as a
single disease entity, often classified into type I tumors (low-grade serous,
mucinous, endometrioid, clear cell) and type II tumors (high-grade serous,
undifferentiated cancers, carcinosarcomas). The aim of our study was to determine
the incidence, clinical relevance, and prognostic and predictive impact of
somatic mutations in both types I and II EOCs.
METHODS: Two hundred sixty-two evaluable, primary, high-risk stage I (grade 3, or
aneuploid grade 1 or 2, or clear cell) and stage II-IV EOCs, collected at the
University Hospitals Leuven and within the European Organisation for Research and
Treatment of Cancer 55971 trial, were genotyped for hotspot mutations in KRAS
(COSMIC [Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer] coverage >97%), BRAF (>94%),
NRAS (>97%), PIK3CA (>79%), PTEN, FBXW7 (>57%), AKT2, AKT3, and FOXL2, using
Sequenom MassARRAY.
RESULTS: Of the 13% histopathologically classified type I tumors, 49% were KRAS
or PIK3CA mutant versus only 2.9% in the type II tumors (87%). Mucinous subtypes 
harbored significantly more KRAS mutations than all nonmucinous tumors (50% vs
4%, P < 0.001). PIK3CA mutations were predominantly found in clear cell
carcinomas (46.2%) and endometrioid carcinoma (20%) and were frequently
associated with endometriosis. Moreover, low-grade serous tumors were more
frequently KRAS or BRAF mutated (44%) than high-grade serous tumors (0.6%). KRAS 
or PIK3CA mutation did not correlate with progression-free survival or overall
survival. Mutations in NRAS, PTEN, FBXW7, AKT2, AKT3, and FOXL2 were rare (<1%).
CONCLUSIONS: Somatic mutations are rare in type II EOCs, whereas type I EOCs
contain distinct diseases with different driver mutations. In general, these
tumors respond worse to standard paclitaxel carboplatin therapy. Clinical trials 
with molecular targeted therapy in the different subtypes of type I tumors are
urgently needed using this theragnostic information.

PMID: 24557434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2014 May 1;200:10-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2014.02.008. Epub 
2014 Feb 18.

Factors regulating the bovine, caprine, rat and human ovarian aromatase promoters
in a bovine granulosa cell model.

Sahmi F(1), Nicola ES(1), Zamberlam GO(1), Gonçalves PD(1), Vanselow J(2), Price 
CA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en reproduction animale, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Montreal, St-Hyacinthe, QC, Canada. (2)Reproductive Biology,
Leibniz Institute for Farm Animal Biology, Dummerstorf, Germany. (3)Centre de
recherche en reproduction animale, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Montreal, St-Hyacinthe, QC, Canada. Electronic address:
christopher.price@umontreal.ca.

The ovarian promoter of the primate and rodent genes encoding cytochrome P450
aromatase (CYP19A1) are robustly responsive to forskolin in luteinized cell
models, whereas the ruminant ovarian promoter is minimally active. We explored
this discrepancy by investigating the activity of the bovine ovarian promoter in 
two bovine granulosa cell models, luteinizing and non-luteinizing cells in vitro.
In non-luteinizing cells, both FSH and IGF1 increased abundance of transcripts
derived from the ovarian promoter. Comparison of the activity of promoters of
several species in response to transcription factors (forskolin, NR5A2, FOXL2) in
luteinizing cells demonstrated that a rat ovarian promoter-luciferase reporter
was regulated mainly by forskolin (18-fold increase over basal expression) and
addition of NR5A2 or FOXL2 had no further effect. Activity of a human promoter
was significantly increased by NR5A2 plus forskolin (153-fold) compared with
forskolin alone (71-fold over basal); addition of FOXL2 did not significantly
increase promoter activity. Forskolin alone provoked minor activation of caprine 
and bovine promoter reporters (3-fold over basal), and addition of NR5A2
increased activity (7- to 11-fold). When forskolin, NR5A2 and FOXL2 treatments
were combined, the activity of the caprine and bovine promoters increased to 20- 
and 34-fold, respectively. These data suggest that a major reason why CYP19A1 is 
not expressed in luteinized cells (and the corpus luteum) of ruminants may be the
stimulatory effect of FOXL2, which does not appear to be the case in the human
and rat.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24556528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2014 Aug;40(4):1239-52. doi: 10.1007/s10695-014-9919-6.
Epub 2014 Feb 14.

Genome-wide identification, phylogeny, and gonadal expression of fox genes in
Nile tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus.

Yuan J(1), Tao W, Cheng Y, Huang B, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, 400715, People's Republic of China.

The fox genes play important roles in various biological processes, including
sexual development. In the present study, we isolated 65 fox genes, belonging to 
18 subfamilies named A-R, from Nile tilapia through genome-wide screening.
Twenty-four of them have two or three (foxm1) copies. Furthermore, 16, 25, 68,
and 45 fox members were isolated from nematodes, protochordates, teleosts, and
tetrapods, respectively. Phylogenetic analyses indicated fox gene family had
undergone three expansions parallel to the three rounds of genome duplication
during evolution. We also analyzed the clustered fox genes and found that
apparent linkage duplication existed in teleosts, which further supported
fish-specific genome duplication hypothesis. In addition, species- and
lineage-specific duplication is another reason for fox gene family expansion.
Based on the four pairs of XX and XY gonadal transcriptome data from four
critical developmental stages, we analyzed the expression profile of all fox
genes and identified sexually dimorphic fox genes at each stage. All fox genes
were detected in gonads, with 15 of them at the background expression level
(total read per kb per million reads, RPKM < 10), 29 at moderate expression level
(10 < total RPKM < 100), and 21 at high expression level (total RPKM > 100).
There are 27, 24, 28, and 9 sexually dimorphic fox genes at 5, 30, 90, and
180 days after hatching (dah), respectively. foxq1a, foxf1, foxr1, and foxr1 were
identified as the most differentially expressed genes at each stage. foxl2 was
characterized as XX-dominant gene, while foxd5, foxi3, foxn3, foxj1a, foxj3b, and
foxo6b were characterized as XY-dominant genes. qPCR and in situ hybridization of
foxh1 and foxj1a were performed to confirm the expression profiles and to
validate the transcriptome data. Our results suggest that fox genes might play
important roles in sex determination and gonadal development in teleosts.

PMID: 24526262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Reprod Sci. 2014 Oct;21(10):1249-55. doi: 10.1177/1933719114522549. Epub 2014 Feb
11.

FOXL2 in human endometrium: hyperexpressed in endometriosis.

Governini L(1), Carrarelli P(1), Rocha AL(2), Leo VD(1), Luddi A(1), Arcuri F(1),
Piomboni P(1), Chapron C(3), Bilezikjian LM(4), Petraglia F(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University of Siena,
Siena, Italy. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Federal University of 
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. (3)Department of Gynecology Obstetrics II
and Reproductive Medicine, Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Faculté de Médecine, AP-HP, CHU Cochin, Paris, France. (4)The Clayton Foundation 
Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute for Biological Studies, La
Jolla, CA, USA. (5)Department of Molecular and Developmental Medicine, University
of Siena, Siena, Italy felice.petraglia@unisi.it.

The present study investigated expression and protein localization of FOXL2
messenger RNA (mRNA) in endometrium of healthy women and in patients with
endometriosis during endometrial cycle. In endometriotic lesions, FOXL2 mRNA and 
protein were evaluated and a possible correlation with activin A mRNA expression 
changes was also studied. Endometrium was collected from healthy women (n = 52)
and from women with endometriosis (n = 31) by hysteroscopy; endometriotic tissues
were collected by laparoscopy (n = 38). FOXL2 gene expression analysis in
endometrium of healthy women showed a significant expression and no significant
changes in mRNA levels between proliferative and secretory phases; a similar
pattern was observed in endometrium of patients with endometriosis.
Immunohistochemical evaluation showed that FOXL2 protein localized in stromal and
glandular cells and colocalized with SUMO-1. FOXL2 mRNA expression was 3-fold
higher in endometriosis than in healthy endometrium (P < .01) and a positive
correlation between FOXL2 and activin A mRNA was found (P < .05) in
endometriosis. In conclusion, FOXL2 mRNA expression and its protein localization 
do not change during endometrial cycle in eutopic endometrium from healthy
individuals or patients with endometriosis; the hyperexpression of FOXL2 in
endometriotic lesions suggests an involvement of this transcriptional regulator, 
probably associated with activin A expression and related to the pathogenesis of 
endometriosis.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMID: 24520083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Aquat Toxicol. 2014 Mar;148:211-20. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2014.01.010. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

Molecular signatures in rainbow darter (Etheostoma caeruleum) inhabiting an
urbanized river reach receiving wastewater effluents.

Bahamonde PA(1), Tetreault GR(2), McMaster ME(3), Servos MR(4), Martyniuk CJ(5), 
Munkittrick KR(5).

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Rivers Institute and Department of Biology, University of New
Brunswick, Saint John, NB, Canada E2L 4L5. Electronic address:
paulina.bahamonde@unb.ca. (2)Emerging Methods Branch, Aquatic Contaminant
Research Division, Water Science and Technology Directorate, Environment Canada, 
Burlington, ON, Canada L7R 4A6; University of Waterloo, Department of Biology,
Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1. (3)Emerging Methods Branch, Aquatic Contaminant
Research Division, Water Science and Technology Directorate, Environment Canada, 
Burlington, ON, Canada L7R 4A6. (4)University of Waterloo, Department of Biology,
Waterloo, ON, Canada N2L 3G1. (5)Canadian Rivers Institute and Department of
Biology, University of New Brunswick, Saint John, NB, Canada E2L 4L5.

Rainbow darter (Etheostoma caeruleum) is a small benthic fish species found in
North America that are abundant and distributed throughout the Grand River
watershed, ON, Canada. Rainbow darter exhibit intersex in males at sites adjacent
to municipal wastewater effluents (MWWE). In October 2010, female and male
rainbow darter were collected at 3 sites (1 upstream reference and 2 downstream
exposed sites) in the Grand River near the cities of Kitchener and Waterloo. The 
primary objectives of this research were (1) to characterize the responses of
whole organism endpoints (i.e. condition factor (K), liversomatic (LSI) and
gonadosomatic index (GSI), histopathology) to MWWEs and (2) to identify
transcripts showing altered steady state abundance with exposure to MWWE in fish 
inhabiting municipal wastewater effluent-exposed areas. Genes measured in this
study included vitellogenin, Sry-box containing protein 9 (sox9), forkhead box L2
(foxl2), doublesex and mab-3 related transcription factor 1 (dmrt1), cytochrome
P450, family 11, subfamily A, polypeptide 1 (cyp11a) as well as estrogen (esr1,
esrb) and androgen (ar) receptors. There were no changes in condition factor;
however, there was a significant increase in LSI and a decrease in GSI in fish
inhabiting downstream environments when compared with fish collected from the
reference site. Males had a high incidence (~ 70%) of intersex in downstream
sites; characterized by the presence of oocytes within the testis. In the gonad, 
there were sex specific differences for genes related to sexual differentiation; 
dmrt1 was only expressed in males whereas foxl2 and sox9 were highly expressed in
females compared to males. Expression levels of ar and esr1 were higher in
females than males. Conversely, esrb was not differentially expressed between
sexes or among sites. There were no differences detected for the genes
investigated within sex among sites. This study is the first to report on gene
expression changes in the rainbow darter, with emphasis on the differences in
transcript abundance between sexes and how these changes relate to exposures to
MWWEs. Molecular approaches are being investigated for their potential
application to field ecotoxicology, and molecular bioassays for relevant,
sentinel species in environmental monitoring programs are required to better
understand the impact of anthropogenic impacts on species at risk in river
systems.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24513783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Virchows Arch. 2014 Mar;464(3):301-13. doi: 10.1007/s00428-013-1522-1. Epub 2014 
Feb 1.

Testicular cancer: biology and biomarkers.

Looijenga LH(1), Stoop H, Biermann K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Laboratory of Experimental Patho-Oncology, Erasmus MC
- University Medical Center Rotterdam, P.O. Box 2040, 3000, CA, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands, l.looijenga@erasmusmc.nl.

The term "human germ cell tumors" (GCTs) refers to a heterogeneous group of
neoplasms, all with a defined histological appearance. They have specific
epidemiological characteristics, clinical behavior, and pathogenesis.
Histologically, GCTs contain various tissue elements, which are homologs of
normal embryogenesis. We have proposed a subclassification of GCTs in five
subtypes, three of which preferentially occur in the testis. These include
teratomas and yolk sac tumors of neonates and infants (type I), seminomas and
nonseminomas of (predominantly) adolescents and adults (type II), and
spermatocytic seminomas of the elderly (type III). Both spontaneous and induced
animal models have been reported, of which the relevance for human GCTs is still 
to be clarified. Multidisciplinary studies have recently shed new light on the
(earliest steps in the) pathogenesis of GCTs, mainly in regard of malignant type 
II GCTs (germ cell cancer (GCC)). This review discusses novel understanding of
the pathogenesis of (mainly) GCC, focusing on identification of informative
diagnostic markers suitable for application in a clinical setting. These include 
OCT3/4, SOX9/FOXL2, SOX17/SOX2, as well as embryonic microRNAs. These markers
have been identified through studies on normal embryogenesis, specifically
related to the gonads, including the germ cell lineage. Their strengths and
limitations are discussed as well as the expected future approach to identify the
group of individuals at highest risk for development of a GCC. The latter would
allow screening of defined populations, early diagnosis, optimal follow-up, and
potentially early treatment, preventing long-term side effects of systemic
treatment.

PMID: 24487784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Curr Biol. 2014 Feb 17;24(4):404-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2013.12.039. Epub 2014 Jan
30.

FOXL2 is a female sex-determining gene in the goat.

Boulanger L(1), Pannetier M(1), Gall L(1), Allais-Bonnet A(1), Elzaiat M(1), Le
Bourhis D(2), Daniel N(1), Richard C(1), Cotinot C(1), Ghyselinck NB(3), Pailhoux
E(4).

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR 1198 Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas,
France. (2)INRA, UMR 1198 Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, 78350
Jouy-en-Josas, France; UNCEIA R&D, 13 Rue Jouët, 94704 Maisons-Alfort, France.
(3)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Inserm
U964, CNRS UMR 7104, University of Strasbourg (UdS), Department of Functional
Genomics and Cancer, 1 Rue Laurent Fries, BP10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France. 
(4)INRA, UMR 1198 Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas,
France. Electronic address: eric.pailhoux@jouy.inra.fr.

The origin of sex reversal in XX goats homozygous for the polled intersex
syndrome (PIS) mutation was unclear because of the complexity of the mutation
that affects the transcription of both FOXL2 and several long noncoding RNAs
(lncRNAs). Accumulating evidence suggested that FOXL2 could be the sole gene of
the PIS locus responsible for XX sex reversal, the lncRNAs being involved in
transcriptional regulation of FOXL2. In this study, using zinc-finger
nuclease-directed mutagenesis, we generated several fetuses, of which one XX
individual bears biallelic mutations of FOXL2. Our analysis demonstrates that
FOXL2 loss of function dissociated from loss of lncRNA expression is sufficient
to cause an XX female-to-male sex reversal in the goat model and, as in the mouse
model, an agenesis of eyelids. Both developmental defects were reproduced in two 
newborn animals cloned from the XX FOXL2(-/-) fibroblasts. These results
therefore identify FOXL2 as a bona fide female sex-determining gene in the goat. 
They also highlight a stage-dependent role of FOXL2 in the ovary, different
between goats and mice, being important for fetal development in the former but
for postnatal maintenance in the latter.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24485832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Sex Dev. 2014;8(5):243-51. doi: 10.1159/000358072. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Building an ovary: insights into establishment of somatic cell lineages in the
mouse.

Nicol B(1), Yao HH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, N.C., USA.

The molecular pathways that drive the differentiation of somatic cell populations
in the testis and ovary have been the subjects of intensive research over the
past decade. It is now clear that ovarian differentiation is a coordinate event
driven by secreted factors including R-spondin1, WNT4, and follistatin and
transcriptional regulators such as ß-catenin and FOXL2. These factors direct
bipotential somatic cell lineages toward an ovarian fate and simultaneously
suppress the emergence of testis-determining processes. This review summarizes
the molecular pathways responsible for establishment of the ovary and discusses
the current hypotheses on the origin(s) of somatic cell lineages and how these
somatic cells acquire the characteristics necessary for their function during
ovarian development and maintenance.

PMID: 24480990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Apr;164A(4):950-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36379. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

An individual with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES)
and additional features expands the phenotype associated with mutations in KAT6B.

Yu HC(1), Geiger EA, Medne L, Zackai EH, Shaikh TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora,
Colorado.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal
dominant disorder caused by mutations in FOXL2. We identified an individual with 
BPES and additional phenotypic features who did not have a FOXL2 mutation. We
used whole exome sequencing to identify a de novo mutation in KAT6B (lysine
acetyltransferase 6B) in this individual. The mutation was a 2-bp insertion
leading to a frameshift which resulted in a premature stop codon. The resulting
truncated protein does not have the C-terminal serine/methionine transcription
activation domain necessary for interaction with other transcriptional and
epigenetic regulators. This mutation likely has a dominant-negative or
gain-of-function effect, similar to those observed in other genetic disorders
resulting from KAT6B mutations, including Say-Barber-Biesecker-Young-Simpson
(SBBYSS) and genitopatellar syndrome (GTPTS). Thus, our subject's phenotype
broadens the spectrum of clinical findings associated with mutations in KAT6B.
Furthermore, our results suggest that individuals with BPES without a FOXL2
mutation should be tested for KAT6B mutations. The transcriptional and epigenetic
regulation mediated by KAT6B appears crucial to early developmental processes,
which when perturbed can lead to a wide spectrum of phenotypic outcomes.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4414115
PMID: 24458743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. FASEB J. 2014 May;28(5):2020-8. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-246108. Epub 2014 Jan 22.

FOXL2 transcriptionally represses Sf1 expression by antagonizing WT1 during
ovarian development in mice.

Takasawa K(1), Kashimada K, Pelosi E, Takagi M, Morio T, Asahara H, Schlessinger 
D, Mizutani S, Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology, Tokyo Medical and Dental 
University, Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan. kkashimada.ped@tmd.ac.jp.

Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1; Ad4BP/NR5A1) plays key roles in gonadal development.
Initially, the Sf1 gene is expressed in mouse fetal gonads of both sexes, but
later is up-regulated in testes and down-regulated in ovaries. While Sf1
expression is activated and maintained by Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) and LIM homeobox 9 
(LHX9), the mechanism of sex-specific regulation remains unclear. We hypothesized
that Sf1 is repressed by the transcription factor Forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) during 
ovarian development. In an in vitro system (TM3 cells), up-regulation of Sf1 by
the WT1 splice variant WT1-KTS was antagonized by FOXL2, as determined by
quantitative RT-PCR. Using reporter assays, we localized the Sf1 proximal
promoter region involved in this antagonism to a 674-bp interval. A conserved
FOXL2 binding site was identified in this interval by in vitro chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Introducing mutations into this site abolished negative
regulation by FOXL2 in reporter assays. Finally, in Foxl2-null mice, Sf1
expression was increased 2-fold relative to wild-type XX fetal gonads. Our
results support the hypothesis that FOXL2 negatively regulates Sf1 expression by 
antagonizing WT1-KTS during early ovarian development in mice.

PMCID: PMC3986836
PMID: 24451388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Hum Reprod. 2014 Apr;20(4):286-92. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gau007. Epub 2014 Jan 
20.

The two classes of primordial follicles in the mouse ovary: their development,
physiological functions and implications for future research.

Zheng W(1), Zhang H, Liu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg,
SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden.

Ovarian follicles are the basic functional units in the mammalian ovary. This
review summarizes early pioneering studies and focuses on recent progress that
has shown that there are two distinct classes of primordial follicles in the
ovary: the first wave of primordial follicles that are activated immediately
after they are formed and the adult primordial follicles that are activated
gradually in later life. These two separate classes have been proposed for two
decades, but sufficient experimental evidence to support this hypothesis has only
been obtained recently using newly developed follicular tracing techniques in
genetically modified mouse models. These two follicle populations differ from
each other primarily in terms of their developmental dynamics and their
contributions to ovarian physiology. It is apparent now that these two follicle
populations should be treated separately, and such knowledge will hopefully lead 
to a more in-depth understanding of how distinct types of primordial follicles
contribute to physiologic and pathologic alterations of the mammalian ovary.

PMID: 24448914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Indian J Surg Oncol. 2013 Mar;4(1):37-47. doi: 10.1007/s13193-012-0201-z. Epub
2012 Dec 7.

Recent advances in granulosa cell tumor ovary: a review.

Kottarathil VD(1), Antony MA(2), Nair IR(3), Pavithran K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and
Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Ponekkara P.O, Kochi, Kerala India
682041 ; 710, Sunny Palace, Changampuzha Samadhi Road, Edapally, Kochi, Kerala
682024 India. (2)Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Surgical Oncology, Amrita
Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham,
Ponekkara P.O, Kochi, Kerala India 682041. (3)Department of Pathology, Amrita
Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham,
Ponekkara P.O, Kochi, Kerala India 682041. (4)Department of Medical Oncology,
Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre, Amrita Vishwa
Vidyapeetham, Ponekkara P.O, Kochi, Kerala India 682041.

Granulosa cell tumors constitute less than 5 % of all ovarian tumors. Unlike
epithelial ovarian tumors, they occur in a younger age group, are usually
detected in an early stage and often have features of hyperestrogenism. The
presenting symptoms are usually nonspecific with abdominal pain or distension.
They follow an indolent course and are characterized by a long natural history.
Mutation of FOXL2 (402C->G) seen in 97 % of adult GCT may be pathognomonic for
adult GCT. Only stage of the disease has been consistently shown in various
studies to affect survival of patients with GCT. The initial management of
patients, for whom fertility is not an issue, is total abdominal hysterectomy,
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy and removal of all gross disease. Nodal
dissection is not a significant factor for survival and is not recommended in
surgical staging of GCT. Fertility preserving surgery with unilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy is feasible in young patients with stage Ia GCT. Patients
with early stage disease (stage I and II) have a very good prognosis with 5 year 
DFS and OS of 89 % and 99 % respectively and these groups of patients usually
don't require any postoperative treatment. Patients with stage Ic disease
associated with poor prognostic factors like large tumor size or high mitotic
index and stage II, have a higher chance of relapse, and may benefit with
postoperative treatment but role of chemotherapy is still debatable. In advanced 
stage disease (stage III and IV) the 5 year DFS and OS disease was 72 % and 80 % 
respectively hence the option of postoperative treatment with 6 cycles of BEP
should be considered in this group. Recently paclitaxel is being investigated as 
an effective tool in GCT. The efficacy of radiation in GCT is not well defined
but in optimally debulked cases postoperative radiation is a viable option. Due
to high chance of recurrence even years after apparent clinical cure of the
primary tumor, lifelong follow up with clinical examination and tumor markers
like inhibin B is recommended. About 25 % GCT develop recurrence and the median
time to recur is usually 4-5 years. Most recurrences are intraperitoneal and
usually a complete debulking of the disease is feasible even in the recurrent
setting. Postoperative chemotherapy (platinum based) is usually given after
surgery more so in cases with widespread disease or after suboptimal
cytoreduction. Recurrent chemoresistant, progressive non-responding GCT or
patients with high surgical risk are ideal candidates for targeted therapy.

PMCID: PMC3578540
PMID: 24426698  [PubMed]


136. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 9;9(1):e85545. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085545. eCollection 
2014.

FOXL2, GATA4, and SMAD3 co-operatively modulate gene expression, cell viability
and apoptosis in ovarian granulosa cell tumor cells.

Anttonen M(1), Pihlajoki M(2), Andersson N(2), Georges A(3), L'hôte D(3),
Vattulainen S(2), Färkkilä A(1), Unkila-Kallio L(4), Veitia RA(3), Heikinheimo
M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research Center, University of Helsinki and
Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland ; Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research Center,
University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland. (3)Programme de Pathologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Institut Jacques
Monod, UMR 7592 CNRS-Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France. (4)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. (5)Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research Center,
University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland ; Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Aberrant ovarian granulosa cell proliferation and apoptosis may lead to granulosa
cell tumors (GCT), the pathogenesis of which involves transcription factors
GATA4, FOXL2, and SMAD3. FOXL2 gene harbors a point mutation (C134W) in a vast
majority of GCTs. GATA4 is abundantly expressed in GCTs and its expression
correlates with poor prognosis. The TGF-ß mediator SMAD3 promotes GCT cell
survival through NF-<U+03BA>B activation, and interacts with FOXL2. Here, we find that
the expression patterns of these factors overlap in the normal human ovary and 90
GCTs, and positively correlate with each other and with their mutual target gene 
CCND2, which is a key factor for granulosa cell proliferation. We have explored
the molecular interactions of FOXL2, GATA4, and SMAD3 and their roles in the
regulation of CCND2 using co-immunoprecipitation, promoter transactivation, and
cell viability assays in human GCT cells. We found that not only SMAD3, but also 
GATA4 physically interact with both wild type and C134W-mutated FOXL2. GATA4 and 
SMAD3 synergistically induce a 8-fold increase in CCND2 promoter transactivation,
which is 50% reduced by both FOXL2 types. We confirmed that wild type FOXL2
significantly decreases cell viability. Interestingly, GATA4 and SMAD3 caused a
marked reduction of GCT cell apoptosis induced by wild type FOXL2. Thus, the
effects of GATA4 and SMAD3 on both cell viability and apoptosis are distinct from
those of wild type FOXL2; a perturbation of this balance due to the oncogenic
FOXL2 mutation is likely to contribute to GCT pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3887065
PMID: 24416423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Mar;41(3):1501-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2995-3. Epub 2014
Jan 11.

A sex-associated sequence identified by RAPD screening in gynogenetic individuals
of turbot (Scophthalmus maximus).

Vale L(1), Dieguez R, Sánchez L, Martínez P, Viñas A.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética, Facultad de Biología (CIBUS), Universidad de
Santiago de Compostela Avda. Lope Gómez de Marzoa, 15782, Santiago de Compostela,
Spain.

Understanding the genetic basis of sex determination mechanisms is essential for 
improving the productivity of farmed aquaculture fish species like turbot
(Scophthalmus maximus). In culture conditions turbot males grow slower than
females starting from eight months post-hatch, and this differential growth rate 
is maintained until sexual maturation is reached, being mature females almost
twice as big as males of the same age. The goal of this study was to identify
sex-specific DNA markers in turbot using comparative random amplified
polymorphism DNA (RAPD) profiles in males and females to get new insights of the 
genetic architecture related to sex determination. In order to do this, we
analyzed 540 commercial 10-mer RAPD primers in male and female pools of a
gynogenetic family because of its higher inbreeding, which facilitates the
detection of associations across the genome. Two sex-linked RAPD markers were
identified in the female pool and one in the male pool. After the analysis of the
three markers on individual samples of each pool and also in unrelated
individuals, only one RAPD showed significant association with females. This
marker was isolated, cloned and sequenced, containing two sequences, a
microsatellite (SEX01) and a minisatellite (SEX02), which were mapped in the
turbot reference map. From this map position, through a comparative mapping
approach, we identified Foxl2, a relevant gene related to initial steps of sex
differentiation, and Wnt4, a gene related with ovarian development, close to the 
microsatellite and minisatellite markers, respectively. The position of Foxl2 and
Wnt4 was confirmed by linkage mapping in the reference turbot map.

PMID: 24415295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Nat Commun. 2014;5:2936. doi: 10.1038/ncomms3936.

FOXL2 posttranslational modifications mediated by GSK3ß determine the growth of
granulosa cell tumours.

Kim JH(1), Kim YH(2), Kim HM(3), Park HO(3), Ha NC(4), Kim TH(5), Park M(3), Lee 
K(6), Bae J(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, 84 Heukseok-Ro, Dongjak-Gu,
Seoul 156-756, Korea [2]. (2)1] Department of Microbiology, Catholic University
of Daegu School of Medicine, 17 Duruegongwon-Ro, Nam-Gu, Daegu 705-718, Korea
[2]. (3)College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, 84 Heukseok-Ro, Dongjak-Gu,
Seoul 156-756, Korea. (4)Department of Manufacturing Pharmacy, Pusan National
University, 63 Busandaehak-Ro, Kumjeong-Gu, Busan 609-735, Korea. (5)Department
of Pathology, CHA University, 59 Yatap-Ro, Bundang-Gu, Seongnam 463-836, Korea.
(6)Department of Life Science, Chung-Ang University, 84 Heukseok-Ro, Dongjak-Gu, 
Seoul 156-756, Korea.

Approximately 97% of patients with ovarian granulosa cell tumours (GCTs) bear the
C134W mutation in FOXL2; however, the pathophysiological mechanism of this
mutation is unknown. Here we report how this mutation affects GCT development.
Sequential posttranslational modifications of the C134W mutant occur where
hyperphosphorylation at serine 33 (S33) by GSK3ß induces MDM2-mediated
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. In contrast, S33 of wild-type FOXL2
is underphosphorylated, leading to its SUMOylation and stabilization. This
prominent hyperphosphorylation is also observed at S33 of FOXL2 in GCT patients
bearing the C134W mutation. In xenograft mice, the S33 phosphorylation status
correlates with the oncogenicity of FOXL2, and the inhibition of GSK3ß
efficiently represses GCT growth. These findings reveal a previously unidentified
regulatory mechanism that determines the oncogenic attributes of the C134W
mutation via differential posttranslational modifications of FOXL2 in GCT
development.

PMID: 24390485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Gynecol Oncol. 2014 May;133(2):382-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.12.012. Epub 2013
Dec 14.

The role of FOXL2 in the pathogenesis of adult ovarian granulosa cell tumours.

Rosario R(1), Cohen PA(2), Shelling AN(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of Auckland, New Zealand.
Electronic address: r.rosario@auckland.ac.nz. (2)School of Women's and Infants'
Health, University of Western Australia, Australia. (3)Department of Obstetrics &
Gynaecology, University of Auckland, New Zealand.

OBJECTIVE: It has been four years since the discovery of the FOXL2 402C>G
mutation in adult ovarian granulosa cell tumours. Yet to date, there have been
few studies which have investigated the precise role of the mutation in tumour
pathogenesis. This review aims to summarise the research in this area, proposes a
mechanism of action for the mutation, and explores the implications for clinical 
practice and future therapeutics.
METHODS: A literature search was performed with the keywords 'granulosa cell
tumour' and 'FOXL2' on PubMed.
RESULTS: Although the search returned 52 articles, of these only nine
publications investigate the pathogenic effect of the mutant FOXL2 allele. Mutant
FOXL2 maintains some of the transcriptional activity of the wildtype allele, but 
there is a subtle alteration of the expression in a unique suite of
cancer-related genes. The mutation appears to deregulate the anti-proliferative
transforming growth factor beta (TGF-ß) pathway and this may contribute to the
pathogenesis of adult GCTs. The inability of mutant FOXL2 to elicit an effective 
apoptotic signalling cascade may also be important in GCT pathogenesis.
CONCLUSION: The 402C>G mutation in FOXL2 is central to the development of adult
granulosa cell tumours. Based on the evidence, we suggest that FOXL2 is an
oncogene or tumour suppressor depending on the genetic context that is the GCT
subtype.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24342437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Jan 10;443(2):537-42. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.010. Epub 2013 Dec 8.

FOXL2-induced follistatin attenuates activin A-stimulated cell proliferation in
human granulosa cell tumors.

Cheng JC(1), Chang HM(1), Qiu X(1), Fang L(1), Leung PC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Child & Family Research Institute,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Child & Family Research Institute,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada.
Electronic address: peter.leung@ubc.ca.

Human granulosa cell tumors (GCTs) are rare, and their etiology remains largely
unknown. Recently, the FOXL2 402C>G (C134W) mutation was found to be specifically
expressed in human adult-type GCTs; however, its function in the development of
human GCTs is not fully understood. Activins are members of the transforming
growth factor-beta superfamily, which has been shown to stimulate normal
granulosa cell proliferation; however, little is known regarding the function of 
activins in human GCTs. In this study, we examined the effect of activin A on
cell proliferation in the human GCT-derived cell line KGN. We show that activin A
treatment stimulates KGN cell proliferation. Treatment with the activin type I
receptor inhibitor SB431542 blocks activin A-stimulated cell proliferation. In
addition, our results show that cyclin D2 is induced by treatment with activin A 
and is involved in activin A-stimulated cell proliferation. Moreover, the
activation of Smad signaling is required for activin A-induced cyclin D2
expression. Finally, we show that the overexpression of the wild-type FOXL2 but
not the C134W mutant FOXL2 induced follistatin production. Treatment with
exogenous follistatin blocks activin A-stimulated cell proliferation, and the
overexpression of wild-type FOXL2 attenuates activin A-stimulated cell
proliferation. These results suggest that FOXL2 may act as a tumor suppressor in 
human adult-type GCTs by inducing follistatin expression, which subsequently
inhibits activin-stimulated cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24332943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Reprod Biol. 2013 Dec;13(4):317-24. doi: 10.1016/j.repbio.2013.10.002. Epub 2013 
Oct 22.

Molecular identification and expression of FOXL2 and DMRT1 genes from willow
minnow Gnathopogon caerulescens.

Ashida H(1), Ueyama N, Kinoshita M, Kobayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Aquatic Biology, Department of Fisheries, Graduate School of
Agriculture, Kinki University, Japan.

Willow minnow, Gnathopogon caerulescens, is a commercially important freshwater
fish species in Japan. In particular, female fish with eggs are more expensive
than male fish. Many methods have been tested to achieve 100% willow minnow
female production; however, none of them were successful because of the
temperature-dependent sex determination mechanism. To date, the molecular
mechanism underlying sex determination in willow minnow is still not completely
understood. This study was designed as an attempt to understand the sex
differentiation mechanism of willow minnow at the molecular level. We cloned the 
mRNAs of two sex-related genes of G. caerulescens-forkhead-box protein L2 (FOXL2)
and doublesex- and mab-3-related transcription factor 1 (DMRT1). We compared the 
inferred amino acid sequences to those of other fish and examined the expression 
patterns of these genes in adult tissues and during development. The FOXL2 and
DMRT1 genes of willow minnow were isolated and identified. Both gene sequences
share high homology with those of Chinese Cyprinidae. The cell- and
tissue-specific expression of FOXL2 and DMRT1 were also determined. Both genes
were expressed in gonads, and their expression level increased before gonadal sex
differentiation. Overall, these results suggest that these two genes play a key
role in the sex differentiation of willow minnow. Detailed knowledge regarding
this mechanism will be useful for efficient all-female cyprinid fish production
that follows a temperature-dependent sex determination system.

Copyright © 2013 Society for Biology of Reproduction & the Institute of Animal
Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of Sciences in Olsztyn.
Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp. z o.o. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24287040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Vis. 2013 Nov 16;19:2298-305. eCollection 2013.

Identification of the forkhead transcriptional factor 2 (FOXL2) gene mutations in
four Chinese families with blepharophimosis syndrome.

Zhang L(1), Wang L, Han R, Guan L, Fan B, Liu M, Ying M, Peng H, Li N.

Author information: 
(1)Henan Eye Institute, Henan Eye Hospital, Henan, People's Republic of China ;
Tianjin Key Lab of Ophthalmology and Visual Science, Tianjin Eye Institute,
Tianjin, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: To determine the genetic origin of disease in four Chinese families with
blepharophimosis syndrome.
METHODS: Four Han Chinese families with blepharophimosis syndrome were
ascertained and patients underwent complete physical and ophthalmic examinations.
Blood samples were collected and genomic DNA was extracted. Sequence analysis of 
the forkhead transcriptional factor 2 (FOXL2) gene was performed by direct
sequencing and mutations were analyzed.
RESULTS: Three mutations in FOXL2 were found in four families, including
c.672_701dup30 (p.Ala224_Ala234dup10), c.313C>A (p.N105H), and c.430G>T
(p.R144W). The c.672_701dup30 (p.Ala224_Ala234dup10) mutation was reported
previously and predicted to result in expansions of the polyalanine tract. The
mutations of c.313C>A (p. N105H) and c.430G>T (p.R144W) are two novel missense
mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study further supports the view that the expansion of the
polyalanine tract is the hotspot of mutations within FOXL2. The two novel
missense mutations detected in this study will expand the mutation spectrum of
the FOXL2 gene and contribute to the research on the molecular pathogenesis of
FOXL2.

PMCID: PMC3834601
PMID: 24265544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Tohoku J Exp Med. 2013;231(4):243-50.

The FOXL2 mutation (c.402C>G) in adult-type ovarian granulosa cell tumors of
three Japanese patients: clinical report and review of the literature.

Takahashi A(1), Kimura F, Yamanaka A, Takebayashi A, Kita N, Takahashi K,
Murakami T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shiga University of Medical Science.

Adult-type granulosa cell tumor (AGCT) is a rare class of malignant ovarian tumor
with unique features, characterized by slow growth, late recurrence, relatively
good prognosis and unified cause in almost all patients. The forkhead box L2
(FOXL2) gene encodes an essential transcription factor in the ovary. FOXL2 is
important in female sex determination, follicle recruitment, and granulosa cell
development. About 70-97% of AGCTs were reported to carry a somatic mutation
c.402C>G (C134W) in the FOXL2 gene. However, it is unknown whether AGCTs of
Japanese patients harbor the FOXL2 c.402C>G mutation. Here, we report a
mutational analysis of the FOXL2 gene in four Japanese patients with AGCTs, and
we review the literature to determine the precise incidence of FOXL2 mutations in
AGCTs. All four patients were analyzed by immunohistochemistry for FOXL2. Genomic
DNA was extracted from paraffin-embedded tissues, and was analyzed to detect the 
c.402C>G mutation in FOXL2 by direct sequencing. All tumors were stained with
FOXL2. Three of the four tumors harbor the c.402C>G mutation. Based on the
literature review, FOXL2 immunostaining is a highly specific marker for sex
cord-stromal tumors (SCSTs), but it is not specific for AGCTs, one subtype of
SCSTs. We identified 340 patients with the FOXL2 mutation (c.402C>G) and
determined that the incidence of the mutation is 91.9% in AGCT patients.
Therefore, this FOXL2 mutation is specific to AGCTs in the ovary and is useful
for diagnosis of this disease.

PMID: 24257635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Reprod Dev. 2014 Mar 7;60(1):14-20. Epub 2013 Nov 15.

Differential apoptotic and proliferative activities of wild-type FOXL2 and
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES)-associated mutant
FOXL2 proteins.

Kim JH(1), Bae J.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy, Chung-Ang University, Seoul 156-756, Korea.

FOXL2 is an essential transcription factor that is required for proper
development of the ovary and eyelid. Mutations in FOXL2 cause an autosomal
dominant genetic disorder, blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome
(BPES). BPES type I patients have eyelid malformation and premature ovarian
failure leading to infertility, whereas women with type II BPES are fertile or
subfertile. In the present study, we evaluated and compared apoptotic and
antiproliferative activities of wild-type (WT) and mutant FOXL2 proteins found in
BPES type I and II in human granulosa cell tumor-derived KGN cells. Ectopic
expression of WT FOXL2 induced apoptosis and inhibited cell cycle progression in 
human granulosa cells. In contrast, mutated FOXL2s found in BPES type I
significantly reduced these activities, whereas mutated FOXL2s in BPES type II
showed intermediate activities. Furthermore, mutant FOX L2 proteins were
defective in activating transcription of target genes including Caspase 8,
TNF-R1, FAS, p21, and BMP4, which regulate apoptosis, proliferation, and
differentiation of granulosa cells. Thus, decreased apoptotic and
antiproliferative activities caused by mutant forms of FOXL2 found in BPES
patients may at least partially contribute to the pathophysiology of ovarian
dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3958583
PMID: 24240106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Histopathology. 2014 Feb;64(3):380-8. doi: 10.1111/his.12253. Epub 2013 Nov 6.

A current perspective on the pathological assessment of FOXL2 in adult-type
granulosa cell tumours of the ovary.

Kommoss S(1), Gilks CB, Penzel R, Herpel E, Mackenzie R, Huntsman D, Schirmacher 
P, Anglesio M, Schmidt D, Kommoss F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen,
Tübingen, Germany; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

AIMS: The diagnosis of adult-type granulosa cell tumours of the ovary (aGCT) is
based on histomorphology aided by immunohistochemical staining for sex cord
markers. Recently a single, recurrent somatic point mutation (402C<U+2192>G) in FOXL2
was described in aGCT. We have investigated the impact of FOXL2 mutation testing 
in a large cohort of aGCT diagnosed previously by conventional histology and
immunohistochemistry.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue cores from a cohort
of 52 aGCT diagnosed previously by expert gynaecopathologists were analysed
immunohistologically. FOXL2 mutation status was determined by Sanger sequencing
and high-sensitivity TaqMan allelic discrimination assay. Histomorphology was
reassessed by two expert gynaecopathologists. FOXL2 mutation analyses could be
performed successfully in 46 cases, 40 of which were positive for the c.402C>G
mutation, confirming a diagnosis of aGCT. In the six cases negative for the
c.402C>G mutation, one case was confirmed on review as FOXL2 wild-type aGCT,
whereas in the remaining five cases diagnoses other than aGCT were made.
CONCLUSION: In cases where a diagnosis of aGCT is a consideration and unequivocal
diagnosis is not possible based on morphology and routine immunostains, FOXL2
mutation testing can help to confirm the diagnosis. It is particularly relevant
for accurate subclassification within the group of sex cord-stromal tumours.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24192202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Gynecol Oncol. 2014 Jan;132(1):181-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.10.013. Epub 2013
Oct 22.

Impact of a second opinion using expression and molecular analysis of FOXL2 for
sex cord-stromal tumors. A study of the GINECO group & the TMRO network.

Maillet D(1), Goulvent T(2), Rimokh R(3), Vacher-Lavenu MC(4), Pautier P(5),
Alexandre J(6), Pujade-Laurraine E(7), Devouassoux-Shisheboran M(8), Treilleux
I(9), Ray-Coquard I(10), Savina A(11).

Author information: 
(1)Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France; Université Claude Bernard Lyon1 - Université
de Lyon, Lyon, France. (2)Institut Roche de Recherche et Médecine
Translationnelle, 92650 Boulogne Billancourt, France. (3)Centre Léon Bérard,
Lyon, France; Inserm U1052, CNRS UMR5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de 
Lyon, Lyon, France; Université Claude Bernard Lyon1 - Université de Lyon, Lyon,
France. (4)Hôpital Cochin, Assistance publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France; 
Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France. (5)Institut Gustave-Roussy, Paris,
France. (6)Hôpital Cochin, Assistance publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France. 
(7)Hôtel-Dieu - Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France; Université 
Paris Descartes, Paris, France. (8)Inserm U1052, CNRS UMR5286, Centre de
Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, Lyon, France; Hôpital de la Croix-Rousse -
Hospices Civils de Lyon, Lyon, France. (9)Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France;
Inserm U1052, CNRS UMR5286, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Lyon, Lyon,
France. Electronic address: isabelle.treilleux@lyon.unicancer.fr. (10)Centre Léon
Bérard, Lyon, France; Université Claude Bernard Lyon1 - Université de Lyon, Lyon,
France. Electronic address: isabelle.ray-coquard@lyon.unicancer.fr. (11)Roche SAS
Scientific Partnerships, 92650 Boulogne Billancourt, France.

OBJECTIVE: Ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors (SCSTs) are rare and their diagnosis
is often difficult to establish. Recently, immunostaining and molecular analysis 
for Forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) have been developed in this pathology. This study
aims to assess the benefit of an algorithm incorporating these new tools for a
better diagnosis and classification of SCSTs
METHODS: Seventy-two tumors with a potential diagnosis of SCSTs were addressed by
37 different pathologists to one French rare ovarian tumor expert center, member 
of the Rare Malignant Ovarian Tumor network (TMRO). Then a "second opinion" (SO) 
through an algorithm incorporating immunostaining (IHC) and molecular analysis of
FOXL2 was performed for all these cases. This algorithm was then validated by all
pathologists of the TMRO network.
RESULTS: After a second opinion including molecular analysis and immunostaining
for FOXL2 the initial diagnosis was changed in 15 of 72 samples (21%). FOXL2
mutation was present in 44 out of 47 adult granulosa cell tumors (94%), in 3 out 
of 8 Thecomas (37%), in 1 out of 10 Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors (SLSTs) (10%) and 
in 3 out of 5 undifferentiated-SCSTs (Und-SCSTs) (60%). Immunoexpression of FOXL2
was available in 45 cases of SCSTs: FOXL2 was expressed in 44 of them (98%).
CONCLUSIONS: A second opinion in an expert center for all cases of SCSTs is
fundamental to get an optimal classification of these rare tumors. This second
opinion could be performed with an algorithm which integrates FOXL2 mutation and 
expression status of FOXL2 in order to standardize the practice.

© 2013.

PMID: 24157616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Presse Med. 2013 Nov;42(11):1500-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2013.04.018. Epub 2013 Oct
21.

[Premature ovarian failures].

[Article in French]

Bricaire L(1), Laroche E, Bourcigaux N, Donadille B, Christin-Maitre S.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Saint-Antoine, endocrinologie de la reproduction, Centre des maladies 
endocriniennes rares de la croissance (CMERC), 75012 Paris, France.

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is clinically suspected by amenorrhea and
confirmed by an elevated FSH serum level above 40 mUI/L (even 20 mUI/L) twice, in
a woman before the age of 40. Prevalence of POF is between 1 to 2% in women. In
90% of cases, no aetiology is identified. Obvious causes are chemotherapy, pelvic
radiotherapy, ovarian surgery and diethylstilbestrol exposure in utero. A
karyotype should be performed as Turner Syndrome is the most frequent genetic
cause of POF. Some X abnormalities such as X deletion or X autosome translocation
can be found. FMR1 pre-mutation (fragile X syndrome) should be searched for, even
though no cases of mental retardation are known, in the family. Other genetic
abnormalities can be suggested by associated symptoms (i.e.: FOXL2, SF1
mutations). Auto-immune aetiology can be suspected if other auto-immune features 
are present, however, there are no reliable auto-antibodies to confirm
auto-immunity in POF. Treatment of POF is based on hormonal replacement therapy
in order to avoid estrogen deficiency, suppress vasomotor symptoms and avoid bone
loss as well as cardiovascular risk. Estrogens should be associated with
progesterone or a progestin, at least up to the age of 51. Patients with POF
should be informed that spontaneous pregnancies may occur (in 5% of cases). In
case of desire of pregnancy, the patient should be oriented to a specialized unit
for in vitro fertilization with oocyte donation. Psychological support is
essential and should be part of the treatment. POF is associated with an
increased risk of emotional distress and depression. No preventive treatment of
POF is available so far.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24157186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Histopathology. 2014 Apr;64(5):626-32. doi: 10.1111/his.12314. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Adult granulosa cell tumour-like areas occurring in ovarian epithelial neoplasms:
report of a case series with investigation of FOXL2 mutation status.

Singh N(1), Gilks CB, Huntsman DG, Smith JH, Coutts M, Ganesan R, McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, UK.

AIMS: To look for FOXL2 mutation in rare ovarian epithelial lesions showing
stromal components with morphological features of adult granulosa cell tumour
(AGCT).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report the 402C<U+2192>G FOXL2 mutation status in five
epithelial ovarian lesions in women aged 45-77 years showing stromal
proliferations that were morphologically indistinguishable from AGCT. The lesions
were mucinous cystadenoma, mixed epithelial cystadenoma, endometriotic cyst,
mucinous borderline tumour (intestinal type), and mucinous carcinoma. In one
case, the AGCT component formed a discrete nodule, and in the others it was
distributed within the septa and cyst walls. FOXL2 mutation was present in two
cases and absent in three cases. One mutation-positive case showed an AGCT nodule
abutting a mucinous borderline tumour, interpreted as a collision tumour. The
other positive case had an AGCT component within the septa of a mucinous
carcinoma, and both components are likely to be neoplastic. In the three cases
without FOXL2 mutation, the stromal component most likely represents a
non-neoplastic AGCT-like proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Areas typical of AGCT are rarely associated with epithelial ovarian 
lesions. These are heterogeneous and likely to be truly neoplastic in only a
subset of cases. FOXL2 mutation testing may be useful in confirming a true
neoplastic AGCT component.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24138090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Feb 15;23(4):1073-83. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt502. Epub 2013 Oct 
16.

Mutations in MAP3K1 tilt the balance from SOX9/FGF9 to WNT/ß-catenin signaling.

Loke J(1), Pearlman A, Radi O, Zuffardi O, Giussani U, Pallotta R, Camerino G,
Ostrer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and.

In-frame missense and splicing mutations (resulting in a 2 amino acid insertion
or a 34 amino acid deletion) dispersed through the MAP3K1 gene tilt the balance
from the male to female sex-determining pathway, resulting in 46,XY disorder of
sex development. These MAP3K1 mutations mediate this balance by enhancing
WNT/ß-catenin/FOXL2 expression and ß-catenin activity and by reducing
SOX9/FGF9/FGFR2/SRY expression. These effects are mediated at multiple levels
involving MAP3K1 interaction with protein co-factors and phosphorylation of
downstream targets. In transformed B-lymphoblastoid cell lines and NT2/D1 cells
transfected with wild-type or mutant MAP3K1 cDNAs under control of the
constitutive CMV promoter, these mutations increased binding of RHOA, MAP3K4,
FRAT1 and AXIN1 and increased phosphorylation of p38 and ERK1/2. Overexpressing
RHOA or reducing expression of MAP3K4 in NT2/D1 cells produced phenocopies of the
MAP3K1 mutations. Using siRNA knockdown of RHOA or overexpressing MAP3K4 in
NT2/D1 cells produced anti-phenocopies. Interestingly, the effects of the MAP3K1 
mutations were rescued by co-transfection with wild-type MAP3K4. Although MAP3K1 
is not usually required for testis determination, mutations in this gene can
disrupt normal development through the gains of function demonstrated in this
study.

PMID: 24135036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Hum Pathol. 2013 Dec;44(12):2774-81. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.07.028. Epub
2013 Oct 14.

An immunohistochemical and molecular analysis of problematic and unclassified
ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors.

Stewart CJ(1), Alexiadis M, Crook ML, Fuller PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, King Edward Memorial Hospital, Perth, Western
Australia, Australia; School for Women's and Infants' Health, University of
Western Australia, Crawley, Australia. Electronic address:
colin.stewart@health.wa.gov.au.

Most ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors (SCSTs) can be categorized on the basis of
conventional histology, but approximately 10% of cases are unclassified because
they present indeterminate or overlapping morphologic features.
Immunohistochemical and molecular studies of unclassified ovarian SCST are very
limited, but recently, it has been demonstrated that 2 major subgroups of SCST,
adult-type granulosa cell tumor and Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor, are characterized 
by somatic mutations in FOXL2 and DICER1, respectively. In this study, 12
diagnostically problematic ovarian SCST, including 9 unclassified tumors, were
investigated for FOXL2 and DICER1 mutations and for immunohistochemical
expression of calretinin, CD56, CD99, estrogen receptor a, estrogen receptor ß,
FOXL2, inhibin, progesterone receptor, and steroidogenic factor-1. Four of 11
tumors with satisfactory analysis showed a FOXL2 mutation; 3 of these cases were 
reported initially as unclassified SCST and 1 as Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor.
Conversely, 3 cases with an original diagnosis of granulosa cell tumor were FOXL2
mutation-negative, and none of 7 tumors with satisfactory analysis demonstrated a
DICER1 mutation. All tumors expressed at least 4 of the immunomarkers examined,
although staining was often focal and there was no consistent correlation with
tumor morphology. In conclusion, molecular analysis is useful in the assessment
of diagnostically challenging ovarian SCST. The absence of FOXL2 and DICER1
mutations in most unclassified SCST suggests that these could represent a
distinct tumor subgroup with different molecular pathogenesis.
Immunohistochemical profiles overlap with those of better categorized SCST, but
staining may be focal or negative emphasizing the requirement for antibody panels
in diagnostic assessment.

© 2013.

PMID: 24134930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Endocrinology. 2013 Dec;154(12):4814-25. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1451. Epub 2013 Oct
8.

Antagonistic roles of Dmrt1 and Foxl2 in sex differentiation via estrogen
production in tilapia as demonstrated by TALENs.

Li MH(1), Yang HH, Li MR, Sun YL, Jiang XL, Xie QP, Wang TR, Shi HJ, Sun LN, Zhou
LY, Wang DS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, China. wdeshou@swu.edu.cn.

Transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs) are a powerful approach 
for targeted genome editing and have been proved to be effective in several
organisms. In this study, we reported that TALENs can induce somatic mutations in
Nile tilapia, an important species for worldwide aquaculture, with reliably high 
efficiency. Six pairs of TALENs were constructed to target genes related to sex
differentiation, including dmrt1, foxl2, cyp19a1a, gsdf, igf3, and nrob1b, and
all resulted in indel mutations with maximum efficiencies of up to 81% at the
targeted loci. Effects of dmrt1 and foxl2 mutation on gonadal phenotype, sex
differentiation, and related gene expression were analyzed by histology,
immunohistochemistry, and real-time PCR. In Dmrt1-deficient testes, phenotypes of
significant testicular regression, including deformed efferent ducts, degenerated
spermatogonia or even a complete loss of germ cells, and proliferation of
steroidogenic cells, were observed. In addition, disruption of Dmrt1 in XY fish
resulted in increased foxl2 and cyp19a1a expression and serum estradiol-17ß and
11-ketotestosterone levels. On the contrary, deficiency of Foxl2 in XX fish
exhibited varying degrees of oocyte degeneration and significantly decreased
aromatase gene expression and serum estradiol-17ß levels. Some Foxl2-deficient
fish even exhibited complete sex reversal with high expression of Dmrt1 and
Cyp11b2. Furthermore, disruption of Cyp19a1a in XX fish led to partial sex
reversal with Dmrt1 and Cyp11b2 expression. Taken together, our data demonstrated
that TALENs are an effective tool for targeted gene editing in tilapia genome.
Foxl2 and Dmrt1 play antagonistic roles in sex differentiation in Nile tilapia
via regulating cyp19a1a expression and estrogen production.

PMID: 24105480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2014 Mar 25;385(1-2):62-70. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.09.034. 
Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Fox tales: regulation of gonadotropin gene expression by forkhead transcription
factors.

Thackray VG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine and Center for Reproductive Science and
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, United States.
Electronic address: vthackray@ucsd.edu.

Luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) are produced by
pituitary gonadotrope cells and are required for steroidogenesis, the maturation 
of ovarian follicles, ovulation, and spermatogenesis. Synthesis of LH and FSH is 
tightly regulated by a complex network of signaling pathways activated by
hormones including gonadotropin-releasing hormone, activin and sex steroids.
Members of the forkhead box (FOX) transcription factor family have been shown to 
act as important regulators of development, homeostasis and reproduction. In this
review, we focus on the role of four specific FOX factors (FOXD1, FOXL2, FOXO1
and FOXP3) in gonadotropin hormone production and discuss our current
understanding of the molecular function of these factors derived from studies in 
mouse genetic and cell culture models.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3947687
PMID: 24099863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 2;8(10):e76642. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076642. eCollection
2013.

The CpG island in the murine foxl2 proximal promoter is differentially methylated
in primary and immortalized cells.

Tran S(1), Wang Y, Lamba P, Zhou X, Boehm U, Bernard DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montréal,
Québec, Canada ; Department of Medicine, University of California Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Forkhead box L2 (Foxl2), a member of the forkhead transcription factor family,
plays important roles in pituitary follicle-stimulating hormone synthesis and in 
ovarian maintenance and function. Mutations in the human FOXL2 gene cause eyelid 
malformations and premature ovarian failure. FOXL2/Foxl2 is expressed in
pituitary gonadotrope and thyrotrope cells, the perioptic mesenchyme of the
developing eyelid, and ovarian granulosa cells. The mechanisms governing this
cell-restricted expression have not been described. We mapped the Foxl2
transcriptional start site in immortalized murine gonadotrope-like cells, LßT2,
by 5' rapid amplification of cDNA ends and then PCR amplified approximately 1 kb 
of 5' flanking sequence from murine genomic DNA. When ligated into a reporter
plasmid, the proximal promoter conferred luciferase activity in both homologous
(LßT2) and, unexpectedly, heterologous (NIH3T3) cells. In silico analyses
identified a CpG island in the proximal promoter and 5' untranslated region,
suggesting that Foxl2 transcription might be regulated epigenetically. Indeed,
pyrosequencing and quantitative analysis of DNA methylation using real-time PCR
revealed Foxl2 proximal promoter hypomethylation in homologous compared to some, 
though not all, heterologous cell lines. The promoter was also hypomethylated in 
purified murine gonadotropes. In vitro promoter methylation completely silenced
reporter activity in heterologous and homologous cells. Collectively, the data
suggest that differential proximal promoter DNA methylation may contribute to
cell-specific Foxl2 expression in some cellular contexts. However,
gonadotrope-specific expression of the gene cannot be explained by promoter
hypomethylation alone.

PMCID: PMC3788739
PMID: 24098544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Feb 15;23(4):920-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt486. Epub 2013 Oct 1.

Two classes of ovarian primordial follicles exhibit distinct developmental
dynamics and physiological functions.

Zheng W(1), Zhang H, Gorre N, Risal S, Shen Y, Liu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Gothenburg,
Gothenburg SE-405 30, Sweden.

In the mammalian ovary, progressive activation of primordial follicles serves as 
the source of fertilizable ova, and disorders in the development of primordial
follicles lead to various ovarian diseases. However, very little is known about
the developmental dynamics of primordial follicles under physiological
conditions, and the fates of distinct populations of primordial follicles also
remain unclear. In this study, by generating the Foxl2-CreER(T2) and
Sohlh1-CreER(T2) inducible mouse models, we have specifically labeled and traced 
the in vivo development of two classes of primordial follicles, the first wave of
simultaneously activated follicles after birth and the primordial follicles that 
are gradually activated in adulthood. Our results show that the first wave of
follicles exists in the ovaries for ~3 months and contributes to the onset of
puberty and to early fertility. The primordial follicles at the ovarian cortex
gradually replace the first wave of follicles and dominate the ovary after 3
months of age, providing fertility until the end of reproductive life. Moreover, 
by tracing the time periods needed for primordial follicles to reach various
advanced stages in vivo, we were able to determine the exact developmental
dynamics of the two classes of primordial follicles. We have now revealed the
lifelong developmental dynamics of ovarian primordial follicles under
physiological conditions and have clearly shown that two classes of primordial
follicles follow distinct, age-dependent developmental paths and play different
roles in the mammalian reproductive lifespan.

PMCID: PMC3900105
PMID: 24087793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Sep;37(9):1458-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31829bafee.

Luteinized thecomas (thecomatosis) associated with sclerosing peritonitis exhibit
positive staining with sex cord markers steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) and FOXL2.

McCluggage WG(1), Staats PN, Gilks CB, Clement PB, Young RH.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast
Northern Ireland, UK †Department of Pathology, University of Maryland School of
Medicine Baltimore, MD §James Homer Wright Pathology Laboratories, Massachusetts 
General Hospital <U+2225>Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA
‡Department of Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital and University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

PMID: 24076780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2013;141(2-3):169-76. doi: 10.1159/000354773. Epub 2013 Sep
14.

Sex-related genomic sequences in cartilaginous fish: an overview.

Rocco L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental, Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences and
Technologies, Second University of Naples, Caserta, Italy.

Sex determination and differentiation are key events in the development of either
the testis or ovary in fish. Sex determination mechanisms include environmental
and genetic regulation. Research on sex determination systems and their related
genes have been implemented in the teleost species, but the amount of information
about these genes in cartilaginous fish is very scarce. This paper summarizes the
few available data on molecular studies and chromosome localization of specific
sequences useful to discriminate between various chromosome pairs in the common
torpedo, Torpedo torpedo, and in the scyliorhinid coral catshark, Atelomycterus
marmoratus, species that do not have morphologically distinct sex chromosomes. In
addition, recent results obtained by sequence analysis of foxl2, a
female-specific gene expressed during early phases of gonadal development in
interesting key-species, such as the holocephalian Callorhinchus milii, is
discussed. Nevertheless, the mechanism of sex determination in cartilaginous fish
remains largely unknown. Further research needs to be carried out regarding the
importance of basic and applied sex determination studies in fish, including
chromosomal distribution of sex-related sequences.

PMID: 24052041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Dec 19;52(1):R17-33. doi: 10.1530/JME-13-0159. Print 2014 
Feb.

FOXL2: a central transcription factor of the ovary.

Georges A(1), Auguste A, Bessière L, Vanet A, Todeschini AL, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7592, Institut Jacques Monod, 15 Rue Hélène Brion, 75013 Paris,
France Université Paris Diderot, Paris VII, Paris, France.

Forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) is a gene encoding a forkhead transcription factor
preferentially expressed in the ovary, the eyelids and the pituitary gland. Its
germline mutations are responsible for the blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus
inversus syndrome, which includes eyelid and mild craniofacial defects associated
with primary ovarian insufficiency. Recent studies have shown the involvement of 
FOXL2 in virtually all stages of ovarian development and function, as well as in 
granulosa cell (GC)-related pathologies. A central role of FOXL2 is the lifetime 
maintenance of GC identity through the repression of testis-specific genes.
Recently, a highly recurrent somatic FOXL2 mutation leading to the p.C134W
subtitution has been linked to the development of GC tumours in the adult, which 
account for up to 5% of ovarian malignancies. In this review, we summarise data
on FOXL2 modulators, targets, partners and post-translational modifications.
Despite the progresses made thus far, a better understanding of the impact of
FOXL2 mutations and of the molecular aspects of its function is required to
rationalise its implication in various pathophysiological processes.

PMID: 24049064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2013 Dec 1;194:81-93. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.08.016. Epub
2013 Sep 14.

foxl2 and foxl3 are two ancient paralogs that remain fully functional in
teleosts.

Crespo B(1), Lan-Chow-Wing O, Rocha A, Zanuy S, Gómez A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Fish Physiology and Biotechnology, Instituto de Acuicultura de
Torre la Sal, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), 12595 Torre
la Sal, Ribera de Cabanes s/n, Castellón, Spain.

FOXL2 is a forkhead transcription factor involved in mammalian development and
regulation of reproduction. Two foxl2 paralogs, foxl2a and foxl2b, have been
described in various teleost species and were considered as fish-specific
duplicates. Here, we report the isolation and characterization of foxl2a (foxl2) 
and foxl2b (foxl3) in European sea bass (Dicentrarchus labrax), together with the
identification of these two genes in non-teleost genomes. Phylogenetic and
synteny analyses indicate that these paralogs originated from an ancient genome
duplication event that happened long before the teleost specific duplication.
While foxl2/foxl2a has been maintained in most vertebrate lineages, foxl2b, which
we propose to rename as foxl3, was repeatedly lost in tetrapods. Gonadal
expression patterns of the sea bass genes point to a strong sexual dimorphism,
and the mRNA levels of foxl2 in ovary and foxl3 in testis vary significantly
during the reproductive cycle. When overexpressed in cultured ovarian follicular 
cells, foxl2 and foxl3 produced functional transcription factors able to control 
the expression of reproduction-related genes. Taken together, these data suggest 
that Foxl2 may play a conserved role in ovarian maturation, while Foxl3 could be 
involved in testis physiology.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24045113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Dev Biol. 2013 Nov 15;383(2):295-306. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.08.026. Epub 2013
Sep 11.

Disruption of mitotic arrest precedes precocious differentiation and
transdifferentiation of pregranulosa cells in the perinatal Wnt4 mutant ovary.

Maatouk DM(1), Mork L, Chassot AA, Chaboissier MC, Capel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.

Mammalian sex determination is controlled by antagonistic pathways that are
initially co-expressed in the bipotential gonad and subsequently become male- or 
female-specific. In XY gonads, testis development is initiated by upregulation of
Sox9 by SRY in pre-Sertoli cells. Disruption of either gene leads to complete
male-to-female sex reversal. Ovarian development is dependent on canonical Wnt
signaling through Wnt4, Rspo1 and ß-catenin. However, only a partial
female-to-male sex reversal results from disruption of these ovary-promoting
genes. In Wnt4 and Rspo1 mutants, there is evidence of pregranulosa
cell-to-Sertoli cell transdifferentiation near birth, following a severe decline 
in germ cells. It is currently unclear why primary sex reversal does not occur at
the sex-determining stage, but instead occurs near birth in these mutants. Here
we show that Wnt4-null and Rspo1-null pregranulosa cells transition through a
differentiated granulosa cell state prior to transdifferentiating towards a
Sertoli cell fate. This transition is preceded by a wave of germ cell death that 
is closely associated with the disruption of pregranulosa cell quiescence. Our
results suggest that maintenance of mitotic arrest in pregranulosa cells may
preclude upregulation of Sox9 in cases where female sex-determining genes are
disrupted. This may explain the lack of complete sex reversal in such mutants at 
the sex-determining stage.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4066978
PMID: 24036309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jan;27(1-2):181-4. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2013-0219.

A novel insertion in the FOXL2 gene in a Chilean patient with blepharophimosis
ptosis epicanthus inversus syndrome type I.

Martinez-Aguayo A, Poggi H, Cattani A, Molina M, Romeo E, Lagos M.

OBJECTIVE: A novel insertion in the forkhead transcription factor 2 (FOXL2) was
identified in a Chilean patient with blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus
inversus syndrome associated with premature ovarian failure (BPES type I). A
clinical and molecular characterization of a patient with BPES type I was
performed.
METHOD: We present a 16-year-old adolescent girl with surgically treated
blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus that was associated with
delayed puberty and secondary amenorrhea at the age of 15, indicators that
suggested that the patient had BPES type I. The FOXL2 gene was analyzed by
sequencing its coding region.
RESULTS: The sequence analysis of the FOXL2 gene revealed a novel heterozygous
mutation: an 11 bp duplication (c.901_911dup11) that was predicted to encode a
truncated protein (p.Pro305Argfs*54).
CONCLUSIONS: A novel out-of-frame duplication following the polyalanine domain in
the FOXL2 gene was identified in a Chilean patient with BPES type I. This study
characterized the molecular alterations in FOXL2 and confirmed the diagnosis,
thereby providing information to allow for improved genetic counseling for the
patient and her family.

PMID: 24030029  [PubMed - in process]


161. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2013 Dec 1;194:31-44. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.08.014. Epub
2013 Sep 5.

Characterization of four nr5a genes and gene expression profiling for testicular 
steroidogenesis-related genes and their regulatory factors in response to
bisphenol A in rare minnow Gobiocypris rarus.

Zhang Y(1), Yuan C, Hu G, Li M, Zheng Y, Gao J, Yang Y, Zhou Y, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Shaanxi
Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, Yangling, Shaanxi 712100,
China.

Bisphenol A (BPA) widely used in the manufacture of numerous products is
ubiquitous in aquatic environment. To explore the mechanisms of BPA-mediated
actions, male rare minnow Gobiocypris rarus were exposed to BPA at concentrations
of 5, 15, and 50 µg/L for 14 and 35 days in the present study. Four subtypes of
nr5a gene encoding important transcription factors for steroidogenesis were
characterized, and tissue distribution analysis demonstrated distinct expression 
profiling of the four genes in G. rarus. BPA at environmentally relevant
concentration (5 µg/L) caused increase of gonadosomatic index (GSI) of male fish.
In response to BPA, no obvious changes on the testis development were observed.
Modulation of vtg mRNA expression by BPA suggests estrogenic and/or
anti-estrogenic effects of BPA were dependent on exposed duration (14 or 35
days). Gene expression profiling for testicular steroidogenesis-related genes,
sexual steroid receptors, gonadotropin receptors, and transcription factors
indicates differential regulation was dependent on exposure duration and dose of 
BPA. The correlation analysis at mRNA level demonstrates that the BPA-mediated
actions on testicular steroidogenesis might involve sex steroid hormone receptor 
signaling, gonadotropin/gonadotropin receptor pathway, and transcription factors 
such as nuclear receptor subfamily 5, group A (Nr5a), fork head box protein L2
(Foxl2).

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24012916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Gynecol Oncol. 2013 Nov;131(2):325-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2013.08.031. Epub 2013
Sep 2.

Adult granulosa cell tumours (GCT): clinicopathological outcomes including FOXL2 
mutational status and expression.

Rosario R(1), Wilson M, Cheng WT, Payne K, Cohen PA, Fong P, Shelling AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, University of Auckland, New Zealand.
Electronic address: r.rosario@auckland.ac.nz.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this research was to use nucleic acids isolated from
formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue to investigate the diagnostic
potential and prognostic significance of FOXL2 in adult-type GCTs, particularly
as a marker of identifying early stage patients that are likely to relapse.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective review of GCT patients referred to the
Auckland Gynae-Oncology Multidisciplinary Team from 1955 to 2012. Baseline
characteristics, clinical course, histopathology and survival data was recorded. 
Using nucleic acids extracted from FFPE tumour blocks, FOXL2 mutation status and 
expression was determined by DNA sequencing and RT-qPCR, respectively, and
correlated with clinical data.
RESULTS: 57 adult GCT patients were identified, however FFPE tumour blocks were
available for only 37 of these patients. Sequencing results confirmed the
presence of the FOXL2 mutation in 70% of patients. FOXL2 mutation positive adult 
tumours showed a trend towards higher FOXL2 expression than wildtype adult
tumours, particularly in stage I patients (p=0.051). In addition, patients with
homozygous FOXL2 mutations had a significantly higher relapse rate (p=0.04).
There was no significant correlation between FOXL2 mutation status or FOXL2
expression and any other clinical variables.
CONCLUSIONS: FFPE tumour blocks are a valuable resource of molecular information,
especially when studying rare tumours such as GCTs. The FOXL2 mutation appears to
have some diagnostic potential, however additional work in a larger cohort needs 
to be completed to confirm the prognostic significance of this gene mutation, and
its expression.

© 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24007948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Sex Dev. 2013;7(6):308-15. doi: 10.1159/000354280. Epub 2013 Aug 24.

Antagonists to the Wnt cascade exhibit sex-specific expression in gonads of
sexually mature shovelnose sturgeon.

Amberg JJ(1), Goforth RR, Sepúlveda MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, Ind., USA.

Little is known regarding molecular mechanisms involved in sex determination and 
differentiation in sturgeon species. We addressed this knowledge gap by using
next generation pyrosequencing technology to provide transcript libraries and
species-specific sequences for mature gonads of shovelnose sturgeon,
Scaphirhynchus platorynchus. We then mined these libraries to identify
gender-specific transcripts and quantified relative transcript abundance using
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). We detected a limited
number of genes known to play a role in sex differentiation in other species. The
sequence for dmrt1 was found only in the testes library. The abundance of dmrt1
differed slightly between the sexes, but the melt curve suggests that there may
be different isoforms of dmrt1 in ovaries and testes of shovelnose sturgeon. The 
transcription factor foxl2 was 5.3-fold greater in ovaries than in testes. Two
antagonists to the Wnt cascade, dickkopf-1 (dkk1) and dapper-1 (dact1), were
found only in the ovary library. Results from qPCR indicated that dkk1 and dact1 
were upregulated 1,819.1- and 207.5-fold, respectively, in ovaries compared with 
testes. These results suggest that antagonists to the Wnt cascade may play
significant roles in sex differentiation and gonadal development in sturgeon and 
could serve as sex markers in this group of ancient fish.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23988442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2013 Nov 1;193:210-20. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.07.020.
Epub 2013 Aug 19.

Analysis of protein expression in zebrafish during gonad differentiation by
targeted proteomics.

Groh KJ(1), Schönenberger R, Eggen RI, Segner H, Suter MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Eawag, Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science and Technology, 8600
Dübendorf, Switzerland. Electronic address: ksenia.groh@eawag.ch.

The molecular mechanisms governing sex determination and differentiation in the
zebrafish (Danio rerio) are not fully understood. To gain more insights into the 
function of specific genes in these complex processes, the expression of multiple
candidates needs to be assessed, preferably on the protein level. Here, we
developed a targeted proteomics method based on selected reaction monitoring
(SRM) to study the candidate sex-related proteins in zebrafish which were
selected based on a global proteomics analysis of adult gonads and
representational difference analysis of male and female DNA, as well as on
published information on zebrafish and other vertebrates. We employed the
developed SRM protocols to acquire time-resolved protein expression profiles
during the gonad differentiation period in vas::EGFP transgenic zebrafish.
Evidence on protein expression was obtained for the first time for several
candidate genes previously studied only on the mRNA level or suggested by
bioinformatic predictions. Tuba1b (tubulin alpha 1b), initially included in the
study as one of the potential housekeeping proteins, was found to be
preferentially expressed in the adult testis with nearly absent expression in the
ovary. The revealed changes in protein expression patterns associated with gonad 
differentiation suggest that several of the examined proteins, especially Ilf2
and Ilf3 (interleukin enhancer-binding factors 2 and 3), Raldh3 (retinaldehyde
dehydrogenase type 3), Zgc:195027 (low density lipoprotein-related receptor
protein 3) and Sept5a (septin 5a), may play a specific role in the sexual
differentiation in zebrafish.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23968773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Integr Comp Biol. 2013 Oct;53(4):755-65. doi: 10.1093/icb/ict093. Epub 2013 Aug
14.

Masculinizing effect of background color and cortisol in a flatfish with
environmental sex-determination.

Mankiewicz JL(1), Godwin J, Holler BL, Turner PM, Murashige R, Shamey R, Daniels 
HV, Borski RJ.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Biology, Box 7617, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC
27695-7617, USA; Textile Engineering, Chemistry and Science, Box 8301, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC 27695-8301, USA.

Environmental sex-determination (ESD) is the phenomenon by which environmental
factors regulate sex-determination, typically occurring during a critical period 
of early development. Southern flounder (Paralichthys lethostigma) exhibit
temperature-dependent sex-determination that appears to be restricted to the
presumed XX female genotype with the extremes of temperature, both high and low, 
skewing sex ratios toward males. In order to evaluate other environmental factors
that may influence sex-determination, we investigated the influence of background
color and cortisol on sex-determination in southern flounder. Experiments
involving three sets of tanks, each painted a different color, were conducted at 
different temperatures using southern flounder of mixed XX-XY genotype. The
studies involved rearing juvenile southern flounder in either black, gray, or
blue tanks and sex-determination was assessed by gonadal histology. In both
studies, blue tanks showed significant male-biased sex ratios (95 and 75% male)
compared with black and gray tanks. The stress corticosteroid cortisol may
mediate sex-determining processes associated with environmental variables.
Cortisol from the whole body was measured throughout the second experiment and
fishes in blue tanks had higher levels of cortisol during the period of
sex-determination. These data suggest that background color can be a cue for ESD,
with blue acting as a stressor during the period of sex-determination, and
ultimately producing male-skewed populations. In a separate study using XX
populations of southern flounder, cortisol was applied at 0, 100, or 300 mg/kg of
gelatin-coated feed. Fish were fed intermittently prior to, and just through, the
period of sex-determination. Levels of gonadal P450 aromatase (cyp19a1) and
forkhead transcription factor L2 (FoxL2) messenger RNA (mRNA) were measured by
qRT-PCR as markers for differentiation into females. Müllerian-inhibiting
substance mRNA was used as a marker of males' gonadal development. Control fish
showed female-biased sex ratios approaching 100%, whereas treatment with 100
mg/kg cortisol produced 28.57% females and treatment with 300 mg/kg cortisol
produced only 13.33% females. These results suggest that cortisol is a critical
mediator of sex-determination in southern flounder by promoting masculinization. 
This linkage between the endocrine stress axis and conserved sex-determination
pathways may provide a mechanism for adaptive modification of sex ratio in a
spatially and temporally variable environment.

PMID: 23946267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Sep;98(9):3713-23. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-4302. Epub 
2013 Jul 24.

Differentiation of human embryonic stem cells into functional ovarian
granulosa-like cells.

Lan CW(1), Chen MJ, Jan PS, Chen HF, Ho HN.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University Taipei 100, Taiwan.

CONTEXT: Granulosa cells are important for the development and maturation of
oocytes. The dysfunction of granulosa cells may contribute to abnormal
folliculogenesis and steroidogenesis.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to establish an effective culture system to
differentiate human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) into granulosa cells.
DESIGN: For differentiation of hESCs to granulosa cells, we used multistep
approaches comprising in vitro treatments with cocktails of growth factors.
Expression of mesendoderm/intermediate plate mesoderm markers, and granulosa cell
markers were analyzed by real time-PCR, Western blotting, immunofluorescence, and
flow cytometry. The production of estradiol and anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) was 
analyzed by ELISA.
RESULTS: Gene expression analyses showed the progress of hESCs to primitive
streak-mesendoderm, intermediate plate mesoderm, and finally to functional
granulosa-like cells that expressed the granulosa cell-specific forkhead
transcription factor FOXL2, estrogen synthetase cytochrome P450 19A1 (CYP19A1),
AMH, the type 2 AMH receptor (AMHR2), and the FSH receptor (FSHR). However, they 
did not express the LH receptor (LHR). Western blot showed that AMHR2 and CYP19A1
levels in differentiated hESCs were higher than in undifferentiated cells. Flow
cytometry showed that the percentage of AMHR2-, FSHR-, and CYP19A1-positive cells
increased to 36%, 12%, and 34%, respectively, after differentiation for 12 days. 
These granulosa-like cells were also capable of producing AMH and aromatizing
testosterone to estradiol, suggesting that they were biologically functional.
CONCLUSIONS: We successfully established an effective protocol to generate
functional ovarian granulosa-like cells from hESCs. The derivation of these cells
opens new avenues for the further study and potential application of these cells 
in human folliculogenesis and steroidogenesis.

PMID: 23884780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 Oct;30(10):2328-46. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mst130. Epub 2013 Jul
24.

Divergent expression regulation of gonad development genes in medaka shows
incomplete conservation of the downstream regulatory network of vertebrate sex
determination.

Herpin A(1), Adolfi MC, Nicol B, Hinzmann M, Schmidt C, Klughammer J, Engel M,
Tanaka M, Guiguen Y, Schartl M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wuerzburg, Physiological Chemistry, Biocenter, Am Hubland,
Wuerzburg, Germany.

Genetic control of male or female gonad development displays between different
groups of organisms a remarkable diversity of "master sex-determining genes" at
the top of the genetic hierarchies, whereas downstream components surprisingly
appear to be evolutionarily more conserved. Without much further studies,
conservation of sequence has been equalized to conservation of function. We have 
used the medaka fish to investigate the generality of this paradigm. In medaka,
the master male sex-determining gene is dmrt1bY, a highly conserved downstream
regulator of sex determination in vertebrates. To understand its function in
orchestrating the complex gene regulatory network, we have identified targets
genes and regulated pathways of Dmrt1bY. Monitoring gene expression and
interactions by transgenic fluorescent reporter fish lines, in vivo
tissue-chromatin immunoprecipitation and in vitro gene regulation assays revealed
concordance but also major discrepancies between mammals and medaka, notably
amongst spatial, temporal expression patterns and regulations of the canonical
Hedgehog and R-spondin/Wnt/Follistatin signaling pathways. Examination of Foxl2
protein distribution in the medaka ovary defined a new subpopulation of theca
cells, where ovarian-type aromatase transcriptional regulation appears to be
independent of Foxl2. In summary, these data show that the regulation of the
downstream regulatory network of sex determination is less conserved than
previously thought.

PMCID: PMC3888023
PMID: 23883523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2013 Jul;13(7):871-82. doi:
10.1586/14737140.2013.811174.

Genetic changes in nonepithelial ovarian cancer.

Van Nieuwenhuysen E(1), Lambrechts S, Lambrechts D, Leunen K, Amant F, Vergote I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecological Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Leuven Cancer Institute, University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium.
els.vannieuwenhuysen@uzleuven.be

Nonepithelial ovarian cancers (OCs), including sex cord-stromal tumors (SCSTs)
and germ cell tumors (GCTs), are an uncommon subset of OC, together accounting
for 10% of all OCs. The etiology of these tumors remains largely unresolved. It
is well established that tumorigenesis is the result of multiple genetic
alterations driving a normal cell toward a malignant state. Much effort has been 
made into researching the molecular mechanisms underlying epithelial OC, but far 
less is known about the genetic changes in SCSTs and GCTs. Recently, a single
point missense mutation (C134W) was found in the FOXL2 gene in approximately 95% 
of adult-type granulosa cell tumors, suggesting a key role for FOXL2 in these
tumors. By contrast, the FOXL2 mutation was not found in the juvenile type.
DICER1 somatic missense mutations were found in approximately 60% of
Sertoli-Leydig tumors. Ovarian GCTs share many morphological features and a
similar pattern of chromosomal alterations with testicular GCTs. In the latter,
recent genome-wide association studies have identified seven susceptibility loci 
near KITLG, SPRY4, UKC2, BAK1, DMRT1, TERT and ATF7IP. All of the susceptibility 
loci detected thus far are all involved in primordial germ cell function or sex
determination. TGF-ß/BMP and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling was absent in dysgerminomas,
but present in yolk sac tumors, suggesting intertumoral heterogeneity. In this
article, the authors aim to provide an overview of the current knowledge on the
possible molecular changes in SCSTs and GCTs of the ovary.

PMID: 23875665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. FEBS Lett. 2013 Aug 2;587(15):2474-82. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.06.023. Epub
2013 Jun 26.

MicroRNA-133b stimulates ovarian estradiol synthesis by targeting Foxl2.

Dai A(1), Sun H, Fang T, Zhang Q, Wu S, Jiang Y, Ding L, Yan G, Hu Y.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing
University Medical School, Nanjing, PR China.

Forkhead L2 (Foxl2) is expressed in ovarian granulosa cells and participates in
steroidogenesis by transcriptionally regulating target genes such as
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) and CYP19A1. In this study, a
direct link between microRNA-133b (miR-133b) and Foxl2-mediated estradiol release
in granulosa cells was established. miR-133b was involved in follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH)-induced estrogen production. Luciferase assays confirmed that
miR-133b was bound to the 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) of Foxl2 mRNA.
Consistent with this finding, miR-133b overexpression reduced the Foxl2 levels.
Furthermore, miR-133b inhibited Foxl2 binding to the StAR and CYP19A1 promoter
sequences. These results demonstrate that miR-133b down-regulates Foxl2
expression in granulosa cells by directly targeting the 3'UTR, thus inhibiting
the Foxl2-mediated transcriptional repression of StAR and CYP19A1to promote
estradiol production.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23810756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2013 Nov 1;193:234-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2013.06.007.
Epub 2013 Jun 22.

Temperature induced-masculinisation in the Nile tilapia causes rapid
up-regulation of both dmrt1 and amh expressions.

Poonlaphdecha S(1), Pepey E, Canonne M, de Verdal H, Baroiller JF, D'Cotta H.

Author information: 
(1)UMR Intrepid, CIRAD-PERSYST, Campus International de Baillarguet, 34398
Montpellier cedex 5, France.

Nile tilapia has primarily a XX/XY sex determining system but minor genetic
factors as well as temperature can override the major factors. Female XX
progenies can be sex-reversed into functional males by rearing at high
temperatures (>34°C) from 10dpf onwards. Temperature effects on the molecular
pathways during sex differentiation in teleosts need to be deciphered. The
temporal expression profiles of cyp19a1a and foxl2, two ovarian-developmental
genes and dmrt1 and amh, two testes-developmental genes were analysed during key 
stages of the sex differentiation of genetic all-females, all-males and
temperature-masculinised XX females (TM) tilapia. Overall QPCR analysis was
similar between gonads and trunks. Both amh and dmrt1 expressions were
up-regulated simultaneously in TM already at 13-15dpf. Dmrt1 expression became
markedly elevated ~3-fold higher than XY male levels at 20-26dpf whereas amh had 
similar levels to XY males. Foxl2 and cyp19a1a expression profiles were similar. 
Both were up-regulated at early stages in TM but repressed after 17-19dpf,
whilest levels continued to increase in XX-females. Our results show that
temperature action on tilapia testis development induces the rapid increase of
both dmrt1 and amh expressions followed by the down-regulation of foxl2 and
cyp19a1a. This suggests that dmrt1 and/or amh may be the modulator(s) of the
down-regulation of foxl2 and/or cyp19a1a.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23800559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Sep;37(9):1450-5. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31828e4f55.

Ovarian cellular fibromas lack FOXL2 mutations: a useful diagnostic adjunct in
the distinction from diffuse adult granulosa cell tumor.

McCluggage WG(1), Singh N, Kommoss S, Huntsman DG, Gilks CB.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast
†Department of Pathology, Barts Health NHS Trust, London, United Kingdom ‡Centre 
for Translational and Applied Genomics §Department of Pathology, University of
British Columbia <U+2225>Department of Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver,
BC, Canada.

Ovarian cellular fibromas are uncommon neoplasms, which may result in
considerable diagnostic confusion with diffuse adult granulosa cell tumor. This
is an important distinction, as the former usually exhibits benign behavior,
whereas the latter is a low-grade malignant neoplasm capable of recurrence and
metastasis. FOXL2 mutation (402C<U+2192>G) has been demonstrated in >95% of ovarian
adult granulosa cell tumors, only rarely in other ovarian sex cord-stromal
neoplasms, and never in ovarian fibromas. In this study, we evaluated a series of
ovarian cellular fibromas or mitotically active cellular fibromas (n=22), 3 with 
minor sex cord elements, for FOXL2 mutation. These were mostly received in
consultation, often with a differential diagnosis of diffuse adult granulosa cell
tumor. Immunohistochemically, 10 of 10 cases tested exhibited nuclear staining
with FOXL2. FOXL2 (402C<U+2192>G) mutation was not demonstrated in any of the 22
cellular or mitotically active cellular fibromas. Three additional neoplasms
composed of cellular nodules of epithelioid cells in a background fibrous stroma,
raising the possibility of adult granulosa cell tumor with a prominent
fibrothecomatous component, were also tested; 2 of these were mutation negative, 
and 1 contained a FOXL2 mutation. FOXL2 mutation analysis is a useful adjunct in 
distinguishing between diffuse adult granulosa cell tumor (mutation present) and 
cellular fibroma (mutation absent). Mutation testing should be considered in
problematic cases, as this will provide prognostic information for the patient.

PMID: 23774170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. PLoS One. 2013 May 22;8(5):e63512. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063512. Print 2013.

Novel insights into the bovine polled phenotype and horn ontogenesis in Bovidae.

Allais-Bonnet A(1), Grohs C, Medugorac I, Krebs S, Djari A, Graf A, Fritz S,
Seichter D, Baur A, Russ I, Bouet S, Rothammer S, Wahlberg P, Esquerré D, Hoze C,
Boussaha M, Weiss B, Thépot D, Fouilloux MN, Rossignol MN, van Marle-Köster E,
Hreiðarsdóttir GE, Barbey S, Dozias D, Cobo E, Reversé P, Catros O, Marchand JL, 
Soulas P, Roy P, Marquant-Leguienne B, Le Bourhis D, Clément L, Salas-Cortes L,
Venot E, Pannetier M, Phocas F, Klopp C, Rocha D, Fouchet M, Journaux L,
Bernard-Capel C, Ponsart C, Eggen A, Blum H, Gallard Y, Boichard D, Pailhoux E,
Capitan A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, UMR 1198 Biologie du
Développement et Reproduction, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

Despite massive research efforts, the molecular etiology of bovine polledness and
the developmental pathways involved in horn ontogenesis are still poorly
understood. In a recent article, we provided evidence for the existence of at
least two different alleles at the Polled locus and identified candidate
mutations for each of them. None of these mutations was located in known coding
or regulatory regions, thus adding to the complexity of understanding the
molecular basis of polledness. We confirm previous results here and exhaustively 
identify the causative mutation for the Celtic allele (PC) and four candidate
mutations for the Friesian allele (PF). We describe a previously unreported
eyelash-and-eyelid phenotype associated with regular polledness, and present
unique histological and gene expression data on bovine horn bud differentiation
in fetuses affected by three different horn defect syndromes, as well as in
wild-type controls. We propose the ectopic expression of a lincRNA in PC/p horn
buds as a probable cause of horn bud agenesis. In addition, we provide evidence
for an involvement of OLIG2, FOXL2 and RXFP2 in horn bud differentiation, and
draw a first link between bovine, ovine and caprine Polled loci. Our results
represent a first and important step in understanding the genetic pathways and
key process involved in horn bud differentiation in Bovidae.

PMCID: PMC3661542
PMID: 23717440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biol Reprod. 2013 Jul 11;89(1):9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.108100. Print 2013 
Jul.

Effects of an inhibitor of the <U+03B3>-secretase complex on proliferation and apoptotic
parameters in a FOXL2-mutated granulosa tumor cell line (KGN).

Irusta G(1), Pazos MC, Abramovich D, De Zúñiga I, Parborell F, Tesone M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología y Medicina Experimental (IByME-CONICET), Buenos Aires,
Argentina.

Erratum in
    Biol Reprod. 2014 Dec;91(6):138. Maidana, Camila Pazos [corrected to Pazos, Maria
Camila].

Ovarian granulosa cell tumors (GCTs) represent 3%-5% of all ovarian malignancies.
Treatments have limited proven efficacy and biologically targeted treatment is
lacking. The aim of this study was to investigate the role of Notch signaling in 
the proliferation, steroidogenesis, apoptosis, and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
(PI3K)/AKT pathway in a FOXL2-mutated granulosa tumor cell line (KGN)
representative of the adult form of GCTs. When Notch signaling is initiated, the 
receptors expose a cleavage site in the extracellular domain to the
metalloproteinase TACE and, following this cleavage, Notch undergoes another
cleavage mediated by the presenilin-gamma-secretase complex. To achieve our goal,
DAPT, an inhibitor of the gamma-secretase complex, was used to investigate the
role of the Notch system in parameters associated with cell growth and death,
using a human granulosa cell tumor line (KGN) as an experimental model. We
observed that JAGGED1, DLL4, NOTCH1, and NOTCH4 were highly expressed in KGN
cells as compared to granulosa-lutein cells obtained from assisted reproductive
techniques patients. The proliferation and viability of KGN cells, as well as
progesterone and estradiol production, decreased in the presence of 20 µM DAPT.
Apoptotic parameters like PARP and caspase 8 cleavages, BAX, and BCLXs increased 
in KGN cells cultured with DAPT, whereas others such as BCL2, BCLXl, FAS, and FAS
ligand did not change. AKT phosphorylation decreased and PTEN protein increased
when Notch signaling was inhibited in KGN cells. We conclude that the Notch
system acts as a survival pathway in KGN cells, and might be interacting with the
PI3K/AKT pathway.

PMID: 23699387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Sex Dev. 2013;7(5):253-60. doi: 10.1159/000350787. Epub 2013 May 8.

Sex-biased expression of sex-differentiating genes FOXL2 and FGF9 in American
alligators, alligator Mississippiensis.

Janes DE(1), Elsey RM, Langan EM, Valenzuela N, Edwards SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Mass., USA. Daniel.janes@nih.gov

Across amniotes, sex-determining mechanisms exhibit great variation, yet the
genes that govern sexual differentiation are largely conserved. Studies of
evolution of sex-determining and sex-differentiating genes require an exhaustive 
characterization of functions of those genes such as FOXL2 and FGF9. FOXL2 is
associated with ovarian development, and FGF9 is known to play a role in
testicular organogenesis in mammals and other amniotes. As a step toward
characterization of the evolutionary history of sexual development, we measured
expression of FOXL2 and FGF9 across 3 developmental stages and 8 juvenile tissue 
types in male and female American alligators, Alligator mississippiensis. We
report surprisingly high expression of FOXL2 before the stage of embryonic
development when sex is determined in response to temperature, and sustained and 
variable expression of FGF9 in juvenile male, but not female tissue types. Novel 
characterization of gene expression in reptiles with temperature-dependent sex
determination such as American alligators may inform the evolution of
sex-determining and sex-differentiating gene networks, as they suggest
alternative functions from which the genes may have been exapted. Future
functional profiling of sex-differentiating genes should similarly follow other
genes and other species to enable a broad comparison across sex-determining
mechanisms.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3798014
PMID: 23689672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Horm Cancer. 2013 Oct;4(5):277-92. doi: 10.1007/s12672-013-0146-x. Epub 2013 May 
15.

Characterization of the inhibitor of kappaB kinase (IKK) complex in granulosa
cell tumors of the ovary and granulosa cell tumor-derived cell lines.

Jamieson S(1), Fuller PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Steroid Receptor Biology Laboratory, Prince Henry's Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, VIC, 3168, Australia.

Granulosa cell tumors of the ovary (GCT) are a distinct, hormonally active subset
of ovarian cancers. Although it has recently been shown that ~97 % of all adult
GCT harbor a novel somatic missense mutation in the FOXL2 gene, given its almost 
universal presence, it does not explain differences in tumor stage and/or
recurrence. The nuclear factor kappaB (NF<U+03BA>B) transcription factor is
constitutively active in two human GCT-derived cell lines, COV434 and KGN, which 
are useful in vitro models to investigate juvenile and adult GCT, respectively.
This study aimed to determine the molecular basis and pathogenetic significance
of this aberrant NF<U+03BA>B activity. Selective chemical inhibitors were used to target
candidate components of the pathway. The constitutive activity was blocked by two
independent inhibitors of I<U+03BA>Ba phosphorylation, suggesting that aberrant
activation occurs upstream of this point. NF<U+03BA>B inhibition resulted in a
dose-dependent decrease in cell proliferation and viability and a dose-dependent 
increase in apoptosis. Inhibitors of earlier components of the pathway were
without effect. Two independent inhibitors of inhibitor of kappaB kinase (IKK)ß, 
a catalytic subunit of the NF<U+03BA>B activation complex, were unable to inhibit the
constitutive activity, but surprisingly also ligand-induced activity. These
findings suggest a central role for IKKß; however, no mutations or altered
expression of the IKKß, IKKa, or IKK<U+03B3> genes was observed in the cell lines or in 
a panel of human GCT samples. This study highlights unresolved issues in
understanding the pathogenesis of GCT and in the use of the COV434 and KGN cells 
lines as model systems.

PMID: 23674259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Front Oncol. 2013 Apr 30;3:95. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00095. eCollection 2013.

MicroRNAs and Recent Insights into Pediatric Ovarian Cancers.

Francis JC(1), Kolomeyevskaya N, Mach CM, Dietrich JE, Anderson ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine Houston,
TX, USA.

Ovarian cancer is the most common pediatric gynecologic malignancy. When
diagnosed in children, ovarian cancers present unique challenges that differ
dramatically from those faced by adults. Here, we review the spectrum of ovarian 
cancers found in young women and girls and discuss the biology of these diseases.
A number of advances have recently shed significant new understanding on the
potential causes of ovarian cancer in this unique population. Particular emphasis
is placed on understanding how altered expression of non-coding RNA transcripts
known as microRNAs play a key role in the etiology of ovarian germ cell and sex
cord-stromal tumors. Emerging transgenic models for these diseases are also
reviewed. Lastly, future challenges and opportunities for understanding pediatric
ovarian cancers, delineating clinically useful biomarkers, and developing
targeted therapies are discussed.

PMCID: PMC3639433
PMID: 23641362  [PubMed]


177. Mol Ecol. 2013 Mar;22(6):1485-7.

Contaminants and impoSEX: transcriptomics of contaminant-induced sex change.

Chapman RW(1), Guillette LJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Resources Research Institute, South Carolina Department of Natural
Resources and Hollings Marine Laboratory, 331 Ft. Johnson Road, Charleston, SC
29412, USA. chapmanr@dnr.sc.gov

Comment on
    Mol Ecol. 2013 Mar;22(6):1589-608.

Reproduction is the goal of living organisms, and environmental conditions that
influence sexual development are therefore critical to understanding adaptation
in natural populations. It is not surprising that so much attention has been
devoted to the impacts of the physical and chemical environment on this process
(Vandenberg et al.2012). Chemicals of concern include a variety of endocrine
disruptors (EDs) including oestrogen and oestrogen mimics that directly lead to
malformation of the gonad. On the molecular side, the impact that EDs have on
genes directly involved in the feminization or masculinization of the gonad such 
as Cyp 19A (or aromatase), foxl2,Sox9, Dmrt1 and NrOb1, has received considerable
attention due to their direct involvement in the regulation of oestrogen and
testosterone. In this issue of Molecular Ecology, Pascoal et al. (2013) examine
the impact of a known endocrine disruptor (tributyltin or TBT) on the
transcriptome of the dog whelk, Nucella lapillus (Fig. 1),in relation to the
formation of imposex individuals (masculinized females). They conclude that TBT
mimics the endogenous ligand of the nuclear retinoid X receptor (RXR) and/or
peroxisome profilerator-activated receptor (PPAR) disrupting pathways.

PMID: 23599957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Oncol Lett. 2013 Apr;5(4):1211-1218. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Abnormal methylation of seven genes and their associations with clinical
characteristics in early stage non-small cell lung cancer.

Zhao Y(1), Zhou H, Ma K, Sun J, Feng X, Geng J, Gu J, Wang W, Zhang H, He Y, Guo 
S, Zhou X, Yu J, Lin Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200032;

To identify novel abnormally methylated genes in early stage non-small cell lung 
cancer (NSCLC), we analyzed the methylation status of 13 genes (ALX1, BCL2,
FOXL2, HPP1, MYF6, OC2, PDGFRA, PHOX2A, PITX2, RARB, SIX6, SMPD3 and SOX1) in
cancer tissues from 101 cases of stage I NSCLC patients and lung tissues from 30 
cases of non-cancerous lung disease controls, using methylation-specific PCR
(MSP). The methylation frequencies (29.70-64.36%) of 7 genes (MYF6, SIX6, SOX1,
RARB, BCL2, PHOX2A and FOLX2) in stage I NSCLC were significantly higher compared
with those in non-cancerous lung disease controls (P<0.05). The co-methylation of
SIX6 and SOX1, or the co-methyaltion of SIX6, RARB and SOX1 was associated with
adenosquamous carcinoma (ADC), and the co-methylation of BCL2, RARB and SIX6 was 
associated with smoking. A panel of 4 genes (MYF6, SIX6, BCL2 and RARB) may offer
a sensitivity of 93.07% and a specificity of 83.33% in the diagnosis of stage I
NSCLC. Furthermore, we also detected the expression of 8 pathological markers
(VEGF, HER-2, P53, P21, EGFR, CHGA, SYN and EMA) in cancer tissues of stage I
NSCLC by immunohistochemistry, and found that high expression levels of p53 and
CHGA were associated with the methylation of BCL2 (P=0.025) and PHOX2A (P=0.023),
respectively. In this study, among the 7 genes which demonstrated
hypermethylation in stage I NSCLC compared with non-cancerous lung diseases, 5
genes (MYF6, SIX6, PHOX2A, FOLX2 and SOX1) were found for the first time to be
abonormally methylated in NSCLC. Further study of these genes shed light on the
carcinogenesis of NSCLC.

PMCID: PMC3629069
PMID: 23599765  [PubMed]


179. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Jun 15;372(1-2):57-64. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.03.021. 
Epub 2013 Apr 6.

Granulosa cell tumor mutant FOXL2C134W suppresses GDF-9 and activin A-induced
follistatin transcription in primary granulosa cells.

McTavish KJ(1), Nonis D, Hoang YD, Shimasaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California, San Diego,
School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093-0633, USA.

A single somatic FOXL2 mutation (FOXL2(C134W)) was identified in almost all
granulosa cell tumor (GCT) patients. In the pituitary, FOXL2 and Smad3
coordinately regulate activin stimulation of follistatin transcription. We
explored whether a similar regulation occurs in the ovary, and whether
FOXL2(C134W) has altered activity. We show that in primary granulosa cells, GDF-9
and activin increase Smad3-mediated follistatin transcription. In contrast to
findings in the pituitary, FOXL2 negatively regulates GDF-9 and
activin-stimulated follistatin transcription in the ovary. Knockdown of
endogenous FOXL2 confirmed this inhibitory role. FOXL2(C134W) displayed enhanced 
inhibitory activity, completely ablating GDF-9 and activin-induced follistatin
transcription. GDF-9 and activin activity was lost when either the smad binding
element or the forkhead binding element were mutated, indicating that both sites 
are required for Smad3 actions. This study highlights that FOXL2 negatively
regulates follistatin expression within the ovary, and that the pathogenesis of
FOXL2(C134W) may involve an altered interaction with Smad3.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3669547
PMID: 23567549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Heredity (Edinb). 2013 Jul;111(1):57-65. doi: 10.1038/hdy.2013.19. Epub 2013 Apr 
3.

The discovery of Foxl2 paralogs in chondrichthyan, coelacanth and tetrapod
genomes reveals an ancient duplication in vertebrates.

Geraldo MT(1), Valente GT, Braz AS, Martins C.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Genomics Laboratory, Department of Morphology, Institute of
Biosciences, Sao Paulo State University-UNESP, Botucatu, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

The Foxl2 (forkhead box L2) gene is an important member of the forkhead domain
family, primarily responsible for the development of ovaries during female sex
differentiation. The evolutionary studies conducted previously considered the
presence of paralog Foxl2 copies only in teleosts. However, to search for
possible paralog copies in other groups of vertebrates and ensure that all
predicted copies were homolog to the Foxl2 gene, a broad evolutionary analysis
was performed, based on the forkhead domain family. A total of 2464 sequences for
the forkhead domain were recovered, and subsequently, 64 representative sequences
for Foxl2 were used in the evolutionary analysis of this gene. The most important
contribution of this study was the discovery of a new subgroup of Foxl2 copies
(ortholog to Foxl2B) present in the chondrichthyan Callorhinchus milii, in the
coelacanth Latimeria chalumnae, in the avian Taeniopygia guttata and in the
marsupial Monodelphis domestica. This new scenario indicates a gene duplication
event in an ancestor of gnathostomes. Furthermore, based on the analysis of the
syntenic regions of both Foxl2 copies, the duplication event was not exclusive to
Foxl2. Moreover, the duplicated copy distribution was shown to be complex across 
vertebrates, especially in tetrapods, and the results strongly support a loss of 
this copy in eutherian species. Finally, the scenario observed in this study
suggests an update for Foxl2 gene nomenclature, extending the actual suggested
teleost naming of Foxl2A and Foxl2B to all vertebrate sequences and contributing 
to the establishment of a new evolutionary context for the Foxl2 gene.

PMCID: PMC3692314
PMID: 23549337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2013 Dec;39(6):1419-30. doi: 10.1007/s10695-013-9796-4.
Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Cloning and expression analysis of Foxl2 during the reproductive cycle in Korean 
rockfish, Sebastes schlegeli.

Mu WJ(1), Wen HS, Li JF, He F.

Author information: 
(1)Fisheries College, Ocean University of China, 5 Yushan Road, Qingdao, 266003, 
China.

Foxl2 is a member of the winged helix/forkhead family of transcription factors
and is known to regulate ovarian aromatase, which plays a crucial role in ovarian
differentiation. To address the role of Foxl2 in gonads and brain during gonadal 
development, we isolated the full-length cDNA of Foxl2 and analyzed its
spatiotemporal expression patterns in the viviparous teleost Korean rockfish,
Sebastes schlegeli. Tissue distribution pattern revealed that the Foxl2 was
detected in the liver, fat, gill, brain, and ovary, but could hardly be found in 
the testis. Reverse transcriptase PCR suggested that Foxl2 in Korean rockfish may
involve in ovary development in the study of expression level during gonads
development. It also revealed that the stage of highest expression level for
Foxl2 was almost much earlier than cyp19a1a and cyp19a1b during the gonadal
development stage in gonads and brain except for cyp19a1a in brain. Furthermore, 
the expression pattern of Foxl2 as well as aromatases may imply the role of Foxl2
in the up-regulation of aromatases not only in the female fish but also in male.

PMID: 23546994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59819. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059819. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

Interactions between genetic variants in AMH and AMHR2 may modify age at natural 
menopause.

Braem MG(1), Voorhuis M, van der Schouw YT, Peeters PH, Schouten LJ, Eijkemans
MJ, Broekmans FJ, Onland-Moret NC.

Author information: 
(1)University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
M.G.M.Braem@umcutrecht.nl

The onset of menopause has important implications on women's fertility and
health. We previously identified genetic variants in genes involved in initial
follicle recruitment as potential modifiers of age at natural menopause. The
objective of this study was to extend our previous study, by searching for
pairwise interactions between tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (tSNPs) in 
the 5 genes previously selected (AMH, AMHR2, BMP15, FOXL2, GDF9). We performed a 
cross-sectional study among 3445 women with a natural menopause participating in 
the Prospect-EPIC study, a population-based prospective cohort study, initiated
between 1993 and 1997. Based on the model-based multifactor dimensionality
reduction (MB-MDR) test with a permutation-based maxT correction for multiple
testing, we found a statistically significant interaction between rs10407022 in
AMH and rs11170547 in AMHR2 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.019) associated with age at natural menopause.
Rs10407022 did not have a statistically significant main effect. However,
rs10407022 is an eQTL SNP that has been shown to influence mRNA expression levels
in lymphoblastoid cell lines. This study provides additional insights into the
genetic background of age at natural menopause and suggests a role of the AMH
signaling pathway in the onset of natural menopause. However, these results
remain suggestive and replication by independent studies is necessary.

PMCID: PMC3609726
PMID: 23544102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Reprod Sci. 2013 May;20(5):524-35. doi: 10.1177/1933719113483017. Epub 2013 Mar
27.

Embryonic stem cell-derived granulosa cells participate in ovarian follicle
formation in vitro and in vivo.

Woods DC(1), White YA, Niikura Y, Kiatpongsan S, Lee HJ, Tilly JL.

Author information: 
(1)Vincent Center for Reproductive Biology, MGH Vincent Department of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Differentiating embryonic stem cells (ESCs) can form ovarian follicle-like
structures in vitro, consisting of an oocyte-like cell surrounded by somatic
cells capable of steroidogenesis. Using a dual-fluorescence reporter system in
which mouse ESCs express green fluorescent protein (GFP) under the control of a
germ cell-specific Pou5f1 gene promoter and red fluorescent protein (Discosoma sp
red [DsRed]) driven by the granulosa cell-specific Forkhead box L2 (Foxl2) gene
promoter, we first confirmed in vitro formation of follicle-like structures
containing GFP-positive cells surrounded by DsRed-positive cells. Isolated
DsRed-positive cells specified from ECSs exhibited a gene expression profile
consistent with granulosa cells, as revealed by the detection of messenger RNAs
(mRNAs) for Foxl2, follistatin (Fst), anti-Müllerian hormone (Amh), and
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor (Fshr) as well as by production of both
progesterone and estradiol. In addition, treatment of isolated DsRed-expressing
cells with follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) significantly increased estradiol
production over basal levels, confirming the presence of functional FSH receptors
in these cells. Last, ESC-derived DsRed-positive cells injected into neonatal
mouse ovaries became incorporated within the granulosa cell layer of immature
follicles. These studies demonstrate that Foxl2-expressing ovarian somatic cells 
derived in vitro from differentiating ESCs express granulosa cell markers,
actively associate with germ cells in vitro, synthesize steroids, respond to FSH,
and participate in folliculogenesis in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3635068
PMID: 23536570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2013 Jun 15;372(1-2):42-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2013.02.020.
Epub 2013 Mar 21.

Essential but differential role of FOXL2wt and FOXL2C134W in GDF-9 stimulation of
follistatin transcription in co-operation with Smad3 in the human granulosa cell 
line COV434.

Nonis D(1), McTavish KJ, Shimasaki S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California San Diego,
School of Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093-0633, USA.

The FOXL2(C134W) mutation has been identified in virtually all adult granulosa
cell tumors (GCTs). Here we show that the exogenous FOXL2 expression is necessary
for GDF-9 stimulation of follistatin transcription in the human GCT cell line,
COV434 that lacks endogenous FOXL2 expression. Interestingly, in the presence of 
Smad3 co-expression, FOXL2(C134W) negated GDF-9 stimulation of follistatin
transcription. However, mutation of the Smad binding element (SBE) located in the
intronic enhancer elements in the follistatin gene restored normal FOXL2 activity
to FOXL2(C134W), thus the altered activity of FOXL2(C134W) is dependent on the
ability of Smad3 to directly bind the SBE. Mutation of the FOXL2 binding element 
(FBE) or the FBE and SBE completely prevented GDF-9 activity, suggesting that the
FBE is essential for GDF-9 stimulation in COV434. Overall, our study supports the
view that altered interaction of FOXL2(C134W) with co-factors may underlie the
pathogenesis of this mutation in GCTs.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3657561
PMID: 23523567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(3):e1003358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003358. Epub 2013 Mar 
14.

Microhomology-mediated mechanisms underlie non-recurrent disease-causing
microdeletions of the FOXL2 gene or its regulatory domain.

Verdin H(1), D'haene B, Beysen D, Novikova Y, Menten B, Sante T, Lapunzina P,
Nevado J, Carvalho CM, Lupski JR, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

Genomic disorders are often caused by recurrent copy number variations (CNVs),
with nonallelic homologous recombination (NAHR) as the underlying mechanism.
Recently, several microhomology-mediated repair mechanisms--such as
microhomology-mediated end-joining (MMEJ), fork stalling and template switching
(FoSTeS), microhomology-mediated break-induced replication (MMBIR), serial
replication slippage (SRS), and break-induced SRS (BISRS)--were described in the 
etiology of non-recurrent CNVs in human disease. In addition, their formation may
be stimulated by genomic architectural features. It is, however, largely
unexplored to what extent these mechanisms contribute to rare, locus-specific
pathogenic CNVs. Here, fine-mapping of 42 microdeletions of the FOXL2 locus,
encompassing FOXL2 (32) or its regulatory domain (10), serves as a model for
rare, locus-specific CNVs implicated in genetic disease. These deletions lead to 
blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES), a developmental condition affecting the eyelids
and the ovary. For breakpoint mapping we used targeted array-based comparative
genomic hybridization (aCGH), quantitative PCR (qPCR), long-range PCR, and Sanger
sequencing of the junction products. Microhomology, ranging from 1 bp to 66 bp,
was found in 91.7% of 24 characterized breakpoint junctions, being significantly 
enriched in comparison with a random control sample. Our results show that
microhomology-mediated repair mechanisms underlie at least 50% of these
microdeletions. Moreover, genomic architectural features, like sequence motifs,
non-B DNA conformations, and repetitive elements, were found in all breakpoint
regions. In conclusion, the majority of these microdeletions result from
microhomology-mediated mechanisms like MMEJ, FoSTeS, MMBIR, SRS, or BISRS.
Moreover, we hypothesize that the genomic architecture might drive their
formation by increasing the susceptibility for DNA breakage or promote
replication fork stalling. Finally, our locus-centered study, elucidating the
etiology of a large set of rare microdeletions involved in a monogenic disorder, 
can serve as a model for other clustered, non-recurrent microdeletions in genetic
disease.

PMCID: PMC3597517
PMID: 23516377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2013 Apr 26;54(4):2985-91. doi: 10.1167/iovs.13-11794.

Clinical, radiologic, and genetic features in blepharophimosis, ptosis, and
epicanthus inversus syndrome in the Indian population.

Chawla B(1), Bhadange Y, Dada R, Kumar M, Sharma S, Bajaj MS, Pushker N, Chandra 
M, Ghose S.

Author information: 
(1)Oculoplastics, Orbit, and Ocular Oncology Service, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Centre 
for Ophthalmic Sciences, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi,
India. bhavna2424@hotmail.com

PURPOSE: To study the clinical, radiologic, and genetic features in Indian
Blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) patients.
METHODS: A total of 33 clinically well characterized BPES cases who presented
between 2009 to 2011 were recruited. Clinical evaluation consisted of ophthalmic 
and orthoptic examination. For orbital indices, computed tomography (CT) scan of 
orbits was performed. Genetic studies included cytogenetic analysis and molecular
analysis of FOXL2 gene.
RESULTS: Significant clinical findings included a high incidence of refractive
error in 94%, amblyopia in 60%, and strabismus in 40% of BPES cases. Orbital
radiologic indices on CT scan in BPES were found to be comparable to the control 
group. On karyotyping, 8 out of 33 (24%) cases harbored chromosomal
abnormalities. These abnormalities included 46,XY;del(3qter), 46,XY;del(3q26.3), 
46,XX;del(3q24-25), and 46,XY;del(3q26qter). On molecular analysis, a novel
mutation consisting of heterozygous substitution at c1635 that replaced cytosine 
by thymidine was detected.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study on clinical
features in BPES patients of Indian origin. A high incidence of refractive error,
strabismus, and amblyopia was found in BPES cases. Orbital imaging confirmed that
clinical features are limited to soft tissue abnormalities, with no underlying
bony changes. Cytogenetic studies showed that most chromosomal abnormalities in
the Indian population are in the region of the long arm of chromosome 3. Results 
of molecular analysis indicate that there may be loci other than the FOXL2 gene, 
which are affected in BPES cases. Our study expands the existing mutation
spectrum of FOXL2 gene.

PMID: 23513057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Jul;165(3):181-8. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2013.03.007. Epub 2013 Mar 16.

Cloning, genomic structure and expression analysis of ubc9 in the course of
development in the half-smooth tongue sole (Cynoglossus semilaevis).

Hu Q(1), Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Yellow Sea Fisheries Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Fishery Sciences, 
Qingdao 266071, China.

The small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) pathway is an essential biological
process in eukaryote, and Ubc9 is an important E2 conjugating enzyme (UBE2) for
SUMO pathway and plays a critical role in cellular differentiation, development
and sex modification in various species. However, the relationship between Ubc9
and sex modification and development in fish remains elusive. To elucidate the
impact of Ubc9 on sex modification and development, the full length of the cDNA
and genomic sequence was cloned from half-smooth tongue sole, Cynoglossus
semilaevis. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR demonstrated that ubc9 was ubiquitously
expressed in different tissues, and the expression levels varied in the different
stages of embryonic and gonadal development. In addition, the expression level
was significantly higher in the temperature-treated females than the normal
females and males. Moreover, the PET-32-Ubc9 plasmid was constructed and the
recombinant protein was expressed in Escherichia coli. Follistatin gene
expression was initially up-regulated and FSE genes (cyp19a1a, ctnnb1, foxl2)
were initially down-regulated after the injection of Ubc9 protein, prior to 96 h 
eventually recovered to normal levels. Taken together, the results show that Ubc9
is involved in embryogenesis, gametogenesis and sex modification, and exerts an
effect on gene expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23507627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Jun;165(2):125-37. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2013.03.011. Epub 2013 Mar 15.

Molecular cloning, characterization, and sexually dimorphic expression of five
major sex differentiation-related genes in a Scorpaeniform fish, sablefish
(Anoplopoma fimbria).

Smith EK(1), Guzmán JM, Luckenbach JA.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Physiology Program, Northwest Fisheries Science Center, National
Marine Fisheries Service, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
Seattle, WA, USA.

Regardless of how sex is determined, the gonadal genes expressed downstream that 
regulate sex differentiation are relatively conserved among vertebrates. The goal
of this study was to clone and characterize five key sex differentiation-related 
genes in a Scorpaeniform fish, sablefish (Anoplopoma fimbria). Complete mRNA
sequences of foxl2, cyp19a1a, dmrt1, sox9a and amh were cloned, sequenced, and
phylogenetically analyzed. The sablefish mRNA sequences exhibited the
characteristic domains of each gene. The deduced amino sequences were highly
conserved in some cases, such as Foxl2, whereas others, such as Amh, exhibited
lower homology to corresponding sequences in other vertebrates. Using
quantitative PCRs developed for each gene, we found that foxl2 and cyp19a1a mRNA 
levels were significantly elevated in juvenile sablefish ovaries compared to
testes, whereas dmrt1, sox9a and amh mRNA levels were significantly elevated in
testes relative to ovaries. These patterns were upheld in our tissue distribution
analyses of adult fish, but overall four of the genes, foxl2, cyp19a1a, dmrt1 and
amh, were robust markers of sex in sablefish. This study provides important
molecular tools for ongoing work related to sex control in sablefish and
exploration of the earliest period of molecular sex differentiation and its
regulation.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 23507626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Mol Vis. 2013;19:418-23. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Genetic analysis of the forkhead transcriptional factor 2 gene in three Chinese
families with blepharophimosis syndrome.

Jiang H(1), Huang X, Su Z, Rao L, Wu S, Zhang T, Li K, Quan Q, Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Research Center, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, PR China.

PURPOSE: Clinically, blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES) has been divided into two
subsets according to the association of ocular malformation with (type I) or
without (type II) premature ovarian failure (POF). BPES is ascribed to mutations 
in the forkhead transcriptional factor 2 (FOXL2) gene. This study aimed at
identifying clinical features and mutations within the FOXL2 gene in three
Chinese families with BPES.
METHODS: A clinical and molecular genetic investigation was performed in affected
and unaffected members from three Chinese families with BPES. Genomic DNA was
prepared from leucocytes of peripheral venous blood, the entire coding region of 
FOXL2 were amplified with PCR, and direct DNA sequencing of the PCR products was 
performed for mutations in FOXL2.
RESULTS: Three mutations in FOXL2 were found in three families, including
c.672_701dup30, c.663_692dup30, and c.475dupC. Of the three, the c.475dupC
(p.His159fs) was novel in family C and resulted in a frameshift mutation to
generate a truncated protein owing to a premature stop codon at codon 238. The
new duplication mutation was associated with BPES type II. The c.672_701dup30
(p.Ala224_Ala234dup10) and the c.663_692dup30 (p.Ala221_Ala231dup10) were
detected in family A and family B, respectively, leading to expansions of the
polyalanine (poly-Ala) tract that is frequently the hot spot of mutations within 
FOXL2.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results expand the spectrum of FOXL2 mutations, and further
indicate the association of a novel duplication mutation leading to a truncated
protein with BPES type II. The other two known mutations may support the previous
hypothesis regarding expansions of the polyalanine tract associated with BPES
type II as a mutational hot spot in FOXL2.

PMCID: PMC3580973
PMID: 23441113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biol Reprod. 2013 Mar 28;88(3):78. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.107797. Print 2013
Mar.

Mechanisms of activin-stimulated FSH synthesis: the story of a pig and a FOX.

Bernard DJ(1), Tran S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada. daniel.bernard@mcgill.ca

Activins were discovered and, in fact, named more than a quarter century ago
based on their abilities to stimulate pituitary follicle-stimulating hormone
(FSH) synthesis and secretion. However, it is only in the last decade that we
have finally come to understand their underlying mechanisms of action in
gonadotroph cells. In this minireview, we chronicle the research that led to the 
recent discovery of forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) as an essential mediator of
activin-regulated FSH beta subunit (Fshb) transcription in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 23426431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2013 May;165(1):61-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2013.02.007. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Oyster sex determination is influenced by temperature - first clues in spat
during first gonadic differentiation and gametogenesis.

Santerre C(1), Sourdaine P, Marc N, Mingant C, Robert R, Martinez AS.

Author information: 
(1)Normandie Univ, France.

The sex-determining system of Crassostrea gigas is still poorly known, especially
regarding the potential influence of temperature. In order to address this
question, mRNA expressions of actors of the molecular cascade (Cg-DMl, Cg-SoxE,
Cg-ß-catenin, Cg-Foxl2/Cg-Foxl2os) and of Oyvlg, a germ cell marker, were
investigated by real-time PCR in spat grown at different temperatures (18, 22, 25
and 28°C). In parallel, gonadic differentiation, gametogenesis and sex ratios
were assessed by histology at each of these temperatures. Whatever the
temperature, Cg-DMl, Cg-SoxE, Cg-ß-catenin and Oyvlg expressions peaked at the
same developmental stage, always after Cg-Foxl2/Cg-Foxl2os (around 40-44dpf for
spat grown at 18°C). Temperatures increased the kinetics of first gonadic
differentiation and gametogenesis. At 25°C a significant switch occurred in sex
ratio towards males and in the balance of expression between male and female
genes, in favor of males. A slight gametogenesis disturbance was also observed.
These results strengthen the hypotheses about the sex-determining time window and
molecular cascade governing the development of C. gigas, with notably the
involvement of Cg-Foxl2/Cg-Foxl2os in the very early steps. They also suggest an 
influence of temperature on the oyster's sex determination which, associated to
genetic control, would induce a mixed sex determination system (GSD+TSD).

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23416889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Apr;164(4):236-46. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2013.01.004. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

Sex-specific expression, synthesis and localization of aromatase regulators in
one-year-old Atlantic salmon ovaries and testes.

von Schalburg KR(1), Gowen BE(2), Rondeau EB(3), Johnson NW(4), Minkley DR(3),
Leong JS(3), Davidson WS(5), Koop BF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Victoria,
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada V8W 3N5; Department of Molecular Biology and
Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada V5A 1S6.
Electronic address: krvs@uvic.ca. (2)Department of Biology, Electron Microscopy
Laboratory, University of Victoria, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada V8W 3N5.
(3)Department of Biology, Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Victoria,
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada V8W 3N5. (4)Microtek Research and Development 
Ltd., 6761 Kirkpatrick Crescent, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada V8X 3X1.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada V5A 1S6.

Transcripts for dax1, foxl2, mis and sf1 are co-expressed in the somatic
companion cells of teleost germ cells. These regulatory factors function, in
part, to modulate the transcription of aromatase, particularly cyp19a, the
terminal enzyme of estrogen biosynthesis. At least two separate aromatase loci
exist in teleost fish that encode distinct isoforms. The activity of two forms,
cyp19a and cyp19b1, is predominantly associated with the ovary and the brain,
respectively. We isolated sequences that compose the proximal promoters of
cyp19a, cyp19b1 and foxl2a, to identify potential transcription factor binding
motifs to define sex-specific regulatory profiles for each gene. We also provide 
evidence for the translation and immunological localization of DAX-1, FOXL2 and
MIS to the endoplasmic reticulum and accumulation within secretory vesicles of
the salmon oocyte. We found no evidence for the expression of CYP19A or CYP19B1
in the oocyte at the one-year-old stage. However, synthesis of both aromatases
was localized to testicular germ and soma cells at this early stage of
development. Production of these regulatory factors in the germ cells may serve
to modulate the transcription and activity of endogenous aromatase and/or
contribute to the differentiation of the neighbouring companion cells through
secretory signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23391703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Dev Dyn. 2013 Apr;242(4):380-7. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23944. Epub 2013 Mar 6.

Just how conserved is vertebrate sex determination?

Cutting A(1), Chue J, Smith CA.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Childrens Hospital, Parkville,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: Sex determination in vertebrate embryos has long been equated with
gonadal differentiation into testes or ovaries. This view has been challenged
over the years by reports of somatic sexual dimorphisms pre-dating gonadal sex
differentiation. The recent finding that sex determination in birds is likely to 
be partly cell autonomous has again called for a broader definition of sex
determination. Inherent sexual differentiation in each and every cell may apply
widely among vertebrates, and may involve more than one "master sex gene" on a
sex chromosome. At the gonadal level, key genes required for proper sexual
differentiation are conserved among vertebrates, but their relative positions in 
the ovarian and testicular cascades differ.
RESULTS: We illustrate these differences by comparing key sex genes in fishes
versus birds and mammals, with emphasis on DM domain genes and the SOX9-AMH
pathway in the testis and the FOXL2-Aromatase pathway in the ovary. Such
comparisons facilitate the identification of ancient versus derived genes
involved in gonadal sex determination.
CONCLUSIONS: The data indicate that vertebrate sex-determining cascades are not
as conserved as once thought.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23390004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55099. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055099. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Overexpression of wild-type but not C134W mutant FOXL2 enhances GnRH-induced cell
apoptosis by increasing GnRH receptor expression in human granulosa cell tumors.

Cheng JC(1), Klausen C, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Child and Family Research Institute,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

The etiology of granulosa cell tumors (GCTs) is largely unknown. The primary mode
of treatment is surgical, however not all women are cured by surgery alone. Thus,
it is important to develop improved treatments through a greater understanding of
the molecular mechanisms that contribute to this disease. Recently, it has been
shown that a FOXL2 402C>G (C134W) mutation is present in 97% of human adult-type 
GCTs, suggesting an important role for this mutation in the development of GCTs. 
We have shown previously that gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH)-I and -II
induce apoptosis in cultured normal human granulosa cells. Moreover, it has been 
reported that FOXL2 can bind to the promoter of the mouse GnRH receptor gene and 
regulate its transcription. Thus, we hypothesized that C134W mutant FOXL2 could
modulate the pro-apoptotic effects of GnRH via aberrant regulation of GnRH
receptor levels. Using KGN cells, a human GCT-derived cell line which harbors the
FOXL2 402C>G mutation, we show that treatment with GnRH-I and -II induces cell
apoptosis, and that small interfering RNA-mediated depletion of GnRH receptor
abolishes these effects. Overexpression of wild-type FOXL2 increases both mRNA
and protein levels of GnRH receptor and consequently enhances GnRH-induced
apoptosis. Importantly, neither the expression levels of GnRH receptor nor
GnRH-induced apoptosis were affected by overexpression of the C134W mutant FOXL2.
Interestingly, knockdown of endogenous FOXL2 down-regulates GnRHR expression in
normal human granulosa cells with wild-type FOXL2, but not in KGN cells. These
results suggest that the FOXL2 402C>G mutation may contribute to the development 
of human adult-type GCTs by reducing the expression of GnRH receptor, thus
conferring resistance to GnRH-induced cell apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3553060
PMID: 23372819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Int J Gynecol Pathol. 2013 Mar;32(2):167-70. doi: 10.1097/PGP.0b013e318257def6.

Primary ovarian borderline tumor in the inguinal lymph node.

Carrabin N(1), Treilleux I, Meeus P, Tredan O, Ray-Coquard I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Centre Léon Bérard, Lyon, France.
nicolas.carrabin@yahoo.fr

We report the case of a primary serous ovarian borderline tumour developed in an 
inguinal lymph node. No primary ovarian borderline tumour was observed within the
ovaries after bilateral ovariectomy and complete pathological examination. We
considered the diagnosis of ectopic ovarian tissue because the tumour was
completely surrounded by normal ovarian tissue with positive FOXL2 staining. The 
whole ovarian tissue was itself entirely surrounded by lymphatic tissue. Two
other hypotheses should be considered: primary retroperitoneal borderline tumour 
or retroperitoneal nodal involvement by an ovarian serous borderline tumour.
Ectopic ovarian tissue can be observed in lymph node. We don't believe ectopic
location of ovarian tissue increase the risk of neoplastic change.

PMID: 23370643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Apr 1;31(10):e165-6. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.45.0346. Epub 2013 
Jan 28.

Cytochrome P17 inhibition with ketoconazole as treatment for advanced granulosa
cell ovarian tumor.

Garcia-Donas J(1), Hurtado A, García-Casado Z, Albareda J, López-Guerrero JA,
Alemany I, Grande E, Camara JC, Hernando S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Oncology Department, Centro Integral Oncologico Clara Campal, Madrid, 
Spain. jgarciadonas@gmail.com

PMID: 23358981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mod Pathol. 2013 Jun;26(6):860-7. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2012.226. Epub 2013 Jan 
25.

FOXL2 molecular testing in ovarian neoplasms: diagnostic approach and procedural 
guidelines.

Kommoss S(1), Anglesio MS, Mackenzie R, Yang W, Senz J, Ho J, Bell L, Lee S,
Lorette J, Huntsman DG, Blake Gilks C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

A single, recurrent somatic point mutation (402C<U+2192>G) in FOXL2 has been described
in almost all adult-type granulosa cell tumors but not other ovarian neoplasms.
Histopathological features of adult-type granulosa cell tumors can be mimicked by
a variety of other tumors, making diagnosis of adult-type granulosa cell tumor
challenging. It has been suggested that molecular testing for FOXL2 mutation
might be a useful tool in the diagnosis of adult-type granulosa cell tumors. The 
aim of this study was to demonstrate how testing for the FOXL2 mutation can be
used in a gynecological pathology consultation service and to establish clear
procedural guidelines for FOXL2 testing. Immunohistochemistry for FOXL2 was done 
using an anti-FOXL2 polyclonal antiserum. If immunohistochemistry was positive,
FOXL2 mutation status was subsequently analyzed using a TaqMan assay. A dilution 
experiment was done to assess the sensitivity and minimum tumor cellularity
requirements for our TaqMan assay. Twenty problematic cases were assessed, where 
the differential diagnosis after the initial investigations included adult-type
granulosa cell tumors. Differential diagnoses included: thecoma, Sertoli-Leydig
cell tumor, juvenile granulosa cell tumor, endometrial stromal sarcoma and
others. In all cases, FOXL2 immunohistochemistry was positive and in six samples 
the FOXL2 mutation was detected, thus confirming a diagnosis of adult-type
granulosa cell tumor. The TaqMan assay was able to reliably detect the FOXL2
mutation with input DNA in the range of 2.5-20<U+2009>ng, and with a minimum of 25%
tumor cell nuclei. The analysis of the FOXL2 mutational status in clinical
samples is a useful diagnostic tool in situations where the differential
diagnosis is between adult-type granulosa cell tumor and other ovarian tumors.
The TaqMan assay requires a minimum of 2.5<U+2009>ng DNA, with optimal assay performance
for 5 to 10<U+2009>ng DNA input. Laser capture or needle-macrodissection should be
undertaken to enrich samples with tumor cell content below 25%.

PMID: 23348906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Mar;27(3):407-21. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1286. Epub 2013 Jan
22.

Impaired fertility and FSH synthesis in gonadotrope-specific Foxl2 knockout mice.

Tran S(1), Zhou X, Lafleur C, Calderon MJ, Ellsworth BS, Kimmins S, Boehm U,
Treier M, Boerboom D, Bernard DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montréal,
Québec, Canada.

Erratum in
    Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Mar;29(3):484.

Impairments in pituitary FSH synthesis or action cause infertility. However,
causes of FSH dysregulation are poorly described, in part because of our
incomplete understanding of mechanisms controlling FSH synthesis. Previously, we 
discovered a critical role for forkhead protein L2 (FOXL2) in activin-stimulated 
FSH ß-subunit (Fshb) transcription in immortalized cells in vitro. Here, we
tested the hypothesis that FOXL2 is required for FSH synthesis in vivo. Using a
Cre/lox approach, we selectively ablated Foxl2 in murine anterior pituitary
gonadotrope cells. Conditional knockout (cKO) mice developed overtly normally but
were subfertile in adulthood. Testis size and spermatogenesis were significantly 
impaired in cKO males. cKO females exhibited reduced ovarian weight and ovulated 
fewer oocytes in natural estrous cycles compared with controls. In contrast,
ovaries of juvenile cKO females showed normal responses to exogenous gonadotropin
stimulation. Both male and female cKO mice were FSH deficient, secondary to
diminished pituitary Fshb mRNA production. Basal and activin-stimulated Fshb
expression was similarly impaired in Foxl2 depleted primary pituitary cultures.
Collectively, these data definitively establish FOXL2 as the first identified
gonadotrope-restricted transcription factor required for selective FSH synthesis 
in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3589670
PMID: 23340250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Gynecol Oncol. 2013 Apr;129(1):209-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2012.12.034. Epub
2012 Dec 30.

Comparative study of microRNA regulation on FOXL2 between adult-type and
juvenile-type granulosa cell tumours in vitro.

Rosario R(1), Blenkiron C, Shelling AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medical and Health
Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. r.rosario@auckland.ac.nz

OBJECTIVES: Despite their distinct biology, granulosa cell tumours (GCTs) are
treated similarly to other ovarian tumours. Predominantly expressed in granulosa 
cells, the transcription factor Forkhead Box L2 (FOXL2) is near absent in
juvenile-type GCTs. This research aimed to investigate miRNAs as a mechanism of
suppression of FOXL2 expression in juvenile-type GCTs.
METHODS: The miRNA abundance of two GCT cell lines COV434 and KGN was profiled
using Affymetrix miRNA GeneChip arrays. Luciferase assays were used to confirm
miRNA binding to the 3'UTR of FOXL2. Identified as promising candidates, the
miR-17 miRNA family was targeted for knockdown with a miRNA sponge. Additionally,
individual family members miR-17, miR-20b and miR-106a were knocked down using
Anti-miR™ inhibitors. Subsequently, FOXL2 expression was analysed using RT-qPCR
and Western blotting.
RESULTS: The profiling of COV434 and KGN cells revealed unique miRNA signatures, 
with COV434 expressing miR-17 family miRNAs whilst KGN expressed members of the
let-7 miRNA gene family. Luciferase assays confirmed miRNA binding to FOXL2's
3'UTR. Reduction of miR-17 family miRNAs increased FOXL2 mRNA expression, however
luciferase assays performed in combination with the sponge suggested this is an
indirect effect. As no changes in protein were observed, we propose another miRNA
is repressing the translation of FOXL2 mRNA.
CONCLUSION: Through miRNA profiling we have begun to unravel the profiles of
GCTs, showing that juvenile and adult derived-cell lines are biologically
distinct. By expanding on this discovery we may further elucidate the miRNA-mRNA 
pathways involved in GCT initiation and progression with potential for novel
therapeutics for these cancers.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23280087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Mar;66(3):198-204. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201062. Epub
2012 Dec 25.

Gonadal malignancy in 13 consecutive collected patients with disorders of sex
development (DSD) from Semarang (Indonesia).

Juniarto AZ(1), Setyawati BA, Miranti IP, Santosa A, Hersmus R, Stoop H, Cools M,
Oosterhuis JW, Drop SL, Faradz SM, Looijenga LH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics Center for Biomedical Research, Faculty of Medicine
Diponegoro University (FMDU), Semarang, Central Java, Indonesia.

AIMS: Caucasian patients with disorders of sex development (DSD) are at a high
risk of developing germ cell cancer (GCC). GCC is prominent in young adults in
Western countries, while the incidence is significantly lower in Asia. So far,
the risk of GCC in Asian DSD patients is unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A detailed study of gonad histology , morphology and
immunohistochemistry (OCT3/4, testis-specific protein Y-encoded, VASA, SCF/KITLG,
SOX9, FOXL2) of 16 Indonesian DSD patients was undertaken. 13 cases could be
analysed, including ovarian tissue (n=3), streak gonad (n=1), undifferentiated
gonad (n=1) and testicular tissue (n=8), diagnosed as 46, XX (n=1), 46, XY (n=7) 
and sex chromosome DSD (n=5). The precursor lesion gonadoblastoma or carcinoma in
situ, or GCC was diagnosed in four cases (30.8%; three 46, XY and one sex
chromosome DSD ). A hormone producing ovarian Leydig cell tumour was identified
in a 46, XX patient, supposed to be a late onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
CONCLUSIONS: In spite of the significantly lower risk of GCC in the general Asian
population, DSD is a dominant risk factor. The study demonstrates the power of
immunohistochemical markers for (early) diagnosis. This knowledge will deepen
understanding of the pathobiology of GCC and clinical handling of patients with
DSD, globally.

PMID: 23268320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Histopathology. 2013 Jan;62(1):71-88. doi: 10.1111/his.12052.

A practical approach to immunohistochemical diagnosis of ovarian germ cell
tumours and sex cord-stromal tumours.

Rabban JT(1), Zaloudek CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA, USA. joseph.rabban@ucsf.edu

Immunohistochemistry can be useful in the diagnosis of ovarian germ cell tumours 
and sex cord-stromal tumours. A wide variety of markers are available, including 
many that are novel. The aim of this review is to provide a practical approach to
the selection and interpretation of these markers, emphasizing an understanding
of their sensitivity and specificity in the particular differential diagnosis in 
question. The main markers discussed include those for malignant germ cell
differentiation (SALL4 and placental alkaline phosphatase), dysgerminoma (OCT4,
CD117, and D2-40), yolk sac tumour (a-fetoprotein and glypican-3), embryonal
carcinoma (OCT4, CD30, and SOX2), sex cord-stromal differentiation (calretinin,
inhibin, SF-1, FOXL2) and steroid cell tumours (melan-A). In addition, the
limited role of immunohistochemistry in determining the primary site of origin of
an ovarian carcinoid tumour is discussed.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 23240671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Mol Reprod Dev. 2013 Feb;80(2):102-17. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22141.

Estrus synchronization and ovarian hyper-stimulation treatments have negligible
effects on cumulus oocyte complex gene expression whereas induction of ovulation 
causes major expression changes.

Agca C(1), Yakan A, Agca Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Missouri-Columbia, Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA.

The effects of exogenous hormones, used for estrus synchronization and ovarian
hyper stimulation, on cumulus oocyte complexes (COCs) gene expression in sexually
mature rats were determined using microarrays. Gene expression in COCs collected 
from GnRH (G(trt)), GnRH + eCG (G + E(trt)), and GnRH + eCG + hCG (G + E +
H(trt)) treatments were compared to COCs from naturally cycling (NC) rats before 
the preovulatory luteninizing hormone surge. There was no significant difference 
in gene expression among NC, G(trt), and G + E(trt); however, over 2,600 genes
were significantly different between NC and G + E + H(trt) (P < 0.05). Genes
upregulated in G + E + H(trt) encode for: proteins that are involved in
prostaglandin synthesis (Ptgs2, Pla2g4a, and Runx1) and cholesterol biosynthesis 
(Hmgcr, Sc4mol, and Dhcr24); receptors that allow cholesterol uptake (Ldlr and
Scarb1), regulate progesterone synthesis (Star), and inactivate estrogen
(Sult1e1); and downstream effectors of LH signal (Pgr, Cebpb, Creb3l1, Areg,
Ereg, and Adamts1). Conversely, G + E + H(trt) downregulated genes encoding
proteins involved in: DNA replication and cell cycle progression (Ccne2, Orc5l,
Rad50, and Mcm6); reproductive developmental process; and granulosa cell
expansion (Gdf9, Bmp15, Amh, Amhr2, Bmpr1b, Tgfb2, Foxl2, Pde3a, Esr2, Fshr,
Ybx2, Ccnd2, Ccnb1ip1, and Zp3); maternal effect genes required for embryo
development (Zar1, Npm2, Nlrp5, Dnmt1, H1foo, and Zfp57); amino acid degradation;
and ketogenesis (Hmgcs2, and Cpt1b). These results from the rat show that
hormones used for estrus synchronization (G(trt)) and ovarian hyper stimulation
(G + E(trt)) had minimal effects on gene expression, whereas induction of
ovulation (G + E + H(trt)) caused major changes in gene expression of rat COCs.
This study provides comprehensive information about regulated genes during late
follicle development and ovulation induction.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23239112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2013 Feb;43(2):110-5. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hys206. Epub 2012 Dec
5.

Deep sequencing in cancer research.

Yoshida K(1), Sanada M, Ogawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Project, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, Japan. sogawa-tky@umin.ac.jp

Cancer is caused by alterations in the cellular genome including
single-nucleotide variations, small insertions and deletions (indels), copy
number changes and other structural variations and, as such, their detection in a
comprehensive manner is of critical importance for fully understanding cancer
pathogenesis, improvement of diagnosis as well as the development of novel
therapeutics. In this point of views, the recent development of massively
parallel (or 'next-generation') sequencing technologies has provided an
unprecedented possibility to accomplish this need by enabling single-nucleotide
resolution analysis of the entire genome of cancer cells as well as more targeted
analysis of coding sequencing or transcriptomes. Through international
co-operations, a wide variety of cancer cell types have now been analyzed using
these technologies to help unmask their pathogenesis. In this review, we briefly 
overview the recent advances in cancer research obtained through the massive
effort of sequencing cancer genomes.

PMID: 23225907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Sex Dev. 2012;6(6):303-15. doi: 10.1159/000343783. Epub 2012 Nov 14.

Sexing frogs by real-time PCR: using aromatase (cyp19) as an early ovarian
differentiation marker.

Navarro-Martín L(1), Velasco-Santamaría YM, Duarte-Guterman P, Robertson C,
Lanctôt C, Pauli B, Trudeau VL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics, Department of Biology,
University of Ottawa, 30 Marie Curie, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
laianavarromartin@gmail.com

Most anurans have no identified sex-markers; therefore, alternative methods for
identification of early changes in sex ratios are required. In this study,
Lithobates sylvaticus and Silurana tropicalis tadpoles were sampled at different 
developmental stages covering the entire process of sex differentiation. Three
candidate genes known to be involved in sex differentiation in other vertebrate
species were selected to develop a method to identify phenotypic sex in frogs:
cytochrome p450 aromatase (cyp19), forkhead box L2 (foxl2) and the cytochrome
17-alpha-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase (cyp17). Cloning of these genes revealed
nucleotide identity values ranging between 75-97% when compared to other
amphibian species. Gene expression of cyp17,cyp19 and foxl2 in L. sylvaticus
adult gonads and gonad-mesonephros complex (GMC) of tadpoles was analyzed by
real-time RT-PCR. Results showed clear sexually dimorphic patterns in the
expression of the 3 genes. Our analysis reveals that GMC gene expression levels
of cyp19 alone can be used as a robust predictor of phenotypic sex in L.
sylvaticus tadpoles. In addition, we validated this method measuring cyp19 mRNA
levels in S. tropicalis GMCs. We propose measuring cyp19 as a tool to study the
effects of chemical contaminants (including endocrine disrupting compounds) on
amphibian gonadal development and sex ratios in the future.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23154306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Ocul Surf. 2012 Oct;10(4):221-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jtos.2012.07.003. Epub 2012 Jul
25.

Wakayama Symposium: Notch-FoxL2-a-SMA axis in eyelid levator muscle development
and congenital blepharophimosis.

Liu CY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Edith J. Crawley Vision Research Center/Department of Ophthalmology, College
of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. Electronic address:
Liucg@uc.edu.

This review summarizes our recent findings regarding the Notch signaling pathway 
in regulating normal eyelid morphogenesis and its role in the pathogenesis of
human congenital blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus syndrome
(BPES). We used genetic and molecular biological approaches to investigate the
mechanism by which Notch1 activation controls expression of FoxL2, which in turn 
activates smooth muscle actin gene expression in periocular mesenchyma to control
eyelid levator smooth muscle formation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3495103
PMID: 23084143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Dec;26(12):2092-103. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1158. Epub 2012
Oct 9.

Clusterin and FOXL2 act concordantly to regulate pituitary gonadotroph adenoma
growth.

Chesnokova V(1), Zonis S, Wawrowsky K, Tani Y, Ben-Shlomo A, Ljubimov V, Mamelak 
A, Bannykh S, Melmed S.

Author information: 
(1)Pituitary Center, Department of Medicine, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, California 90048, USA.

Pituitary tumors grow slowly and despite their high prevalence are invariably
benign. We therefore studied mechanisms underlying pituitary tumor growth
restraint. Pituitary tumor transforming gene (PTTG), the index human securin, a
hallmark of pituitary tumors, triggers pituitary cell proliferation and murine
pituitary tumor development. We show that human gonadotroph cell pituitary
tumors, unlike other secreting tumor types, express high levels of
gonadotroph-specific forkhead transcription factor FOXL2, and both PTTG and
Forkhead box protein L2 (FOXL2) stimulate gonadotroph clusterin (Clu) expression.
Both Clu RNA isoforms are abundantly expressed in these nonhormone-secreting
human tumors, and, when cultured, these tumor cells release highly abundant
levels of secreted Clu. FOXL2 directly stimulates the Clu gene promoter, and we
show that PTTG triggers ataxia telangiectasia mutated kinase/IGF-I/p38MAPK DNA
damage/chromosomal instability signaling, which in turn also induces Clu
expression. Consequently, Clu restrains pituitary cell proliferation by inducing 
cyclin dependent kinase inhibitors p16 and p27, whereas Clu deletion
down-regulates p16 and p27 in the Clu(-/-) mouse pituitary. FOXL2 binds and
suppresses the PTTG promoter, and Clu also suppresses PTTG expression, thus
neutralizing protumorigenic PTTG gonadotroph tumor cell properties. In vivo,
murine gonadotroph LßT2 tumor cell xenografts overexpressing Clu and FOXL2 both
grow slower and elicit smaller tumors. Thus, gonadotroph tumor cell proliferation
is determined by the interplay between cell-specific FOXL2 with PTTG and Clu.

PMCID: PMC3517712
PMID: 23051594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Semin Reprod Med. 2012 Oct;30(5):387-95. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1324722. Epub 2012
Oct 8.

WNT4, RSPO1, and FOXL2 in sex development.

Biason-Lauber A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Fribourg, Fribourg, Switzerland.
anna.lauber@unifr.ch

The idea that the female sexual development happens by default was born in the
middle of the last century after Jost performed his innovative experiments to
study the bases of differentiation of the reproductive tract and found that the
female reproductive tract develops even in the absence of any gonad. The term
default (passive) attributed to the whole female developmental pathway,
therefore, established itself, even if it was not originally so intended.
However, recent developments have demonstrated that ovarian development is an
active process. Wingless type MMTV integration site family, member 4 (WNT4), one 
of a few factors with a demonstrated function in the ovarian-determination
pathway, has been found to be involved in sexual differentiation by suppressing
male sexual differentiation, promoting Müllerian duct differentiation, and
maintaining oocyte health. WNT4 expression in the ovary seems to be regulated by 
R-spondin 1 (RSPO1), a thrombospondin family member protein. The role and
interactions of WNT4, RSPO1, and other factors such as forkhead transcription
factor 2 in ovarian development and function will be discussed.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

PMID: 23044875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46270. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046270. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

The transcriptional targets of mutant FOXL2 in granulosa cell tumours.

Rosario R(1), Araki H, Print CG, Shelling AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Auckland, Auckland,
New Zealand. r.rosario@auckland.ac.nz

BACKGROUND: Despite their distinct biology, granulosa cell tumours (GCTs) are
treated the same as other ovarian tumours. Intriguingly, a recurring somatic
mutation in the transcription factor Forkhead Box L2 (FOXL2) 402C>G has been
found in nearly all GCTs examined. This investigation aims to identify the
pathogenicity of mutant FOXL2 by studying its altered transcriptional targets.
METHODS: The expression of mutant FOXL2 was reduced in the GCT cell line KGN, and
wildtype and mutant FOXL2 were overexpressed in the GCT cell line COV434. Total
RNA was hybridised to Affymetrix U133 Plus 2 microarrays. Comparisons were made
between the transcriptomes of control cells and cells altered by FOXL2 knockdown 
and overexpression, to detect potential transcriptional targets of mutant FOXL2.
RESULTS: The overexpression of wildtype and mutant FOXL2 in COV434, and the
silencing of mutant FOXL2 expression in KGN, has shown that mutant FOXL2 is able 
to differentially regulate the expression of many genes, including two well known
FOXL2 targets, StAR and CYP19A. We have shown that many of the genes regulated by
mutant FOXL2 are clustered into functional annotations of cell death,
proliferation, and tumourigenesis. Furthermore, TGF-ß signalling was found to be 
enriched when using the gene annotation tools GATHER and GeneSetDB. This
enrichment was still significant after performing a robust permutation analysis.
CONCLUSION: Given that many of the transcriptional targets of mutant FOXL2 are
known TGF-ß signalling genes, we suggest that deregulation of this key
antiproliferative pathway is one way mutant FOXL2 contributes to the pathogenesis
of adult-type GCTs. We believe this pathway should be a target for future
therapeutic interventions, if outcomes for women with GCTs are to improve.

PMCID: PMC3460904
PMID: 23029457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Histol Histopathol. 2012 Nov;27(11):1361-83.

Genes promoting and disturbing testis development.

Barrionuevo FJ(1), Burgos M, Scherer G, Jiménez R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute of Biotechnology, University of Granada, 
Laboratory 127 CIBM, Center for Biomedical Research, Armilla, Granada, Spain.

Mammals have an XX/XY sex chromosomal sex determination system in which males
represent the heterogametic sex. The Y-linked gene, SRY, determines sex by
inducing the undifferentiated, bipotential gonads to differentiate as testes,
which produce androgens and promote in this way the development of a male
phenotype. Thus, in mammals, sex determination can be equated to testis
determination, which involves several important cell processes, including Sertoli
cell differentiation, mesonephric cell migration, testis cord formation,
testis-specific vascularization, and myoid and Leydig cell differentiation. Many 
genes are currently known to be involved in testis development. Some of them,
including SF1, WT1, GATA4 and FOG2, are necessary for the formation of the
bipotential, undifferentiated gonad but also have important roles in testis
differentiation. Others can be considered testis-promoting, differentaition
and/or maintenance genes: these include SRY, SOX9, FGF9, PTGDS, SOX8, SOX3,
NR0B1, PDGFRa, DMRT1, AMH, NGF, NTF3 and NGFR as the most important examples.
Finally, there is a smaller group of genes which are involved in ovarian
development and which can cause aberrant testis development if mutated, including
RSPO1, WNT4, CTNNB1, FST, BMP2 and FOXL2. In this paper, we review our current
knowledge on the function, spatio-temporal expression pattern and mutant sexual
phenotypes associated with these genes, and discuss the various roles they play
in gonad development.

PMID: 23018237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Biol Reprod. 2012 Nov 16;87(5):116. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.101220. Print
2012 Nov.

Expression patterns of gonadotropin hormones and their receptors during early
sexual differentiation in Nile tilapia Oreochromis niloticus.

Yan H(1), Ijiri S, Wu Q, Kobayashi T, Li S, Nakaseko T, Adachi S, Nagahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Marine Life Sciences, Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Hokkaido, Japan.

In Nile tilapia, sex-specific expression of foxl2 and cyp19a1a in XX gonads and
dmrt1 in XY gonads at 5-6 days after hatching (dah) is critical for
differentiation of the gonads into either ovaries or testes. The factors
triggering sexually dimorphic expression of these genes are unknown, and whether 
the gonadotropin hormones are involved in early gonadal sex differentiation of
the Nile tilapia has been unclear. In the present study, we determined the
precise timing of expression of follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and
luteinizing hormone (LH) in the pituitary and that of their receptors (fshra and 
lhcgrbb) in the undifferentiated gonad in both XX and XY tilapia fry by
quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis. Expression of fshb mRNA and
Fsh protein in the pituitary was detected from the first sampling day (3 dah) to 
25 dah in both XX and XY tilapia larvae without sexual dimorphism and increased
gradually after 25 dah in the pituitary. fshra mRNA was expressed beginning 5 dah
and was present at significantly higher levels in XX gonads than in the XY gonads
at 6-25 dah. These results indicate that the level of Fsh protein in the
pituitary was not critical for differentiation of gonads into ovaries or testes, 
but the expression level of its receptor, fshra, in undifferentiated gonads
appeared to be involved in determining gonadal sexual differentiation. Based on
these observations, it is likely that in XX gonads, up-regulation of fshra may be
necessary to induce cyp19a1a expression, which stimulates estradiol-17beta (E(2))
production and subsequent ovarian differentiation. On the other hand, lhb mRNA
was not detected until 25 dah in the pituitaries of both sexes, and sexual
dimorphism in lhcgrbb mRNA levels appeared later (10-25 dah) than that of fshra
in the gonads, indicating the limited role of LH and lhcgrbb in gonadal
differentiation of the Nile tilapia.

PMID: 23018182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Comp Biochem Physiol C Toxicol Pharmacol. 2013 Jan;157(1):33-40. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpc.2012.09.004. Epub 2012 Sep 23.

Monocrotophos pesticide modulates the expression of sexual differentiation genes 
and causes phenotypic feminization in zebrafish (Danio rerio).

Zhang X(1), Gao L, Yang K, Tian H, Wang W, Ru S.

Author information: 
(1)Marine Life Science College, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, PR China.

Monocrotophos (MCP) is an organophosphorus pesticide moderately toxic to fish,
and it has significant estrogenic properties in vivo. In this study, zebrafish
(Danio rerio) were exposed to 0.001, 0.010, and 0.100 mg/L 40% MCP pesticide in a
semi-static manner from fertilization to 40 days post-hatching. Histological
analyses were performed to determine whether sex differentiation in zebrafish was
affected by MCP, and the mRNA expression levels of genes involved in sexual
differentiation were quantified by real-time PCR to clarify the possible
mechanism(s) of action. The results revealed a prominent increase in the
proportion of females (71%) in the 0.100 mg/L MCP pesticide treatment as well as 
the presence of one intersex individual in each of the groups exposed to 0.001
and 0.100 mg/L MCP. MCP exposure stimulated forkhead transcription factor gene L2
(foxl2) expression and suppressed doublesex/mab-3 related transcription factor 1 
(dmrt1) expression, indirectly leading to elevated gonadal aromatase (cyp19a1a)
gene expression, which should promote phenotypic feminization. In addition, MCP
treatment increased the transcription of brain aromatase (cyp19a1b), resulting in
an indirect impact on sexual differentiation. The results from this investigation
can be used for risk and hazard assessment of MCP pesticide.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23010531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Hum Reprod. 2012 Nov;27(11):3347-57. doi: 10.1093/humrep/des306. Epub 2012 Aug
27.

The combination of polyalanine expansion mutation and a novel missense
substitution in transcription factor FOXL2 leads to different ovarian phenotypes 
in blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) patients.

Fan J(1), Zhou Y, Huang X, Zhang L, Yao Y, Song X, Chen J, Hu J, Ge S, Song H,
Fan X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, NO.639 Zhi Zao Ju Road, Shanghai 200011, P.
R. China.

STUDY QUESTION: What are the implications of multiple alterations of the forkhead
box L2 (FOXL2) gene in blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome
(BPES) patients?
SUMMARY ANSWER: A multi-mutation of FOXL2, consisting of the expansion of the
polyalanine tract from 14 to 24 residues (FOXL2-Ala24), an novel Y186C
substitution from c.557A>G, and a synonymous variant (c.505G>A), had a cumulative
effect on ovarian phenotypes in BPES patients.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Mutations in FOXL2, a gene encoding a forkhead
transcription factor cause BPES. Overall, the expansion of the polyalanine tract 
of FOXL2 from 14 to 24 residues (FOXL2-Ala24) accounts for 30% of intragenic
mutations.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: In this study, patients from seven BPES families
and six sporadic cases were included.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: We conducted an extensive clinical,
hormonal and functional study in 20 patients carrying the expansion of the
polyalanine tract of FOXL2 associated with BPES. A multi-mutation of FOXL2 was
detected in one BPES family that showed more severe BPES symptoms. Subcellular
localization and transactivation studies were performed for the constructs of
FOXL2-Ala24, Y186C and FOXL2-Ala24-Y186C.
MAIN RESULTS: We described the first multi-mutation of FOXL2 (c. [672_701dup30;
557A>G]) that leads to the polyalanine expansion of +10 residues (FOXL2-Ala24)
combined with an Y186C substitution and a synonymous variant in a Chinese BPES
family. This multi-mutation genotype was associated with more serious BPES
clinical manifestations and the development of esotropia in the right eye. In in 
vitro studies, the multi-mutation affected the function of FOKL2 on the StAR
promoter and DK3, and induced more aggressive aggregation and mislocalization of 
FOXL2 protein. The synonymous variant, while not affecting amino acid coding,
causes a change in the RNA stem-loop structure.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The multi-mutation of FOXL2 was detected in one
BPES family and it needs to be validated further by more BPES subjects.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The results of our study contribute new
insights into the research field of BPES caused by the multi-mutation of FOXL2.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: This study was supported by Shanghai Leading
Academic Discipline Project (Grant number S30205) and Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine Doctor Innovation Fund (Grant number 201131). The
authors have no competing interests to declare.

PMID: 22926839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Eur J Med Genet. 2012 Nov;55(11):630-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.07.005. Epub
2012 Aug 3.

Blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus syndrome with translocation and
deletion at chromosome 3q23 in a black African female.

Alao MJ(1), Lalèyè A, Lalya F, Hans Ch, Abramovicz M, Morice-Picard F, Arveiler
B, Lacombe D, Rooryck C.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pédiatrie, Hôpital de la Mère et de l'Enfant Lagune, 01 BP 107,
Cotonou, Benin. amomj@yahoo.fr

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a rare autosomal
dominant disorder whose main features are the abnormal shape, position and
alignment of the eyelids. Type I refers to BPES with female infertility from
premature ovarian failure while type II is limited to the ocular features. A
causative gene, FOXL2, has been localized to 3q23. We report a black female who
carried a de novo chromosomal translocation and 3.13 Mb deletion at 3q23, 1.2 Mb 
5' to FOXL2. This suggests the presence of distant cis regulatory elements at the
extended FOXL2 locus. In spite of 21 protein coding genes in the 3.13 Mb deleted 
segment, the patient had no other malformation and a strictly normal psychomotor 
development at age 2.5 years. Our observation confirms panethnicity of BPES and
adds to the knowledge of the complex cis regulation of human FOXL2 gene
expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22906557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Sep;158A(9):2322-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35516. Epub 2012
Aug 6.

BPES with atypical premature ovarian insufficiency, and evidence of mitotic
recombination, in a woman with trisomy X and a translocation
t(3;11)(q22.3;q14.1).

Schlade-Bartusiak K(1), Brown L, Lomax B, Bruyère H, Gillan T, Hamilton S,
McGillivray B, Eydoux P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Children's & Women's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada.
ksbartusiak@cw.bc.ca

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a rare autosomal
dominant disorder characterized by a complex dysgenesis of the eyelids and
premature ovarian insufficiency. FOXL2 located at 3q22.3, encoding a forkhead
transcription factor, is the only gene known to be responsible for BPES. We
describe a patient diagnosed with BPES with atypical ovarian failure,
characterized by normal levels of gonadotropins, who was found to have trisomy X 
as well as a translocation (3;11)(q22.3;q14.1). The translocation breakpoint at
3q22.3 is located upstream of the FOXL2 gene and most likely causes BPES by
separating the FOXL2 transcription unit from its cis-regulatory sequences. By
array analysis we detected mosaicism for the balanced and an unbalanced form of
the translocation in blood cells. We propose mitotic recombination as the likely 
mechanism of the mosaicism formation. Mitotic recombination is a common
phenomenon in human cells. Thus, we hypothesize that it may be one of the
mechanisms responsible for cryptic imbalances and possible abnormal phenotypes in
some carriers of balanced rearrangements.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22887799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Reproduction. 2012 Oct;144(4):485-94. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0259. Epub 2012 Jul 30.

Mouse forkhead L2 maintains repression of FSH-dependent genes in the granulosa
cell.

Kuo FT(1), Fan K, Bentsi-Barnes I, Barlow GM, Pisarska MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics/Gynecology, Center for Fertility and Reproductive Medicine,
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.

The forkhead transcription factor forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) is expressed in
granulosa cells of small and medium follicles in the mouse ovary. Foxl2 female
knockout mice exhibit primordial follicle depletion and primary ovarian failure, 
but evidence from adult female conditional Foxl2 knockout mice suggests that
FOXL2 may also play a significant role in maintenance of ovarian differentiation 
at stages beyond the primordial follicle and initial wave of folliculogenesis. We
previously showed that human FOXL2 functions as a transcriptional repressor of
several key genes involved in granulosa cell proliferation and differentiation,
including steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR), P450aromatase (CYP19A1
(CYP19)), P450scc (CYP11A1 (CYP11A)), and cyclin D2 (CCND2). To elucidate the
role of mouse FOXL2, we determined its role in transcriptional regulation in
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells and then confirmed our findings in mouse
granulosa cells. We found that mouse FOXL2 represses the activities of the mouse 
Star, Cyp19a1, Cyp11a1 promoters in CHO cells, but may not repress the Ccnd2
promoter, and identified the minimal mouse Star, Cyp19a1, and Cyp11a1 promoter
regions responsive to FOXL2 regulation. We then knocked down Foxl2 in mouse
granulosa cells using siRNA, which resulted in significantly increased expression
levels of mouse Star, Cyp19a1, and Cyp11a1 but not Ccnd2. To increase Foxl2
expression levels, we generated a mouse Foxl2 lentiviral construct and used it to
infect mouse granulosa cells. Following lentiviral infection, the expression
levels of mouse Star, Cyp19a1, and Cyp11a1, but not Ccnd2, decreased
significantly. These data confirm that mouse FOXL2 functions as a transcriptional
repressor of key granulosa cell genes that influence ovarian development.

PMID: 22847492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Biol Reprod. 2012 Oct 25;87(4):99. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.101907. Print 2012
Oct.

Sox9 and Sox8 are required for basal lamina integrity of testis cords and for
suppression of FOXL2 during embryonic testis development in mice.

Georg I(1), Barrionuevo F, Wiech T, Scherer G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Freiburg, Germany.

The sex-determining gene Sry and its target gene Sox9 initiate the early steps of
testis development in mammals. Of the related Sox genes Sox8, Sox9, and Sox10,
all expressed during Sertoli cell differentiation, only inactivation of Sox9
before the sex determination stage at Embryonic Day 11.5 (E11.5) causes XY sex
reversal, while Sox9 inactivation after this stage has no effect on testis cord
differentiation. We have previously shown that both Sox9 and Sox8 are essential
for maintaining testicular function in post-E14.0 Sertoli cells. To gain insight 
into the molecular and cellular processes underlying the abnormal development of 
Sox9 and Sox8 mutant testes, we performed a detailed developmental study of
embryonic and neonatal stages. We observe a progressive disruption of the basal
lamina surrounding the testis cords that starts at E17.5 and already at E15.5
reduced expression levels of collagen IV, collagen IXa3 and testatin, structural 
components of the basal lamina, and the extracellular matrix transcriptional
regulator Scleraxis. Lineage tracing reveals that mutant Sertoli cells delaminate
from testis cords and are present as isolated cells between remaining cords.
Also, Sox10 expression is strongly reduced in the absence of Sox9 and/or Sox8.
Finally, we document increasing expression of the ovarian marker FOXL2 in mutant 
cords starting at E15.5, indicating progressive transdifferentiation of mutant
Sertoli cells. This study shows that Sox9 and Sox8 maintain integrity of the
basal lamina to prevent testis cord disintegration and that both factors actively
suppress the ovarian program during early testis development.

PMID: 22837482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Dev Biol. 2012 Oct 1;370(1):98-109. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.010. Epub 2012
Jul 21.

Germ cells are not the primary factor for sexual fate determination in goldfish.

Goto R(1), Saito T, Takeda T, Fujimoto T, Takagi M, Arai K, Yamaha E.

Author information: 
(1)Nanae Fresh Water Laboratory, Field Science Center for Northern Biosphere,
Hokkaido University, 2-9-1 Sakura, Nanae, Kameda, Hokkaido 041-1105, Japan.
goto-kazeto@hokudai-nanae.jp

The presence of germ cells in the early gonad is important for sexual fate
determination and gonadal development in vertebrates. Recent studies in zebrafish
and medaka have shown that a lack of germ cells in the early gonad induces sex
reversal in favor of a male phenotype. However, it is uncertain whether the
gonadal somatic cells or the germ cells are predominant in determining gonadal
fate in other vertebrate. Here, we investigated the role of germ cells in gonadal
differentiation in goldfish, a gonochoristic species that possesses an XX-XY
genetic sex determination system. The primordial germ cells (PGCs) of the fish
were eliminated during embryogenesis by injection of a morpholino oligonucleotide
against the dead end gene. Fish without germ cells showed two types of gonadal
morphology: one with an ovarian cavity; the other with seminiferous tubules.
Next, we tested whether function could be restored to these empty gonads by
transplantation of a single PGC into each embryo, and also determined the gonadal
sex of the resulting germline chimeras. Transplantation of a single GFP-labeled
PGC successfully produced a germline chimera in 42.7% of the embryos. Some of the
adult germline chimeras had a developed gonad on one side that contained donor
derived germ cells, while the contralateral gonad lacked any early germ cell
stages. Female germline chimeras possessed a normal ovary and a germ-cell free
ovary-like structure on the contralateral side; this structure was similar to
those seen in female morphants. Male germline chimeras possessed a testis and a
contralateral empty testis that contained some sperm in the tubular lumens.
Analysis of aromatase, foxl2 and amh expression in gonads of morphants and
germline chimeras suggested that somatic transdifferentiation did not occur. The 
offspring of fertile germline chimeras all had the donor-derived phenotype,
indicating that germline replacement had occurred and that the transplanted PGC
had rescued both female and male gonadal function. These findings suggest that
the absence of germ cells did not affect the pathway for ovary or testis
development and that phenotypic sex in goldfish is determined by somatic cells
under genetic sex control rather than an interaction between the germ cells and
somatic cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22824426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Oncogene. 2013 May 30;32(22):2739-46. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.298. Epub 2012 Jul
16.

Adult ovarian granulosa cell tumor transcriptomics: prevalence of FOXL2 target
genes misregulation gives insights into the pathogenic mechanism of the
p.Cys134Trp somatic mutation.

Benayoun BA(1), Anttonen M, L'Hôte D, Bailly-Bechet M, Andersson N, Heikinheimo
M, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.

Ovarian granulosa cell tumors (OGCT) are the most frequent kind of sex
cord-stromal tumors, and represent ~2-5% of all ovarian malignancies. OGCTs exist
as two entities, juvenile and adult types, with specific clinical and
pathological characteristics. The molecular pathogenesis of these tumors has just
begun to be unraveled. Indeed, recent studies have indicated that mutation and/or
misregulation of the key ovarian transcription factor FOXL2 has a role in OGCT
formation, although the mechanisms remain unclear. To better understand the
molecular characteristics of OGCT, we studied the transcriptomic profiles of ten 
human adult-type OGCT samples, as well as ethnically matched granulosa cell (GC) 
controls. We find that the OGCT samples analyzed herein exhibit several hallmarks
of cancer, including increased expression of genes linked to cell proliferation, 
but decreased expression of those conferring sensitivity to cell death. Moreover,
genes differentially expressed in OGCTs are significantly enriched for known
FOXL2 target genes, consistently with the prevalence of FOXL2 somatic mutation in
these tumors. Expression of these targets is altered in a way expected to promote
malignant transformation, for instance, through induction of genes associated
with faster cell cycling and downregulation of genes associated with cell death. 
Over time, such defects may be responsible at least partly for the malignant
transformation of healthy GCs into OGCT. These insights into the molecular
pathogenesis of OGCTs may open the way to new efforts in the development of more 
targeted therapeutic strategies for OGCT patients.

PMID: 22797072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. APMIS. 2012 Aug;120(8):635-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0463.2012.02878.x. Epub 2012
Mar 24.

Mutational analysis of PIK3CA, JAK2, BRAF, FOXL2, IDH1, AKT1 and EZH2 oncogenes
in sarcomas.

Je EM(1), An CH, Yoo NJ, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea.

Recent studies have revealed several recurrent mutations in oncogenes that could 
not only be underlying mechanisms of tumorigenesis, but also be potential targets
for cancer therapies. Compared to carcinomas, genetic alterations of sarcomas are
relatively unknown. To see whether recurrent oncogenes discovered in
non-sarcomatous malignancies are present in sarcomas as well, we analyzed
oncogenes with known mutations in various types of sarcomas. We performed
mutational analysis of recurrent mutation sites of PIK3CA (exons 9 and 20), JAK2 
(exon 14), BRAF (exon 15), FOXL2 (exon 1), IDH1 (exon 4), AKT1 (exon 3), and EZH2
(exon 16) genes in 108 sarcomas by single- strand conformation polymorphism and
DNA sequencing. The sarcomas consisted of malignant fibrous histiocytomas,
rhabdomyosarcomas, osteosarcomas, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors,
leiomyosarcomas, synovial sarcomas, liposarcomas, angiosarcomas, chondrosarcomas,
and Ewing sarcomas. Overall, we detected the two PIK3CA mutations and one JAK2
mutation (total: 3/108: 2.8%). Two rhabdomyosarcomas (16.7%) and one angiosarcoma
(16.7%) harbored the mutations, whereas other sarcomas harbored none. The PIK3CA 
mutations were novel missense mutations that had not been detected in other
cancers. The JAK2 mutation was an intron mutation. This study demonstrated that
the somatic mutations of PIK3CA and JAK2 occurred in a small fraction of the
sarcomas and that these mutations may not play a principal role in the
development of sarcomas.

© 2012 The Authors APMIS © 2012 APMIS.

PMID: 22779686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Mol Reprod Dev. 2012 Sep;79(9):626-36. doi: 10.1002/mrd.22070. Epub 2012 Jul 26.

Parabens inhibit the early phase of folliculogenesis and steroidogenesis in the
ovaries of neonatal rats.

Ahn HJ(1), An BS, Jung EM, Yang H, Choi KC, Jeung EB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of
Veterinary Medicine, Chungbuk National University, Cheongju, Chungbuk, Republic
of Korea.

Parabens are widely used as anti-microbial agents in the cosmetic and
pharmaceutical industries. Recently, parabens have been shown to act as
xenoestrogens, a class of endocrine disruptors. In the present study, 55 female
pups were given daily subcutaneous injections of methyl-, propyl-, and
butyl-paraben or 17beta-estradiol (E2) during neonatal Day 1-7. The ovaries were 
excised on postnatal Day 8, then fixed and stained with hematoxylin and eosin for
histological analysis. The follicles were counted and classified as being in the 
primordial, early primary, or primary stages. The number of primordial follicles 
increased while early primary follicles decreased at the high doses of propyl-
and butyl-paraben. The levels of anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH) and Foxl2 mRNA
increased by propyl- and butyl-parabens whereas kit ligand/stem cell factor
(KITL) expression was up regulated only by butyl-paraben. The mRNA levels of StAR
and Cyp11a1 were significantly decreased after treatment with methyl-, propyl-,
and butyl-parabens. Consistent with its use as a positive control, E2 regulated
the expression of KITL, StAR, and Cyp11a1 genes, but surprisingly did not affect 
AMH and Foxl2 levels. Thus, E2 and parabens had different effects on the
regulation of folliculogenic and steroidogenic genes, demonstrating the
estrogenic and nonestrogenic properties of parabens in the ovary. Taken together,
our data show that parabens stimulated AMH mRNA expression and consequently
inhibited the early phase of folliculogenesis in the ovaries of neonatal female
rat. The levels of steroidogenic enzymes, indicators of follicle differentiation,
appeared to be regulated by parabens through inhibition of their transcriptional 
repressor, Foxl2.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22777679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Dev Genes Evol. 2012 Sep;222(5):279-86. doi: 10.1007/s00427-012-0410-z. Epub 2012
Jul 3.

Sexually dimorphic expression of foxl2 during gametogenesis in scallop Chlamys
farreri, conserved with vertebrates.

Liu XL(1), Zhang ZF, Shao MY, Liu JG, Muhammad F.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Marine Genetics and Breeding (Ocean University of China),
Ministry of Education, Qingdao 266003, People's Republic of China.

FOXL2 is a member of the forkhead box family, a transcription factor essential
for the early regulation of ovarian development that is expressed in a sexually
dimorphic manner in vertebrates. However, data on this gene in invertebrates are 
rare. In this study, we cloned a full-length cDNA sequence of foxl2 from the
scallop Chlamys farreri, an important commercial mollusk in China. The cDNA
sequence of Cf-foxl2 (C. farreri foxl2) has 1,824 bp with an open reading frame
of 1,107 bp encoding 369 amino acid residues containing the conserved domain
forkhead box. Semiquantitative RT-PCR showed that Cf-foxl2 was expressed mainly
in the ovary. Using quantitative real-time PCR, we found that the highest
expression was in the ovary of proliferative stage animals, about 62-fold higher 
than that in the testis and about twofold higher than that in the ovary of
growing and mature stages. In situ hybridization revealed that Cf-foxl2 mRNA was 
located in the cytoplasm of follicle cells and germ cells in the ovary and testis
except in the spermatozoa. Our data imply that Cf-foxl2 is expressed in a
sexually dimorphic pattern at the RNA level, which is conserved with vertebrates.

PMID: 22752442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39727. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039727. Epub 2012 Jun 20.

Transcriptome analysis of the oriental river prawn, Macrobrachium nipponense
using 454 pyrosequencing for discovery of genes and markers.

Ma K(1), Qiu G, Feng J, Li J.

Author information: 
(1)Key laboratory of Freshwater Aquatic Genetic Resources Certificated by
Ministry of Agriculture, College of Fisheries and Life Science, Shanghai Ocean
University, Shanghai, PR China.

BACKGROUND: The oriental river prawn, Macrobrachium nipponense, is an
economically and nutritionally important species of the Palaemonidae family of
decapod crustaceans. To date, the sequencing of its whole genome is unavailable
as a non-model organism. Transcriptomic information is also scarce for this
species. In this study, we performed de novo transcriptome sequencing to produce 
the first comprehensive expressed sequence tag (EST) dataset for M. nipponense
using high-throughput sequencing technologies.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Total RNA was isolated from eyestalk, gill,
heart, ovary, testis, hepatopancreas, muscle, and embryos at the cleavage,
gastrula, nauplius and zoea stages. Equal quantities of RNA from each tissue and 
stage were pooled to construct a cDNA library. Using 454 pyrosequencing
technology, we generated a total of 984,204 high quality reads (338.59 Mb) with
an average length of 344 bp. Clustering and assembly of these reads produced a
non-redundant set of 81,411 unique sequences, comprising 42,551 contigs and
38,860 singletons. All of the unique sequences were involved in the molecular
function (30,425), cellular component (44,112) and biological process (67,679)
categories by GO analysis. Potential genes and their functions were predicted by 
KEGG pathway mapping and COG analysis. Based on our sequence analysis and
published literature, many putative genes involved in sex determination,
including DMRT1, FTZ-F1, FOXL2, FEM1 and other potentially important candidate
genes, were identified for the first time in this prawn. Furthermore, 6,689 SSRs 
and 18,107 high-confidence SNPs were identified in this EST dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcriptome provides an invaluable new data for a functional
genomics resource and future biological research in M. nipponense. The molecular 
markers identified in this study will provide a material basis for future genetic
linkage and quantitative trait loci analyses, and will be essential for
accelerating aquaculture breeding programs with this species.

PMCID: PMC3380025
PMID: 22745820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2012 Jul;136(7):825-8. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2011-0355-OA.

FOXL2 mutations in granulosa cell tumors occurring in males.

Lima JF(1), Jin L, de Araujo AR, Erikson-Johnson MR, Oliveira AM, Sebo TJ, Keeney
GL, Medeiros F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Anatomic Pathology, Department of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA. felipelima.joema@mayo.edu

CONTEXT: Granulosa cell tumors comprise less than 5% of ovarian tumors in women
and are much rarer in men, with only about 20 cases reported, to our knowledge.
Recently, a somatic mutation of FOXL2 was reported in virtually all adult-type
granulosa cell tumors in women.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate FOXL2 mutations in granulosa cell tumors occurring in
males.
DESIGN: Five cases of an adult-type granulosa cell tumor from males were selected
from the files of the Mayo Clinic. Nine other testicular tumors (1 juvenile
granulosa cell tumor, 5 Leydig cell tumors, and 3 Sertoli-Leydig cell tumors)
were evaluated for comparison. Inhibin immunostain was performed in all cases.
DNA was extracted from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue, followed by
polymerase chain reaction and direct sequencing of FOXL2.
RESULTS: All 5 cases had classic histopathologic features of the adult-type
granulosa cell tumor. Inhibin was diffusely positive in all cases. FOXL2 402C<U+2192>G
(C134W) was identified in 40% (2 of 5) of the male, adult-type granulosa cell
tumors. Of the 2 tumors positive for the mutation, 1 occurred in the testis of a 
man, and the other one affected the abdominal ovaries of a phenotypically male
patient. All other testicular tumors were negative for the mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: The FOXL2 402C<U+2192>G (C134W) mutation is also present in adult-type
granulosa cell tumors occurring in men, although in a smaller proportion when
compared with the rates reported in women. FOXL2 mutational analysis can be a
helpful in the diagnosis of granulosa cell tumors of the testis.

PMID: 22742556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Reprod Toxicol. 2012 Nov;34(3):463-70. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2012.06.001. Epub 
2012 Jun 23.

Bisphenol A modulates germ cell differentiation and retinoic acid signaling in
mouse ES cells.

Aoki T(1), Takada T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Engineering, Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Ritsumeikan University, Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan.

Bisphenol A (BPA) has been reported to have an adverse effect on mammalian
reproduction and recognized as an endocrine disruptor. However, the molecular
mechanism that causes impaired development of germ cells remains elusive. In this
study, we investigated the effect of BPA using in vitro differentiation of
embryonic stem (ES) cells focusing on the expression of germ cell marker genes.
We found that the BPA-treated embryoid bodies (EBs), exhibited the most prominent
up-regulation of meiotic entry gene Stra8 and induction mechanism appeared to be 
different from that of retinoic acid. Localization of aggregated Sycp3 signal in 
nuclei, characteristic to leptotene of meiosis, was also detected. In addition,
up-regulation of ovarian markers (Foxl2 and Wnt4) and suppression of testicular
markers (Sox9 and Fgf9) were observed. These results suggest that BPA might
affect testicular and ovarian development as well as germ cell differentiation,
and appears to induce genes responsible for ovary development.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22732146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biol Reprod. 2012 Aug 9;87(2):32. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.101584. Print 2012 
Aug.

FOXL2 is regulated during the bovine estrous cycle and its expression in the
endometrium is independent of conceptus-derived interferon tau.

Eozenou C(1), Vitorino Carvalho A, Forde N, Giraud-Delville C, Gall L, Lonergan
P, Auguste A, Charpigny G, Richard C, Pannetier M, Sandra O.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR1198 Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, Jouy-en-Josas,
France.

Erratum in
    Biol Reprod. 2012 Oct;87(4):102. Carvalho, Anaïs Vitorino [corrected to Vitorino 
Carvalho, Anaïs].

FOXL2, a winged-helix/forkhead domain transcription factor, is a key gene
involved in the differentiation and biological functions of the ovary. In a
recent transcriptomic analysis, we found that FOXL2 expression in bovine
caruncular endometrium was different from that in intercaruncular endometrium. In
order to gain new insights into FOXL2 in this tissue, we determined the
expression of this transcription factor during the estrous cycle and the
establishment of pregnancy in cattle. The endometrial expression of FOXL2 did not
vary during maternal recognition of pregnancy (Days 16-20). Using an in vivo
bovine model and primary cell cultures, we showed that FOXL2 was not an
interferon-tau target gene. Both FOXL2 transcript and protein were expressed from
Day 5 to Day 20 of the estrous cycle, and their levels showed a significant
increase during the luteolytic phase. A 2-day progesterone supplementation in
heifers led to a clear down-regulation of FOXL2 protein levels, suggesting the
negative impact of progesterone on FOXL2 expression. Immunohistochemistry data
revealed the localization of FOXL2 in endometrial stromal and glandular cells.
FOXL2 subcellular distribution was shown to be nuclear in endometrial samples
collected during the luteolytic period, while it was not detected in nuclei
during the luteal phase and at implantation. Collectively, our findings provide
the first evidence that FOXL2 is involved in the regulation of endometrial tissue
physiology.

PMID: 22623620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e36353. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0036353. Epub 2012 May 9.

Gametogenesis in the Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas: a microarrays-based
analysis identifies sex and stage specific genes.

Dheilly NM(1), Lelong C, Huvet A, Kellner K, Dubos MP, Riviere G, Boudry P,
Favrel P.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, Biologie des Organismes Marins et des
Ecosystèmes Associés, IBFA, SFR ICORE, Caen, France. nolwenn.dheilly@univ-perp.fr

BACKGROUND: The Pacific oyster Crassostrea gigas (Mollusca, Lophotrochozoa) is an
alternative and irregular protandrous hermaphrodite: most individuals mature
first as males and then change sex several times. Little is known about genetic
and phenotypic basis of sex differentiation in oysters, and little more about the
molecular pathways regulating reproduction. We have recently developed and
validated a microarray containing 31,918 oligomers (Dheilly et al., 2011)
representing the oyster transcriptome. The application of this microarray to the 
study of mollusk gametogenesis should provide a better understanding of the key
factors involved in sex differentiation and the regulation of oyster
reproduction.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Gene expression was studied in gonads of oysters 
cultured over a yearly reproductive cycle. Principal component analysis and
hierarchical clustering showed a significant divergence in gene expression
patterns of males and females coinciding with the start of gonial mitosis. ANOVA 
analysis of the data revealed 2,482 genes differentially expressed during the
course of males and/or females gametogenesis. The expression of 434 genes could
be localized in either germ cells or somatic cells of the gonad by comparing the 
transcriptome of female gonads to the transcriptome of stripped oocytes and
somatic tissues. Analysis of the annotated genes revealed conserved molecular
mechanisms between mollusks and mammals: genes involved in chromatin
condensation, DNA replication and repair, mitosis and meiosis regulation,
transcription, translation and apoptosis were expressed in both male and female
gonads. Most interestingly, early expressed male-specific genes included bindin
and a dpy-30 homolog and female-specific genes included foxL2, nanos homolog 3, a
pancreatic lipase related protein, cd63 and vitellogenin. Further functional
analyses are now required in order to investigate their role in sex
differentiation in oysters.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study allowed us to identify potential markers of 
early sex differentiation in the oyster C. gigas, an alternative hermaphrodite
mollusk. We also provided new highly valuable information on genes specifically
expressed by mature spermatozoids and mature oocytes.

PMCID: PMC3348941
PMID: 22590533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Sex Dev. 2012;6(4):178-87. doi: 10.1159/000338471. Epub 2012 May 11.

SMARCE1 Promotes chicken embryonic gonad development by regulating ER a and AR
expression.

Gong P(1), Yang Y, Lei W, Feng Y, Li S, Peng X, Gong Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding and Reproduction of
Ministry of Education, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, PR China.

SMARCE1 is one of some differentially expressed genes screened from a subtracted 
cDNA library between females and males during the period of sex differentiation. 
To understand the potential role of SMARCE1 in avian sex determination and
differentiation, over-expression of SMARCE1 was performed in chicken embryos
using the RCASBP.B retrovirus. Results showed that SMARCE1 expression was
up-regulated in the infected embryonic gonads at the investigated stages
(E6.5-E12.5) assessed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR, whole mount in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry. With the over-expression of SMARCE1,
CYP19A1, FOXL2, ERa, and SOX9 expression was significantly up-regulated while AR 
expression was significantly decreased in the male and/or female chicken gonad.
Nevertheless, DMRT1 and AMH expression was not changed after the over-expression 
of SMARCE1. It is proposed that it might be via the SMARCE1-FOXL2 pathway that
CYP19A1 expression was activated, and DMRT1 expression may be independent of the 
SMARCE1-SOX9 pathway. Meanwhile, the SMARCE1-AR pathway might be antagonized by
up-regulated expression of ERa via estrogen-ER/androgen-AR signaling. The results
of HE staining showed that the ovarian cortex was thickened and both testis
seminiferous cord and interstitial cells were increased with the over-expression 
of SMARCE1. In conclusion, SMARCE1 can promote chicken embryonic gonad
development by regulating the ERa and AR expression.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22584849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Sex Dev. 2012;6(4):210-21. doi: 10.1159/000338085. Epub 2012 May 3.

Expression of a natural antisense transcript of Cg-Foxl2 during the gonadic
differentiation of the oyster Crassostrea gigas: first demonstration in the
gonads of a lophotrochozoa species.

Santerre C(1), Sourdaine P, Martinez AS.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, Caen, France.

In the oyster Crassostrea gigas, a successive hermaphrodite, Cg-Foxl2, an
ortholog of Foxl2, is suspected to be involved in vitellogenesis or female sex
determination. The existence of a natural antisense transcript (NAT) of this
factor has been suspected in gonads but needs to be confirmed to better
understand the early events of the gonadic differentiation. The occurrence of
this NAT was studied by orientation-specific RT-PCR. The NAT and its mRNA
expressions were investigated during the development and in adults by real-time
PCR and in situ hybridization. The presence of stable in vivo RNA-RNA duplexes
was also explored by RNase protection-based approach. This work is the first
evidence of characterization of a NAT in the gonads of mollusks and
Lophotrochozoa. This NAT named Cg-Foxl2os is supposed to be polyadenylated and
forms RNA-RNA duplexes with its mRNA. Cg-Foxl2os is significantly more expressed 
than Cg-Foxl2 in 2-month-old spats and in mature males. It is co-localized with
the mRNA in the cytoplasm of spermatogonia and spermatocytes. The results of this
study demonstrate the existence of a NAT of Cg-Foxl2 in the gonads of C. gigas.
It may regulate its mRNA expression through formation of cytoplasmic RNA-RNA
duplexes during the oyster gonadic differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22572405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 15;21(14):3264-74. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds170. Epub 2012 Apr
27.

Discovery of novel protein partners of the transcription factor FOXL2 provides
insights into its physiopathological roles.

L'Hôte D(1), Georges A, Todeschini AL, Kim JH, Benayoun BA, Bae J, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, UMR 7592 CNRS-Université Paris Diderot, Paris 75205,
France.

FOXL2 transcription factor is responsible for the Blepharophimosis Ptosis
Epicantus inversus Syndrome (BPES), a genetic disease involving craniofacial
malformations often associated with ovarian failure. Recently, a somatic FOXL2
mutation (p.C134W) has been reported in >95% of adult-type granulosa cell tumors.
Here, we have identified 10 novel FOXL2 partners by yeast-two-hybrid screening
and co-immunoprecipitation. Most BPES-inducing mutated FOXL2 proteins display
aggregation in cultured cells. Here, we show that two of the partners (NR2C1 and 
GMEB1) can be sequestered in such aggregates. This co-aggregation can contribute 
to the pathogenesis of FOXL2 mutations. We have also measured the effects of
FOXL2 interactants on the transcriptional regulation of a series of target
promoters. Some of the partners (CXXC4, CXXC5, BANF1) were able to repress FOXL2 
activity indistinctively of the promoter. Interestingly, CREM-t2a, which acted as
a repressor on most promoters, increased wild-type (WT) FOXL2 activity on two
promoters (PTGS2 and CYP19A1), but was unable to increase the activity of the
oncogenic mutant p.C134W. Conversely, GMEB1, which also acted as a repressor on
most promoters and increased WT FOXL2 activity on the Per2 promoter, increased to
a greater extent the activity of the p.C134W variant. Interestingly, partners
with intrinsic pro-apoptotic effect were able to increase apoptosis induction by 
WT FOXL2, but not by the p.C134W mutant, whereas partners with an anti-apoptotic 
effect decreased apoptosis induction by both FOXL2 versions. Altogether, these
results suggest that the p.C134W mutated form fails to integrate signals through 
protein-protein interactions to regulate target promoter subsets and in
particular to induce cell death.

PMID: 22544055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Horm Metab Res. 2012 Sep;44(9):656-61. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1304617. Epub 2012 Mar
12.

Nerve growth factor stimulates cellular proliferation of human epithelial ovarian
cancer.

Urzua U(1), Tapia V, Geraldo MP, Selman A, Vega M, Romero C.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Biología Celular y Molecular, ICBM, Santiago, Chile.

Due to its ability to induce vascular endothelial growth factor expression and
proliferation, migration, and vasculogenesis of endothelial cells, nerve growth
factor (NGF) has been considered as an angiogenic factor in epithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC). In this work, we evaluated the angiogenic and proliferative mRNA
expression profiles of EOC and addressed the responsiveness of EOC explants to
NGF stimulation. Twenty EOC samples were obtained from Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Department, University of Chile's Clinical Hospital. Global gene expression
profiles of selected poorly differentiated serous EOC samples were obtained with 
DNA oligonucleotide microarrays. In addition, EOC explants were subjected to NGF 
stimulation and levels of p-AKT, BAX, BCL2, Ki-67, c-MYC, and FOXL2 proteins were
determined by immunohistochemistry. Results showed that mRNAs coding for specific
transcriptional regulators and antiapoptotic components of the NGF signaling
pathway were upregulated in EOC cells. At the protein level, key members of the
NGF pathway including p-AKT, BCL2/BAX, Ki-67, and c-MYC were found increased,
while FOXL2 was decreased in response to NGF stimulation. These findings strongly
suggest that NGF stimulates cellular proliferation of human EOC.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22411587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Biol Reprod. 2012 May 10;86(5):144, 1-9. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.094904.
Print 2012 May.

The forkhead transcription factor, FOXP3, is required for normal pituitary
gonadotropin expression in mice.

Jung DO(1), Jasurda JS, Egashira N, Ellsworth BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale,
Carbondale, Illinois 62901-6523, USA.

The hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis is central to normal reproductive
function. This pathway begins with the release of gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
in systematic pulses by the hypothalamus. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone is bound
by receptors on gonadotroph cells in the anterior pituitary gland and stimulates 
the synthesis and secretion of luteinizing hormone and, to some extent,
follicle-stimulating hormone. Once stimulated by these glycoprotein hormones, the
gonads begin gametogenesis and the synthesis of sex hormones. In humans,
mutations of the forkhead transcription factor, FOXP3, lead to an autoimmune
disorder known as immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and enteropathy,
X-linked syndrome. Mice with a mutation in the Foxp3 gene have a similar
autoimmune syndrome and are infertile. To understand why FOXP3 is required for
reproductive function, we are investigating the reproductive phenotype of Foxp3
mutant mice (Foxp3(sf/Y)). Although the gonadotroph cells appear to be intact in 
Foxp3(sf/Y) mice, luteinizing hormone beta (Lhb) and follicle-stimulating hormone
beta (Fshb) expression are significantly decreased, demonstrating that these mice
exhibit a hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Hypothalamic expression of
gonadotropin-releasing hormone is not significantly decreased in Foxp3(sf/Y)
males. Treatment of Foxp3(sf/Y) males with a gonadotropin-releasing hormone
receptor agonist does not rescue expression of Lhb or Fshb. Interestingly, we do 
not detect Foxp3 expression in the pituitary or hypothalamus, suggesting that the
infertility seen in Foxp3(sf/Y) males is a secondary effect, possibly due to loss
of FOXP3 in immune cells. Pituitary expression of glycoprotein hormone alpha
(Cga) and prolactin (Prl) are significantly reduced in Foxp3(sf/Y) males, whereas
the precursor for adrenocorticotropic hormone, pro-opiomelanocortin (Pomc), is
increased. Human patients diagnosed with IPEX often exhibit thyroiditis due to
destruction of the thyroid gland by autoimmune cells. We find that Foxp3(sf/Y)
mice have elevated expression of thyroid-stimulating hormone beta (Tshb),
suggesting that they may suffer from thyroiditis as well. Expression of the
pituitary transcription factors, Pitx1, Pitx2, Lhx3, and Egr1, is normal;
however, expression of Foxl2 and Gata2 is elevated. These data are the first to
demonstrate a defect at the pituitary level in the absence of FOXP3, which
contributes to the infertility observed in mice with Foxp3 loss of function
mutations.

PMCID: PMC3364925
PMID: 22357547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Biol Reprod. 2012 May 31;86(5):163, 1-10. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.096248.
Print 2012 May.

Insulin-like growth factor 3 regulates expression of genes encoding steroidogenic
enzymes and key transcription factors in the Nile tilapia gonad.

Li M(1), Wu F, Gu Y, Wang T, Wang H, Yang S, Sun Y, Zhou L, Huang X, Jiao B,
Cheng CH, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, China.

Insulin-like growth factors (Igfs) are implicated in a wide variety of
physiological roles in teleost gonadal development and reproduction. In the
present study, igf3 mRNA expression in the tilapia ovary was found to be higher
than in the testis from 5 to 40 days after hatching (dah) but was lower than that
in testis from 50 to 70 dah. Consistently, Igf3 protein signal was detected in
the somatic cells of XX and XY gonads from 10 dah until adulthood by
immunohistochemistry, using a specific Igf3 polyclonal antibody. Incubation of
ovarian and testicular cells in primary culture with recombinant Igf3
significantly increased nr5a1, foxl2, dmrt1, cyp19a1a, cyp11a1, cyp11b2, hsd3b2 ,
and cyp17a1 expression in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Promoter analysis
using luciferase assays in HEK293 cells revealed that igf3 promoter activity was 
directly activated by Nr5a1 (Sf1) and further enhanced by Foxl2, Nr0b1a (Dax1),
and Nr0b1b (Dax2) but repressed by Dmrt1 and estrogen receptor (Esr1, Esr2a, or
Esr2b) along with 17beta-estradiol treatment. In addition, igf3 promoter activity
was increased slightly by forskolin treatment alone but synergistically
up-regulated by transfection with nr5a1. These in vitro results correlated well
with the expression profile of igf3 during early gonad differentiation. Our
results indicated that igf3 is involved in fish gonad steroidogenesis because of 
its ability to regulate the expression of foxl2, dmrt1, and nr5a1 and
steroidogenic enzymes. The expression of igf3 is in turn regulated by
transcription factors Foxl2, Dmrt1, and Nr5a1, as well as by 17beta-estradiol
treatment.

PMID: 22337331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Nov;47(11):1007-11.

[Mutation analysis of FOXL2 gene in Chinese patients with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Ye J(1), Shi X, He JJ, Zhang HN.

Author information: 
(1)Eye Center of the Second Affiliated Hospital, Medical College of Zhejiang
University, Hangzhou 310009, China. yejuan_99@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: To analyse mutational points of FOXL2 gene in 5 Chinese patients with 
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) and to predict
structural changes of the mutational FOXL2 protein. So as to improve the
diagnostic accuracy of this kind of disease.
METHODS: Five milliliter samples of peripheral venous blood were collected from
the patients.Genomic DNA was extracted from each sample. Three pairs of PCR
primers which were used to amplify the exon of FOXL2 gene were designed. After
PCR process, the products were analyzed by direct genomic sequencing.
RESULTS: The same c. 672_701dup30 (p. Ala224_Ala234dup) heterozygous mutation was
detected from two different families. c.655C > T (p.Q219X), c.370 A > G (p.
K124E) and c.858_874dup17 (p.P292fs) heterozygous mutations were detected from
the other 3 sporadic cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Two novel heterozygous mutations in FOXL2 (c.370A > G,
c.858_874dup17) which were detected from Chinese BPES patients expand the
worldwide mutational spectrum of FOXL2 gene. Being detected from two different
families we confirm c. 672_701dup30 heterozygous mutation as a mutation hotspot
in China.

PMID: 22336067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Aug 15;359(1-2):43-52. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2012.01.025. 
Epub 2012 Feb 4.

Cell-type specific modulation of pituitary cells by activin, inhibin and
follistatin.

Bilezikjian LM(1), Justice NJ, Blackler AN, Wiater E, Vale WW.

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. bilezikjian@salk.edu

Activins are multifunctional proteins and members of the TGF-ß superfamily.
Activins are expressed locally in most tissues and, analogous to the actions of
other members of this large family of pleiotropic factors, play prominent roles
in the regulation of diverse biological processes in both differentiated and
embryonic stem cells. They have an essential role in maintaining tissue
homeostasis in the adult and are known to contribute to the developmental
programs in the embryo. Activins are further implicated in the growth and
metastasis of tumor cells. Through distinct modes of action, inhibins and
follistatins function as antagonists of activin and several other TGF-ß family
members, including a subset of BMPs/GDFs, and modulate cellular responses and the
signaling cascades downstream of these ligands. In the pituitary, the activin
pathway is known to regulate key aspects of gonadotrope functions and also exert 
effects on other pituitary cell types. As in other tissues, activin is produced
locally by pituitary cells and acts locally by exerting cell-type specific
actions on gonadotropes. These local actions of activin on gonadotropes are
modulated by the autocrine/paracrine actions of locally secreted follistatin and 
by the feedback actions of gonadal inhibin. Knowledge about the mechanism of
activin, inhibin and follistatin actions is providing information about their
importance for pituitary function as well as their contribution to the
pathophysiology of pituitary adenomas. The aim of this review is to highlight
recent findings and summarize the evidence that supports the important functions 
of activin, inhibin and follistatin in the pituitary.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3367026
PMID: 22330643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):2955-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1018392109. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

A Y-linked anti-Müllerian hormone duplication takes over a critical role in sex
determination.

Hattori RS(1), Murai Y, Oura M, Masuda S, Majhi SK, Sakamoto T, Fernandino JI,
Somoza GM, Yokota M, Strüssmann CA.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Marine Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Marine
Science and Technology, Tokyo 108-8477, Japan.

Gonadal sex determination in vertebrates generally follows a sequence of
genetically programmed events. In what is seemingly becoming a pattern, all
confirmed or current candidate "master" sex-determining genes reported in this
group, e.g., SRY in eutherian mammals, DMY/dmrt1bY in medaka, DM-W in the African
clawed frog, and DMRT1 in chicken encode transcription factors. In contrast, here
we show that a male-specific, duplicated copy of the anti-Müllerian hormone (amh)
is implicated in testicular development of the teleost fish Patagonian pejerrey
(Odontesthes hatcheri). The gene, termed amhy because it is found in a single
metacentric/submetacentric chromosome of XY individuals, is expressed much
earlier than the autosomal amh (6 d after fertilization vs. 12 wk after
fertilization) and is localized to presumptive Sertoli cells of XY males during
testicular differentiation. Moreover, amhy knockdown in XY embryos resulted in
the up-regulation of foxl2 and cyp19a1a mRNAs and the development of ovaries.
These results are evidence of a functional amh duplication in vertebrates and
suggest that amhy may be the master sex-determining gene in this species. If
confirmed, this would be a unique instance of a hormone-related gene, a member of
the TGF-ß superfamily, in such a role.

PMCID: PMC3286941
PMID: 22323585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Mol Vis. 2012;18:211-8. Epub 2012 Jan 26.

Missense mutation outside the forkhead domain of FOXL2 causes a severe form of
BPES type II.

Haghighi A(1), Verdin H, Haghighi-Kakhki H, Piri N, Gohari NS, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

PURPOSE: Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a
developmental disease characterized by a complex eyelid malformation associated
or not with premature ovarian failure (POF). BPES is essentially an autosomal
dominant disease, due to mutations in the forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) gene, encoding 
a forkhead transcription factor. More than one hundred unique FOXL2 mutations
have been described in BPES in different populations, many of which are missense 
mutations in the forkhead domain. Here, we report on a very severe form of BPES
resulting from a missense mutation outside the forkhead domain.
METHODS: A clinical and molecular genetic investigation was performed in affected
and unaffected members of an Iranian family with BPES. The FOXL2 coding region
was sequenced in an index case. Targeted mutation testing was performed in 8
family members.
RESULTS: We have identified a heterozygous FOXL2 missense mutation c.650C<U+2192>G
(p.Ser217Cys) co-segregating with disease in members of a three-generation family
with BPES type II. Only few missense mutations have been reported outside the
forkhead domain so far. They were all found in mild BPES, in line with in vitro
studies demonstrating mostly normal localization and normal or increased
transactivation properties of the mutant proteins. Unlike previous studies,
affected members of the family studied here showed a severe BPES phenotype, with 
bilateral amblyopia due to uncorrected ptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study demonstrating a severe BPES phenotype
resulting from a FOXL2 missense mutation outside the forkhead domain, expanding
our knowledge about the phenotypic consequences of missense mutations outside the
forkhead domain in BPES.

PMCID: PMC3272052
PMID: 22312189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Histopathology. 2012 Apr;60(5):838-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.04148.x.
Epub 2012 Feb 1.

The C134W (402 C>G) FOXL2 mutation is absent in ovarian gynandroblastoma:
insights into the genesis of an unusual tumour.

Oparka R(1), Cassidy A, Reilly S, Stenhouse A, McCluggage WG, Herrington CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, Dundee,
Scotland, UK.

AIMS: Ovarian gynandroblastomas are rare tumours that, by definition, comprise a 
combination of components resembling both female, typically granulosa cell tumour
(GCT), and male, typically Sertoli or Sertoli/Leydig cell tumour (ST/SLT), sex
cord/stromal differentiation. The histogenesis of these tumours is unknown and,
in view of the very strong association between the C134W (402 C>G) FOXL2 mutation
and adult-type GCT, we analysed a series of gynandroblastomas for this mutation.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Both components of each lesion were isolated by laser
capture microdissection and the C134W (402 C>G) FOXL2 mutation was analysed by
polymerase chain reaction sequencing. No mutation was identified in either the
GCT or ST/SLT component of six cases, three of which contained adult-type GCT.
CONCLUSIONS: This suggests that, despite their similar morphological appearances,
the GCT-like component of gynandroblastoma has a different molecular basis from
conventional adult-type GCT. This finding underscores a more general principle
that morphological similarity does not necessarily indicate molecular identity.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22296244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Endocrinology. 2012 Apr;153(4):2023-33. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1763. Epub 2012 Jan 
31.

FOXL2 is involved in the synergy between activin and progestins on the
follicle-stimulating hormone ß-subunit promoter.

Ghochani Y(1), Saini JK, Mellon PL, Thackray VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine and the Center for Reproductive Science
and Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093,
USA.

Differential regulation of gonadotropin hormone production in the pituitary is
critical for fertility. Activin and progesterone signaling in gonadotrope cells
is important for Fshb gene expression. Previously, we reported that synergy
between activin and progestins required the binding of SMAD proteins and the
progesterone receptor (PR) to the murine Fshb promoter. In this study, we
demonstrate that the FOXL2 transcription factor is also necessary for the full
synergistic response between activin and progestins. We show that this synergy
occurs in a species-specific manner and that multiple elements in the Fshb
promoter that bind forkhead box L2 (FOXL2), SMA/mothers against decapentaplegic
homologs (SMAD), and PR are required. Furthermore, we demonstrate that FOXL2 can 
physically interact with PR and SMAD3. Thus, it is likely that protein-protein
interactions among FOXL2, SMAD, and PR recruited to the Fshb promoter play a key 
role in facilitating Fshb transcription before the secondary FSH surge in
rodents.

PMCID: PMC3320250
PMID: 22294749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biol Aujourdhui. 2011;205(4):201-21. doi: 10.1051/jbio/2011021. Epub 2012 Jan 19.

[Genetics of early ovarian differentiation: recent data].

[Article in French]

Baillet A(1), Mandon-Pépin B, Veitia R, Cotinot C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique et Biologie Cellulaire, EA 4589 Université de
Versailles Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, École Pratique des Hautes Études, 78035
Versailles Cedex, France.

Early ovarian development has long been thought of as a default pathway switched 
on passively by the absence of SRY gene. Recent genetic and transcriptomic
studies challenge this view and show that two master pathways simultaneously
repress male-specific genes and activate female-specific genetic cascades. This
antagonistic action is maintained from embryonic stages to adulthood. The
differentiation of the ovarian somatic component is regulated by both the
forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 (alone or in combination with oestrogens
according to the species) and ß-catenin pathway activated by Wnt4 and Rspo1. The 
sex-specific change in the fate of primordial germ cells depends on the gonad
environment. Female gonocytes actively proliferate by mitosis then enter meiosis 
I until the diplotene stage. Primordial follicle formation occurs when oocytes
are individually surrounded with pre-granulosa cells. In mammals, the population 
of primordial follicles serves as a resting and finite pool of oocytes available 
during the female reproductive life span. Recent data on factors controlling
these molecular processes will be presented in this review.

PMID: 22251856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Horm Res Paediatr. 2012;77(1):2-11. doi: 10.1159/000335236. Epub 2012 Jan 12.

FOXL2 impairment in human disease.

Verdin H(1), De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

FOXL2 encodes a forkhead transcription factor that plays important roles in the
ovary during development and in post-natal, adult life. Here, we focus on the
clinical consequences of FOXL2 impairment in human disease. In line with other
forkhead transcription factors, its constitutional genetic defects and a somatic 
mutation lead to developmental disease and cancer, respectively. More than 100
unique constitutional mutations and regulatory defects have been found in
blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES), a complex eyelid malformation associated (type 
I) or not (type II) with premature ovarian failure (POF). In agreement with the
BPES phenotype, FOXL2 is expressed in the developing eyelids and in fetal and
adult ovaries. Two knock-out mice and at least one natural animal model, the
Polled Intersex Syndrome goat, are known. They recapitulate the BPES phenotype
and have provided many insights into the ovarian pathology. Only a few
constitutional mutations have been described in nonsyndromic POF. Moreover, a
recurrent somatic mutation p.C134W was found to be specific for adult ovarian
granulo-sa cell tumors. Functional studies investigating the consequences of
FOXL2 mutations or regulatory defects have shed light on the molecular
pathogenesis of the aforementioned conditions, and contributed considerably to
genotype-phenotype correlations. Recently, a conditional knock-out of Foxl2 in
the mouse induced somatic transdifferentiation of ovary into testis in adult
mice, suggesting that Foxl2 has an anti-testis function in the adult ovary. This 
changed our view on the ovary and testis as terminally differentiated organs in
adult mammals. Finally, this might have potential implications for the
understanding and treatment of frequent conditions such as POF and polycystic
ovary syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22248822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. PLoS Genet. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002447. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002447. Epub 2011
Dec 29.

DNA methylation of the gonadal aromatase (cyp19a) promoter is involved in
temperature-dependent sex ratio shifts in the European sea bass.

Navarro-Martín L(1), Viñas J, Ribas L, Díaz N, Gutiérrez A, Di Croce L, Piferrer 
F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Ciències del Mar, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas 
(CSIC), Barcelona, Spain.

Sex ratio shifts in response to temperature are common in fish and reptiles.
However, the mechanism linking temperature during early development and sex
ratios has remained elusive. We show in the European sea bass (sb), a fish in
which temperature effects on sex ratios are maximal before the gonads form, that 
juvenile males have double the DNA methylation levels of females in the promoter 
of gonadal aromatase (cyp19a), the enzyme that converts androgens into estrogens.
Exposure to high temperature increased the cyp19a promoter methylation levels of 
females, indicating that induced-masculinization involves DNA
methylation-mediated control of aromatase gene expression, with an observed
inverse relationship between methylation levels and expression. Although
different CpGs within the sb cyp19a promoter exhibited different sensitivity to
temperature, we show that the increased methylation of the sb cyp19a promoter,
which occurs in the gonads but not in the brain, is not a generalized effect of
temperature. Importantly, these effects were also observed in sexually
undifferentiated fish and were not altered by estrogen treatment. Thus,
methylation of the sb cyp19a promoter is the cause of the lower expression of
cyp19a in temperature-masculinized fish. In vitro, induced methylation of the sb 
cyp19a promoter suppressed the ability of SF-1 and Foxl2 to stimulate
transcription. Finally, a CpG differentially methylated by temperature and
adjacent to a Sox transcription factor binding site is conserved across species. 
Thus, DNA methylation of the aromatase promoter may be an essential component of 
the long-sought-after mechanism connecting environmental temperature and sex
ratios in vertebrate species with temperature-dependent sex determination.

PMCID: PMC3248465
PMID: 22242011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Klin Monbl Augenheilkd. 2012 Jan;229(1):28-30. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1281864. Epub 
2012 Jan 12.

[Blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) (corrected)].

[Article in German]

Tyers A(1), Meyer-Rüsenberg HW.

Author information: 
(1)Salisbury District Hospital, Salisbury, Wiltshire, UK. tonytyers@hotmail.com

Erratum in
    Klin Monbl Augenheilkd. 2012 Jan;229(1):E1.

The blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES, also known as
Waardenburg syndrome) was probably first reported by Ammon in 1841 and discribed 
more fully by Vignes in 1889. Its primary effects on the soft tissue of the
midface are blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus and telecanthus. It
starts with the epicanthic folds at about the age of 3-4 years, followed by the
correction of the ptosis about 9-12 months later. Early surgery may be necessary 
for amblyopia. In 1995 the gene locus was identified as 3Q23. BPES is due to a
mutation within a single gene, the FOXL2 gene. In female patients an early
childhood ovarian insufficiency must be excluded.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 22241538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Endocr Rev. 2012 Feb;33(1):109-44. doi: 10.1210/er.2011-0014. Epub 2012 Jan 12.

Molecular pathogenesis of granulosa cell tumors of the ovary.

Jamieson S(1), Fuller PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry’s Institute of Medical Research and Department of Medicine,
Monash University, Clayton 3168, Australia.

Granulosa cell tumors of the ovary (GCT) comprise a distinct subset of ovarian
cancers that account for approximately 5% of all ovarian malignancies. They are
thought to arise from normal proliferating granulosa cells of the late
preovulatory follicle and exhibit many morphological and biochemical features of 
these cells. GCT are distinct from other ovarian carcinomas in their hormonal
activity; their ability to secrete estrogen, inhibin, and Müllerian inhibiting
substance accounts for some of the clinical manifestations of the disease and
also provides useful tumor markers for disease surveillance. Although considered 
to be of low malignant potential, GCT are commonly associated with slow, indolent
disease progression, and frequent yet long delays to tumor recurrence are
characteristic of this disease. Unlike the more intensely investigated epithelial
ovarian tumors, relatively little is known about the molecular and genetic
changes that give rise to GCT. To date, many investigations have centered around 
pathways known to be involved in normal granulosa cell proliferation, including
those activated by FSH receptor stimulation. Most recently, the finding that
approximately 97% of adult GCT harbor a somatic missense mutation in the FOXL2
gene (c.402C<U+2192>G; p.C134W) represents an exciting advancement in the field of GCT
research. The high frequency with which the mutation occurs in adult GCT, along
with its absence from juvenile GCT and other human malignancies is suggestive of 
an oncogenic or gain-of-function mutation and, indeed, that the mutation is
pathognomonic for adult GCT. In this review, we explore the implications of this 
finding and the most recent work characterizing molecular pathways of potential
pathogenetic significance in GCT.

Copyright © 2012 by The Endocrine Society

PMID: 22240241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2011 Nov;55(8):607-12.

Multifunctional role of steroidogenic factor 1 and disorders of sex development.

Mello MP(1), França ES, Fabbri HC, Maciel-Guerra AT, Guerra-Júnior G.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Biologia Molecular e Engenharia Genética, Universidade Estadual de
Campinas, SP, Brazil. mmello@unicamp.br

Disorders of sex development (DSD) involve several conditions that result from
abnormalities during gonadal determination and differentiation. Some of these
disorders may manifest at birth by ambiguous genitalia; others are diagnosed only
at puberty, by the delayed onset of secondary sexual characteristics. Sex
determination and differentiation in humans are processes that involve the
interaction of several genes such as WT1, NR5A1, NR0B1, SOX9, among others, in
the testicular pathway, and WNT4, DAX1, FOXL2 and RSPO1, in the ovarian pathway. 
One of the major proteins in mammalian gonadal differentiation is the
steroidogenic nuclear receptor factor 1 (SF1). This review will cover some of the
most recent data on SF1 functional roles and findings related to mutations in its
coding gene, NR5A1.

PMID: 22218443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Cancer Genet. 2011 Nov;204(11):596-602. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.10.002.

FOXL2 mutation and large-scale genomic imbalances in adult granulosa cell tumors 
of the ovary.

Geiersbach KB(1), Jarboe EA, Jahromi MS, Baker CL, Paxton CN, Tripp SR, Schiffman
JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, UT, USA. katherine.geiersbach@aruplab.com

Adult granulosa cell tumors (AGCTs) are a rare class of ovarian tumors with
recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities including trisomy 12, trisomy 14, monosomy
16/deletion 16q, and monosomy 22. Over 90% contain a missense point mutation
(C134W) in the FOXL2 gene at 3q22.3. The relationship between FOXL2 mutation and 
cytogenetic abnormalities is unclear, although both are presumably early events
in tumorigenesis. In addition, FOXL2 C134W mutant allele imbalance has been noted
in a minority of AGCTs, but the mechanism for allelic imbalance has not yet been 
described. We used a microarray platform designed for formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissue specimens, the Affymetrix OncoScan FFPE Express
330K Molecular Inversion Probe (MIP) array, to explore the correlation between
genomic imbalances detected by microarray and FOXL2 mutation status detected by
pyrosequencing in a series of 21 archived AGCTs. Tumors were characterized by
histopathologic features, stage, and alpha-inhibin expression by
immunohistochemistry. All tumors were positive for inhibin, and 18/21 tumors
contained a FOXL2 mutation. The most common genomic imbalances were a gain of
14q, a loss of 16q, and a loss of 22q. Three tumors showed evidence of FOXL2
mutant allele imbalance by pyrosequencing; microarray revealed a 32.5 Mb deletion
encompassing FOXL2 in 1 case and a 70.9 Mb stretch of homozygosity encompassing
FOXL2 in the other case. The third case, with a FOXL2 mutant allele imbalance,
showed a diminished mutant allele population (32%) despite high estimated tumor
content (>90%), suggesting tumor heterogeneity for the mutation. This study
provides the first correlation of FOXL2 mutation status and genomic imbalances in
AGCTs, and it further elucidates the mechanisms for mutant allele imbalance in
cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22200085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Ophthalmic Genet. 2012 Jun;33(2):107-10. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2011.634879. Epub 
2011 Dec 15.

Microdeletion found by array-CGH in girl with blepharophimosis syndrome and
apparently balanced translocation t(3;15)(q23;q25).

González-González C(1), García-Hoyos M, Hernaez Calzón R, Arroyo Díaz C, González
Fanego C, Lorda Sánchez I, Sánchez-Escribano F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Megalab, Madrid, Spain. cgonzalezggen@yahoo.es

BACKGROUND: Blepharophimosis, ptosis and epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a
rare autosomal dominant congenital disorder. Mutations in FOXL2, a gene located
at 3q23, have been shown to cause the syndrome. We report a girl with BPES with a
"de novo" apparently balanced translocation between chromosomes 3 and 15:
t(3;15)(q23;q25).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Conventional cytogenetic and CGH array were performed.
RESULTS: The karyotype showed an apparently balanced translocation. Molecular
studies by array-CGH did not show deletions in the FOXL2 gene; however, a novel
63.2 kb deletion involving a non-protein-coding gene (PISRT1) was found.
CONCLUSIONS: The novel deletion found could be involved in FOXL2 regulation and
constitutes the smallest deletion described in a female with BPES. In cases of
"de novo" apparently balanced translocation, only a 5-6% risk of phenotype
alteration is described. Molecular studies can help to discover these alterations
and provide insight for genetic counseling.

PMID: 22171663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Arkh Patol. 2011 Jul-Aug;73(4):10-3.

Foxl-2 in gonad development and pathology.

Jaubert F(1), Galmiche L, Lortat-Jacob S, Fournet JC, Fellous M.

Author information: 
(1)Faculte de medicine, Universite Descartes, Paris V, France.

The Foxl-2 gene is involved in eyelid and ovary development. Mutations can lead
to a shortened protein and malformations such as BPES associated or not to POF.
Forkhead point mutation C134W is a marker of adult type granulosa cell tumors
only. Foxl-2 dysregulation is also present in DSD and DSD associated tumors such 
as Gonadoblastoma and gonadoblastoma like intratubular undetermined germ cell
neoplasia. A similar spectrum of pathology involvement is also found for WT1 and 
RET and gives a new insight into the relationship between development,
malformations and oncogenesis.

PMID: 22164424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Chromosome Res. 2012 Jan;20(1):201-13. doi: 10.1007/s10577-011-9263-y.

The potential role of microRNAs in regulating gonadal sex differentiation in the 
chicken embryo.

Cutting AD(1), Bannister SC, Doran TJ, Sinclair AH, Tizard MV, Smith CA.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Australian Animal Health Laboratories, Portarlington Road, Geelong,
Victoria, Australia.

Differential gene expression regulates tissue morphogenesis. The embryonic gonad 
is a good example, where the developmental decision to become an ovary or testis 
is governed by female- or male-specific gene expression. A number of genes have
now been identified that control gonadal sex differentiation. However, the
potential role of microRNAs (miRNAs) in ovarian and testicular pathways is
unknown. In this review, we summarise our current understanding of gonadal
differentiation and the possible involvement of miRNAs, using the chicken embryo 
as a model system. Chickens and other birds have a ZZ/ZW sex chromosome system,
in which the female, ZW, is the heterogametic sex, and the male, ZZ, is
homogametic (opposite to mammals). The Z-linked DMRT1 gene is thought to direct
testis differentiation during embryonic life via a dosage-based mechanism. The
conserved SOX9 gene is also likely to play a key role in testis formation. No
master ovary determinant has yet been defined, but the autosomal FOXL2 and
Aromatase genes are considered central. No miRNAs have been definitively shown to
play a role in embryonic gonadal development in chickens or any other vertebrate 
species. Using next generation sequencing, we carried out an expression-based
screen for miRNAs expressed in embryonic chicken gonads at the time of sexual
differentiation. A number of miRNAs were identified, including several that
showed sexually dimorphic expression. We validated a subset of miRNAs by qRT-PCR,
and prediction algorithms were used to identify potential targets. We discuss the
possible roles for these miRNAs in gonadal development and how these roles might 
be tested in the avian model.

PMID: 22161018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Arch Ophthalmol. 2011 Dec;129(12):1564-9. doi: 10.1001/archophthalmol.2011.348.

Insights into levator muscle dysfunction in a cohort of patients with molecularly
confirmed blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome using
high-resolution imaging, anatomic examination, and histopathologic examination.

Decock CE(1), De Baere EE, Bauters W, Shah AD, Delaey C, Forsyth R, Leroy BP,
Kestelyn P, Claerhout I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185,
B-9000 Ghent, Belgium. Christian.decock@ugent.be

OBJECTIVE: To study the basis of defective levator palpebrae superioris (LPS)
function in blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES), an
autosomal dominant eyelid malformation sometimes associated with ovarian
dysfunction.
METHODS: Eight patients with molecularly proved BPES underwent high-resolution
surface-coil 3-T magnetic resonance imaging before surgical intervention. The
features of LPS muscle and adjoining connective tissue were compared with an
age-matched control subject. During LPS resection for ptosis repair, detailed
anatomic examination of the LPS was performed. Histopathologic characteristics
were compared with normal control samples from a cadaver and a patient with
simple severe congenital ptosis.
RESULTS: The most striking feature shown on magnetic resonance imaging was the
thin, long anterior part of the LPS. During the operation, this consisted of a
disorganized, thin, long aponeurosis. However, in the posterior part of the LPS, 
there was an organized thick structure suggestive of a muscle belly.
Histopathologic examination revealed posteriorly well-formed striated muscle
fibers in all patients with BPES but not in the control sample from the patient
with simple severe congenital ptosis. These striated muscle fibers were
comparable to those of the normal control tissue but were more intermixed with
collagenous tissue and little fatty degeneration.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of striated muscle fibers in LPS of patients with BPES 
contrasts with the fatty degeneration in patients with simple severe congenital
ptosis. To our knowledge, this is the first study providing novel insights into
the pathogenesis of the eyelid malformation in BPES through extensive imaging,
anatomic study, and histopathologic testing in a unique cohort of patients with
molecularly proved BPES.

PMID: 22159675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Sex Dev. 2011;5(6):304-17. doi: 10.1159/000334517. Epub 2011 Nov 22.

Loss of R-spondin1 and Foxl2 amplifies female-to-male sex reversal in XX mice.

Auguste A(1), Chassot AA, Grégoire EP, Renault L, Pannetier M, Treier M, Pailhoux
E, Chaboissier MC.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR 1198, Biologie du Développement et de la Reproduction,
Jouy-en-Josas, France.

In vertebrates, 2 main genetic pathways have been shown to regulate ovarian
development. Indeed, a loss of function mutations in Rspo1 and Foxl2 promote
partial female-to-male sex reversal. In mice, it has been shown that the secreted
protein RSPO1 is involved in ovarian differentiation and the transcription factor
FOXL2 is required for follicular formation. Here, we analysed the potential
interactions between these 2 genetic pathways and have shown that while Rspo1
expression seems to be independent of Foxl2 up-regulation, Foxl2 expression
partly depends of Rspo1 signalisation. This suggests that different
Foxl2-positive somatic cell lineages exist within the ovaries. In addition, a
combination of both mutated genes in XX Foxl2(-/-)/Rspo1(-/-) gonads promotes sex
reversal, detectable at earlier stages than in XX Rspo1(-/-) mutants. Ectopic
development of the steroidogenic lineage is more pronounced in XX
Foxl2(-/-)/Rspo1(-/-) gonads than in XX Rspo1(-/-) embryos, suggesting that Foxl2
is involved in preventing ectopic steroidogenesis in foetal ovaries.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22116255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Sex Dev. 2012;6(1-3):33-45. doi: 10.1159/000334056. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

Telling the story of XX sex reversal in the goat: highlighting the sex-crossroad 
in domestic mammals.

Pannetier M(1), Elzaiat M, Thépot D, Pailhoux E.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR 1198, ENVA, Biologie du Développement et de la Reproduction,
Jouy-en-Josas, France.

The conditions for sex reversal in vertebrate species have been studied
extensively and have highlighted numerous key factors involved in sex
differentiation. We review here the history of the development of knowledge,
referring to one example of complete female-to-male XX sex reversal associated
with a polled phenotype in the goat. The results and hypotheses concerning this
polled intersex syndrome (PIS) are then presented, firstly with respect to the
transcriptional regulatory effects of the PIS mutation, and secondly regarding
the role of the main ovarian-differentiating factor in this PIS locus, the FOXL2 
gene.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22094227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 May 6;354(1-2):103-10. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.10.012. 
Epub 2011 Oct 21.

Molecular mechanisms of temperature-dependent sex determination in the context of
ecological developmental biology.

Matsumoto Y(1), Crews D.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Integrative Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX
78712, USA. y_matsumoto@utexas.edu

Temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD) is a prime example of phenotypic
plasticity in that gonadal sex is determined by the temperature of the incubating
egg. In the red-eared slider turtle (Trachemys scripta), the effect of
temperature can be overridden by exogenous ligands, i.e., sex steroid hormones
and steroid metabolism enzyme inhibitors, during the temperature-sensitive period
(TSP) of development. Precisely how the physical signal of temperature is
transduced into a biological signal that ultimately results in sex determination 
remains unknown. In this review, we discuss the sex determining pathway
underlying TSD by focusing on two candidate sex determining genes, Forkhead box
protein L2 (FoxL2) and Doublesex mab3- related transcription factor 1 (Dmrt1).
They appear to be involved in transducing the environmental temperature signal
into a biological signal that subsequently determines gonadal sex. FoxL2 and
Dmrt1 exhibit gonad-typical patterns of expression in response to temperature
during the TSP in the red-eared slider turtle. Further, the biologically active
ligands regulate the expression of FoxL2 and Dmrt1 during development to modify
gonad trajectory. The precise regulatory mechanisms of expression of these genes 
by temperature or exogenous ligands are not clear. However, the environment often
influences developmental gene expression by altering the epigenetic status in
regulatory regions. Here, we will discuss if the regulation of FoxL2 and Dmrt1
expression by environment is mediated through epigenetic mechanisms during
development in species with TSD.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 22037450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Med Sci (Paris). 2011 Oct;27(10):859-65. doi: 10.1051/medsci/20112710014. Epub
2011 Oct 21.

[Sex differentiation: state of the art and future prospects].

[Article in French]

Pannetier M(1), Pailhoux E.

Author information: 
(1)Inra, UMR1198-Biologie du développement et de la reproduction, Bâtiment J.
Poly, Jouy-en-Josas, France.

Our knowledge on sex differentiation in mammals has considerably progressed
during the last decennials, beginning with the discovery of the
testis-determining factor. Here, the morphogenetic processes involved in the
early gonadic switch will be presented, together with the major genes involved in
testis and ovary formation. Existing differences between the widely used mouse
model and other mammals, such as human and goat, will be highlighted.

© 2011 médecine/sciences – Inserm / SRMS.

PMID: 22027423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25463. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025463. Epub 2011 Oct 12.

SUMOylation of the Forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 promotes its
stabilization/activation through transient recruitment to PML bodies.

Georges A(1), Benayoun BA, Marongiu M, Dipietromaria A, L'Hôte D, Todeschini AL, 
Auer J, Crisponi L, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Programme de Pathologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Institut Jacques Monod, UMR
7592 CNRS-Université Paris Diderot, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: FOXL2 is a transcription factor essential for ovarian development and
maintenance. It is mutated in the genetic condition called Blepharophimosis
Ptosis Epicantus inversus Syndrome (BPES) and in cases of isolated premature
ovarian failure. We and others have previously shown that FOXL2 undergoes several
post-translational modifications.
METHODS AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, using cells in culture, we show that
interference with FOXL2 SUMOylation leads to a robust inhibition of its
transactivation ability, which correlates with a decreased stability.
Interestingly, FOXL2 SUMOylation promotes its transient recruitment to subnuclear
structures that we demonstrate to be PML (Promyelocytic Leukemia) Nuclear Bodies.
Since PML bodies are known to be sites where post-translational modifications of 
nuclear factors take place, we used tandem mass spectrometry to identify new
post-translational modifications of FOXL2. Specifically, we detected four
phosphorylated, one sulfated and three acetylated sites.
CONCLUSIONS: By analogy with other transcription factors, we propose that PML
Nuclear Bodies might transiently recruit FOXL2 to the vicinity of locally
concentrated enzymes that could be involved in the post-translational maturation 
of FOXL2. FOXL2 acetylation, sulfation, phosphorylation as well as other
modifications yet to be discovered might alter the transactivation capacity of
FOXL2 and/or its stability, thus modulating its global intracellular activity.

PMCID: PMC3192040
PMID: 22022399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jan;1819(1):57-66. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.10.003. 
Epub 2011 Oct 14.

FTZ-F1 and FOXL2 up-regulate catfish brain aromatase gene transcription by
specific binding to the promoter motifs.

Sridevi P(1), Chaitanya RK, Dutta-Gupta A, Senthilkumaran B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, School of Life Sciences-Centre for Advanced
Studies, University of Hyderabad, P.O. Central University, Hyderabad 500 046,
Andhra Pradesh, India.

Cytochrome P450 aromatase (cyp19) catalyzes the conversion of androgens into
estrogens. Teleosts have distinct, ovarian specific (cyp19a1a) and brain specific
(cyp19a1b) cyp19 genes. Previous studies in teleosts demonstrated regulation of
cyp19a1a expression by the NR5A nuclear receptor subfamily as well as a fork head
transcription factor, FOXL2. In the present study, we investigated the
involvement of fushi tarazu factor 1, FTZ-F1, a NR5A subfamily member, and FOXL2 
in the regulation of cyp19a1b expression in brain of the air-breathing catfish,
Clarias gariepinus. Based on the synchronous expression pattern of cyp19a1b,
FTZ-F1 and FOXL2 in the brain, we isolated the 5' upstream region of cyp19a1b to 
analyse regulatory motifs. Promoter motif analysis revealed FTZ-F1/NR5A1 and
FOXL2 binding nucleotide sequences. Transient transfection studies showed that
FTZ-F1 and FOXL2 together enhanced the transcriptional activity of cyp19a1b gene 
in mammalian cell lines. Mutation in either of their putative binding sites
within the cyp19a1b promoter abolished this effect. Electrophoretic gel mobility 
shift experiments indicated that FTZ-F1 and FOXL2 proteins bind to the
synthesized radio-labelled oligomers used as probes and mobility shifted upon
addition of their respective antibodies. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
confirmed the binding of both these transcription factors to their corresponding 
cis-acting elements in the upstream region of cyp19a1b. To our knowledge, this
study is the first report on the transcriptional regulation of cyp19a1b by FTZ-F1
and FOXL2 in a teleost fish.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22019437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Biol Reprod. 2012 Feb 14;86(2):37. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.095208. Print 2012
Feb.

Temporal differences in granulosa cell specification in the ovary reflect
distinct follicle fates in mice.

Mork L(1), Maatouk DM, McMahon JA, Guo JJ, Zhang P, McMahon AP, Capel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North
Carolina, USA.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2012 Feb;86(2):34.

The embryonic origins of ovarian granulosa cells have been a subject of debate
for decades. By tamoxifen-induced lineage tracing of Foxl2-expressing cells, we
show that descendants of the bipotential supporting cell precursors in the early 
gonad contribute granulosa cells to a specific population of follicles in the
medulla of the ovary that begin to grow immediately after birth. These precursor 
cells arise from the proliferative ovarian surface epithelium and enter mitotic
arrest prior to upregulating Foxl2. Granulosa cells that populate the cortical
primordial follicles activated in adult life derive from the surface epithelium
perinatally, and enter mitotic arrest at that stage. Ingression from the surface 
epithelium dropped to undetectable levels by Postnatal Day 7, when most surviving
oocytes were individually encapsulated by granulosa cells. These findings add
complexity to the standard model of sex determination in which the Sertoli and
granulosa cells of the adult testis and ovary directly stem from the supporting
cell precursors of the bipotential gonad.

PMCID: PMC3290667
PMID: 21976597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Clin Dysmorphol. 2012 Jan;21(1):48-52. doi: 10.1097/MCD.0b013e32834977f1.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome plus: deletion 3q22.3q23 in 
a patient with characteristic facial features and with genital anomalies, spastic
diplegia, and speech delay.

Zahanova S(1), Meaney B, Labieniec B, Verdin H, De Baere E, Nowaczyk MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, DeGroote School of Medicine, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Canada.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome(BPES; OMIM110100) is a
genetic disorder usually inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Primarily,
its diagnosis is based on four major features present at birth: short horizontal 
palpebral fissures (blepharophimosis), drooping of the eyelids (ptosis), a
vertical fold of skin from the lower eyelid up either side of the nose
(epicanthus inversus), and lateral displacement of the inner canthi with normal
interpupillary distance(telecanthus; Oley and Baraitser, 1988). Two types of BPES
are recognized: type I BPES includes the four major eyelid features and female
infertility as a result of premature ovarian failure, whereas type II BPES
consists only of eyelid abnormalities (Zlotogora et al., 1983). BPES is sometimes
associated with developmental delay, but patients with BPES typically have a
normal lifespan (Oley and Baraitser, 1988; Beysen et al., 2009). The clinical
diagnosis of BPES is confirmed with demonstration of a FOXL2 mutation, subtle
FOXL2 deletion or 3q23 microdeletion, or deletion of the FOXL2 regulatory region 
(Crisponi et al., 2001; De Baere et al., 2003; Beysen et al., 2005; D’haene et
al., 2009). FOXL2, located at 3q23, is the only gene currently known to be
associated with BPES (Beysen et al., 2009). It is possible to identify an
underlying genetic defect in 88% of BPES cases diagnosed clinically (Beysen et
al., 2009). Of the genetic defects found, approximately 81% are intragenic
mutations of FOXL2, 10–12% are microdeletions of the gene or surrounding areas,
and 5% are deletions in the regulatory areas (Beysen et al., 2009; D’haene et
al., 2009,2010). In BPES-like patients (i.e. those displaying some,but not all
four major features of BPES), other copy number changes can be detected in 33% of
cases(Gijsbers et al., 2008). Patients with BPES carrying larger deletions
encompassing FOXL2 present more frequently with associated clinical findings,
such as mental retardation (D’haene et al., 2009). In this study, we present a
child with BPES caused by a large interstitial deletion,3q22.3q23 (chr3:139 354
104–144 013 999)(hg18), which includes FOXL2. In addition to the classic features
of BPES, he presents with an external genital anomaly,spastic diplegia, and
speech delay.

PMID: 21934608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2011 Dec 1;174(3):259-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2011.08.015. 
Epub 2011 Aug 30.

Cloning and differential expression of FOXL2 during ovarian development and
recrudescence of the catfish, Clarias gariepinus.

Sridevi P(1), Senthilkumaran B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, School of Life Sciences, University of
Hyderabad, P.O. Central University, Hyderabad 500 046, Andhra Pradesh, India.

FOXL2 is a member of the forkhead/HNF-3-related family of transcription factors
which provides tissue-specific gene regulation. It is known to regulate ovarian
aromatase, (cyp19a1a) which plays a crucial role in ovarian differentiation. To
understand the role of FOXL2 in gonads and brain during ovarian development and
recrudescence, we cloned the full-length cDNA of FOXL2 and analyzed its
spatio-temporal expression both at transcript and protein levels in the
air-breathing catfish, Clarias gariepinus. Based on its deduced amino acid
sequence, an antigenic peptide conjugated with a carrier protein was synthesized 
which was then used for raising antibody that reacted specifically with FOXL2.
Tissue distribution pattern of FOXL2 revealed its presence prominently in ovary
and female brain with sexual dimorphism. Highest expression of FOXL2 was observed
in ovary and brain during prespawning phase indicating an important role for this
correlate in ovarian recrudescence. Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) treatment,
in vitro and in vivo, induced FOXL2 expression in the ovary during preparatory
and prespawning phases. Similar type of enhanced expression was evident in brain 
after hCG-induction during the prespawning phase. The ontogeny of FOXL2 showed
sexual dimorphic expression pattern both in gonads and brain. Based on our
previous studies, the expression pattern of FOXL2 was found to be synchronous not
only with that of ovarian cyp19a1a but also with brain cyp19a1b. Present study
substantiates the role of FOXL2 in the regulation of aromatase in teleosts and
also designates FOXL2 as a potential ovary and brain marker during female sex
development in catfish.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21906596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Dec;160(4):187-93. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2011.08.005. Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Effects of sexual steroids on the expression of foxl2 in Gobiocypris rarus.

Jiang W(1), Yang Y, Zhao D, Liu X, Duan J, Xie S, Zhao H.

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Key Laboratory of Genetic Regulation and Integrated Biology, School of
Life Sciences, Huazhong Normal University, Wuhan, Hubei, China.

Gobiocypris rarus is an emerging fish model for aquatic toxicology in China as it
is sensitive to environmental hormone disruptors. Exogenous sex steroids can
affect sex differentiation and the expression of sex-related genes. Foxl2, a
member of forkhead-box transcription factor family, is the key gene for ovary
development and its mutation causes the blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus
inversus syndrome in human. We find that two foxl2 genes exist in fish genome,
one is foxl2, and the other is foxl2b. Here, we reported the isolation and
expression of foxl2 in G. rarus. G. rarus foxl2 cDNA is 1700bp in length with a
921bp of open reading frame encoding 306 amino acids containing the typical
FH-domain. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed its predominant expression in the
eye, brain, gill and gonads. Moreover, the expression level in the ovary was
significantly higher than that in the testis. Quantitative RT-PCR showed that
foxl2 was up regulated after treatment with estradiol and was down regulated with
2-methyl-testosterone. These results suggested that Foxl2 plays an important role
in female development of G. rarus, foxl2 mRNA expression is regulated by
downstream sex hormones, and foxl2 can be used as a molecular indicator
monitoring the environmental endocrine disruptors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21889601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Oncol Rep. 2011 Dec;26(6):1539-46. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1443. Epub 2011 Sep 1.

Remarkable difference of somatic mutation patterns between oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes.

Liu H(1), Xing Y, Yang S, Tian D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Department of Biology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, PR China.

Cancers arise owing to mutations that confer selective growth advantages on the
cells in a subset of tumor suppressor and/or oncogenes. To understand oncogenesis
and diagnose cancers, it is crucial to discriminate these two groups of genes by 
using the difference in their mutation patterns. Here, we investigated>120,000
mutation samples in 66 well-known tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes of the
COSMIC database, and found a set of significant differences in mutation patterns 
(e.g., non-3n-indel, non-sense SNP and mutation hotspot) between them. By
screening the best measurement, we developed indices to readily distinguish one
from another and predict clearly the unknown oncogenesis genes as tumor
suppressors (e.g., ASXL1, HNF1A and KDM6A) or oncogenes (e.g., FOXL2, MYD88 and
TSHR). Based on our results, a third gene group can be classified, which has a
mutational pattern between tumor suppressors and oncogenes. The concept of the
third gene group could help to understand gene function in different cancers or
individual patients and to know the exact function of genes in oncogenesis. In
conclusion, our study provides further insights into cancer-related genes and
identifies several potential therapeutic targets.

PMID: 21887471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Endocrinology. 2011 Oct;152(10):3917-29. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0989. Epub 2011 Aug
23.

Mutant Forkhead L2 (FOXL2) proteins associated with premature ovarian failure
(POF) dimerize with wild-type FOXL2, leading to altered regulation of genes
associated with granulosa cell differentiation.

Kuo FT(1), Bentsi-Barnes IK, Barlow GM, Pisarska MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics/Gynecology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8635 West Third Street, Los
Angeles, California 90048, USA.

Premature ovarian failure in the autosomal dominant disorder
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus is due to mutations in the gene
encoding Forkhead L2 (FOXL2), producing putative truncated proteins. We
previously demonstrated that FOXL2 is a transcriptional repressor of the
steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR), P450SCC (CYP11A), P450aromatase (CYP19),
and cyclin D2 (CCND2) genes, markers of ovarian follicle proliferation and
differentiation. Furthermore, we found that mutations of FOXL2 may regulate
wild-type FOXL2, leading to loss of transcriptional repression of CYP19, similar 
to StAR. However, the regulatory mechanisms underlying these premature ovarian
failure-associated mutations remain largely unknown. Therefore, we examined the
effects of a FOXL2 mutant protein on the transcriptional repression of the CYP19 
promoter by the full-length protein. We found that mutant FOXL2 exerts a
dominant-negative effect on the repression of CYP19 by wild-type FOXL2. Both
wild-type and mutant FOXL2 and can form homo- and heterodimers. We identified a
minimal -57-bp human CYP19 promoter containing two potential FOXL2-binding
regions and found that both wild-type and mutant FOXL2 can bind to either of
these regions. Mutational analysis revealed that either site is sufficient for
transcriptional repression by wild-type FOXL2, and the dominant-negative effect
of mutant FOXL2, but these are eliminated when both sites are mutated. These
findings confirm that mutant FOXL2 exerts a dominant-negative effect on wild-type
FOXL2's activity as a transcriptional repressor of key genes in ovarian follicle 
differentiation and suggest that this is likely due to heterodimer formation and 
possibly also competition for DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC3176639
PMID: 21862621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Jun 5;356(1-2):31-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.07.049.
Epub 2011 Aug 12.

Oogenesis: transcriptional regulators and mouse models.

Jagarlamudi K(1), Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Magee-Womens
Research Institute, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

Oocyte differentiation into a totipotent cell requires initial germ cell cyst
breakdown to form primordial follicles, recruitment of primordial follicles for
development into primary follicles and remarkable growth of the ovarian follicle 
which culminates in ovulation. During oogenesis, the oocyte undergoes dynamic
alterations in gene expression which are regulated by a set of well-coordinated
transcription factors active in the germ line and soma. A number of germ cell
specific as well as somatic expressed transcriptional regulators are critical in 
ovarian formation and folliculogenesis. These transcriptional regulators include:
Foxo3, Foxl2, Figla, Lhx8, Nobox, Sohlh1 and Sohlh2. A subset of these
transcriptional regulators is mutated in women with ovarian insufficiency and
infertility. Studies on transcriptional regulators preferentially expressed in
the ovary are important to develop a better understanding of the mechanisms of
activation and survival of ovarian follicles, as well as an understanding of
ovary specific pathways that can be modulated in the future to regulate fertility
and protect against external insults such as chemotherapy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21856374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2012 Jun;38(3):653-64. doi: 10.1007/s10695-011-9548-2. Epub
2011 Aug 18.

Molecular cloning of Foxl2 gene and the effects of endocrine-disrupting chemicals
on its mRNA level in rare minnow, Gobiocypris rarus.

Wang H(1), Wu T, Qin F, Wang L, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Shaanxi Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology for Agriculture, College of Animal
Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, 22 Xinong Road, Yangling,
Shaanxi, China.

Endocrine-disrupting chemicals (EDCs) can affect normal sexual differentiation in
fish. Foxl2, one forkhead transcription factor, plays an important role in
ovarian differentiation in the early development of the female gonad in mammals
and fish. How EDCs affect Foxl2 expression is little known. In this study, we
isolated a Foxl2 cDNA from the ovary of rare minnow Gobiocypris rarus and
examined its expression during early development stages and in different adult
tissues. Then, we analyzed Foxl2 expression in G. rarus juvenile following 3-day 
exposure to 17a- ethinylestradiol (EE2), 4-n-nonylphenol (NP), and bisphenol A
(BPA). Alignment of known Foxl2 sequences among vertebrates showed high identity 
in forkhead domain and C-terminal region with other vertebrate proteins.
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis showed that Foxl2 expression was linear decrease and
cyp19a1a, the downstream target gene of Foxl2, had no correlation with Foxl2 from
18 to 50 days post fertilization (dpf). Among different adult tissues, Foxl2 is
mainly expressed in ovary, brain, gill, eye, and male spleen. In the 3-day
exposure, the juvenile fish to EDCs, 0.1 nM EE2, and 1 nM BPA significantly
up-regulated the expression of Foxl2 gene, while NP had no effect on Foxl2
expression. Altogether, these results provide basic data for further study on how
Foxl2 mediates EDCs impact on the sexual differentiation in G. rarus.

PMID: 21850400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. BMC Genomics. 2011 Aug 8;12:404. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-404.

Differential gene expression in male and female rainbow trout embryos prior to
the onset of gross morphological differentiation of the gonads.

Hale MC(1), Xu P, Scardina J, Wheeler PA, Thorgaard GH, Nichols KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN
47907, USA. mchale@purdue.edu

BACKGROUND: There are large differences between the sexes at the genetic level;
these differences include heterogametic sex chromosomes and/or differences in
expression of genes between the sexes. In rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)
qRT-PCR studies have found significant differences in expression of several
candidate sex determining genes. However, these genes represent a very small
fraction of the genome and research in other species suggests there are large
portions of the transcriptome that are differentially expressed between the
sexes. These differences are especially noticeable once gonad differentiation and
maturation has occurred, but less is known at earlier stages of development. Here
we use data from a microarray and qRT-PCR to identify genes differentially
expressed between the sexes at three time points in pre-hatch embryos, prior to
the known timing of sexual differentiation in this species.
RESULTS: The microarray study revealed 883 differentially expressed features
between the sexes with roughly equal numbers of male and female upregulated
features across time points. Most of the differentially expressed genes on the
microarray were not related to sex function, suggesting large scale differences
in gene expression between the sexes are present early in development. Candidate 
gene analysis revealed sox9, DMRT1, Nr5a1 and wt1 were upregulated in males at
some time points and foxl2, ovol1, fst and cyp19a1a were upregulated in females
at some time points.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study to identify sexual dimorphism in expression
of the genome during embryogenesis in any fish and demonstrates that
transcriptional differences are present before the completion of gonadogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3166948
PMID: 21824436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Reproduction. 2011 Oct;142(4):489-95. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0092. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

Forkhead transcription factors in ovarian function.

Uhlenhaut NH(1), Treier M.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Robert Rössle Strasse 10, 13125
Berlin-Buch, Germany. henriette.uhlenhaut@mdc-berlin.de

Since the discovery of the conserved forkhead (Fkh) DNA binding domain more than 
20 years ago, members of the Fkh or forkhead box (FOX) family of transcription
factors have been shown to act as important regulators of numerous developmental 
and homeostatic processes. The human genome contains 44 Fkh genes, several of
which have recently been reported to be essential for female fertility. In this
review, we highlight the roles of specific FOX proteins in ovarian
folliculogenesis and present our current understanding of their molecular
function. In particular, we describe what we have learned from loss-of-function
studies using mouse models as well as human genetics and illustrate how different
stages of folliculogenesis, both in oocytes and in somatic granulosa and theca
cells, are regulated by FOXC1, FOXL2, and FOXO subfamily members.

PMID: 21810859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Sex Dev. 2011;5(4):167-80. doi: 10.1159/000329477. Epub 2011 Jul 22.

Gonadal development and tumor formation at the crossroads of male and female sex 
determination.

Cools M(1), Wolffenbuttel KP, Drop SL, Oosterhuis JW, Looijenga LH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, University
Hospital Ghent and Ghent University, Belgium. martine.cools @ ugent.be

Malignant germ cell tumor (GCT) formation is a well-known complication in the
management of patients with a disorder of sex development (DSD). DSDs are defined
as congenital conditions in which development of chromosomal, gonadal, or
anatomical sex is atypical. DSD patients in whom the karyotype - at least at the 
gonadal level - contains (a part of) the Y chromosome are at increased risk for
neoplastic transformation of germ cells, leading to the development of the
so-called 'type II germ cell tumors'. However, tumor risk in the various forms of
DSD varies considerably between the different diagnostic groups. This
contribution integrates our actual knowledge on the pathophysiology of tumor
development in DSDs, recent findings on gonadal (mal)development in DSD patients,
and possible correlations between the patient's phenotype and his/her risk for
germ cell tumor development.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21791949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Nature. 2011 Jul 20;476(7358):101-4. doi: 10.1038/nature10239.

DMRT1 prevents female reprogramming in the postnatal mammalian testis.

Matson CK(1), Murphy MW, Sarver AL, Griswold MD, Bardwell VJ, Zarkower D.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Center and Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and
Development, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2011 Sep 8;477(7363):238.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2012 May;187(5):1924-5.

Sex in mammals is determined in the fetal gonad by the presence or absence of the
Y chromosome gene Sry, which controls whether bipotential precursor cells
differentiate into testicular Sertoli cells or ovarian granulosa cells. This
pivotal decision in a single gonadal cell type ultimately controls sexual
differentiation throughout the body. Sex determination can be viewed as a battle 
for primacy in the fetal gonad between a male regulatory gene network in which
Sry activates Sox9 and a female network involving WNT/ß-catenin signalling. In
females the primary sex-determining decision is not final: loss of the FOXL2
transcription factor in adult granulosa cells can reprogram granulosa cells into 
Sertoli cells. Here we show that sexual fate is also surprisingly labile in the
testis: loss of the DMRT1 transcription factor in mouse Sertoli cells, even in
adults, activates Foxl2 and reprograms Sertoli cells into granulosa cells. In
this environment, theca cells form, oestrogen is produced and germ cells appear
feminized. Thus Dmrt1 is essential to maintain mammalian testis determination,
and competing regulatory networks maintain gonadal sex long after the fetal
choice between male and female. Dmrt1 and Foxl2 are conserved throughout
vertebrates and Dmrt1-related sexual regulators are conserved throughout
metazoans. Antagonism between Dmrt1 and Foxl2 for control of gonadal sex may
therefore extend beyond mammals. Reprogramming due to loss of Dmrt1 also may help
explain the aetiology of human syndromes linked to DMRT1, including disorders of 
sexual differentiation and testicular cancer.

PMCID: PMC3150961
PMID: 21775990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Jun 5;356(1-2):55-64. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.06.019.
Epub 2011 Jul 8.

The transcription factor FOXL2: at the crossroads of ovarian physiology and
pathology.

Caburet S(1), Georges A, L'Hôte D, Todeschini AL, Benayoun BA, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7592, Institut Jacques Monod, Equipe Génétique et Génomique du
Développement Gonadique, 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France.

FOXL2 is a gene encoding a forkhead transcription factor. Its mutations or
misregulation have been shown to cause the blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus
inversus (BPES) syndrome and more recently have been associated with the
development of Ovarian Granulosa Cell Tumors (OGCT). BPES is a genetic disorder
involving mild craniofacial abnormalities often associated with premature ovarian
failure. OGCTs are endocrine malignancies, accounting for 2-5% of ovarian
cancers, the treatment of which is still challenging. In this review we summarize
recent data concerning FOXL2 transcriptional targets and molecular partners, its 
post-translational modifications, its mutations and its involvement in newly
discovered pathophysiological processes. In the ovary, FOXL2 is involved in the
regulation of cholesterol and steroid metabolism, apoptosis, reactive oxygen
species detoxification and cell proliferation. Interestingly, one of the main
roles of FOXL2 is also to preserve the identity of ovarian granulosa cells even
at the adult stage and to prevent their transdifferentiation into Sertoli-like
cells. All these recent advances indicate that FOXL2 is central to ovarian
development and maintenance. The elucidation of the impact of FOXL2 germinal and 
somatic mutations will allow a better understanding of the pathogenesis of BPES
and of OGCTs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21763750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Horm Cancer. 2011 Jun;2(3):157-69. doi: 10.1007/s12672-011-0069-3.

Nuclear receptor profiling of ovarian granulosa cell tumors.

Alexiadis M(1), Eriksson N, Jamieson S, Davis M, Drummond AE, Chu S, Clyne CD,
Muscat GE, Fuller PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Institute of Medical Research,
Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia.

Granulosa cell tumors of the ovary (GCT) represent ~5% of malignant ovarian
tumors. The adult form is defined by a mutation in the FOXL2 gene. GCT exhibit
many of the features of normal proliferating granulosa cells. We have profiled
the expression of the 48 human nuclear receptors (NR) by quantitative RT-PCR in a
panel of GCT and in two GCT-derived cell lines, COV434 and KGN. The highest level
of expression is seen for COUP-TF2 with abundant expression of PPAR<U+03B3>, SF-1, and
TR-a. Estrogen receptor (ER)-ß is the most abundant of the steroid receptors with
relatively high expression also of AR, ER-a, and PR. The concordance of
expression for each NR across the tumors is remarkably high with same discordance
between the cell lines and the tumors, particularly the COV434 line. No
significant differences were observed with respect to tumor stage for NR
expression. These findings provide a full profile of NR expression in GCT which
will enable full characterization of their roles and potential as therapeutic
targets.

© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2011

PMID: 21761343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. FASEB J. 2011 Oct;25(10):3561-9. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-184333. Epub 2011 Jul 14.

Antagonistic regulation of Cyp26b1 by transcription factors SOX9/SF1 and FOXL2
during gonadal development in mice.

Kashimada K(1), Svingen T, Feng CW, Pelosi E, Bagheri-Fam S, Harley VR,
Schlessinger D, Bowles J, Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
QLD 4072, Australia.

Sex determination in fetal germ cells depends on a balance between exposure to
retinoic acid (RA) and the degradation of RA achieved by the testis-specific
expression of the catabolic cytochrome P450 enzyme, CYP26B1. Therefore,
identification of factors regulating the expression of the Cyp26b1 gene is an
important goal in reproductive biology. We used in situ hybridization to
demonstrate that Cyp26b1 and transcription factor genes steroidogenic factor-1
(Sf1) and Sry-related HMG box 9 (Sox9) are coexpressed in Sertoli cells, whereas 
Cyp26b1 and Sf1 are coexpressed in Leydig cells in mouse fetal testes. In the
mouse gonadal somatic cell line TM3, transfection of constructs expressing SOX9
and SF1 activated Cyp26b1 expression, independently of the positive regulator RA.
In embryonic gonads deficient in SOX9 or SF1, Cyp26b1 expression was decreased
relative to wild-type (WT) controls, as measured by quantitative RT-PCR
(qRT-PCR). Furthermore, qRT-PCR showed that Cyp26b1 up-regulation by SOX9/SF1 was
attenuated by the ovarian transcription factor Forkhead box L2 (FOXL2) in TM3
cells, whereas in Foxl2-null mice, Cyp26b1 expression in XX gonads was increased 
~20-fold relative to WT controls. These data support the hypothesis that SOX9 and
SF1 ensure the male fate of germ cells by up-regulating Cyp26b1 and that FOXL2
acts to antagonize Cyp26b1 expression in ovaries.

PMCID: PMC3177566
PMID: 21757499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Cell Sci. 2011 Aug 1;124(Pt 15):2561-72. doi: 10.1242/jcs.085001. Epub 2011 Jul
5.

Notch gain of function in mouse periocular mesenchyme downregulates FoxL2 and
impairs eyelid levator muscle formation, leading to congenital blepharophimosis.

Zhang Y(1), Kao WW, Pelosi E, Schlessinger D, Liu CY.

Author information: 
(1)Edith J. Crawley Vision Research Center/Department of Ophthalmology, College
of Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

Notch signaling is pivotal for the morphogenesis and homeostasis of many tissues.
We found that aberrant Notch activation in mouse neural-crest-derived periocular 
mesenchymal cells (POMCs), which contribute to the formation of corneal and
eyelid stroma, results in blepharophimosis. Compound transgenic mice
overexpressing the Notch1 intracellular domain (N1-ICD) in POMCs (POMC(N1-ICD))
showed relatively minor effects on the cornea, but increased cell apoptosis and
decreased cell proliferation during eyelid morphogenesis. Eyelid closure at E15.5
and eyelid formation at birth were incomplete. In further analyses,
overexpression of N1-ICD impaired eyelid levator smooth muscle formation by
downregulating the transcription factor FoxL2. This is similar to the effect of
haploinsufficiency of FOXL2 in humans, which results in type II BPES
(blepharophimosis, ptosis and epicanthus inversus syndrome). In vitro studies
showed that FoxL2 expression is augmented by a low dose of N1-ICD but was
downregulated by a high dose, depending on the extent of Hes-1 and Hey-1
activation. Moreover, transfection of CMV-FoxL2 enhanced a-SMA promoter activity.
These data strongly imply that a physiologically low level of Notch1 is crucial
for proper FoxL2 expression in POMCs, which is, in turn, essential for Müeller
muscle formation and normal eyelid development.

PMCID: PMC3138700
PMID: 21730020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Sex Dev. 2011;5(4):213-23. doi: 10.1159/000328823. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Dimorphic expression of various transcription factor and steroidogenic enzyme
genes during gonadal ontogeny in the air-breathing catfish, Clarias gariepinus.

Raghuveer K(1), Senthilkumaran B, Sudhakumari CC, Sridevi P, Rajakumar A, Singh
R, Murugananthkumar R, Majumdar KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, School of Life Sciences-Centre for Advanced
Studies, University of Hyderabad, India.

In the present study the expression of 13 genes known to be involved in sex
differentiation and steroidogenesis in catfish was analyzed during gonadal
ontogeny by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Dmrt1 and sox9a showed exclusive
expression in male gonads while ovarian aromatase (cyp19a1) and foxl2 were
abundant in differentiating female gonads. Most of the genes related to
steroidogenesis were expressed only after gonadal differentiation. However, genes
coding for 3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (3ß-hsd), 17a-hydroxylase/C17-20 lyase
type 1 (cyp17) and steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (star) were barely
detectable during gonadal differentiation. Ovarian aromatase, cyp19a1, which is
responsible for estradiol-17ß biosynthesis in females, was expressed very early
in the undifferentiated gonads of catfish, around 30-40 days post hatch (dph).
The steroidogenic enzyme, 11ß-hydroxylase (cyp11b1) required for the production
of 11-ketotestosterone (11-KT) was expressed only after differentiation of
testis. These results suggest that estradiol-17ß has a critical role in ovarian
differentiation, while the role of 11-KT in testicular differentiation is
doubtful. In conclusion, dimorphic expression of dmrt1 and sox9a in gonads during
early development is required for testicular differentiation, and sex-specific
expression of cyp19a1 and foxl2 in females plays a critical role in ovarian
development. Our study reveals that the critical period of gonadal
differentiation in catfish starts around 30-40 dph when sex-specific genes showed
differential expression.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3150998
PMID: 21720151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Aug;25(8):1404-15. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-0093. Epub 2011 Jun 
23.

Impaired FSHbeta expression in the pituitaries of Foxl2 mutant animals.

Justice NJ(1), Blount AL, Pelosi E, Schlessinger D, Vale W, Bilezikjian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Forkhead box L2 (FoxL2) is required for ovarian development and differentiation. 
FoxL2 is also expressed in the pituitary where it has been implicated in the
development and regulation of gonadotropes, which secrete LH and FSH, the
endocrine signals that regulate folliculogenesis in the ovary and spermatogenesis
in the testis. Here, we show that FoxL2 is not required for the specification of 
gonadotropes; the pituitaries of Foxl2 mutant mice contain normal numbers of
gonadotropes that express glycoprotein a subunit and LHß. Whereas the
specification of gonadotropes and all other hormonal cell types is normal in the 
pituitaries of Foxl2 mutant animals, FSHß levels are severely impaired in both
male and female animals, suggesting that FoxL2 is required for normal Fshb
expression. The size of the pituitary is reduced in proportion to the smaller
body size of Foxl2 mutants, with a concomitant increase in the pituitary cellular
density. In primary pituitary cultures, activin induces FSH secretion and Fshb
mRNA expression in cells from wild-type mice. In cells from Foxl2 mutant mice,
however, FSH secretion is not detected, and activin is unable to drive Fshb
expression, suggesting that the mechanism of activin-dependent activation of Fshb
transcription is impaired. However, a small number of gonadotropes in the
ventromedial region of the pituitaries from Foxl2 mutant mice maintain FSHß
expression, suggesting that a FoxL2- and activin-independent mechanism can drive 
Fshb transcription. These data indicate that, in addition to its role in the
ovary, FoxL2 function in the pituitary is required for normal expression of FSH.

PMCID: PMC3146251
PMID: 21700720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Pediatr Dev Pathol. 2011 Sep-Oct;14(5):391-5. doi: 10.2350/10-12-0943-OA.1. Epub 
2011 Jun 17.

FOXL2 and SOX9 distinguish the lineage of the sex cord-stromal cells in
gonadoblastomas.

Buell-Gutbrod R(1), Ivanovic M, Montag A, Lengyel E, Fadare O, Gwin K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Gonadoblastomas are mixed germ cell sex cord-stromal tumors that arise in
dysgenetic gonads and are composed of immature germ cells and sex cord-stromal
cells of indeterminate differentiation. FOXL2 is one of the first genes expressed
in female gonad development, and it is required for proper granulosa cell
differentiation during folliculogenesis. SOX9 , a downstream target of SRY , the 
gene in the Y chromosomal sex-determining region, is required for testicular
development and for the formation and maintenance of (pre-)Sertoli cells. This
study characterized the sex cord-stromal cells of gonadoblastoma by evaluating
the expression of these counteracting transcription factors. Archival
paraffin-embedded material of 7 gonadoblastomas, 5 of which were overgrown by
dysgerminoma, was examined by immunohistochemistry for expression and
localization of FOXL2 and SOX9. The sex cord-stromal cells revealed strong
nuclear staining for FOXL2 and were negative for SOX9 expression. Germ cells in
the gonadoblastoma and dysgerminoma components showed no FOXL2 and SOX9
expression. Areas of transition between gonadoblastoma and dysgerminoma revealed 
nests with a gradual reduction of FOXL2 expression. Our results support the
hypothesis that the sex cord-stromal cell component of gonadoblastomas is of
granulosa cell origin. In addition, FOXL2 appears to be a useful marker for the
evaluation of overgrowth by dysgerminomas and for the identification of the
transition zone of "dysgerminoma in situ." As FOXL2 and SOX9 are differentially
expressed, they also should be useful for distinguishing gonadoblastomas from
intratubular germ cell neoplasias and can help to differentiate those with a
Sertoli cell component from gonadoblastoma with a granulosa cell component.

PMID: 21682576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Sep;160(1):54-61. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2011.05.007. Epub 2011 Jun 2.

Isolation and characterization of the CYP17A1 gene and its processed pseudogene
in Rana rugosa.

Suda M(1), Uno Y, Fujii J, Matsuda Y, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Waseda University, Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo,
Japan.

CYP17A1 expression is up-regulated in the gonad in Rana (Glandirana) rugosa
tadpoles treated with androgens to induce female-to-male sex-reversal. In this
study, we isolated the CYP17A1 gene and its processed pseudogene from R. rugosa. 
The former was found to consist of 8 exons, and the latter a single-exon gene,
designated CYP17A1P. The sequence of the promoter region of CYP17A1 differed from
that of CYP17A1P. We found several consensus binding-sites for candidate
transcription factors including androgen receptor (AR), Sox and FoxL2 in the
CYP17A1 promoter region, but an AR-binding site was absent from CYP17A1P. When AR
was over-expressed in Xenopus A6 cells, it did not increase CYP17A1 transcription
in luciferase assays. CYP17A1 was strongly expressed in indifferent male gonads
during sex determination and exclusively in testis, among eight adult tissues of 
R. rugosa. By contrast, CYP17A1P was expressed at very low, and similar levels in
the adult tissues of both sexes. Fluorescent In-Situ Hybridization (FISH)
analysis showed that CYP17A1P is localized to chromosome 4, while CYP17A1 is on
chromosome 9. These results collectively suggest that CYP17A1, but not CYP17A1P
is involved in male sex-determination in R. rugosa, and that androgens may not
have a direct effect on the CYP17A1 transcription.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21664481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Gynecol Oncol. 2011 Sep;122(3):580-4. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.05.008.

FOXL2 C402G mutation detection using MALDI-TOF-MS in DNA extracted from Israeli
granulosa cell tumors.

Gershon R(1), Aviel-Ronen S, Korach J, Daniel-Carmi V, Avivi C, Bar-Ilan D,
Barshack I, Meirow D, Ben-Baruch G, Cohen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetric and Gynecologic, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer,
Israel.

OBJECTIVE: To develop a rapid, sensitive and reliable method to detect FOXL2
C402G mutation in granulosa cell tumor (GCT) and to investigate the prevalence of
FOXL2 mutation in granulose cell tumors among Israeli patients.
METHODS: We designed and optimized a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization 
time of flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF-MS) genotyping assay to detect FOXL2 
C402G mutation in DNA isolated from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue
samples. We examined 20 tumor samples obtained from Israeli patients diagnosed
with granulose cell tumor.
RESULTS: Eighteen out of 20 samples were found to harbor FOXL2 C402G mutation.
Pathological review of the two tumors harboring wild type FOXL2 (C402) concluded 
that they were adenocarcinomas and has been misclassified at initial diagnosis.
We found that the prevalence of FOXL2 mutations among Israeli patients with GCT
(100%) is similar to previous reports.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the FOXL2 mutations can be reliably
detected by MALDI-TOF-MS genotyping. MALDI-TOF-MS genotyping is a simple, robust 
and highly sensitive method to detect FOXL2 C402G mutation. Our results confirm
previous studies reporting over 95% prevalence of FOXL2 mutation in GCT.
Furthermore, we suggest that testing for the presence of the FOXL2 C402G mutation
may improve diagnostic accuracy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21640373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Sep 1;20(17):3376-85. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr244. Epub 2011 Jun 
1.

Mutational probing of the forkhead domain of the transcription factor FOXL2
provides insights into the pathogenicity of naturally occurring mutations.

Todeschini AL(1), Dipietromaria A, L'hôte D, Boucham FZ, Georges AB,
Pandaranayaka PJ, Krishnaswamy S, Rivals I, Bazin C, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7592, Institut Jacques Monod, Equipe Génétique et Génomique du
Développement Gonadique, 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France.

Mutations of the transcription factor FOXL2, involved in cranio-facial and
ovarian development, lead to the Blepharophimosis Syndrome. Here, we have
systematically replaced the amino acids of the helices of the forkhead domain
(FHD) of FOXL2 by glycine residues to assess the impact of such substitutions. A 
number of mutations lead to protein mislocalization, aggregation and to partial
or complete loss of transactivation ability on a series of luciferase reporter
systems. To rationalize the results of this glycine mutation scan, we have
modeled the structure of the FHD by comparison with crystallographic data
available for other FHDs. We failed to detect a clear-cut correlation between
protein mislocalization or aggregation and the position of the mutation. However,
we found that the localization of the side chain of each amino acid strongly
correlated with the impact of its mutation on FOXL2 transactivation capacity.
Indeed, when the side chains of the amino acids involved in the helices of the
forkhead are supposed to point towards the hydrophobic core formed by the three
main helices, a loss of function was observed. On the contrary, if the side
chains point outward the hydrophobic core, protein function was preserved. The
extension of this analysis to natural mutants shows that a similar correlation
can be found for BPES mutations associated or not with ovarian dysfunction. Our
findings reveal new insights into the molecular effects of FOXL2 mutations
affecting the FHD, which represent two-thirds of intragenic mutations, and
provide the first  predictive tool of their effects.

PMID: 21632871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Mod Pathol. 2011 Oct;24(10):1360-7. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.95. Epub 2011 May
27.

Prognostic significance of FOXL2 mutation and mRNA expression in adult and
juvenile granulosa cell tumors of the ovary.

D'Angelo E(1), Mozos A, Nakayama D, Espinosa I, Catasus L, Muñoz J, Prat J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, IIB-Sant Pau, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,
Autonomous University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Recently, mutation of the FOXL2 gene has been consistently identified in adult
granulosa cell tumors of the ovary. The purpose of this study is to investigate
whether the FOXL2 mutation and mRNA expression have a role in the pathogenesis of
juvenile and adult granulosa cell tumors and influence tumor progression.
Thirty-four adult granulosa cell tumors and 20 juvenile granulosa cell tumors
were examined for the presence of the FOXL2 (C402G) mutation. Expression levels
were studied by quantitative PCR and immunohistochemistry. We found that FOXL2
(C402G) mutation was present in 19/27 (70%) of the adult type tumors but in none 
of the juvenile granulosa cell tumors (0/18). No correlation was encountered
between the presence of FOXL2 mutation and various clinicopathologic parameters
except for the presence of a different sex-cord component, which was more
frequently found in the subgroup of wild-type adult granulosa cell tumors than in
the mutated tumors. Patients with tumors harboring the FOXL2 (C402G) mutation had
a worse disease-free survival than those with the wild-type gene. Expression
levels of FOXL2 mRNA had an impact on disease-free survival in both adult and
juvenile granulosa cell tumors. We also found that the mutated tumors had a
higher immunohistochemical expression of the FOXL2 protein, and there was a
linear correlation between mRNA and immunohistochemical FOXL2 expression in both 
adult and juvenile granulosa cell tumors. Patients with juvenile granulosa cell
tumors and higher FOXL2 protein expression had worse overall survival and
disease-free survival than those with negative or weakly immunoreactive tumors.
Our data suggest that FOXL2 mutation and mRNA expression are of prognostic
importance in both adult and juvenile granulosa cell tumors.

PMID: 21623383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Jul;25(7):1170-83. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0480. Epub 2011 May 
26.

SMADs and FOXL2 synergistically regulate murine FSHbeta transcription via a
conserved proximal promoter element.

Tran S(1), Lamba P, Wang Y, Bernard DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada.

Pituitary FSH regulates ovarian and testicular function. Activins stimulate FSHß 
subunit (Fshb) gene transcription in gonadotrope cells, the rate-limiting step in
mature FSH synthesis. Activin A-induced murine Fshb gene transcription in
immortalized gonadotropes is dependent on homolog of Drosophila mothers against
decapentaplegic (SMAD) proteins as well as the forkhead transcription factor
FOXL2 (FOXL2). Here, we demonstrate that FOXL2 synergizes with SMAD2, SMAD3, and 
SMAD4 to stimulate murine Fshb promoter-reporter activity in heterologous cells. 
Moreover, SMAD3-induction of Fshb promoter activity or endogenous mRNA expression
is dependent upon endogenous FOXL2 in homologous cells. FOXL2/SMAD synergy
requires binding of both FOXL2 and SMAD3 or SMAD4 to DNA. Of three putative
forkhead-binding elements identified in the murine Fshb promoter, only the most
proximal is absolutely required for activin A induction of reporter activity in
homologous cells. Additionally, mutations to the minimal SMAD-binding element
adjacent to the proximal forkhead-binding element abrogate activin A or
FOXL2/SMAD3 induction of reporter activity. In contrast, a mutation that impairs 
an adjacent PBX1/PREP1 (pre-B cell leukemia transcription factor 1-PBX/knotted-1 
homeobox-1) binding site does not alter activin A-stimulated promoter activity in
homologous cells. Collectively, these and previous data suggest a model in which 
activins stimulate formation of FOXL2-SMAD2/3/4 complexes, which bind to the
proximal murine Fshb promoter to stimulate its transcription. Within these
complexes, FOXL2 and SMAD3 or SMAD4 bind to adjacent cis-elements, with SMAD3
brokering the physical interaction with FOXL2. Because this composite response
element is highly conserved, this suggests a general mechanism whereby activins
may regulate and/or modulate Fshb transcription in mammals.

PMID: 21622537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2011 Jun 1;3:1025-33.

Stage-specific mice ovarian somatic cell is involved in primordial
folliculogenesis.

Li G(1), Zhang H, Wang Y, Wen J, Teng Z, Mao G, Wang J, Guo M, Mu X, Xia G.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agro-biotechnology, College of Biological Sciences,
China Agricultural University, Beijing, PR China.

Although recent studies have shown that female germ cells can be produced from
stem-cell lines in mice, whether these germ cells can interact with ovarian
somatic cells (OSCs) to form primordial follicles (PFs) is still unclear. Here,
we found after the PF pool is established, Irx3 and FoxL2 which were extensively 
expressed in the OSCs of the perinatal mouse decreased. Additionally, during
primordial folliculogenesis, down-regulation of FoxL2 prevents OSCs invading germ
cell cysts. Therefore, we investigated whether OSCs at different stages of
folliculogenesis were able to reconstitute PFs with fetal ovarian germ cells in
vitro. In this system, neither OSCs at the post-PF pool-establishment stage nor
OSCs from normal or doxorubicin-treated adult mice were able to reconstitute PFs.
Mice eliminated most of pre-existing PFs failed to exhibit any spontaneous
regeneration of PFs. Our results suggest that OSCs can only support physiological
primordial folliculogenesis during the prenatal period. OSCs lose the ability to 
form PFs after the establishment of the PF pool may be another reason why the PF 
pool is non-renewable in most adult mammals.

PMID: 21622111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Endocrinology. 2011 Jul;152(7):2883-93. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1475. Epub 2011 May 
10.

Inhibition of SRY-calmodulin complex formation induces ectopic expression of
ovarian cell markers in developing XY gonads.

Sim H(1), Argentaro A, Czech DP, Bagheri-Fam S, Sinclair AH, Koopman P,
Boizet-Bonhoure B, Poulat F, Harley VR.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics and Development Division, Prince Henry's Institute of
Medical Research, Level 4 Block E, Monash Medical Centre, 246 Clayton Road,
Clayton, Melbourne, Victoria 3168, Australia.

The transcription factor sex-determining region of the Y chromosome (SRY) plays a
key role in human sex determination, because mutations in SRY cause disorders of 
sex development in XY individuals. During gonadal development, Sry in pre-Sertoli
cells activates Sox9 gene transcription, committing the fate of the bipotential
gonad to become a testis rather than an ovary. The high-mobility group domain of 
human SRY contains two independent nuclear localization signals, one bound by
calmodulin (CaM) and the other by importin-ß. Although XY females carry SRY
mutations in these nuclear localization signals that affect SRY nuclear import in
transfected cells, it is not known whether these transport mechanisms are
essential for gonadal development and sex determination. Here, we show that mouse
Sry protein binds CaM and that a CaM antagonist reduces CaM binding, nuclear
accumulation, and transcriptional activity of Sry in transfected cells. CaM
antagonist treatment of cultured, sexually indifferent XY mouse fetal gonads led 
to reduced expression of the Sry target gene Sox9, defects in testicular cord
formation, and ectopic expression of the ovarian markers Rspondin1 and forkhead
box L2. These results indicate the importance of CaM for SRY nuclear import,
transcriptional activity, testis differentiation, and sex determination.

PMID: 21558314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. J Appl Toxicol. 2011 Jul;31(5):379-98. doi: 10.1002/jat.1682. Epub 2011 May 10.

A review of studies on androgen and estrogen exposure in fish early life stages: 
effects on gene and hormonal control of sexual differentiation.

Leet JK(1), Gall HE, Sepúlveda MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, Purdue University, West
Lafayette, IN 47907, USA.

Teleost fish are unique among vertebrates in that phenotypic sex or onset of sex 
inversion can be easily manipulated by hormonal treatments. In recent years,
researchers have begun reporting concentrations of synthetic and natural hormones
in the environment. Although concentrations are very low (in the parts per
trillion to low parts per billion), they are still of concern because of the high
potency of synthetic hormones and the enhanced susceptibility of teleost fishes, 
especially early life stages, to hormonal exposures. In this review, we will
focus on sex differentiation in teleost fishes and how these processes in fish
early life stages may be impacted by environmental hormones which are known to
contaminate aquatic environments. We will start by reviewing information on
sources and concentrations of hormones in the environment and continue by
summarizing the state of knowledge of sex differentiation in teleost
gonochoristic fishes, including information on genes involved (e.g. cyp19, dmrt1,
sox9 and foxl2). We will end our review with a summary of studies that have
examined the effects of androgens and estrogens on fish sex differentiation after
exposure of fish embryos and larvae and with ideas for future research.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 21557264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Ontogenez. 2011 Mar-Apr;42(2):159-60.

[The paper titled Somatic sex reprogramming of adult ovaries to testes by FOXL2
ablation by the research team headed by Mathias Treier was published in December 
in the Cell, vol. 139, issue 6, pp. 1130-1142].

[Article in Russian]

Aslanian MM, Soldatova OP.

PMID: 21542345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Sex Dev. 2011;5(3):147-54. doi: 10.1159/000327712. Epub 2011 May 3.

Methylation status of cMHM and expression of sex-specific genes in adult
sex-reversed female chickens.

Yang X(1), Zheng J, Qu L, Chen S, Li J, Xu G, Yang N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Genetics and Breeding, National Engineering Laboratory
for Animal Breeding, China Agricultural University, Beijing.

The objective of the current study was to analyze the methylation status of the
chicken male hypermethylation (cMHM) region and mRNA expression levels of
sex-dependent genes in adult female-to-male sex-reversed chickens. Sex reversal
from genetic females into phenotypic males was induced by injection of 1.0 mg
fadrozole, an aromatase inhibitor, into fertilized eggs at 3.0 days of
incubation. Birds aged 30 weeks were classified into 4 groups according to the
histological structure of their gonads and the natural logarithm of the ratio of 
testosterone to estradiol in serum, namely standard females, slightly
sex-reversed females with left ovotestes, highly sex-reversed females with left
testes, and standard males. The results showed that methylation of the cMHM
amplicon was lowest in the ovaries of standard females and highest in testes of
standard males. Methylation levels were significantly higher in the left testes
of highly sex-reversed females than in the left ovotestes of slightly
sex-reversed females (p < 0.05). Expression analysis of 9 sex-specific genes in
the gonad indicated that DMRT1 and HINTZ had a similar expression pattern, with
significantly higher levels in standard males as compared to standard females,
slightly and highly sex-reversed females (p < 0.05). Expression of FOXL2, AMH,
P450arom, SF1, and ERa was obviously higher in standard females than in standard 
males, slightly and highly sex-reversed females (p < 0.05). Expression of SOX9 in
standard females was similar to that in slightly sex-reversed females and lower
than in highly sex-reversed females and standard males (p < 0.05).

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21540574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Jul 1;20(13):2642-50. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr166. Epub 2011 Apr 
19.

Allelic reduction of Dlx5 and Dlx6 results in early follicular depletion: a new
mouse model of primary ovarian insufficiency.

Bouhali K(1), Dipietromaria A, Fontaine A, Caburet S, Barbieri O, Bellessort B,
Fellous M, Veitia RA, Levi G.

Author information: 
(1)Evolution des Régulations Endocriniennes, CNRS UMR 7221, Muséum National
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France.

Primary ovarian insufficiency (POI) is characterized by the loss of ovarian
function before the age of 40 in humans. Although most cases of POI are
idiopathic, many are familial, underlying a genetic origin of the disease.
Mutations in genes involved in the control of steroidogenesis, such as NR5A1
(SF-1, Steroidogenic Factor 1), CYP17, CYP19A1 (aromatase), StAR (Steroidogenic
Acute Regulatory), and the forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 have been
associated with different forms of POI. In males, the homeobox transcription
factors Dlx5 and Dlx6 are involved in the control of steroidogenesis through the 
activation of GATA4-induced-StAR transcription. Here, we analyze the potential
involvement of Dlx5 and Dlx6 in female reproduction. To this end, we make use of 
an existing mouse model in which Dlx5 and Dlx6 are simultaneously disrupted. We
show that: (i) allelic reduction of Dlx5 and Dlx6 in the mouse results in a
POI-like phenotype, characterized by reduced fertility and early follicular
exhaustion; (ii) in granulosa cell lines, a reciprocal regulation exists between 
Dlx5 and Foxl2; (iii) in the mouse ovary, allelic reduction of Dlx5/6 results in 
the upregulation of Foxl2. We propose that the mutual regulation between Dlx5/6
and Foxl2 and their opposite effects on StAR expression might contribute to
determine the homeostatic control of steroidogenesis within the ovary.
Dysregulation of this homeostatic control would result in abnormal follicular
maturation and reduced fertility. Our results bring new elements to our
conceptual model of follicle maturation and maintenance and provide new potential
genetic targets for cases of familial POI.

PMID: 21505076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Mod Pathol. 2011 Jun;24(6):765-73. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.169. Epub 2011 Apr
8.

Expression of FOXL2 in human normal pituitaries and pituitary adenomas.

Egashira N(1), Takekoshi S, Takei M, Teramoto A, Osamura RY.

Author information: 
(1)Parhology and Genetic Testing Section, Hamura Laboratory, SRL, Tokyo, Japan.

Many transcription factors have important roles in the function and
differentiation of the human pituitary adenomas. Forkhead box gene transcription 
factor L2, Foxl2, is expressed during mouse pituitary development and
co-localizes with the expression of a-glycoprotein hormone subunit (aGSU). In
addition, Foxl2 regulates expression of the aGSU gene (Cga) in cell culture. To
elucidate the functional role of FOXL2 in the human pituitary, we examined the
expression and localization of FOXL2 in normal human pituitaries and various
types of pituitary adenomas. Human pituitary adenomas were obtained by
trans-sphenoidal surgery from 67 patients. Three normal adult pituitaries were
obtained from autopsies of non-endocrine cases. The localization of FOXL2 and
pituitary hormones in these pituitary patients was examined by
immunohistochemical staining and RT-PCR. Quantitative analysis of FOXL2 protein
was performed by immunoblotting. FOXL2 was localized in the nuclei of ~20% of
normal pituitary cells that also co-expressed gonadotropins including
follicule-stimulating hormone ß (FSHß), luteinizing hormone ß (LHß), and aGSU,
whereas it was observed in minor proportion of thyroid-stimulating hormone
(TSH)-producing cells, prolactin (PRL)-producing cells, and precursor of
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH)-producing cells. FOXL2 immunoreactivity was
not detected in growth hormone (GH)-producing cells or S100-positive
folliculo-stellate cells. In human pituitary adenomas, FOXL2 was expressed in the
nuclei of the adenoma cells. FOXL2 was detected in 13 of 15
gonadotropin-subunit-producing adenoma (Gn-oma) cases and 8 of 11 null cell
adenoma cases, but its incidence was reduced or not detected in the other types
of adenomas. The results of this study suggest that FOXL2 contributes to the
human-specific functional expression and the differentiation of gonadotroph cells
and adenomas.

PMID: 21478824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Child Neurol. 2011 May;26(5):615-8. doi: 10.1177/0883073810384996. Epub 2011
Apr 6.

De novo interstitial deletion of 3q22.3-q25.2 encompassing FOXL2, ATR, ZIC1, and 
ZIC4 in a patient with blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome,
Dandy-Walker malformation, and global developmental delay.

Lim BC(1), Park WY, Seo EJ, Kim KJ, Hwang YS, Chae JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul
National University Children's Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

We report a case carrying a de novo interstitial deletion of chromosome 3q22-q25.
The clinical phenotype of this case included blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus
inversus syndrome, Dandy-Walker malformation, and global developmental delay.
Contiguous heterozygous deletion of FOXL2, ATR, ZIC1, and ZIC4 was postulated as 
the causative mechanism of the clinical phenotype. The association of
blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus syndrome with developmental
delay or mental retardation may be an indication for the use of brain imaging and
chromosomal analysis capable of detecting chromosomal rearrangements encompassing
several candidate genes.

PMID: 21471554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 25;6(3):e17924. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017924.

Lineage-specific restraint of pituitary gonadotroph cell adenoma growth.

Chesnokova V(1), Zonis S, Zhou C, Ben-Shlomo A, Wawrowsky K, Toledano Y, Tong Y, 
Kovacs K, Scheithauer B, Melmed S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Pituitary Center, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America.

Although pituitary adenomas are usually benign, unique trophic mechanisms
restraining cell proliferation are unclear. As GH-secreting adenomas are
associated with p53/p21-dependent senescence, we tested mechanisms constraining
non-functioning pituitary adenoma growth. Thirty six gonadotroph-derived
non-functioning pituitary adenomas all exhibited DNA damage, but undetectable p21
expression. However, these adenomas all expressed p16, and >90% abundantly
expressed cytoplasmic clusterin associated with induction of the Cdk inhibitor
p15 in 70% of gonadotroph and in 26% of somatotroph lineage adenomas (p <U+200A>=<U+200A>
0.006). Murine LßT2 and aT3 gonadotroph pituitary cells, and aGSU.PTTG transgenic
mice with targeted gonadotroph cell adenomas also abundantly expressed clusterin 
and exhibited features of oncogene-induced senescence as evidenced by C/EBPß and 
C/EBPd induction. In turn, C/EBPs activated the clusterin promoter ~5 fold, and
elevated clusterin subsequently elicited p15 and p16 expression, acting to arrest
murine gonadotroph cell proliferation. In contrast, specific clusterin
suppression by RNAis enhanced gonadotroph proliferation. FOXL2, a tissue-specific
gonadotroph lineage factor, also induced the clusterin promoter ~3 fold in aT3
pituitary cells. As nine of 12 pituitary carcinomas were devoid of clusterin
expression, this protein may limit proliferation of benign adenomatous pituitary 
cells. These results point to lineage-specific pathways restricting uncontrolled 
murine and human pituitary gonadotroph adenoma cell growth.

PMCID: PMC3064664
PMID: 21464964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Sex Dev. 2011;5(3):141-6. doi: 10.1159/000324689. Epub 2011 Mar 23.

Robertsonian translocation in a sex reversal dog (XX, SRY negative) may indicate 
that the causative mutation for this intersexuality syndrome resides on canine
chromosome 23 (CFA23).

Switonski M(1), Szczerbal I, Nizanski W, Kociucka B, Bartz M, Dzimira S,
Mikolajewska N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Poznan University of Life
Sciences, Poland. switonsk @ jay.au.poznan.pl

A Bernese mountain dog was subjected for clinical evaluation due to the presence 
of ambiguous external genitalia (enlarged clitoris). Anatomical and histological 
studies revealed the presence of one testicle, one ovotestis and a uterus. This
dog was classified as a female-to-male sex reversal, with 2 normal X chromosomes 
and a lack of the Y chromosome-linked genes SRY and ZFY. It is the first case of 
this syndrome in this breed. Apparently a Robertsonian translocation, rob(5;23), 
was also identified in this dog and it is again the first case of this type of
chromosome abnormality in this breed, as well as the first case of co-occurrence 
of the sex reversal syndrome along with a centric fusion in the dog. Since on the
canine chromosome 23 (CFA23) 3 genes (FOXL2,PISRT1 and CTNNB1) involved in the
sex determination process are present, further cytogenetic FISH studies were
carried out with the use of BAC probes specific for this chromosome. It was found
that a pericentromeric fragment of CFA23 was deleted as a result of the centric
fusion. We hypothesize that a cis regulatory sequence for the sex determination
genes on CFA23 (e.g. proximally located CTNNB1) is present in the deleted
fragment. Thus, a causative mutation responsible for this sex reversal syndrome
may reside on CFA23.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21430365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Biol Reprod. 2011 Jul;85(1):22-30. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.088476. Epub 2011 
Mar 9.

Manipulation of estrogen synthesis alters MIR202* expression in embryonic chicken
gonads.

Bannister SC(1), Smith CA, Roeszler KN, Doran TJ, Sinclair AH, Tizard ML.

Author information: 
(1)CSIRO Livestock Industries, Australian Animal Health Laboratory, Geelong,
Victoria, Australia. stephanie.bannister@univie.ac.at

Tissue-specific patterns of microRNA (miRNA) expression contribute to
organogenesis during embryonic development. Using the embryonic chicken gonads as
a model for vertebrate gonadogenesis, we previously reported that miRNAs are
expressed in a sexually dimorphic manner during gonadal sex differentiation.
Being male biased, we hypothesised that up-regulation of microRNA 202* (MIR202*) 
is characteristic of testicular differentiation. To address this hypothesis, we
used estrogen modulation to induce gonadal sex reversal in embryonic chicken
gonads and analyzed changes in MIR202* expression. In ovo injection of
estradiol-17beta at Embryonic Day 4.5 (E4.5) caused feminization of male gonads
at E9.5 and reduced MIR202* expression to female levels. Female gonads treated at
E3.5 with an aromatase inhibitor, which blocks estrogen synthesis, were
masculinized by E9.5, and MIR202* expression was increased. Reduced MIR202*
expression correlated with reduced expression of the testis-associated genes
DMRT1 and SOX9, and up-regulation of ovary-associated genes FOXL2 and CYP19A1
(aromatase). Increased MIR202* expression correlated with down-regulation of
FOXL2 and aromatase and up-regulation of DMRT1 and SOX9. These results confirm
that up-regulation of MIR202* coincides with testicular differentiation in
embryonic chicken gonads.

PMID: 21389341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Apr;35(4):484-94. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31820a406c.

FOXL2 is a sensitive and specific marker for sex cord-stromal tumors of the
ovary.

Al-Agha OM(1), Huwait HF, Chow C, Yang W, Senz J, Kalloger SE, Huntsman DG, Young
RH, Gilks CB.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Pathology Evaluation Center, Vancouver General Hospital, Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada.

Sex cord-stromal tumors (SCSTs) of the ovary are relatively uncommon tumors.
Diagnosis of SCST rests primarily on the histomorphology of these tumors, and
tumors with an atypical or unconventional appearance can pose diagnostic
challenges. Previously, we had identified FOXL2 (402C<U+2192>G) mutation as being
characteristic of adult granulosa cell tumors (aGCTs). However, molecular
screening for this mutation is not always possible and adds time and cost to the 
diagnostic process. In this study, we investigated the potential diagnostic use
of immunostaining for FOXL2 on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue sections. 
Using a commercially available polyclonal antiserum against FOXL2 protein,
immunoexpression of FOXL2 was tested in 501 ovarian tumor samples, including 119 
SCSTs, using whole tissue sections and tissue microarrays. Staining was
correlated with FOXL2 mutation status. In addition, we compared FOXL2
immunoexpression with that of a-inhibin and calretinin, the 2 traditional
immunomarkers of SCST, in a subset of 89 SCSTs. FOXL2 immunostaining was present 
in 95 of 119 (80%) SCSTs, including >95% of aGCTs, juvenile granulosa cell
tumors, fibromas, and sclerosing stromal tumors. Only 50% of Sertoli-Leydig cell 
tumors (N=40) expressed FOXL2. One of 11 steroid cell tumors and 3 of 3 female
adnexal tumors of probable Wolffian origin showed FOXL2 immunoreactivity, whereas
all other non-SCSTs tested (N=368) were negative for FOXL2 expression. Thus, the 
sensitivity and specificity of FOXL2 immunoreactivity for SCST are 80% and 99%,
respectively. The FOXL2 (402C<U+2192>G) mutation was confirmed to be both a sensitive
and relatively specific indicator of aGCT. Forty-five of 119 SCSTs were mutation 
positive. These cases were 39 of 42 (93%) aGCTs, 3 of 40 Sertoli-Leydig cell
tumors, 2 of 5 thecomas, and 1 of 4 (25%) SCSTs of unclassified type. SCSTs
harboring a FOXL2 mutation consistently immunoexpressed FOXL2 (44 of 45, 98%),
but FOXL2 immunostaining was also seen in many SCSTs that lacked a mutation (49
of 73, 67%). FOXL2 immunostaining showed higher sensitivity for the diagnosis of 
SCST, compared with a-inhibin and calretinin, and FOXL2 staining was typically
more intense in positive cases compared with either a-inhibin or calretinin. In
the SCSTs that were negative for FOXL2 expression, a-inhibin and/or calretinin
immunostaining yielded positive results. In conclusion, FOXL2 is a relatively
sensitive and highly specific marker for SCST. FOXL2 staining is present in
almost all SCSTs with a FOXL2 mutation, and also in a majority of SCSTs without a
mutation. FOXL2, together with a-inhibin and calretinin, forms an immunomarker
panel that will result in positive staining with 1 or more markers in essentially
all cases of SCST.

PMID: 21378549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Br J Ophthalmol. 2011 Jun;95(6):881-6. doi: 10.1136/bjo.2009.177972. Epub 2011
Feb 16.

Mutation spectrum of fork-head transcriptional factor gene (FOXL2) in Indian
Blepharophimosis Ptosis Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome (BPES) patients.

Kaur I(1), Hussain A, Naik MN, Murthy R, Honavar SG.

Author information: 
(1)Hyderabad Eye Research Foundation, Hyderabad, India. inderjeet@lvpei.org

AIM: The fork-head transcription factor gene (FOXL2) gene has been implicated in 
Blepharophimosis Ptosis Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome (BPES) type I and type II.
The authors aimed to evaluate the involvement of FOXL2 in familial and sporadic
cases of BPES in an Indian cohort.
METHODS: The present cohort comprised clinically well-characterised BPES cases
that included six affected families, two sporadic cases and 60 unaffected normal 
controls. The 5' untranslated and coding region of FOXL2 was screened by
resequencing and confirmed by restriction digestion. Further, genotype-phenotype 
correlations were done to understand the implications of the observed mutation.
RESULTS: Six mutations were observed in eight cases (87.5%). These included a
novel deletion (c.860delC), three previously reported duplications (c.663-692dup 
30, c.672-701dup30 and c.843-859dup17), a frame shift (c.804dupC) and a
homozygous missense mutation (p.E69K). The p.E69k mutation was seen in both
heterozygous and homozygous form in a large four-generational family, and disease
severity was found to be directly linked to the allelic dosage. Two SNPs
(c.501C<U+2192>T, c.536C<U+2192>G) were also noted. An unusual coexistence of polycystic
ovarian disease (PCOD) with BPES was also seen in one of the families.
DISCUSSION: Mutations in the region downstream of the fork-head domain were
predominantly responsible for BPES among Indian patients.

PMID: 21325395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Mol Vis. 2011 Feb 9;17:436-42.

Genetic analysis of the FOXL2 gene using quantitative real-time PCR in Chinese
patients with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Hu S(1), Guo J, Wang B, Wang J, Zhou Z, Zhou G, Ding X, Ma X, Qi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, the 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to identify the mutation(s) or deletion(s)
of the forkhead box protein L2 (FOXL2) gene in Chinese patients with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES).
METHODS: Genomic DNA extracted from peripheral blood was collected from two
Chinese families and from one sporadic case. PCR direct sequencing and
quantitative real-time PCR-based copy number screening for the whole exon of
FOXL2 were performed.
RESULTS: Direct sequencing revealed an indel mutation c.50C<U+2192>TA in the sporadic
case which resulted in a frameshift generating 78 novel amino acids and
terminating prematurely at codon 95. Deletions in the FOXL2 gene were confirmed
by quantitative real-time PCR (q-real-time PCR) in two families in which
intragenic mutations were excluded by direct sequencing. These changes containing
deletions and a de novo mutation were not detected either in the non-carrier
relatives or in 100 normal controls.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified two deletions and a de novo mutation in the
FOXL2 gene in Chinese BPES patients. This is the first study to report FOXL2 gene
deletions detected by q-real-time PCR in this ethnic group. This technique
enriches the diagnostic methods of molecular genetics in BPES patients. The de
novo mutation expands the mutation spectrum of FOXL2.

PMCID: PMC3038209
PMID: 21321671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Reprod Dev. 2011 Mar;78(3):212-23. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21288. Epub 2011 Feb 9.

Early avian follicular development is characterized by changes in transcripts
involved in steroidogenesis, paracrine signaling and transcription.

Diaz FJ(1), Anthony K, Halfhill AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Poultry Science, Center for Reproductive Biology and Health, The
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA. fjd10@psu.edu

The mechanisms associated with follicular activation and early growth are not
well understood in avian species. Level of mRNA transcripts involved in
steroidogenesis (STAR, HSD3B, CYP11A1, CYP19), paracrine signaling (AMH, BMP2,
BMP4, BMP6, KITL, WNT4, and PCSK6) and transcription (SMAD1, SMAD2, SMAD3, SMAD5,
SMAD9, FOXL3, FOXL2, NR5A1 (SF1), and WT1) were determined in small avian
follicles 0.5, 1, and 2<U+2009>mm in diameter after oocyte removal. STAR, HSD3B,
CYP11A1, CYP19, PCSK6, FOXO3, and KITL mRNA increased 2- to 45-fold, while FOXL2,
WT1, and WNT4 decreased 30-90% and NR5A1 did not change as follicles developed
from 0.5 to 2<U+2009>mm. Phosphorylated SMAD2, SMAD3, SMAD1/5/9 and FOXO3 proteins were 
found in both granulosa cells and oocytes of small (<0.5<U+2009>mm) and larger (>1<U+2009>mm)
follicles. In contrast, non-phosphorylated FOXO3 protein was found in oocyte and 
granulosa cells of small follicles, but only in the oocyte of larger follicles.
Culture of small avian follicles on the chorioallantoic membrane of chick embryos
(in ovo) for 7 days caused changes in transcript levels that were similar to
changes observed in vivo. The collective findings suggest that the growth of
avian follicles from 0.5 to 2<U+2009>mm is marked by an increase in steroidogenic
capacity, and changes in paracrine signaling that may be important during early
avian follicular development. Thus, a number of candidate marker genes were
identified, and a method of follicle culture was developed to study early
follicular development in a model avian species.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21308853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2011 Jul;19(4):347-51. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3182039ef2.

Mutational analysis (c.402C>G) of the FOXL2 gene and immunohistochemical
expression of the FOXL2 protein in testicular adult type granulosa cell tumors
and incompletely differentiated sex cord stromal tumors.

Hes O(1), Vanecek T, Petersson F, Grossmann P, Hora M, Perez Montiel DM, Steiner 
P, Dvorák M, Michal M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Special Diagnostics, Charles University and University Hospital 
Plzen, Plzen, Czech Republic. hes@medima.cz

BACKGROUND: Recently a somatic point mutation in the FOXL2 gene has been
characterized in ovarian adult type of granulosa cell tumor (ATGCT) (94.6%),
thecomas (12.5%), but not in juvenile type of ovarian granulosa cell tumor, other
ovarian sex cord tumors and ovarian surface epithelial neoplasms. Whether this
mutation is present in testicular ATGCT or incompletely differentiated sex cord
stromal tumor (ISCST) is not known.
DESIGN: Four ATGCTs, 4 ISCST were immunohistochemically investigated with
anti-FOXL2 and 3 ovarian ATGCTs were used as positive control.
RESULTS: Weak-to-moderate immunoreactivity was found in all tested testicular and
ovarian tumors. PCR and direct sequencing were used for detection of c.402C>G of 
the FOXL2 gene. No mutation was found in any of the testicular ATGCTs or ISCSTs
whereas all ovarian tumors showed the c.402C>G point mutation of the FOXL2 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: On the basis of this small series of these rare testicular
neoplasms, it seems that the c.402C>G mutation of the FOXL2 gene frequently found
in adult type of ovarian GCT does not play any significant role in the
development of ATGCT and ISCST.

PMID: 21293260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Biol Reprod. 2011 May;84(5):1024-32. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.088559. Epub
2011 Feb 3.

The fused toes locus is essential for somatic-germ cell interactions that foster 
germ cell maturation in developing gonads in mice.

Kim B(1), Kim Y, Cooke PS, Rüther U, Jorgensen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL, USA.

Ovarian development absolutely depends on communication between somatic and germ 
cell components. In contrast, it is not until after birth that interactions
between somatic and germ cells play an important role in testicular maturation
and spermatogenesis. Previously, we discovered that Irx3 expression was localized
specifically to female gonads during embryonic development; therefore, we sought 
to determine the function of this genetic locus in developing gonads of both
sexes. The fused toes (Ft) mutant mouse is missing 1.6 Mb of chromosome 8, which 
includes the entire IrxB cluster (Irx3, Irx5, Irx6), Ftm, Fts, and Fto genes.
Homozygote Ft mutant embryos die around embryonic day 13.5 (E13.5); therefore, to
assess later development, we harvested gonads at E11.5 and transplanted them into
nude mouse hosts. Our results show defects in somatic and germ cell maturation in
developing gonads of both sexes. Testis development was normal initially;
however, by 3-wk posttransplantation, expression of Sertoli and peritubular myoid
cell markers were decreased. In many cases, gonocytes failed to migrate to
structurally impaired basement membranes of seminiferous cords. Developmental
abnormalities of the ovary appeared earlier and were more severe. Over time, the 
Ft mutant ovary formed very few primordial or primary follicles, which contained 
oocytes that failed to grow and were surrounded by scarce granulosa cells that
expressed low levels of FOXL2. By 3 wk after transplantation, it was difficult to
identify ovarian tissue in Ft mutant ovary transplants. In summary, we conclude
that the Ft locus contains genes essential for somatic-germ cell interactions,
without which the germ cell niche fails to mature in both sexes.

PMID: 21293032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 May 1;20(9):1673-86. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr042. Epub 2011 Feb
2.

Transcription factor FOXL2 protects granulosa cells from stress and delays cell
cycle: role of its regulation by the SIRT1 deacetylase.

Benayoun BA(1), Georges AB, L'Hôte D, Andersson N, Dipietromaria A, Todeschini
AL, Caburet S, Bazin C, Anttonen M, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 7592, Institut Jacques Monod, Equipe Génétique et Génomique du
Développement Gonadique 75205 Paris Cedex 13, France.

FOXL2 is a transcription factor that is essential for ovarian function and
maintenance, the germline mutations of which are responsible for the
Blepharophimosis Ptosis Epicanthus-inversus Syndrome (BPES), often associated
with premature ovarian failure. Recent evidence has linked FOXL2 downregulation
or somatic mutation (p.Cys134Trp) to cancer, although underlying molecular
mechanisms remain unclear. Using a functional genomic approach, we find that
FOXL2 modulates cell-cycle regulators in a way which tends to induce G1 arrest.
Indeed, FOXL2 upregulation promotes cell accumulation in G1 phase and protects
cells from oxidative damage, notably by promoting oxidized DNA repair and by
increasing the amounts of anti-oxidant agent glutathione. In agreement with
clinical observations, we find that FOXL2-mutated versions leading to BPES along 
with ovarian dysfunction mostly fail to transactivate cell-cycle and DNA repair
targets, whereas mutations leading to isolated craniofacial defects (and normal
ovarian function) activate them correctly. Interestingly, these assays revealed a
mild promoter-specific hypomorphy of the tumor-associated mutation (p.Cys134Trp).
Finally, the SIRT1 deacetylase suppresses FOXL2 activity on targets linked to
cell-cycle and DNA repair in a dose-dependent manner. Accordingly, we find that
SIRT1 inhibition by nicotinamide limits proliferation, notably by increasing
endogenous FOXL2 amount/activity. The body of evidence presented here supports
the idea that FOXL2 plays a key role in granulosa cell homeostasis, the failure
of which is central to ovarian ageing and tumorigenesis. As granulosa cell tumors
respond poorly to conventional chemotherapy, our findings on the deacetylase
inhibitor nicotinamide provide an interesting option for targeted therapy.

PMID: 21289058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. FEBS J. 2011 Apr;278(7):1027-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2011.08032.x. Epub 2011
Feb 25.

Sex determination and sexual differentiation in the avian model.

Chue J(1), Smith CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Murdoch Children's Research Institute and
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

The sex of birds is determined by the inheritance of sex chromosomes (ZZ male and
ZW female). Genes carried on one or both of these sex chromosomes control sexual 
differentiation during embryonic life, producing testes in males (ZZ) and ovaries
in females (ZW). This minireview summarizes our current understanding of avian
sex determination and gonadal development. Most recently, it has been shown that 
sex is cell autonomous in birds. Evidence from gynandromorphic chickens (male on 
one side, female on the other) points to the likelihood that sex is determined
directly in each cell of the body, independently of, or in addition to, hormonal 
signalling. Hence, sex-determining genes may operate not only in the gonads, to
produce testes or ovaries, but also throughout cells of the body. In the chicken,
as in other birds, the gonads develop into ovaries or testes during embryonic
life, a process that must be triggered by sex-determining genes. This process
involves the Z-linked DMRT1 gene. If DMRT1 gene activity is experimentally
reduced, the gonads of male embryos (ZZ) are feminized, with ovarian-type
structure, downregulation of male markers and activation of female markers. DMRT1
is currently the best candidate gene thought to regulate gonadal sex
differentiation. However, if sex is cell autonomous, DMRT1 cannot be the master
regulator, as its expression is confined to the urogenital system. Female
development in the avian model appears to be shared with mammals; both the FOXL2 
and RSPO1/WNT4 pathways are implicated in ovarian differentiation.

© 2011 The Authors Journal compilation © 2011 FEBS.

PMID: 21281451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Int J Oncol. 2011 Apr;38(4):1145-51. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.923. Epub 2011 Jan 24.

Expression of the forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 correlates with good
prognosis in breast cancer patients treated with tamoxifen.

Wegman P(1), Göthlin Eremo A, Lindlöf A, Karlsson M, Stål O, Wingren S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, School of Health and Medical Sciences, Örebro
University, 701 85 Örebro, Sweden. pia.wegman@oru.se

Aromatase is an important enzyme in the local synthesis of oestrogens and its
expression has been shown to be increased in breast cancer through the activation
of multiple promoters. However, the mechanisms behind this are not yet fully
understood. A novel candidate in this context is the transcription factor
forkhead box L2 (FOXL2), which has been recognised to be co-expressed with
aromatase and transcriptionally active promoter II in developing goat and chicken
ovaries. We propose that FOXL2 could be involved in the increased expression of
aromatase in breast cancer. We examined FOXL2 and its relation to aromatase in
132 post-menopausal breast cancer patients by immunohistochemistry. Using in
silico analysis, we further searched for FOXL2 binding-elements in the aromatase 
gene promoters. The results demonstrate that FOXL2 is expressed in breast cancer 
and influences clinical outcome with improved recurrence-free survival in cases
with nuclear expression. In a multivariate Cox model, nuclear FOXL2 was a
significant prognostic factor in ER-positive patients treated with tamoxifen
(HR=0.18, 95% confidence interval (CI)=0.04-0.81, P=0.03). Tumours expressing
nuclear FOXL2 were also more likely positive for stromal and/or cytoplasmic
aromatase (P=0.03 and P=0.008, respectively). In silico analyses revealed binding
elements of FOXL2 in promoters I.3, II and I.7 of the aromatase gene of which
promoter I.7 was most significant. In conclusion, this is the first study to
report that FOXL2 is expressed in breast cancer and correlates with aromatase as 
well as with clinical outcome. The results further strengthen a possible binding 
of FOXL2 to aromatase promoter I.7. Nevertheless, whether FOXL2 is a direct
activator of aromatase requires further investigation.

PMID: 21271216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Endocrinology. 2011 Apr;152(4):1199-208. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1041. Epub 2011 Jan
19.

Minireview: roles of the forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 in granulosa cell
biology and pathology.

Pisarska MD(1), Barlow G, Kuo FT.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Fertility and Reproductive Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8635 West Third Street, Suite 160W, Los 
Angeles, California 90048, USA. pisarskam@cshs.org

The forkhead transcription factor (FOXL2) is an essential transcription factor in
the ovary. It is important in ovarian development and a key factor in female sex 
determination. In addition, FOXL2 plays a significant role in the postnatal ovary
and follicle maintenance. The diverse transcriptional activities of FOXL2 are
likely attributable to posttranslational modifications and binding to other key
proteins involved in granulosa cell function. Mutations of FOXL2 lead to
disorders of ovarian function ranging from premature follicle depletion and
ovarian failure to unregulated granulosa cell proliferation leading to tumor
formation. Thus, FOXL2 is a key regulator of granulosa cell function and a master
transcription factor in these cells.

PMCID: PMC3206711
PMID: 21248146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2010 Sep;71 Suppl 1:S42-8. doi:
10.1016/S0003-4266(10)70006-8.

[The adult ovary is not in sleepiness: major role of forkhead proteins].

[Article in French]

Sarfati J(1), Young J, Christin-Maitre S.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Endocrinologie et des Maladies de la Reproduction, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire de Bicêtre - APHP, 78 rue du Général-Leclerc 94275 Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France. sarfati_julie@yahoo.fr

The aim of this review is to underscore the major role of forkhead proteins in
the adult ovary. Indeed, they revolutionize the idea of terminal differentiation 
of adult tissues with for example the in vivo reprogrammation of an adult
organism on the one hand, and, on the other hand, the therapeutic possibilities
of fertility preservation in women. In mammals, SRY, a transcription factor
encoded by the Y chromosome, is responsible for the development of the
undifferentiated gonads into testes. However, testis differentiation can occur in
its absence. The studies of M. Treier demonstrate that FOXL2 is required to
maintain the ovarian phenotype. Indeed, the absence of Foxl2 in an adult mouse
ovary leads to an up regulation of testis-specific genes and a transformation of 
granulosa and theca cells into Sertoli-like and Leydig-like cells. The
maintenance of the ovarian phenotype is an active process throughout life.
Although multiple follicles are present in mammalian ovaries, most of them remain
dormant. During reproductive life, some follicles are activated for development. 
There is an inefficient activation of dormant follicles within cryopreserved
ovaries. An inhibition of the FOXO3a pathway in the mouse ovary leads to an
enhancement of the activation of the dormant follicles. After transplantation,
there are more preovulatory stage follicles and, after fertilization and embryo
transfer, they lead to a healthy progeny. In human ovarian cortical fragments,
the same inhibition and a xenotransplantation permit a development of more
primordial follicles to the preovulatory stage. Thus, this treatment may be a
hope to treat infertile women with cryopreserved ovaries or with a diminishing
ovarian reserve.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21237330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. BMC Genomics. 2011 Jan 13;12:31. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-31.

Regulation and expression of sexual differentiation factors in embryonic and
extragonadal tissues of Atlantic salmon.

von Schalburg KR(1), Yasuike M, Yazawa R, de Boer JG, Reid L, So S, Robb A,
Rondeau EB, Phillips RB, Davidson WS, Koop BF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Victoria,
Victoria, British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The products of cyp19, dax, foxl2, mis, sf1 and sox9 have each been
associated with sex-determining processes among vertebrates. We provide evidence 
for expression of these regulators very early in salmonid development and in
tissues outside of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal/gonadal (HPAG) axis.
Although the function of these factors in sexual differentiation have been
defined, their roles in early development before sexual fate decisions and in
tissues beyond the brain or gonad are essentially unknown.
RESULTS: Bacterial artificial chromosomes containing salmon dax1 and dax2, foxl2b
and mis were isolated and the regulatory regions that control their expression
were characterized. Transposon integrations are implicated in the shaping of the 
dax and foxl2 loci. Splice variants for cyp19b1 and mis in both embryonic and
adult tissues were detected and characterized. We found that cyp19b1 transcripts 
are generated that contain 5'-untranslated regions of different lengths due to
cryptic splicing of the 3'-end of intron 1. We also demonstrate that salmon mis
transcripts can encode prodomain products that present different C-termini and
terminate before translation of the MIS hormone. Regulatory differences in the
expression of two distinct aromatases cyp19a and cyp19b1 are exerted, despite
transcription of their transactivators (ie; dax1, foxl2, sf1) occurring much
earlier during embryonic development.
CONCLUSIONS: We report the embryonic and extragonadal expression of dax, foxl2,
mis and other differentiation factors that indicate that they have functions that
are more general and not restricted to steroidogenesis and gonadogenesis. Spliced
cyp19b1 and mis transcripts are generated that may provide regulatory controls
for tissue- or development-specific activities. Selection of cyp19b1 transcripts 
may be regulated by DAX-1, FOXL2 and SF-1 complexes that bind motifs in intron 1,
or by signals within exon 2 that recruit splicing factors, or both. The potential
translation of proteins bearing only the N-terminal MIS prodomain may modulate
the functions of other TGF ß family members in different tissues. The expression 
patterns of dax1 early in salmon embryogenesis implicate its role as a lineage
determination factor. Other roles for these factors during embryogenesis and
outside the HPAG axis are discussed.

PMCID: PMC3034696
PMID: 21232142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Biol Sex Differ. 2010 Nov 4;1(1):3. doi: 10.1186/2042-6410-1-3.

Expression and localization of forkhead transcriptional factor 2 (Foxl2) in the
gonads of protogynous wrasse, Halichoeres trimaculatus.

Kobayashi Y(1), Horiguchi R, Nozu R, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Sesoko Station, Tropical Biosphere Research Center, University of the Ryukyus,
3422 Sesoko, Motobu 905-0227, Okinawa, Japan. yasu_cob@amber.plala.or.jp.

BACKGROUND: Three-spot wrasse, Halichoeres trimaculatus, is a marine protogynous 
hermaphrodite fish. Individuals mature either as initial phase (IP) males or
females. Appropriate social cues induce the sex change from IP female to terminal
phase (TP) male. However, the molecular mechanisms behind such a sex change
remain largely unknown. Recently, the forkhead transcription factor 2 (Foxl2) was
identified as an essential regulator of vertebrate ovarian
development/function/phenotype. Inspired by this information, we characterized
the expression patterns of Foxl2 in the protogynous wrasse assuming Foxl2 as the 
female-specific marker in this species.
METHODS: First, we clonedFoxl2 cDNA from ovary by reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) followed by rapid amplification of cDNA ends
(RACE). Next, we analysed expression pattern of Foxl2 messenger RNA (mRNA) and
protein in gonads of different sexual phases by real time quantitative PCR assay 
and flour fluorescence immunohistochemical method, respectively. Additionally, we
studied the changes in Foxl2 expression pattern during aromatase inhibitor
(AI)-induced sex change.
RESULTS: The amino acid sequence (306 AA) of wrasse Foxl2, especially the
forkhead domain, shows high identity with that of other reported teleost Foxl2s. 
Quite unexpectedly, no sexual dimorphism was observable between the testes and
ovary in the expression pattern of Foxl2. In female phase fish, signals for Foxl2
protein were detectable in the granulosa cells, but not the theca cells.
Transcript levels of Foxl2 in the testes of IP and TP males were identical to
that in the ovaries of females and, further, Foxl2 protein was found to be
localized in the interstitial cells including tubules and Leydig cells. Treatment
with AI induced sex change in male gonads and an up-regulation was seen in the
expression of Foxl2 in these gonads.
CONCLUSIONS: Unlike in other vertebrates, including teleosts, Foxl2 may have a
different role in the naturally sex changing fishes.

PMCID: PMC3010103
PMID: 21208465  [PubMed]


304. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jan;155A(1):130-3. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33652. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

Dandy-Walker malformation associated with heterozygous ZIC1 and ZIC4 deletion:
Report of a new patient.

Tohyama J(1), Kato M, Kawasaki S, Harada N, Kawara H, Matsui T, Akasaka N, Ohashi
T, Kobayashi Y, Matsumoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Nishi-Niigata Chuo National Hospital, Japan.
jtohyama@masa.go.jp

We report on a female patient with Dandy-Walker malformation possibly caused by
heterozygous loss of ZIC1 and ZIC4. The patient presented with mental
retardation, epilepsy, and multiple congenital malformations including spina
bifida, mild dysmorphic facial features including, thick eyebrows, broad nose,
full lips, macroglossia, and hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis with enlargement
of the fourth ventricle on brain magnetic resonance imaging, which is consistent 
with Dandy-Walker malformation. A chromosome analysis showed interstitial
deletion of chromosome 3q23-q25.1. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) and 
microarray-based genomic analysis revealed the heterozygous deletion of ZIC1 and 
ZIC4 loci on 3q24. Her facial features were not consistent with those observed in
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) involving FOXL2
abnormality. Other deleted genes at 3q23-25.1 might contribute to the dysmorphic 
facial appearance. A milder phenotype as the Dandy-Walker malformation in our
patient supports the idea that modifying loci/genes can influence the development
of cerebellar malformation.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21204220  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Jan;155A(1):106-12. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33715. Epub 2010
Dec 15.

Further molecular and clinical delineation of the Wisconsin syndrome phenotype
associated with interstitial 3q24q25 deletions.

Willemsen MH(1), de Leeuw N, Mercer C, Eisenhauer H, Morris J, Collinson MN,
Barber JC, Lam ST, Lo IF, Rensen H, Ferwerda A, Hamel BC, Kleefstra T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. m.willemsen@antrg.umcn.nl

Deletions of the distal 3q22.3 region encompassing the gene forkhead
transcription factor FOXL2 (FOXL2) usually result in intellectual disability (ID)
and the highly recognizable blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome 
(BPES). We encountered three patients with molecularly defined interstitial
deletions distal to the FOXL2 gene. They present with remarkably similar
manifestations comprising variable ID, a coarse facial appearance, including
prominent nose and eyebrows, hypogonadism and skin pigmentation abnormalities,
and they share an approximately 8.8<U+2009>Mb overlapping 3q24q25 deletion.
Interestingly, one of the present patients was described previously in a clinical
report with emphasis on her clinical similarity to the Wisconsin syndrome,
suggesting that Wisconsin syndrome might be caused by a (micro) deletion within
the 3q24q25 region.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21204216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Mar;96(3):E473-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1799. Epub
2010 Dec 30.

Genes involved in initial follicle recruitment may be associated with age at
menopause.

Voorhuis M(1), Broekmans FJ, Fauser BC, Onland-Moret NC, van der Schouw YT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine and Gynecology, University Medical Center,
P.O. Box 85500, 3508 GA Utrecht, The Netherlands. M.Voorhuis@umcutrecht.nl

CONTEXT: Timing of menopause is largely influenced by genetic factors. Because
menopause occurs when the follicle pool in the ovaries has become exhausted,
genes involved in primordial follicle recruitment can be considered as candidate 
genes for timing of menopause.
OBJECTIVE: The aim was to study the association of 23 tagging single nucleotide
polymorphisms in five genes [Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), AMH type II receptor
(AMHR2), bone morphogenetic protein 15 (BMP15), forkhead transcription factor L2 
(FOXL2), and growth differentiation factor-9 (GDF9)] involved in recruitment of
the primary follicle pool, including the AMHR2 gene, which has recently been
associated with age at menopause.
DESIGN: We conducted a cross-sectional association study.
SETTING AND PARTICIPANTS: We studied a population-based sample of 3616 Dutch
women with natural menopause.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: We measured age at natural menopause.
RESULTS: Both studied AMHR2 tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs2002555
and rs11170547) in the AMHR2 gene were associated with age at natural menopause
in interaction with parity. Parous rs2002555 G/G carriers had menopause 1 yr
later compared with A/A carriers (P = 0.01). For rs11170547, each minor allele
(T) was associated with a 0.41-yr later onset of menopause in parous women (P =
0.01). Additionally, rs6521896 in BMP15 was associated with later menopause (ß = 
0.41; P = 0.007). Variants in the AMH, FOXL2, and GDF9 genes were not associated 
with timing of menopause.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study confirms an earlier finding that variation in the 
AMHR2 gene modifies the relation between parity and age at natural menopause. In 
combination with the association of BMP15 with menopausal age, we find that there
is evidence that genes involved in primary follicle recruitment influence timing 
of menopause.

PMID: 21193543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Arch Gynecol Obstet. 2011 Mar;283(3):635-43. doi: 10.1007/s00404-010-1815-4. Epub
2010 Dec 29.

Genetic aspects of premature ovarian failure: a literature review.

Cordts EB(1), Christofolini DM, Dos Santos AA, Bianco B, Barbosa CP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Reproduction, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics,
Faculdade de Medicina do ABC, Avenida Príncipe de Gales, 821, Santo André, SP,
CEP 09060-650, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of premature ovarian failure (POF) is based on the
finding of amenorrhea before the age of 40 years associated with
follicle-stimulating hormone levels in the menopausal range. It is a
heterogeneous disorder affecting approximately 1% of women <40 years, 1:10,000
women by age 20 years and 1:1,000 women by age 30 years. POF is generally
characterized by low levels of gonadal hormones (estrogens and inhibins) and high
levels of gonadotropins (LH and FSH) (hypergonadotropic amenorrhea).
METHODS: Review of significant articles regarding genetic causes that are
associated with POF.
RESULTS: Heterogeneity of POF is reflected by a variety of possible causes,
including autoimmunity, toxics, drugs, as well as genetic defects. Changes at a
single autosomal locus and many X-linked loci have been implicated in women with 
POF. X chromosome abnormalities (e.g., Turner syndrome) represent the major cause
of primary amenorrhea associated with ovarian dysgenesis. Many genes have been
involved in POF development, among them BMP15, FMR1, FMR2, LHR, FSHR, INHA,
FOXL2, FOXO3, ERa, SF1, ERß and CYP19A1 genes.
CONCLUSION: Despite the description of several candidate genes, the cause of POF 
remains undetermined in the vast majority of cases.

PMID: 21188402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. PLoS One. 2010 Dec 20;5(12):e14389. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014389.

Aromatase is a direct target of FOXL2: C134W in granulosa cell tumors via a
single highly conserved binding site in the ovarian specific promoter.

Fleming NI(1), Knower KC, Lazarus KA, Fuller PJ, Simpson ER, Clyne CD.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Granulosa cell tumors (GCT) of the ovary often express aromatase and 
synthesize estrogen, which in turn may influence their progression. Recently a
specific point mutation (C134W) in the FOXL2 protein was identified in >94% of
adult-type GCT and it is likely to contribute to their development. A number of
genes are known to be regulated by FOXL2, including aromatase/CYP19A1, but it is 
unclear which are direct targets and whether the C134W mutation alters their
regulation. Recently, it has been reported that FOXL2 forms a complex with
steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) which is a known regulator of aromatase in
granulosa cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this work, the human GCT-derived cell lines
KGN and COV434 were heterozygous and wildtype for the FOXL2:C134W mutation,
respectively. KGN had abundant FOXL2 mRNA expression but it was not expressed in 
COV434. Expression of exogenous FOXL2:C134W in COV434 cells induced higher
expression of a luciferase reporter for the ovarian specific aromatase promoter, 
promoter II (PII) (-516bp) than expression of wildtype FOXL2, but did not alter
induction of a similar reporter for the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(StAR) promoter (-1300bp). Co-immunoprecipitation confirmed that FOXL2 bound SF-1
and that it also bound its homologue, liver receptor homologue 1 (LRH-1),
however, the C134W mutation did not alter these interactions or induce a
selective binding of the proteins. A highly conserved putative binding site for
FOXL2 was identified in PII. FOXL2 was demonstrated to bind the site by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and site-directed mutagenesis of
this element blocked its differential induction by wildtype FOXL2 and
FOXL2:C134W.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings suggest that aromatase is a direct
target of FOXL2:C134W in adult-type GCT via a single distinctive and highly
conserved binding site in PII and therefore provide insight into the pathogenic
mechanism of this mutation.

PMCID: PMC3004790
PMID: 21188138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Transl Res. 2011 Jan;157(1):48-52. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2010.08.005. Epub 2010 Sep
8.

FOXL2 mutations in Chinese families with Blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES).

Fan JY(1), Wang YF, Han B, Ji YR, Song HD, Fan XQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai
JiaoTong University School of Medicine, China.

Blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES) is a rare, autosomal dominant disease. Two
clinical types of BPES have been distinguished. In BPES type I, an eyelid
malformation is associated with infertility in affected females as a result of
premature ovarian failure. In BPES type II, eyelid anomalies alone are observed. 
Mutations of FOXL2, which is a gene encoding a forkhead transcription factor,
have recently been shown to cause both types of BPES. Here, we report 1 novel
duplication mutation of the FOXL2 gene identified in a large Chinese family
affected by type II BPES and 1 less recurrent 17-bp duplication in a large
Chinese family affected by BPES of an undetermined type. These new cases give
additional support to the previously reported genotype-phenotype correlations and
our findings have expanded the spectrum of known mutations of the FOXL2 gene.

Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21146150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Oncogene. 2011 Apr 7;30(14):1653-63. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.541. Epub 2010 Nov 29.

Differential apoptotic activities of wild-type FOXL2 and the adult-type granulosa
cell tumor-associated mutant FOXL2 (C134W).

Kim JH(1), Yoon S, Park M, Park HO, Ko JJ, Lee K, Bae J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University,
Seongnam, Korea.

Some mutations in FOXL2 result in premature ovarian failure accompanied by
blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus syndrome type I disease, and
FOXL2-null mice exhibit developmental defects in granulosa cells. Recently, FOXL2
c.402C>G, a new somatic mutation that leads to a p.C134W change, was found in the
majority of adult-type ovarian granulosa cell tumors (GCTs). In this study, we
investigated the possible mechanisms by which the C134W mutation contributes to
the development of GCTs. Wild-type (WT) and mutant FOXL2 displayed differential
apoptotic activities. Specifically, WT FOXL2 induced significant granulosa cell
death, but the mutant exhibited minimal cell death. The FOXL2-induced apoptotic
response was greatly dependent on caspase 8, BID and BAK because the depletion of
any of these three proteins inhibited FOXL2 from eliciting the full apoptotic
response. Activation of caspase 8 and subsequent increased production of
truncated BID, and oligomerization of BAK, and release of cytochrome c were all
associated with the apoptosis induced by WT FOXL2 expression. In contrast, the
mutant FOXL2 was unable to elicit the full array of apoptotic signaling
responses. In addition, we found differential TNF-R1 (tumor necrosis
factor-receptor 1) and Fas (CD95/APO-1) upregulation between the WT and the
mutant, and the silencing of TNF-R1 or Fas and the blockage of the death
signaling mediated by TNF-R1 or Fas using TNF-Fc or Fas-Fc, respectively,
resulted in significant attenuations of FOXL2-induced apoptosis. Moreover,
granulosa cells that expressed either WT FOXL2 or mutant exhibited distinct cell 
death sensitivities on activation of death receptors and deprivation of serum.
Thus, the differential activities of FOXL2 and its mutant may partially account
for the pathophysiology of GCT development.

PMID: 21119601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Sex Dev. 2011;5(1):7-15. doi: 10.1159/000322162. Epub 2010 Nov 22.

Analysis of gene function in cultured embryonic mouse gonads using nucleofection.

Ryan J(1), Ludbrook L, Wilhelm D, Sinclair A, Koopman P, Bernard P, Harley VR.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Vic., Australia.

Mammalian sex determination is a dynamic process involving balanced gene
expression leading to the development of either a testis or an ovary. Candidate
sex-determining genes have been identified through microarray-based studies of
gonadal gene expression; however, few methods exist for validation. This study
describes a new technique for transfecting gonads using nucleofection. Fifteen
micrograms of expression plasmid DNA was transfected into E11.5 gonads, cultured 
for 3 days and gene expression analyzed. Following optimization, we consistently 
achieved cell transfection efficiencies of 11% of cells using pMax-GFP plasmid.
To test the applicability of nucleofection to studies of gene function, a
testis-determining gene was transfected into gonads and its ability to
sex-reverse was examined. When Sry was transfected into female (XX) gonads,
upregulation of its target gene Sox9 was observed, as well as a downregulation of
the ovarian gene Foxl2. Conversely, when shSox9 was introduced into male (XY)
gonads, reduction of Sox9 and its target gene, Amh was observed, with a
concomitant upregulation of Foxl2. Nucleofection-based gene delivery can
recapitulate in vivo events of gonadal development that demonstrates
'proof-of-principle' of the method as a screening tool to evaluate the cellular
function of potential sex-determining and gonadal differentiation genes.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21099207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Endocrinology. 2011 Jan;152(1):272-80. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0636. Epub 2010 Nov
17.

FOXL2 and BMP2 act cooperatively to regulate follistatin gene expression during
ovarian development.

Kashimada K(1), Pelosi E, Chen H, Schlessinger D, Wilhelm D, Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics and Development, Institute for Molecular
Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, Queensland 4072, Australia.

Follistatin is a secreted glycoprotein required for female sex determination and 
early ovarian development, but the precise mechanisms regulating follistatin
(Fst) gene expression are not known. Here, we investigate the roles of bone
morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2) and forkhead-domain transcription factor L2
(FOXL2) in the regulation of Fst expression in the developing mouse ovary. Bmp2
and Fst showed similar temporal profiles of mRNA expression, whereas FOXL2
protein and Fst mRNA were coexpressed in the same ovarian cells. In a cell
culture model, both FOXL2 and BMP2 up-regulated Fst expression. In ex vivo mouse 
fetal gonad culture, exogenous BMP2 increased Fst expression, but this effect was
counteracted by the BMP antagonist Noggin. Moreover, in Foxl2-null mice, Fst
expression was reduced throughout fetal ovarian development, and Bmp2 expression 
was also reduced. Our data support a model in which FOXL2 and BMP2 cooperate to
ensure correct expression of Fst in the developing ovary. Further, Wnt4-knockout 
mice showed reduced expression of Fst limited to early ovarian development,
suggesting a role for WNT4 in the initiation, but not the maintenance, of Fst
expression.

PMCID: PMC3219046
PMID: 21084449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Mutagenesis. 2011 Mar;26(2):283-9. doi: 10.1093/mutage/geq086. Epub 2010 Nov 10.

Functional study on a novel missense mutation of the transcription factor FOXL2
causes blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES).

Fan JY(1), Han B, Qiao J, Liu BL, Ji YR, Ge SF, Song HD, Fan XQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, No.639 Zhi Zao Ju Road, Shanghai 200011,
People's Republic of China.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a rare autosomal
dominant disease caused by FOXL2 gene mutations. However, only one missense
mutation has been found in family with BPES type I. Here, we report a novel
missense mutation in the forkhead domain of the FOXL2 gene (c.340A > G,
NM_023067) resulted in the replacement of lysine by glutamic acid at amino acid
position 114 of the FOXL2 protein (p.K114E, NP_075555) that was identified in a
Chinese family with BPES type I, members of which displayed clinical symptoms
such as shortened palpebral fissures, drooping eyelids, a vertical skin fold
arising from the lower eyelid, and premature ovarian failure (POF) in affected
females. Based on the patients' clinical features and computational analysis of
this missense mutation in a three-dimensional structural model, we hypothesised
that the mutation might disturb the intermolecular contacts between FOXL2 and the
StAR gene. The disturbance of this interaction might contribute to the POF
observed in BPES type I patients. We performed subcellular localisation and
functional studies and as expected, observed significant nuclear aggregation and 
cytoplasmic mislocalization of the mutant type protein and loss-of-function was
confirmed by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, transcriptional activity
assays and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. This functional
study on a novel missense mutation has important implications for the molecular
analysis of this gene.

PMID: 21068205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2010 Jun;46(6):532-6.

[Deletion and mutation analysis to FOXL2 in blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus
inversus syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou ZM(1), Liang DS, Quan Y, Xue JJ, Li HY, Xia XB, Wu LQ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Lab of Medical Genetics of China, Central South University,
Changsha, China.

OBJECTIVE: To perform genetic analysis in 5 patients with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) and refine the
genotype-phenotype correlation.
METHODS: G-band karyotyping, fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), SNP array,
PCR and sequencing techniques were performed to one patient with BPES and mental 
retardation and 4 only with BPES.
RESULTS: Patient 1 with mental retardation carried a 9.4 Mb heterozygous deletion
in chromosome 3q22.1-q23 including FOXL2 gene; Both patient 2 and 3 carried a
c.704delG heterozygous mutation of FOXL2, while they were assigned to the
different clinical type from those reported previously. Patient 3 was assigned to
type II BPES; No mutation of FOXL2 was detected in patient 4 and 5.
CONCLUSIONS: There might be the gene(s) responsible for mental retardation within
chromosome 3q22.1-q23. It was indicated that the mutation c.704delG in FOXL2 led 
to a truncated protein is associated with both type I and II of BPES.

PMID: 21055199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2010 Nov;20(8):1341-3. doi: 10.1111/IGC.0b013e3181ff3e73.

Absence of a FOXL2 mutation (402C<U+2192>G) in the blood of adult-type granulosa cell
tumor patients possessing the FOXL2 mutation.

Lee S(1), Kim TH, Won M, Ko JJ, Rho J, Lee K, Bae J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, CHA University, 222 Yatap-Dong,
Seongnam, Korea.

Recently, a new mutation in FOXL2, c.402C<U+2192>G leading to a p.C134W change, was
reported to be found in 97% of adult-type ovarian granulosa cell tumors (GCTs)
tested. In the current study, we compared the FOXL2 sequences of genomic DNA
isolated from both GCT and blood. Although the GCTs of patients possessed the
FOXL2 mutation, their FOXL2 nucleotide sequences of genomic DNA isolated from
matching blood samples lacked the 402C<U+2192>G mutation. Therefore, we confirmed that
the nucleotide alteration of FOXL2 is due to a somatic mutation and demonstrated 
that sequencing of blood DNA for the detection of the FOXL2 mutation is not a
useful method for the diagnosis of GCT.

PMID: 21051974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Endocrinology. 2010 Nov;151(11):5456-67. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-0605. Epub 2010 Sep
1.

Activin A regulates porcine follicle-stimulating hormone beta-subunit
transcription via cooperative actions of SMADs and FOXL2.

Lamba P(1), Wang Y, Tran S, Ouspenskaia T, Libasci V, Hébert TE, Miller GJ,
Bernard DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, McIntyre
Medical Sciences Building, 3655 Promenade Sir-William-Osler, Montréal, Québec,
Canada.

Activins stimulate FSH synthesis and secretion by pituitary gonadotrope cells.
Activin A induction of porcine and murine FSHß (Fshb) gene transcription in
immortalized gonadotropes is dependent on homolog of Drosophila mothers against
decapentaplegic (SMAD) proteins as well as the forkhead transcription factor L2
(FOXL2). Using both heterologous and homologous cell models, we demonstrate that 
FOXL2 functionally synergizes with SMAD3/4 to stimulate porcine Fshb
promoter-reporter activity. We further show that endogenous FOXL2 and SMAD2/3
physically interact in homologous cells. We identify two composite cis-elements
of adjacent FOXL2 and SMAD binding sites in the proximal porcine Fshb promoter
that mediate activin A, FOXL2, and SMAD3 actions. FOXL2 can bind these elements
independently of SMADs, whereas SMAD3/4 binding requires high-affinity FOXL2
binding. Conversely, FOXL2 alone is insufficient to regulate Fshb transcription
and requires SMADs to induce promoter activity. Collectively, our data suggest a 
model in which activins stimulate formation and nuclear accumulation of SMAD3/4
complexes, which interact with FOXL2 bound to at least two proximal promoter
elements. This association stabilizes SMAD3/4 binding to adjacent SMAD binding
elements. SMAD-FOXL2 complexes then mediate activation of transcription through a
currently unknown mechanism. Conservation of one of the two composite
cis-elements suggests that this may form part of a general mechanism whereby
activins regulate Fshb subunit transcription and FSH synthesis.

PMID: 20810560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. BMC Biol. 2010 Aug 31;8:113. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-8-113.

Oestrogen blocks the nuclear entry of SOX9 in the developing gonad of a marsupial
mammal.

Pask AJ(1), Calatayud NE, Shaw G, Wood WM, Renfree MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Connecticut,
Storrs, CT 06260, USA. andrew.pask@uconn.edu

Comment in
    BMC Biol. 2010;8:110.

BACKGROUND: Hormones are critical for early gonadal development in nonmammalian
vertebrates, and oestrogen is required for normal ovarian development. In
contrast, mammals determine sex by the presence or absence of the SRY gene, and
hormones are not thought to play a role in early gonadal development. Despite an 
XY sex-determining system in marsupial mammals, exposure to oestrogen can
override SRY and induce ovarian development of XY gonads if administered early
enough. Here we assess the effect of exogenous oestrogen on the molecular
pathways of mammalian gonadal development.
RESULTS: We examined the expression of key testicular (SRY, SOX9, AMH and FGF9)
and ovarian (WNT4, RSPO1, FOXL2 and FST) markers during gonadal development in
the marsupial tammar wallaby (Macropus eugenii) and used these data to determine 
the effect of oestrogen exposure on gonadal fate. During normal development, we
observed male specific upregulation of AMH and SOX9 as in the mouse and human
testis, but this upregulation was initiated before the peak in SRY expression and
4 days before testicular cord formation. Similarly, key genes for ovarian
development in mouse and human were also upregulated during ovarian
differentiation in the tammar. In particular, there was early sexually dimorphic 
expression of FOXL2 and WNT4, suggesting that these genes are key regulators of
ovarian development in all therian mammals. We next examined the effect of
exogenous oestrogen on the development of the mammalian XY gonad. Despite the
presence of SRY, exogenous oestrogen blocked the key male transcription factor
SOX9 from entering the nuclei of male somatic cells, preventing activation of the
testicular pathway and permitting upregulation of key female genes, resulting in 
ovarian development of the XY gonad.
CONCLUSIONS: We have uncovered a mechanism by which oestrogen can regulate
gonadal development through the nucleocytoplasmic shuttling of SOX9. This may
represent an underlying ancestral mechanism by which oestrogen promotes ovarian
development in the gonads of nonmammalian vertebrates. Furthermore, oestrogen may
retain this function in adult female mammals to maintain granulosa cell fate in
the differentiated ovary by suppressing nuclear translocation of the SOX9
protein. See commentary: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1741-7007/8/110.

PMCID: PMC2940779
PMID: 20807406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Menopause Int. 2010 Jun;16(2):65-7. doi: 10.1258/mi.2010.010015.

A clinical dilemma: the potential use of egg freezing to preserve fertility in a 
young patient at risk of developing premature ovarian failure.

Cartwright B(1), Grace J, Rymer J.

Author information: 
(1)Menopause Research Unit, King's College London, London, UK.
beth.cartwright@kcl.ac.uk

Following diagnosis of premature ovarian failure (POF), few women become pregnant
spontaneously and the only fertility treatment that can be offered is oocyte
donation. With advances in fertility technology, timely preservation of female
fertility in the form of egg freezing is a topical area, and one of which
patients are increasingly aware. Women with a family history of POF may be
especially concerned about future fertility. We describe a case where a
consultation was sought in the POF clinic for this issue.

PMID: 20729497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2010 May;32(5):328-33.

[Correlation of the methylation status of CpG islands in the promoter region of
10 genes with the 5-Fu chemosensitivity in 3 breast cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou XY(1), Sun JF, He YH, Zhang HY, Yu J, Guo SC, Cai Y, Hu XC, Zhu JD.

Author information: 
(1)Fudan University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the relationship between the methylation status of CpG
islands in the promoter region of 10 genes in breast cancer cells and their
sensitivity to 5-fluouracil (5-Fu), and to identify the genes responsible for the
5-Fu resistance in breast cancer.
METHODS: Three cell lines (differently resistant to chemotherapy) were used in
this study: Bcap-37 (IC(50): 289.77 microg/ml), T47D (IC(50): 134.16 microg/ml)
and ZR-75-30 (IC(50): 4.20 microg/ml). The methylation profile of 10 genes (BAG1,
C11ORF31, CBR1, CBR4, GJA1, FOXL2, IGFBP6, P4HA1, SRI and TYMS) in the 3 breast
cancer cell lines was determined by methylation specific PCR. The steady-state
mRNAs of ABCC8, CHFR and IGFBP6 genes were quantified by real-time RT PCR
analysis.
RESULTS: Among the 10 genes, only genes IGFBP6 and FOXL2 displayed differential
DNA methylation pattern between the 5-Fu-resistant and 5-Fu-sensitive cell lines.
The mRNA expression level of genes PRSS21, LOX, IGFBP6, ABCC8 and CHFR was
quantified by real-time RT-PCR analysis. Except for CHFR, the expression level of
the other 4 genes was correlated with the methylation status of CpG islands,
namely, a lower expression level with methylation status and a higher level with 
demethylation status.
CONCLUSION: The results of the present study have demonstrated that there are 8
genes with differential methylation status in chemosensitive and chemoresistant
breast cancer cell lines, i.e. two genes more than the six genes we reported
previously. Our findings provide both mechanistic insights for the drug
resistance of breast cancer and the basis for further studies on potential
application of the DNA methylation in this set of genes for prediction of
chemosensitivity of breast cancer.

PMID: 20723428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Nat Genet. 2010 Sep;42(9):768-71. doi: 10.1038/ng.645. Epub 2010 Aug 15.

A genome-wide association study identifies four susceptibility loci for keloid in
the Japanese population.

Nakashima M(1), Chung S, Takahashi A, Kamatani N, Kawaguchi T, Tsunoda T, Hosono 
N, Kubo M, Nakamura Y, Zembutsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Keloid is a dermal fibroproliferative growth that results from dysfunction of the
wound healing processes. Through a multistage genome-wide association study using
824 individuals with keloid (cases) and 3,205 unaffected controls in the Japanese
population, we identified significant associations of keloid with four SNP loci
in three chromosomal regions: 1q41, 3q22.3-23 and 15q21.3. The most significant
association with keloid was observed at rs873549 (combined P = 5.89 x 10(-23),
odds ratio (OR) = 1.77) on chromosome 1. Associations on chromosome 3 were
observed at two separate linkage disequilibrium (LD) blocks: rs1511412 in the LD 
block including FOXL2 with P = 2.31 x 10(-13) (OR = 1.87) and rs940187 in another
LD block with P = 1.80 x 10(-13) (OR = 1.98). Association of rs8032158 located in
NEDD4 on chromosome 15 yielded P = 5.96 x 10(-13) (OR = 1.51). Our findings
provide new insights into the pathophysiology of keloid formation.

PMID: 20711176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Mod Pathol. 2010 Nov;23(11):1477-85. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.145. Epub 2010
Aug 6.

The FOXL2 C134W mutation is characteristic of adult granulosa cell tumors of the 
ovary.

Jamieson S(1), Butzow R, Andersson N, Alexiadis M, Unkila-Kallio L, Heikinheimo
M, Fuller PJ, Anttonen M.

Author information: 
(1)Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Granulosa cell tumors of the ovary represent ~5% of malignant ovarian cancers. It
has recently been reported that 95-97% of adult granulosa cell tumors carry a
unique somatic mutation in the FOXL2 gene. We undertook this study to verify the 
presence of the FOXL2 Cys134Trp mutation in two geographically independent
cohorts of granulosa cell tumors and to examine the expression pattern of FOXL2
in these tumors. A total of 56 tumors with the histological diagnosis of adult
granulosa cell tumor from two centers, Melbourne and Helsinki, were examined for 
the presence of the mutation using direct sequence analysis. Two granulosa cell
tumor-derived cell lines, COV434 and KGN, three juvenile granulosa cell tumors
and control tissues were also examined. The expression of the FOXL2 gene was
determined using quantitative RT-PCR and/or immunohistochemistry. We found that
52 of the 56 adult granulosa cell tumors harbor the mutation, of which three were
hemi/homozygous. Of the four cases with wild-type FOXL2 sequence, reappraisal
suggests that three may have been misclassified at primary diagnosis. The KGN
cells were heterozygous for the mutation, whereas the COV434 cells had a
wild-type FOXL2 genotype. The expression levels of FOXL2 were similar across the 
adult granulosa cell tumors and the normal ovary controls; one mutation-negative 
granulosa cell tumor had high FOXL2 mRNA levels, whereas the COV434 cells and two
of the three juvenile granulosa cell tumors lacked the expression of FOXL2. Our
data provide confirmation of the frequent presence of the FOXL2 C134W mutation in
adult granulosa cell tumors and demonstrate that the mutation is not associated
with altered FOXL2 expression. The mutation analysis may be a useful tool to
differentiate particularly between cell-rich diffuse granulosa cell tumors and
mitotically active sex cord-stromal tumors. This unique FOXL2 mutation appears to
be characteristic of adult granulosa cell tumors.

PMID: 20693978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Curr Top Dev Biol. 2010;90:263-90. doi: 10.1016/S0070-2153(10)90007-0.

Building pathways for ovary organogenesis in the mouse embryo.

Liu CF(1), Liu C, Yao HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Illinois, USA.

Despite its significant role in oocyte generation and hormone production in
adulthood, the ovary, with regard to its formation, has received little attention
compared to its male counterpart, the testis. With the exception of germ cells,
which undergo a female-specific pattern of meiosis, morphological changes in the 
fetal ovary are subtle. Over the past 40 years, a number of hypotheses have been 
proposed for the organogenesis of the mammalian ovary. It was not until the turn 
of the millennium, thanks to the advancement of genetic and genomic approaches,
that pathways for ovary organogenesis that consist of positive and negative
regulators have started to emerge. Through the action of secreted factors
(R-spondin1, WNT4, and follistatin) and transcription regulators (beta-catenin
and FOXL2), the developmental fate of the somatic cells is directed toward
ovarian, while testicular components are suppressed. In this chapter, we review
the history of studying ovary organogenesis in mammals and present the most
recent discoveries using the mouse as the model organism.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3400115
PMID: 20691852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Hormones (Athens). 2010 Jul-Sep;9(3):218-131.

Sex determination and disorders of sex development according to the revised
nomenclature and classification in 46,XX individuals.

Kousta E(1), Papathanasiou A, Skordis N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, P. & A. Kyriakou Children's Hospital,
Athens, Greece. lkousta@otenet.gr

There have been considerable advances concerning understanding of the early and
later stages of ovarian development; a number of genes have been implicated and
their mutations have been associated with developmental abnormalities. The most
important genes controlling the initial phase of gonadal development, identical
in females and males, are Wilms' tumor suppressor 1 (WT1) and steroidogenic
factor 1 (SF1). Four genes are likely to be involved in the subsequent stages of 
ovarian development (WNT4, DAX1, FOXL2 and RSPO1), but none is yet proven to be
the ovarian determining factor. Changes in nomenclature and classification were
recently proposed in order to incorporate genetic advances and substitute
gender-based diagnostic labels in terminology. The term "disorders of sex
development" (DSD) is proposed to substitute the previous term "intersex
disorders". Three main categories have been used to describe DSD in the 46,XX
individual: 1) disorders of gonadal (ovarian) development: ovotesticular DSD,
previously named true hermaphroditism, testicular DSD, previously named XX males,
and gonadal dysgenesis; 2) disorders related to androgen excess (congenital
adrenal hyperplasia, aromatase deficiency and P450 oxidoreductase deficiency);
and 3) other rare disorders. In this mini-review, recent advances concerning
development of the genital system in 46,XX individuals and related abnormalities 
are discussed. Basic embryology of the ovary and molecular pathways determining
ovarian development are reviewed, focusing on mutations disrupting normal ovarian
development. Disorders of sex development according to the revised nomenclature
and classification in 46,XX individuals are summarized, including genetic
progress in the field.

PMID: 20688619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Biol Reprod. 2010 Nov;83(5):842-51. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085621. Epub 2010
Jul 21.

Synergistic activation of the Mc2r promoter by FOXL2 and NR5A1 in mice.

Yang WH(1), Gutierrez NM, Wang L, Ellsworth BS, Wang CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Mercer University School of Medicine,
Savannah, Georgia 31404-3089, USA. yang_w@mercer.edu

Forkhead box protein L2 (FOXL2) is the earliest ovarian marker and plays an
important role in the regulation of cholesterol and steroid metabolism,
inflammation, apoptosis, and ovarian development and function. Mutations and
deficiencies of the human FOXL2 gene have been shown to cause
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome as well as premature ovarian
failure. Although Foxl2 interacts with steroidogenic factor 1 (Nr5a1) and
up-regulates cyp19a1a gene transcription in fish, FOXL2 represses the
transcriptional activity of the gene that codes for steroidogenic acute
regulatory protein (Star) in mice. Most of the recent studies have heavily
focused on the FOXL2 target genes (Star and Cyp19a1) in the ovaries. Hence, it is
of importance to search for other downstream targets of FOXL2 and for the
possibility of FOXL2 expression in nonovarian tissues. Herein, we demonstrate
that the interplay between FOXL2 and NR5A1 regulates Star and melanocortin 2
receptor (Mc2r) gene expression in mammalian systems. Both FOXL2 and NR5A1 are
expressed in ovarian and adrenal gland tissues. As expected, FOXL2 represses and 
NR5A1 enhances the promoter activity of Star. Notably, the promoter activity of
Mc2r is activated by FOXL2 in a dose-dependent manner. Surprisingly, we found
that FOXL2 and NR5A1 synergistically up-regulate the transcriptional activity of 
Mc2r. By mapping the Mc2r promoter, we provide evidence that distal NR5A1
response elements (-1410 and -975) are required for synergistic activation by
FOXL2 and NR5A1. These results suggest that the interplay between FOXL2 and NR5A1
on the Mc2r promoter functions as a novel mechanism for regulating MC2R-mediated 
cell signaling as well as steroidogenesis in adrenal glands.

PMID: 20650879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Sep;21(9):562-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tem.2010.05.006.
Epub 2010 Jul 2.

A FoxL in the Smad house: activin regulation of FSH.

Coss D(1), Mellon PL, Thackray VG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, Center for Reproductive Science and
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0674, USA.

Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), produced by pituitary gonadotrope cells, is
required for maturation of ovarian follicles. The FSHbeta subunit is the limiting
factor for production of mature hormone and provides biological specificity.
Activin dramatically induces FSHbeta transcription and the secondary rise in FSH,
important for follicular development, is dependent on this induction. Thus,
regulation of FSHbeta levels by activin is crucial for female reproductive
fitness. This review discusses activin signaling pathways, transcription factors 
and FSHbeta promoter elements required for activin responsiveness. Because FoxL2,
a forkhead transcription factor, was recently shown to be instrumental in
relaying activin signaling to the FSHbeta promoter, we focus in this paper on its
role and the inter-relatedness of several key players in activin responsiveness
on the FSHbeta promoter.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2933269
PMID: 20598900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Apr;24(2):163-86. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2009.12.002.

Control of sex development.

Biason-Lauber A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology/Diabetology, University Children's Hospital,
Steinwiesstrasse 75, CH-8032 Zurich, Switzerland. Anna.Lauber@kispi.uzh.ch

The process of sexual differentiation is central for reproduction of almost all
metazoan, and therefore, for maintenance of practically all multicellular
organisms. In sex development, we can distinguish two different processes, sex
determination, that is the developmental decision that directs the
undifferentiated embryo into a sexually dimorphic individual. In mammals, sex
determination equals gonadal development. The second process known as sex
differentiation takes place once the sex determination decision has been made
through factors produced by the gonads that determine the development of the
phenotypic sex. Most of the knowledge on the factors involved in sexual
development came from animal models and from studies of cases in whom the genetic
or the gonadal sex does not match the phenotypical sex, that is, patients
affected by disorders of sex development (DSDs). Generally speaking, factors
influencing sex determination are transcriptional regulators, whereas factors
important for sex differentiation are secreted hormones and their receptors. This
review focuses on these factors and whenever possible, references regarding the
'prismatic' clinical cases are given.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20541146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Med Sci (Paris). 2010 May;26(5):470-3. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2010265470.

[FOXL2, the gatekeeper of ovarian identity].

[Article in French]

Pannetier M, Pailhoux E.

PMID: 20510144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Histopathology. 2010 Feb;56(3):408-10. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2010.03487.x.

FOXL2 mutation in granulosa-cell tumours of the ovary.

Kim T, Sung CO, Song SY, Bae DS, Choi YL.

PMID: 20459545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Nat Med. 2010 May;16(5):527-9. doi: 10.1038/nm0510-527.

Revisiting reproduction: What a difference a gene makes.

Murphy BD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Reproduction Animale, Université de Montréal,
St-Hyacinthe, Québec, Canada. bruce.d.murphy@umontreal.ca

PMID: 20448577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Recent Pat DNA Gene Seq. 2010 Jun;4(2):86-93.

Recent patents and advances in genomic biomarker discovery for colorectal
cancers.

Quyun C(1), Ye Z, Lin SC, Lin B.

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Division, Zhejiang-California International Nanosystems
Institute (ZCNI), Zhejiang University, 268 Kaixuan Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang,
310029, China.

Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer in the world. Early
diagnosis of colorectal cancer is the key to reducing the death rate of CRC
patients. Predicting the response to current therapeutic modalities of CRC will
also have a great impact on patient care. This review summarizes recent advances 
and patents in biomarker discovery in CRC under five major categories; including 
genomic changes, expression changes, mutations, epigenetic changes and microRNAs.
The interesting patents include: 1) a patent for a method to differentiate normal
exfoliated cells from cancer cells based on whether they were subjected to
apoptosis and DNA degradation; 2) A model (PM-33 multiple molecular marker model)
based on expression changes of up-regulation of the MDM2, DUSP6, and NFl genes
down-regulation of the RNF4, MMD and EIF2S3 genes, which achieved an 88%
sensitivity, and an 82% specificity for CRC diagnosis; 3) gene mutations in PTEN,
KRAS, PIK3CA for predicting the response to anti-EGFR therapies, a common drug
used for CRC treatment; 4) patents on epigenetic changes of ITGA4, SEPT9, ALX4,
TFAP2E FOXL2, SARM1, ID4 etc. and many key miRNAs. Finally, future directions in 
the fields were commented on or suggested, including the combination of multiple 
categories of biomarkers and pathway central or network-based biomarker panels.

PMID: 20426761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Bioessays. 2010 May;32(5):375-80. doi: 10.1002/bies.200900193.

FOXL2 versus SOX9: a lifelong "battle of the sexes".

Veitia RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS-UMR 7592, Bâtiment Buffon, Paris Cedex, France.
reiner.veitia@inserm.fr

Testis determination in most mammals is regulated by a genetic hierarchy
initiated by the SRY gene. Early ovarian development has long been thought of as 
a default pathway switched on passively by the absence of SRY. Recent studies
challenge this view and show that the ovary constantly represses male-specific
genes, from embryonic stages to adulthood. Notably, the absence of the crucial
ovarian transcription factor FOXL2 (alone or in combination with other factors)
induces a derepression of male-specific genes during development, postnatally
and, even more interestingly, during adulthood. Strikingly, in the adult,
targeted ablation of Foxl2 leads to a molecular transdifferentiation of the
supporting cells of the ovary, which acquire cytological and transcriptomic
characteristics of the supporting cells of the testes. These studies bring many
answers to the field of gonadal determination, differentiation and maintenance,
but also open many questions.

PMID: 20414895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Jul;299(1):E101-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00534.2009. Epub 2010 Apr 20.

LATS1 phosphorylates forkhead L2 and regulates its transcriptional activity.

Pisarska MD(1), Kuo FT, Bentsi-Barnes IK, Khan S, Barlow GM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Fertility and Reproductive Medicine, Division of Reproductive
Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of Ob/Gyn, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center,
8635 West Third St., Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. pisarskam@cshs.org

Forkhead L2 (FOXL2) is expressed in the ovary and acts as a transcriptional
repressor of the steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) gene, a marker of
granulosa cell differentiation. Human FOXL2 mutations that produce truncated
proteins lacking the COOH terminus result in blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus
inversus (BPES) syndrome type I, which is associated with premature ovarian
failure (POF). In this study, we investigated whether FOXL2's activity as a
transcriptional repressor is regulated by phosphorylation. We found that FOXL2 is
phosphorylated at a serine residue and, using yeast two-hybrid screening,
identified LATS1 as a potential FOXL2-interacting protein. LATS1 is a
serine/threonine kinase whose deletion in mice results in an ovarian phenotype
similar to POF. Using coimmunoprecipitation and kinase assays, we confirmed that 
LATS1 binds to FOXL2 and demonstrated that LATS1 phosphorylates FOXL2 at a serine
residue. Moreover, we found that FOXL2 and LATS1 are coexpressed in developing
mouse gonads and in granulosa cells of small and medium follicles in the mouse
ovary. Last, we demonstrated that coexpression with LATS1 enhances FOXL2's
activity as a repressor of the StAR promoter, and this results from the kinase
activity of LATS1. These results provide novel evidence that FOXL2 is
phosphorylated by LATS1 and that this phosphorylation enhances the
transcriptional repression of the StAR gene, a marker of granulosa cell
differentiation. These data support our hypothesis that phosphorylation of FOXL2 
may be a control mechanism regulating the rate of granulosa cell differentiation 
and hence, follicle maturation, and its dysregulation may contribute to
accelerated follicular development and POF in BPES type I.

PMCID: PMC2904049
PMID: 20407010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Horm Res Paediatr. 2010;74(2):83-91. doi: 10.1159/000313396. Epub 2010 Apr 15.

Unusual virilization in girls with juvenile granulosa cell tumors of the ovary is
related to intratumoral aromatase deficiency.

Kalfa N(1), Méduri G, Philibert P, Patte C, Boizet-Bonhoure B, Thibaut E,
Pienkowski C, Jaubert F, Misrahi M, Sultan C.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hormonologie du Développement et de la Reproduction, Hôpital
Lapeyronie, CHU Montpellier, Montpellier, France.

BACKGROUND: Hyperandrogenism is a rare symptom of juvenile ovarian granulosa
cell- tumors (JGCTO). This study aimed to determine whether hyperandrogenism was 
related to overexpression of SOX9, decreased expression of FOXL2 or absent
aromatase expression in tumor with particular scheme of expression of P450scc and
P450c17alpha.
METHODS: Through a nationwide study including the French Society of Pediatric
Oncology, 6/30 patients with JGCTO presented with clinical hyperandrogenism and
high plasma testosterone. Tumor specimens underwent immunofluorescence (SOX9,
FOXL2) and immunochemistry (aromatase, P450scc, P450c17alpha). Results were
compared with patients without hyperandrogenism.
RESULTS: SOX9 was expressed in the granulosa cell nucleus in 2/6 cases but also
in 9/24 tumors without hyperandrogenism (p=n.s.). FOXL2 was absent or decreased
in 3/6 cases of JGCTO with hyperandrogenism with no statistical difference from
the group without this symptom. In 6/6 patients, the intratumoral expression of
aromatase was absent (n=5) or dramatically reduced (n=1). In contrast, 15/24
patients without virilization exhibited conserved aromatase expression in their
tumor (p<0.05). A variable number of tumoral cells expressed P450scc while some
interstitial cells were focally immunopositive for P450c17alpha.
CONCLUSION: Unusual virilization in girls with JGCTO is not explained by a
dysregulation in SOX9 or FOXL2 expression, but is related to a localized defect
of aromatase expression in granulosa cells and to the ability of interstitial
cells to produce testosterone.

Copyright (c) 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20395670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2010 May;71(3):214. doi: 10.1016/j.ando.2010.03.001. Epub
2010 Apr 14.

[Role of FOXL2 impairment in syndromic and non-syndromic premature ovarian
failure (POF)].

[Article in French]

De Baere E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 9000
Ghent, Belgique. Elfride.DeBaere@UGent.be

PMID: 20394913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Clin Invest. 2010 Apr;120(4):963-72. doi: 10.1172/JCI41350. Epub 2010 Apr 1.

The ovary: basic biology and clinical implications.

Richards JS(1), Pangas SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. joanner@bcm.tmc.edu

The classical view of ovarian follicle development is that it is regulated by the
hypothalamic-pituitary-ovarian axis, in which gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) controls the release of the gonadotropic hormones follicle-stimulating
hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH), and that ovarian steroids exert both 
negative and positive regulatory effects on GnRH secretion. More recent studies
in mice and humans indicate that many other intra-ovarian signaling cascades
affect follicular development and gonadotropin action in a stage- and
context-specific manner. As we discuss here, mutant mouse models and clinical
evidence indicate that some of the most powerful intra-ovarian regulators of
follicular development include the TGF-beta/SMAD, WNT/FZD/beta-catenin, and
RAS/ERK1/2 signaling pathways and the FOXO/FOXL2 transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC2846061
PMID: 20364094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2010 May;71(3):218-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ando.2010.02.014.
Epub 2010 Apr 2.

Genome-wide association study and premature ovarian failure.

Christin-Maitre S(1), Tachdjian G.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Endocrine Unit, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, ER9, Université Paris VI, 
75012 Paris, France. sophie.christin-maitre@sat.aphp.fr

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is defined as an amenorrhea for more than
4months, associated with elevated gonadotropins, usually higher than 20mIU/ml,
occurring in a woman before the age of 40. Some candidate genes have been
identified in the past 15years, such as FOXL2, FSHR, BMP15, GDF9, Xfra
premutation. However, POF etiology remains unknown in more than 90% of cases. The
first strategy to identify candidate gene, apart from studying genes involved in 
ovarian failure in animal models, relies on the study of X chromosome deletions
and X;autosome translocations in patients. The second strategy is based on
linkage analysis, the third one on Comparative Genomic Hybridization (CGH) array.
The latest strategy relies on Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS). This
technique consists in screening single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
patients and controls. So far, three studies have been performed and have
identified different loci potentially linked to POF, such as PTHB1 and ADAMTS19. 
However, replications in independent cohorts need to be performed. GWAS studies
on large cohorts of women with POF should find new candidate genes in the near
future.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 20362963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Blepharophimosis, Ptosis, and Epicanthus Inversus.

Verdin H, De Baere E.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2004 Jul 8.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Blephariphimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus
syndrome (BPES) is a complex eyelid malformation invariably characterized by four
major features: blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus, and telecanthus.
BPES type I includes the four major features and premature ovarian insufficiency 
(POI); BPES type II includes only the four major features. Other ophthalmic
manifestations that can be associated with BPES include lacrimal duct anomalies, 
amblyopia, strabismus, and refractive errors. Minor features include a broad
nasal bridge, low-set ears, and a short philtrum. Individuals with BPES and an
intragenic FOXL2 pathogenic variant are expected to have normal intelligence, in 
contrast to affected individuals with cytogenetic rearrangements that involve
FOXL2 and additional genes.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of BPES is primarily based on clinical findings.
Occasionally individuals with BPES have cytogenetic rearrangements, such as
interstitial deletions and translocations involving 3q23. FOXL2 is the only gene 
currently known to be associated with BPES.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Timing of eyelid surgery involves
balancing the benefits of early surgery to prevent deprivation amblyopia versus
late surgery to allow for more reliable ptosis measurements. Surgery
traditionally involves a medial canthoplasty for correction of the
blepharophimosis, epicanthus inversus, and telecanthus at age three to five
years, typically followed a year later by ptosis correction; recently, a
one-stage surgical procedure has been described. Premature ovarian failure is
treated with hormone replacement therapy; fertility is addressed with
reproductive technologies such as embryo donation and egg donation. Surveillance:
Ophthalmic follow up depends on age, procedures performed in the past, and
results of visual acuity testing. Endocrinologic and gynecologic follow up are
advised for affected females.
GENETIC COUNSELING: BPES is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant manner;
autosomal recessive inheritance has been reported in one consanguineous family.
For autosomal dominant inheritance: Each child of an individual with BPES has a
50% chance of inheriting the FOXL2 pathogenic variant. Prenatal testing for
pregnancies at increased risk is possible if the pathogenic variant in the family
has been identified; however, requests for prenatal testing for conditions such
as BPES are not common.

PMID: 20301614  [PubMed]


338. Clin Genet. 2010 Jun;77(6):601-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01389.x. Epub
2010 Mar 5.

FOXL2 mutations in Tunisian patients with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus
inversus syndrome.

Kraoua L, Chaabouni M, Trabelsi M, Chelly I, Maazoul F, Ben Abdallah N, Boukthir 
S, Barsaoui S, Chaabouni H, M'rad R.

PMID: 20236120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Dev Dyn. 2010 Apr;239(4):1061-75. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22266.

Genetic network underlying temperature-dependent sex determination is
endogenously regulated by temperature in isolated cultured Trachemys scripta
gonads.

Shoemaker-Daly CM(1), Jackson K, Yatsu R, Matsumoto Y, Crews D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, Texas, USA.

In reptiles with temperature-dependent sex determination, gonadogenesis is
initially directed by the incubation temperature of the egg during the middle
third of embryonic development. The mechanism by which temperature is transduced 
into a sex-determining molecular signal remains a mystery, and here we examine
the molecular network underlying sex determination in gonads in vitro. We use a
whole organ culture system to show that expression of putative members of the
sex-determining network (Dmrt1, Sox9, Mis, and FoxL2) are regulated by
temperature endogenously within cells in the bipotential gonad and do not require
other embryonic tissues to be expressed in a normal pattern in the red-eared
slider turtle, Trachemys scripta. Furthermore, following a change in temperature,
these factors exhibit temperature-responsive expression patterns that last for
the duration of gonadogenesis. Finally, mosaic misexpression of a fusion Sox9
construct demonstrates the ability to functionally manipulate the gonad at the
molecular level.

PMID: 20235200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 May;24(5):1037-51. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0425. Epub 2010 Mar 
16.

FoxL2 Is required for activin induction of the mouse and human
follicle-stimulating hormone beta-subunit genes.

Corpuz PS(1), Lindaman LL, Mellon PL, Coss D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine, University of California San Diego, 9500 
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0674, USA.

Activin is a major physiological regulator of FSH. We identify FoxL2 as a
critical component in activin induction of FSHbeta, both for the mouse gene,
induction of which is Sma- and Mad-related protein (Smad) dependent, and for the 
human gene that is Smad independent. FoxL2 has been shown to regulate gonadotrope
gene expression (GnRH receptor, alpha-glycoprotein subunit, porcine FSHbeta, and 
follistatin), but the mechanisms of action are not well understood. We identify
novel sites required for activin action in both the mouse and human FSHbeta
promoters, some of which bind FoxL2, and show that the FoxL2-binding element
encompasses a larger region (12 bp) than the previously identified
forkhead-binding consensus (7 bp). Remarkably, although required for activin
induction, FoxL2 sites neither contribute to basal FSHbeta promoter activity nor 
confer activin response to a heterologous promoter; thus, they are neither
classical activin-response elements nor is their role solely to recruit Smads to 
the promoter. FoxL2 overexpression can potentiate activin induction in
gonadotropes and can confer activin responsiveness to FSHbeta in heterologous
cells where this promoter is normally refractory to activin induction. Although
Smad3 requires the presence of FoxL2 sites to induce mouse FSHbeta, even through 
its consensus Smad-binding element; the human promoter, which is induced by
activin independently of Smad3, also requires FoxL2 sites for its induction by
activin; thus the actions of FoxL2 are not exclusively through interactions with 
the Smad pathway. Thus, FoxL2 plays a key role in activin induction of the
FSHbeta gene, by binding to sites conserved across multiple species.

PMCID: PMC2870942
PMID: 20233786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Hum Mutat. 2010 May;31(5):E1332-47. doi: 10.1002/humu.21233.

FOXL2 copy number changes in the molecular pathogenesis of BPES: unique cohort of
17 deletions.

D'haene B(1), Nevado J, Pugeat M, Pierquin G, Lowry RB, Reardon W, Delicado A,
García-Miñaur S, Palomares M, Courtens W, Stefanova M, Wallace S, Watkins W,
Shelling AN, Wieczorek D, Veitia RA, De Paepe A, Lapunzina P, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Belgium.

Blepharophimosis Syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal dominant developmental disorder 
of the eyelids with or without ovarian dysfunction caused by FOXL2 mutations.
Overall, FOXL2deletions represent 12% of all genetic defects in BPES. Here, we
have identified and characterized 16 new and one known FOXL2 deletion combining
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA), custom-made quantitative
PCR (qPCR) and/or microarray-based copy number screening. The deletion
breakpoints could be localized for 13 out of 17 deletions. The deletion size is
highly variable (29.8 kb - 11.5 Mb), indicating absence of a recombination
hotspot. Although the heterogeneity of their size and breakpoints is not
reflected in the uniform BPES phenotype, there is considerable phenotypic
variability regarding associated clinical findings including psychomotor
retardation (8/17), microcephaly (6/17), and subtle skeletal features (2/17). In 
addition, in all females in whom ovarian function could be assessed, FOXL2
deletions proved to be associated with variable degrees of ovarian dysfunction.
In conclusion, we present the largest series of BPES patients with FOXL2
deletions and standardized phenotyping reported so far. Our genotype-phenotype
data can be useful for providing a prognosis (i.e. occurrence of associated
features) in newborns with BPES carrying a FOXL2 deletion.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20232352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Insect Physiol. 2010 Aug;56(8):919-25. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2010.02.021.
Epub 2010 Mar 17.

Sexual differentiation in adult insects: male-specific cuticular yellowing in
Schistocerca gregaria as a model for reevaluating some current (neuro)endocrine
concepts.

De Loof A(1), Huybrechts J, Geens M, Vandersmissen T, Boerjan B, Schoofs L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Functional Genomics and Proteomics, K.U.Leuven,
Naamsestraat 59, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. arnold.deloof@bio.kuleuven.be

Changes in the color of the cuticle, days after the completion of hardening, are 
rare in adult insects. Even more so when such changes are specific to one sexual 
form and coincide with sexual maturation. Adult males of the desert locust
Schistocerca gregaria deposit a well characterized 'yellow protein' in their
cuticle about 10 days after the adult molt, but only if they live under crowded
(gregarious) conditions. Isolated-reared (solitarious) males do not turn yellow, 
neither do the females. Upon regrouping, yellowing is quickly induced, but again,
only in the males. Juvenile hormone (JH) is involved, but its sex- and
phase-specific effect suggests that other factors are also involved. We analyzed 
the recent and classical literature to find out what should be added or changed
to the classical way of thinking on sex differentiation in insects so that a
comprehensive conceptual framework could emerge. Undervalued and/or new data on
male accessory glands as a possible second site of JH synthesis, on ecdysteroids 
as possible sex steroids, on the transcription factor fruitless in insects and on
the evolutionarily highly conserved transcription factor Foxl2 that, when ablated
in mice is responsible for the transdifferentiation of the ovaries into testes,
are considered.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20223244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Gynecol Endocrinol. 2010 Apr;26(4):246-9. doi: 10.3109/09513590903225358.

Mutation analysis of FOXL2 gene in Chinese patients with premature ovarian
failure.

Ni F(1), Wen Q, Wang B, Zhou S, Wang J, Mu Y, Ma X, Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei, China.

Premature ovarian failure (POF) has recently been associated with mutations in
Forkhead L2 (FOXL2) gene, which also being a candidate for
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus (BPES) syndrome. In the current
study, we performed a screening analysis by polymerase chain reaction and direct 
sequencing in 118 patients, including one with BPES and her family of six
members. The results came back with no novel mutations but one common 30 bp
duplication within FOXL2 polyalanine tract in the abovementioned POF plus BPES
patient, suggesting mutations in FOXL2 gene was not common among Chinese patients
with POF.

PMID: 20222838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Eur J Med Genet. 2010 May-Jun;53(3):162-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2010.02.008. Epub 
2010 Mar 6.

Delineation of a recognisable phenotype of interstitial deletion 3 (q22.3q25.1)
in a case with previously unreported truncus arteriosus.

Rea G(1), McCullough S, McNerlan S, Craig B, Morrison PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Belfast City Hospital, Belfast, United
Kingdom.

Interstitial deletions of chromosome 3q22.3-25.1 are very rare with only five
previous reports of deletions in this region [1,2,4,7,9]. We describe a case of a
female infant with a de novo deletion. Dysmorphic features and congenital heart
disease led to a clinical genetics assessment on day 1 of life. Chromosomal
analysis showed an interstitial deletion with a female karyotype 46,XX,del
(3)(q23q25.1)dn. Subsequent array CGH demonstrated the breakpoints as
3q22.3q25.1. This is the first documented association with a truncus arteriosus. 
We identify an emerging clinical phenotype of microphthalmia, microcephaly,
congenital heart disease, slow feeding, skeletal abnormalities, with an abnormal 
facies and developmental delay. Array CGH demonstrated that the FOXL2 gene
responsible for BPES was not deleted in this patient.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20215058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 2;5(3):e9477. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009477.

The forkhead transcription factor Foxl2 is sumoylated in both human and mouse:
sumoylation affects its stability, localization, and activity.

Marongiu M(1), Deiana M, Meloni A, Marcia L, Puddu A, Cao A, Schlessinger D,
Crisponi L.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, Cagliari, Italy.

The FOXL2 forkhead transcription factor is expressed in ovarian granulosa cells, 
and mutated FOXL2 causes the blepharophimosis, ptosis and epicanthus inversus
syndrome (BPES) and predisposes to premature ovarian failure. Inactivation of
Foxl2 in mice demonstrated its indispensability for female gonadal sex
determination and ovary development and revealed its antagonism of Sox9, the
effector of male testis development. To help to define the regulatory activities 
of FOXL2, we looked for interacting proteins. Based on yeast two-hybrid
screening, we found that FOXL2 interacts with PIAS1 and UBC9, both parts of the
sumoylation machinery. We showed that human FOXL2 is sumoylated in transfected
cell lines, and that endogenous mouse Foxl2 is comparably sumoylated. This
modification changes its cellular localization, stability and transcriptional
activity. It is intriguing that similar sumoylation and regulatory consequences
have also been reported for SOX9, the male counterpart of FOXL2 in somatic
gonadal tissues.

PMCID: PMC2830456
PMID: 20209145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 May;24(5):1024-36. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0375. Epub 2010 Mar 
5.

FOXL2 interacts with steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) and represses SF-1-induced
CYP17 transcription in granulosa cells.

Park M(1), Shin E, Won M, Kim JH, Go H, Kim HL, Ko JJ, Lee K, Bae J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University,
Seongnam 463-836, Korea.

Mutations in FOXL2 are responsible for blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus
inversus syndrome (BPES) type I, in which affected women exhibit premature
ovarian failure. FOXL2-null mice showed defects in granulosa cell development
during folliculogenesis. We screened a rat ovarian yeast two-hybrid cDNA library 
to identify FOXL2-interacting proteins and found steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1).
Here, we show that human FOXL2 and SF-1 proteins interact in human granulosa
cells and that FOXL2 negatively regulates the transcriptional activation of a
steroidogenic enzyme, CYP17, by SF-1. Furthermore, FOXL2 mutants found in
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome type I patients lost the
ability to repress CYP17 induction mediated by SF-1. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and EMSA results further revealed that FOXL2 inhibited the
binding of SF-1 to the CYP17 promoter, whereas the FOXL2 mutants failed to block 
this interaction. Therefore, this study identifies a novel regulatory role for
FOXL2 on a key steroidogenic enzyme and provides a possible mechanism by which
mutations in FOXL2 disrupt normal ovarian follicle development.

PMID: 20207836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Pathol. 2010 Jun;221(2):147-52. doi: 10.1002/path.2688.

Mutational analysis of FOXL2 codon 134 in granulosa cell tumour of ovary and
other human cancers.

Kim MS(1), Hur SY, Yoo NJ, Lee SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of
Korea, Seoul, Korea.

A missense somatic mutation in the FOXL2 gene affecting codon 134 has recently
been reported in granulosa cell tumour (GCT) and thecoma of the ovary. Such a
recurrent nature of the mutation strongly suggests that the FOXL2 mutation may
play an important role in the development of ovarian sex cord-stromal tumours.
The aim of this study was to characterize the FOXL2 mutation in human tumour
tissues. We analysed 1353 tumour tissues from various origins, including ovarian 
tumours and other common cancers, by single-strand conformation polymorphism
analysis. We found the FOXL2 codon 134 missense mutation in 53 of 56 adult GCTs
(94.6%) and two of the 16 thecomas (12.5%), but none in other tumours.
Histologically, FOXL2 mutation-negative adult GCT showed that GCT cells were
admixed with fibrothecomatous cells, and FOXL2 mutation-positive thecomas showed 
that luteinized theca cells were predominant. However, immunostaining of either
inhibin alpha or FOXL2 did not differentiate the FOXL2 mutation status of adult
GCTs and thecomas. There was no FOXL1 mutation and no common oncogenic mutation
in the adult GCTs and thecomas. Our data indicate that the FOXL2 codon 134
mutation occurs exclusively in GCT and thecoma, and suggest the possibility that 
the development of most GCTs and a fraction of thecomas may be dependent on this 
mutation. Our data also suggest that the FOXL2 mutation status, as well as some
histological features, may be important in the diagnosis of ovarian sex
cord-stromal tumours.

PMID: 20198651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2010 Apr;48(4):485-8. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2010.100.

FOXL2 mutations in Taiwanese patients with blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus
inversus syndrome.

Lin WD(1), Chou IC, Lee NC, Wang CH, Hwu WL, Lin SP, Chao MC, Tsai Y, Tsai FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is an
autosomal dominant developmental disorder that includes an eyelid malformation
associated with (type I) or without (type II) premature ovarian failure (POF).
Mutations in the forkhead transcription factor 2 (FOXL2) gene, a member of
winged/forkhead transcription factor family, are responsible for both types of
BPES. The purpose of this study was to identify mutations in FOXL2 in Taiwanese
patients with BPES.
METHODS: The karyotype and genomic DNA was prepared from the leukocytes of
peripheral venous blood samples. The coding and flanking region sequences of
FOXL2 were analyzed by directed or cloning sequencing.
RESULTS: The karyotypes of these patients did not show significant variation,
especially on the 3q23 region. Two mutations in FOXL2 were identified in two
familial cases. One was c.855-871dup (17-bp insertion) associated with POF. The
other was c.384G>A (TGG>TGA), a novel mutation that resulted in non-sense changes
of the encoded protein, i.e., p.W128X.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results expand the spectrum of FOXL2 mutations and confirm the
mutation hotspot in FOXL2 in Taiwanese BPES patients.

PMID: 20184535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. J Ovarian Res. 2010 Feb 18;3(1):4. doi: 10.1186/1757-2215-3-4.

Microarray analysis of Foxl2 mediated gene regulation in the mouse ovary derived 
KK1 granulosa cell line: Over-expression of Foxl2 leads to activation of the
gonadotropin releasing hormone receptor gene promoter.

Escudero JM(1), Haller JL, Clay CM, Escudero KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological and Health Sciences, Texas A&M University-
Kingsville, Kingsville, TX, USA. kfkwe00@tamuk.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Foxl2 transcription factor is required for ovarian function
during follicular development. The mechanism of Foxl2 regulation of this process 
has not been elucidated. Our approach to begin to understand Foxl2 function is
through the identification of Foxl2 regulated genes in the ovary.
METHODS: Transiently transfected KK1 mouse granulosa cells were used to identify 
genes that are potentially regulated by Foxl2. KK1 cells were transfected in
three groups (mock, activated, and repressed) and twenty-four hours later RNA was
isolated and submitted for Affymetrix microarray analysis. Genesifter software
was used to carry out analysis of microarray data. One identified target, the
gonadotropin releasing hormone receptor (GnRHR) gene, was chosen for further
study and validation of Foxl2 responsiveness. Transient transfection analyses
were carried out to study the effect of Foxl2 over-expression on GnRHR gene
promoter-luciferase fusion activity. Data generated was analyzed with GraphPad
Prism software.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis identified 996 genes of known function that are
potentially regulated by Foxl2 in mouse KK1 granulosa cells. The steroidogenic
acute regulatory protein (StAR) gene that has been identified as Foxl2 responsive
by others was identified in this study also, thereby supporting the effectiveness
of our strategy. The GnRHR gene was chosen for further study because it is known 
to be expressed in the ovary and the results of previous work has indicated that 
Foxl2 may regulate GnRHR gene expression. Cellular levels of Foxl2 were increased
via transient co-transfection of KK1 cells using a Foxl2 expression vector and a 
GnRHR promoter-luciferase fusion reporter vector. The results of these analyses
indicate that over-expression of Foxl2 resulted in a significant increase in
GnRHR promoter activity. Therefore, these transfection data validate the
microarray data which suggest that Foxl2 regulates GnRHR and demonstrate that
Foxl2 acts as an activator of the GnRHR gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Potential Foxl2 regulated ovarian genes have been identified through
microarray analysis and comparison of these data to other microarray studies. The
Foxl2 responsiveness of the GnRHR gene has been validated and provided evidence
of Foxl2 transcriptional activation of the GnRHR gene promoter in the mouse ovary
derived KK1 granulosa cell line.

PMCID: PMC2831895
PMID: 20167115  [PubMed]


350. Sex Dev. 2010;4(1-2):62-72. doi: 10.1159/000277934. Epub 2010 Jan 22.

Gonadal mRNA expression levels of TGFbeta superfamily signaling factors
correspond with post-hatching morphological development in American alligators.

Moore BC(1), Hamlin HJ, Botteri NL, Guillette LJ Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Bartram Hall, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL,
USA. bmoore2 @ tulane.edu

Paracrine factor signaling regulates many aspects of vertebrate gonadal
development. We investigated key ovarian and testicular morphological markers of 
the American alligator (Alligator mississippiensis) during the first 5 months
post-hatching and correlated gonadal development with mRNA expression levels of a
suite of regulatory factors. In both sexes, we observed significant morphology
changes, including ovarian follicle assembly and meiotic progression of
testicular germ cells. Concomitant with these changes were sexually dimorphic and
ontogenetically variable mRNA expressions. In ovaries, FOXL2, aromatase, and
follistatin mRNA expression was greater than in testes at all ages. At one week
after hatching, we observed ovarian medullary remodeling in association with
elevated activin/inhibin beta A subunit, follistatin, and aromatase mRNA
expressions. Three and 5 months following hatching and concomitant with follicle 
assembly, ovaries showed increased mRNA expression levels of GDF9 and the mitotic
factor PCNA. In testes, the activin/inhibin alpha and beta B subunit transcript
levels were greater than in ovaries at all ages. Elevated testicular expression
of GDF9 mRNA levels at 5 months after hatching aligned with increased
spermatogenic activity. We propose that the mRNA expression levels and
concomitant morphological changes observed here affect the establishment of
alligator reproductive health and later fertility.

(c) 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2855286
PMID: 20110644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 20;5(1):e8789. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008789.

Functional exploration of the adult ovarian granulosa cell tumor-associated
somatic FOXL2 mutation p.Cys134Trp (c.402C>G).

Benayoun BA(1), Caburet S, Dipietromaria A, Georges A, D'Haene B, Pandaranayaka
PJ, L'Hôte D, Todeschini AL, Krishnaswamy S, Fellous M, De Baere E, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Programme de Pathologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Institut Jacques Monod,
Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: The somatic mutation in the FOXL2 gene c.402C>G (p.Cys134Trp) has
recently been identified in the vast majority of adult ovarian granulosa cell
tumors (OGCTs) studied. In addition, this mutation seems to be specific to adult 
OGCTs and is likely to be a driver of malignant transformation. However, its
pathogenic mechanisms remain elusive.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have sequenced the FOXL2 open reading frame in
a panel of tumor cell lines (NCI-60, colorectal carcinoma cell lines, JEG-3, and 
KGN cells). We found the FOXL2 c.402C>G mutation in the adult OGCT-derived KGN
cell line. All other cell lines analyzed were negative for the mutation. In order
to gain insights into the pathogenic mechanism of the p.Cys134Trp mutation, the
subcellular localization and mobility of the mutant protein were studied and
found to be no different from those of the wild type (WT). Furthermore, its
transactivation ability was in most cases similar to that of the WT protein,
including in conditions of oxidative stress. A notable exception was an
artificial promoter known to be coregulated by FOXL2 and Smad3, suggesting a
potential modification of their interaction. We generated a 3D structural model
of the p.Cys134Trp variant and our analysis suggests that homodimer formation
might also be disturbed by the mutation.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Here, we confirm the specificity of the FOXL2 c.402C>G 
mutation in adult OGCTs and begin the exploration of its molecular significance. 
This is the first study demonstrating that the p.Cys134Trp mutant does not have a
strong impact on FOXL2 localization, solubility, and transactivation abilities on
a panel of proven target promoters, behaving neither as a dominant-negative nor
as a loss-of-function mutation. Further studies are required to understand the
specific molecular effects of this outstanding FOXL2 mutation.

PMCID: PMC2808356
PMID: 20098707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Lab Anim (NY). 2010 Feb;39(2):28. doi: 10.1038/laban0210-28a.

Ablating a gene causes ovary cells to reprogram.

Dorans K.

PMID: 20090683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Folia Histochem Cytobiol. 2009;47(5):S43-9. doi: 10.2478/v10042-009-0062-7.

The transcription factor FOXL2 in ovarian function and dysfunction.

De Baere E(1), Fellous M, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

The Blepharophimosis Ptosis Epicanthus-inversus Syndrome is a genetic disease
characterized by complex eyelid malformations often associated with premature
ovarian failure (POF). BPES is basically an autosomal dominant disease, due to
mutations in the FOXL2 gene, which encodes a forkhead transcription factor. More 
than one hundred mutations of FOXL2 have been described to date. In agreement
with the BPES phenotype, FOXL2 is expressed (though not exclusively) in the
developing eyelids and in fetal and adult ovaries. Two mouse knock-out models
have been produced. They recapitulate the BPES phenotype and have provided
insights into the pathology. Loss-of-function mutations in FOXL2 are predicted to
lead to BPES and POF, while hypomorphic mutations might lead to BPES without
ovarian dysfunction. However, exceptions to the genotype-phenotype correlation
have been described. To better understand the pathogenic effect of these
mutations it is crucial to study the normal regulation of FOXL2 and its targets. 
We briefly address these aspects in this review and hope that basic research
around FOXL2 will eventually lead to uncover new therapeutic avenues.

PMID: 20067892  [PubMed - in process]


354. Bull Cancer. 2010 Jan;97(1):123-35. doi: 10.1684/bdc.2010.1017.

[Rare ovarian tumours: therapeutic strategies in 2010, national website
observatory for rare ovarian cancers and delineation of referent centers in
France].

[Article in French]

Ray-Coquard I(1), Pautier P, Pujade-Lauraine E, Méeus P, Morice P, Treilleux I,
Duvillard P, Alexandre J, Lhommé C, Selle F, Guastalla J.

Author information: 
(1)Centre Léon-Bérard, 28 Rue Laënnec, 69373 Lyon, France. RAY@lyon.fnclcc.fr

Majorities of the rare ovarian cancers were represented by germ cell tumours and 
sex cords ovarian tumours with borderline tumours, clear cell carcinoma and
mucinous carcinoma and are extremely rare malignant diseases of the ovaries.
Tumors of the stromal (Leydig cells) and/or sex cords (Sertoli cells) represent
approximately 7% of ovarian cancers and develop from the conjunctive tissue
(respectively, interstitial and nurse cells) of the ovaries. All together, they
represented less than 5% of the adult malignant and non malignant ovarian
tumours. Treatment of rare ovarian tumors is currently as follows. Surgery is the
same as that for ovarian adenocarcinoma, with one major difference: conservation 
of reproductive function in women of reproductive age is usual case for this type
of tumor. Chemotherapy for germ cell and sex cords tumors, based on data reported
in the literature is the same as that prescribed for testicular germ-cell tumors.
For rare epithelial carcinoma, carboplatin plus paclitaxel remains the standard
attitude with a well-known less efficiency than for other epithelial subtypes.
Surgery, chemotherapy and possible surgical intervention for residual lesions are
highly complex. Too rare to be included in randomized studies, treatment of these
tumors has benefited from the therapeutic advancements made against testicular
germ-cell tumors or with publications using retrospective data. Effectively, some
prognostic factors such stage, histology, number of managed patients seems to be 
prognostic for survival. Because of the rarity of these tumours a specialized
website (www.ovaire-rare.org) was developed in France in 2002. Objectives were:
to delineate prognostic factors of these very rare diseases, to favour patient
inclusion in a clinical trial available online, to provide access to online
medical expert forum (disease-related) for complex cases, and finally to
demonstrate the impact of these tools on improving medical practice. The website 
provides very interesting data for a better knowledge of these rare tumors and
will possibly help improve medical practice. Since 2008, referent centers were
delineated to promote optimal management of these tumors, organization of
clinical and molecular research at a national or international level and to
elaborate guidelines. The other new scientific data concern surgical procedures
for sex cords tumors, evidence for presence of FOXL2 mutation in adult granulosa 
cell tumors, the use of paclitaxel plus carboplatin for sex cords tumors.

PMID: 20007069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cell. 2009 Dec 11;139(6):1130-42. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.11.021.

Somatic sex reprogramming of adult ovaries to testes by FOXL2 ablation.

Uhlenhaut NH(1), Jakob S, Anlag K, Eisenberger T, Sekido R, Kress J, Treier AC,
Klugmann C, Klasen C, Holter NI, Riethmacher D, Schütz G, Cooney AJ, Lovell-Badge
R, Treier M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory, D-69117
Heidelberg, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell. 2009 Dec 11;139(6):1051-3.

In mammals, the transcription factor SRY, encoded by the Y chromosome, is
normally responsible for triggering the indifferent gonads to develop as testes
rather than ovaries. However, testis differentiation can occur in its absence.
Here we demonstrate in the mouse that a single factor, the forkhead
transcriptional regulator FOXL2, is required to prevent transdifferentiation of
an adult ovary to a testis. Inducible deletion of Foxl2 in adult ovarian
follicles leads to immediate upregulation of testis-specific genes including the 
critical SRY target gene Sox9. Concordantly, reprogramming of granulosa and theca
cell lineages into Sertoli-like and Leydig-like cell lineages occurs with
testosterone levels comparable to those of normal XY male littermates. Our
results show that maintenance of the ovarian phenotype is an active process
throughout life. They might also have important medical implications for the
understanding and treatment of some disorders of sexual development in children
and premature menopause in women.

PMID: 20005806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Cell. 2009 Dec 11;139(6):1051-3. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.11.036.

Females battle to suppress their inner male.

Sinclair A(1), Smith C.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Children's Research Institute, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia.
andrew.sinclair@mcri.edu.au

Comment on
    Cell. 2009 Dec 11;139(6):1130-42.

Conventional wisdom holds that the ovary and testis are terminally differentiated
organs in adult mammals. However, Uhlenhaut et al. (2009) now report that
deletion of a single gene, Foxl2, is sufficient to induce transdifferentiation of
ovary into testis in adult mice, suggesting that testicular development is
actively repressed throughout the life of females.

PMID: 20005799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Cancer Res. 2009 Dec 15;69(24):9160-2. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2669.

Adult-type granulosa cell tumors and FOXL2 mutation.

Köbel M(1), Gilks CB, Huntsman DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Calgary, Canada.

Little is known about the pathogenesis of ovarian granulosa cell tumors.
Recently, we reported the identification of a somatic FOXL2 402C-->G mutation
that is present in virtually all adult-type granulosa cell tumors, but not in a
wide range of other tumor types. This finding has important implications for the 
diagnosis and classification of ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors, provides insight
into the pathogenesis of adult-type granulosa cell tumors, and opens
possibilities for the development of targeted therapies.

PMID: 19996294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Fertil Steril. 2010 Feb;93(3):1006.e3-6. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.08.034.
Epub 2009 Dec 6.

A new FOXL2 gene mutation in a woman with premature ovarian failure and sporadic 
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Corrêa FJ(1), Tavares AB, Pereira RW, Abrão MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Catholic University of Brasilia,
Brasília Federal District, Brazil. fredericoj@pos.ucb.br

OBJECTIVE: To describe a new FOXL2 gene mutation in a woman with sporadic
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) and hypergonadotropic
hypogonadism.
DESIGN: Case report.
SETTING: University medical center.
PATIENT(S): A 28-year-old woman.
INTERVENTION(S): Clinical evaluation, hormone assays, gene mutation research.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): FOXL2 gene mutation.
RESULT(S): The patient with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism was diagnosed with
BPES due to a new FOXL2 gene mutation.
CONCLUSION(S): Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome is a rare
disorder associated with premature ovarian failure (POF). The syndrome is an
autosomal dominant trait that causes eyelid malformations and POF in affected
women. Mutations in FOXL2 gene, located in chromosome 3, are related to the
development of BPES with POF (BPES type I) or without POF (BPES type II). This
report demonstrates a previously undescribed de novo mutation in the FOXL2 gene-a
thymidine deletion, c.627delT (g.864delT)-in a woman with a sporadic case of BPES
and POF. This mutation leads to truncated protein production that is related to a
BPES type I phenotype. This report shows the importance of family history and
genetic analysis in the evaluation of patients with POF and corroborates the
relationship between mutations on the FOXL2 gene and ovarian insufficiency.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19969293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 24;4(11):e7988. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007988.

The specificity of the FOXL2 c.402C>G somatic mutation: a survey of solid tumors.

Schrader KA(1), Gorbatcheva B, Senz J, Heravi-Moussavi A, Melnyk N, Salamanca C, 
Maines-Bandiera S, Cooke SL, Leung P, Brenton JD, Gilks CB, Monahan J, Huntsman
DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: A somatic mutation in the FOXL2 gene is reported to be present in
almost all (97%; 86/89) morphologically defined, adult-type, granulosa-cell
tumors (A-GCTs). This FOXL2 c.402C>G mutation changes a highly conserved cysteine
residue to a tryptophan (p.C134W). It was also found in a minority of other
ovarian malignant stromal tumors, but not in benign ovarian stromal tumors or
unrelated ovarian tumors or breast cancers.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Herein we studied other cancers and cell lines
for the presence of this mutation. We screened DNA from 752 tumors of epithelial 
and mesenchymal origin and 28 ovarian cancer cell lines and 52 other cancer cell 
lines of varied origin. We found the FOXL2 c.402C>G mutation in an unreported
A-GCT case and the A-GCT-derived cell line KGN. All other tumors and cell lines
analyzed were mutation negative.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: In addition to proving that the KGN cell line is a
useful model to study A-GCTs, these data show that the c.402C>G mutation in FOXL2
is not commonly found in a wide variety of other cancers and therefore it is
likely pathognomonic for A-GCTs and closely related tumors.

PMCID: PMC2777318
PMID: 19956657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2010 Dec;36(4):923-32. doi: 10.1007/s10695-009-9369-8. Epub
2009 Nov 26.

Sexually dimorphic gene expression in the gonad and liver of shovelnose sturgeon 
(Scaphirhynchus platorynchus).

Amberg JJ(1), Goforth R, Stefanavage T, Sepúlveda MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forestry and Natural Resources, Purdue University, 195
Marsteller St., West Lafayette, IN 47906, USA.

The development of a biomarker for rapid detection of intersex is desirable to
researchers and fisheries managers alike. The first step is to identify a marker 
that has a dimorphic expression pattern. With a focus on sex-specific genes, we
assessed the use of vitellogenin (vtg), forkhead box L2 (foxl2) and doublesex and
mab-3-related transcription factor 1 (dmrt1) as molecular biomarkers for the
identification of gender in shovelnose sturgeon (Scaphirhynchus platorynchus), a 
species known to have intersex individuals. A total of 61 shovelnose sturgeons
were sampled from the Wabash River, Indiana, in April 2008. Results from our
study indicate that least 7.5% of the non-females had testicular oocytes.
Expression level of liver vtg was not higher in females than males, nor was gonad
dmrt1 expression found to be higher in males. Only the expression of foxl2 was
significantly greater in females and was found to be useful for identifying
gender. Variation in expression levels of foxl2 in gonads of intersex fish
limited its usefulness as a single biomarker for identifying this condition.
Instead, the use of foxl2 to dmrt1 (foxl2 transcript abundance/dmrt1 transcript
abundance) may be useful in the identification of intersex fish, as this ratio
increased with increased feminization. We conclude that foxl2 can be used to
identify sex, but not intersex sturgeon.

PMID: 19941163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2010 Feb;14(1):145-8. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2009.0091.

Identification of a novel mutation in FOXL2 gene that leads to blepharophimosis
ptosis epicanthus inversus and telecanthus syndrome in a Tunisian consanguineous 
family.

Chouchene I, Derouiche K, Chaabouni A, Cherif L, Amouri A, Largueche L, Abdelhak 
S, El Matri L.

Mutations in FOXL2 gene are responsible for blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus
inversus and telecanthus syndrome (BPES). The BPES syndrome is a rare autosomal
dominant genetic disease characterized by eyelid malformations associated with
premature ovarian failure (BPES type I) or not (BPES type II). The human FOXL2
protein (376 aa) contains a 100 amino-acid DNA-binding forkhead domain (residues 
52-152) and a polyalanine tract (residues 221-234). In the present study, we
report the molecular investigation of four affected members with BPES syndrome in
a Tunisian consanguineous family. To identify the causative mutation, we
performed a direct sequencing of the FOXL2 gene. The sequence analysis of the
coding exon revealed a novel frameshift mutation g.1113 dup C, c.876 dup C,
p.P292 Fs. The mutation is located downstream of the polyalanine tract and causes
the protein extension to 532 aa. This study reports for the first time a novel
frameshift mutation in two-generation consanguineous Tunisian family with BPES.
Our results expand the spectrum of FOXL2 mutations.

PMID: 19929410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Fertil Steril. 2010 Jun;94(1):353-6. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.09.050. Epub 
2009 Nov 14.

Human forkhead L2 represses key genes in granulosa cell differentiation including
aromatase, P450scc, and cyclin D2.

Bentsi-Barnes IK(1), Kuo FT, Barlow GM, Pisarska MD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics/Gynecology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California 90048
, USA.

FOXL2 is expressed in granulosa cells (GC) of small and medium ovarian follicles,
functions as a repressor of the human steroidogenic acute regulatory gene, a
marker of a GC differentiation, and its mutation is associated with premature
ovarian failure (POF) in women with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus
syndrome (BPES), type I. We now report that FOXL2 also represses the
transcription of aromatase, P450scc, and cyclin D2, three other key genes
involved in GC proliferation, differentiation, and steroidogenesis, and that a
FOXL2 mutation found in patients with BPES type I, also fails to repress
aromatase transcription, further supporting a role for FOXL2 in follicle
maturation.

Copyright (c) 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2876195
PMID: 19917504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2010 Jul 1;167(3):417-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2009.11.003. 
Epub 2009 Nov 14.

Sex differentiation and sex change in the protandrous black porgy, Acanthopagrus 
schlegeli.

Wu GC(1), Tomy S, Lee MF, Lee YH, Yueh WS, Lin CJ, Lau EL, Chang CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Aquaculture, National Taiwan Ocean University, Keelung 202,
Taiwan.

Protandrous black porgy fish, Acanthopagrus schlegeli, have a striking life cycle
with a male sex differentiation at the juvenile stage and male-to-female sex
change at 3 years of age. We had characterized the sex differentiation and sex
change in this species by the integrative approaches of histology, endocrine and 
molecular genetics. The fish differentiated in gonad at the age around 4-months
and the gonad further developed with a bisexual gonad for almost for 3 years and 
sex change at 3 year of age. An antagonistic relationship in the testicular and
ovarian tissues was found during the development of the gonadal tissue. Male-
(such as sf-1, dmrt1, dax-1 and amh) and female- (such as wnt4, foxl2 and
cyp19a1a) promoting genes were associated with testicular and ovarian
development, respectively. During gonadal sex differentiation, steroidogenic
pathway and estrogen signaling were also highly expressed in the brain. The
increased expression of sf-1 and wnt4, cyp19a1a in ovarian tissue and decreased
expression of dax-1 in the ovarian tissue may play important roles in sex change 
from a male-to-female. Endocrine factors such as estradiol and luteinizing
hormone may also involve in the natural sex change. Estradiol induced the
expression of female-promoting genes and resulted in the precocious sex change in
black porgy. Our series of studies shed light on the sex differentiation and sex 
change in protandrous black porgy and other animals.

(c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19917286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2010 Feb;155(2):118-25. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2009.10.015.

Regulation, expression and characterization of aromatase (cyp19b1) transcripts in
ovary and testis of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss).

von Schalburg KR(1), Yasuike M, Davidson WS, Koop BF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biomedical Research, University of Victoria, Victoria, British
Columbia, Canada.

Cytochrome P450 aromatase is the key enzyme in the pathway that converts
androgens to estrogens. The enzyme functions in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum 
in a complex with NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase. In teleost fish, at least two 
separate loci, cyp19a and cyp19b, encode distinct aromatase isoforms. The
activity of cyp19a and cyp19b are predominantly associated with the ovary and
brain, respectively, although their expression is not confined solely to these
tissues. We found that at least five cyp19b1 transcripts with different 5'-UTRs
are generated in the ovary and testis of rainbow trout. Regulation for selection 
of these variants may be through signals present in exon 2 that recruit
alternative splicing factors. Also, binding elements for FOXL2 and SF-1 located
within the cyp19b1 intron 1 may influence formation of transcripts that contain
the 3'-end of the intron. Another transcript devoid of the exon 2 methionine
initiator codon may utilize other downstream in-frame start codons. Less
developed stages of ovarian and testicular tissues express only the
intron-containing transcripts whereas precocious and more mature gonads express
all five cyp19b1 messages. The function of these different 5'-UTRs may be for
regulation of cyp19b1 at particular developmental stages or to specify control in
distinct gonadal cell-types.

PMID: 19895900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. J Androl. 2010 Jan-Feb;31(1):16-25. doi: 10.2164/jandrol.109.008201. Epub 2009
Oct 29.

Determination and stability of gonadal sex.

Schlessinger D(1), Garcia-Ortiz JE, Forabosco A, Uda M, Crisponi L, Pelosi E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging-IRP, Baltimore, MD 21224, 
USA.

The discovery that the SRY gene induces male sex in humans and other mammals led 
to speculation about a possible equivalent for female sex. But females are
proving to be more complicated. Several master genes appear to be autonomously
involved, and female sex determination seems to remain relatively labile. Partial
loss of function of the transcription factor FOXL2 leads to premature ovarian
failure in women; and in animal models, Foxl2 is required for folliculogenesis as
well as for maintenance, and possibly induction, of female sex determination. In 
the germ line, oocytes apparently form normally even in the absence of Foxl2,
dependent on genes that include female-specific factors such as Fig-alpha, Nobox,
etc. In the soma, ablation of Foxl2 or the independently expressed gene Wnt4
(likely downstream of Rspo1) can produce partial testis differentiation in XX
mice, and the double knockout results in the formation of tubules and
spermatogonia. This indicates that at least 2 autonomous ovarian pathways are
required to antagonize testis differentiation in females, a finding that is being
increasingly corroborated by studies in goats and nonmammalian vertebrates. In
recent expression profiling of mouse ovaries that lack Foxl2 alone or in
combination with Wnt4 or Kit/c-Kit, we found that following Foxl2 loss, early
testis genes (including the downstream effector of Sry, Sox9) and several novel
ovarian genes were consistently dysregulated during embryo-fetal development. The
results support the proposal of dose-dependent Foxl2 function and antitestis
action. A partial working model for somatic development and sex determination is 
presented in which Sox9 is a direct antagonist of Foxl2 in the supporting cell
lineage.

PMCID: PMC2882171
PMID: 19875493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Hum Reprod. 2010 Jan;25(1):235-43. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dep355. Epub 2009 Oct 9.

FOXL2 mutations lead to different ovarian phenotypes in BPES patients: Case
Report.

Méduri G(1), Bachelot A, Duflos C, Bständig B, Poirot C, Genestie C, Veitia R, De
Baere E, Touraine P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherche, INSERM, U-693, Hôpital Bicêtre, 94275 Le Kremlin Bicêtre, 
France.

FOXL2 mutations cause the autosomal dominant Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus
inversus syndrome (BPES) that may be associated with premature ovarian failure
(POF). However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms of FOXL2 actions
in the human ovary. We conducted an extensive clinical, hormonal and ovarian
histological study in two patients carrying a FOXL2 mutation associated with the 
typical eyelid malformations and infertility. This observational study was
conducted at referral centres for POF. Histological and immunohistological
studies were conducted on ovarian biopsies from two women with POF carrying a
FOXL2 mutation resulting in putative polyalanine expansions of the protein.
Abnormalities similar to those observed in mice with FOXL2 gene inactivation were
present in the first patient's ovary, although the ovarian histology of the
second patient was apparently normal. Different ovarian phenotypes, follicular
defects and distribution of FOXL2 protein were observed in two patients carrying 
a FOXL2 mutation.

PMID: 19819892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Endocrinology. 2009 Nov;150(11):5085-93. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0313. Epub 2009 Sep
24.

Foxl2, a forkhead transcription factor, modulates nonclassical activity of the
estrogen receptor-alpha.

Kim SY(1), Weiss J, Tong M, Laronda MM, Lee EJ, Jameson JL.

Author information: 
(1)Morton 4-656, 303 East Chicago Avenue, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Foxl2 is a forkhead transcription factor required for ovary development and
ovarian follicle maturation. In this report, we identified and characterized a
functional relationship between Foxl2 expression and estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha
signaling. We show that Foxl2 has no effect on classical ERalpha-mediated
transcription, which occurs through canonical estrogen response elements.
However, Foxl2 suppresses ERalpha signaling through nonclassical tethered
transcriptional pathways. Specifically, the selective ER modulator tamoxifen
stimulates activator protein-1 (AP1)-dependent transcription via the ERalpha, and
this enhancement is blocked by Foxl2. Two lines of evidence suggest that Foxl2
suppression is mediated by physical interactions with ERalpha rather than direct 
action at AP1 binding sites. First, ERalpha is coimmunoprecipitated with Foxl2.
Second, activation of a upstream activating sequence (UAS) reporter by Gal4-cJun 
in the presence of ERalpha and tamoxifen was blocked by Foxl2, demonstrating
suppression in the absence of an AP1 site. Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2), which is
required for ovulation, was identified through expression profiling as a
candidate physiological target for nonclassical ERalpha signaling and thus
modulation by ERalpha/Foxl2 interactions. This possibility was confirmed by two
sets of experiments. COX2 protein levels were induced by ERalpha in the presence 
of tamoxifen, and protein expression was suppressed by Foxl2. In addition,
ERalpha stimulation of the COX2 promoter was repressed by Foxl2. We conclude that
ERalpha and Foxl2 interact and that Foxl2 selectively suppresses ERalpha-mediated
transcription of AP1-regulated genes. These data provide a potential point of
convergence for ERalpha and Foxl2 to regulate ovarian development and function.

PMCID: PMC2775987
PMID: 19797124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Folia Biol (Krakow). 2009;57(3-4):105-13.

Molecular mechanisms underlying female sex determination--antagonism between
female and male pathway.

Piprek RP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Anatomy, Institute of Zoology, Jagiellonian
University, R. Ingardena 6, 30-060 Kraków, Poland. rafalpiprek@wp.pl

Molecular interactions in a developing gonad are crucial for an individual since 
they determine its phenotypic sex. The process of sex determination is
complicated because of the antagonistic interactions between the male and female 
pathway. Factors responsible for the determination of femaleness make the female 
pathway. This pathway has to inhibit a complex network of male-determining
factors and also has to induce the expression of genes that drive differentiation
of the ovary. Morphological description of the ovary development suggests that
this process is simple, however, the analysis of the robust gene expression
indicates that genetic control of the ovary differentiation is active and
complicated at the molecular level. A plethora of genes is expresed in developing
gonads. Nevertheless, there are only a couple of genes the role in ovary
development of which has been described till now. RSPO1 seems the main gene
participating in the establishment of the ovary fate. The loss of functional
R-spondin1 causes the complete female-to-male sex reversal in human. The second
important factor is WNT4 which plays an opposite role to R-spondin1 in the gonad 
but also is decisive for the ovarian fate. WNT4 and RSPO1 drive the disposition
of beta-catenin in cells and thus these factors regulate gene transcription and
cell-cell adhesion. Foxl2 is another gene contributing to the development of the 
ovary. In females also germ cells seem to play important role in sex
determination.

PMID: 19777952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Int J Dev Biol. 2010;54(4):683-9. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.092920ac.

Gonadal defects in Cited2-mutant mice indicate a role for SF1 in both testis and 
ovary differentiation.

Combes AN(1), Spiller CM, Harley VR, Sinclair AH, Dunwoodie SL, Wilhelm D,
Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics and Development, Institute for Molecular
Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

Sex determination is regulated by a molecular antagonism between testis- and
ovary-determining pathways in the supporting cell lineage of the gonadal
primordia. Genes important for maintaining this lineage play critical roles in
early gonadal development, but their influence on testis and ovary
differentiation is unclear due to the severity of loss-of-function phenotypes.
The transcription factor SF1 (Nr5a1/Ad4BP) is one such factor, required for
establishing the supporting cell lineage, and for propagating the male pathway.
In the gonad, Sf1 expression is enhanced by the transcriptional co-factor Cited2.
We have used the reduced levels of Sf1 expression in Cited2(-/-) mice as a
hypomorphic model to gain insight into the sex-specific roles of SF1 function in 
gonadal development. In XY mutant mice, we found that testis development was
delayed in Cited2(-/-) gonads, and that testis structure was permanently
disrupted. In XX Cited2(-/-) gonads, ectopic cell migration was observed which
correlated with a transient upregulation of Fgf9, and a delay in Wnt4 then Foxl2 
expression. These data suggest a novel role for SF1 in promoting ovarian
development in addition to its roles in testis differentiation.

PMID: 19757380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Jan;1805(1):1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2009.09.002.
Epub 2009 Sep 10.

The forkhead factor FOXL2: a novel tumor suppressor?

Benayoun BA(1), Kalfa N, Sultan C, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, UMR 7592-CNRS, 15 rue Hélène Brion, Paris, France.

FOXL2 is a gene encoding a forkhead transcription factor, whose germline
mutations are responsible for the blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus inversus
syndrome. We have previously shown that expression levels of FOXL2 in a series of
juvenile ovarian granulosa cell tumors (OGCTs) were markedly reduced. More
recently, a whole-transcriptome 'next-generation' sequencing study has identified
the somatic mutation p.Cys134Trp as recurring in adult OGCTs. This mutation may
thus provide the tumor with either a striking proliferative potential or
increased survival abilities. These studies of FOXL2 in OGCTs suggest that it may
act as a tumor suppressor gene. This is in line with the fact that other forkhead
transcription factors have already been involved in the etiology of cancer.
Indeed, an in-depth review of existing data on FOXL2 reveals that its target
genes and molecular partners can often be linked to cancer progression.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19747961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cell Signal. 2009 Dec;21(12):1935-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.09.001. Epub
2009 Sep 8.

Sumoylation of forkhead L2 by Ubc9 is required for its activity as a
transcriptional repressor of the Steroidogenic Acute Regulatory gene.

Kuo FT(1), Bentsi-Barnes IK, Barlow GM, Bae J, Pisarska MD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Fertility and Reproductive Medicine, Division of REI, Department of
Ob/Gyn, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA 90048, United States.

Forkhead L2 (FOXL2) is a member of the forkhead/hepatocyte nuclear factor 3
(FKH/HNF3) gene family of transcription factors and acts as a transcriptional
repressor of the Steroidogenic Acute Regulatory (StAR) gene, a marker of
granulosa cell differentiation. FOXL2 may play a role in ovarian follicle
maturation and prevent premature follicle depletion leading to premature ovarian 
failure. In this study, we found that FOXL2 interacts with Ubc9, an
E2-conjugating enzyme that mediates sumoylation, a key mechanism in
transcriptional regulation. FOXL2 and Ubc9 are co-expressed in granulosa cells of
small and medium ovarian follicles. FOXL2 is sumoylated by Ubc9, and this
Ubc9-mediated sumoylation is essential to the transcriptional activity of FOXL2
on the StAR promoter. As FOXL2 is endogenous to granulosa cells, we generated a
stable cell line expressing FOXL2 and found that activity of the StAR promoter in
this cell line is greatly decreased in the presence of Ubc9. The sumoylation site
was identified at lysine 25 of FOXL2. Mutation of lysine 25 to arginine leads to 
loss of transcriptional repressor activity of FOXL2. Taken together, we propose
that Ubc9-mediated sumoylation at lysine 25 of FOXL2 is required for
transcriptional repression of the StAR gene and may be responsible for
controlling the development of ovarian follicles.

PMCID: PMC2830813
PMID: 19744555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Biol. 2009 Sep 2;8(8):74. doi: 10.1186/jbiol173.

Complementary pathways in mammalian female sex determination.

Nef S(1), Vassalli JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. serge.nef@unige.ch

In mammals, the sex of the embryo is determined by the fate of the gonad. Recent 
papers, including one in BMC Developmental Biology, shed light on the molecular
regulation of ovarian development and suggest that the
R-spondin1/Wnt4/beta-catenin pathway and the Foxl2 transcription factor act in a 
complementary manner to promote ovarian fate and to repress testicular
development.

PMCID: PMC2776915
PMID: 19735582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Fam Cancer. 2009;8(4):569-80. doi: 10.1007/s10689-009-9288-y.

FAP-associated desmoid invasiveness correlates with in vitro resistance to
doxorubicin.

Joyner DE(1), Trang SH, Aboulafia AJ, Damron TA, Randall RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Sarcoma Services, SARC Laboratory, and Huntsman
Cancer Institute, University of Utah, 2000 Circle of Hope, Salt Lake City, UT
84112, USA. david.joyner@hci.utah.edu

Erratum in
    Fam Cancer. 2010 Jun;9(2):261. Randall, R Lor [corrected to Randall, R L].

Desmoid tumors are locally invasive myofibroblastic lesions that arise
predominantly in the abdominal wall or shoulder girdle and are prone to
aggressive local recurrences without metastases. We hypothesized the intrinsic
invasiveness and drug resistance displayed by cells derived from a familial
adenomatous polyposis (FAP)-associated desmoid tumor would surpass the response
shown by cells derived from sporadic desmoid tumors. In vitro cell motility and
expression of motility-associated genes were quantified using Boyden Chambers and
Enzyme-Linked ImmunoSorbent Assays, respectively. Doxorubicin resistance was
quantified by Trypan Blue dye exclusion. cDNA microarrays identified genes
responsive to doxorubicin. FAP-associated tumor cells were significantly more
invasive and refractory to doxorubicin than were cells extracted from sporadic
tumors. Pro-MMP1 protein predominated over MMP3 in FAP-associated cell culture
supernatants, while MMP3 was the dominant antigen in sporadic tumor cell
supernatants. Three genes associated with apoptosis were identified by
microarray, two prosurvival genes overexpressed in FAP-associated cell cultures
(NTN1, TNFRSF10C) and one proapoptosis gene overexpressed in sporadic tumor cell 
cultures (FOXL2).

PMID: 19728161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Genome Med. 2009 Aug 25;1(8):81. doi: 10.1186/gm81.

The new molecular biology of granulosa cell tumors of the ovary.

Kalfa N(1), Veitia RA, Benayoun BA, Boizet-Bonhoure B, Sultan C.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Hormonologie, Hôpital Lapeyronie, CHU Montpellier et UM1,
Montpellier, France.

Granulosa cell tumors (GCTs) of the ovary belong to the group of ovarian sex-cord
stromal tumors and represent 5 to 10% of ovarian malignancies. GCTs exhibit
several morphological, biochemical and hormonal features of normal proliferating 
pre-ovulatory granulosa cells, such as estrogen biosynthesis. Prognostic factors 
of this condition are lacking, and alternative treatment options to preserve
future fertility are needed. Several groups have shown that two genetic factors
implicated in GCTs are of particular interest. The gsp oncogene is a constitutive
activating mutation of the prognosis of the tumor. FOXL2 is a transcription
factor gene involved in ovarian development and function, whose expression is
reduced and which is mutated in the majority of GCTs. FOXL2 appears to play a
major role in cell cycle regulation. These recent findings open new
pathophysiological insights into GCT development as well as revisitation of
granulosa cell and ovarian function.

PMCID: PMC2768967
PMID: 19725933  [PubMed]


375. Mol Hum Reprod. 2009 Dec;15(12):771-7. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gap065. Epub 2009 Aug 
25.

The forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 is expressed in somatic cells of the
human ovary prior to follicle formation.

Duffin K(1), Bayne RA, Childs AJ, Collins C, Anderson RA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive and Developmental Sciences, Centre for Reproductive
Biology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Interactions between germ cells and surrounding somatic cells are central to
ovarian development as well as later function. Disruption of these interactions
arising from abnormalities in either cell type can lead to premature ovarian
failure (POF). The forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 is a candidate POF factor,
and mutations in the FOXL2 gene are associated with syndromic and non-syndromic
ovarian failure. Foxl2-deficient mice display major defects in primordial
follicle activation with consequent follicle loss, and earlier roles in gonadal
development and sex determination have also been suggested. However, despite its 
importance no data presently exist on its expression in the developing human
ovary. Expression of FOXL2 mRNA was demonstrated in the human fetal ovary between
8 and 19 weeks gestation, thus from soon after sex determination to primordial
follicle development. Expression in the ovary was higher after 14 weeks than at
earlier gestation weeks and was very low in the fetal testis at all ages
examined. Immunolocalization revealed FOXL2 expression to be confined to somatic 
cells, both adjacent to germ cells and those located in the developing ovarian
stroma. These cells are the site of action of oocyte-derived activin signalling, 
but in vitro treatment of human fetal ovaries with activin failed to reveal any
regulation of FOXL2 transcription by this pathway. In summary, the expression of 
FOXL2 in somatic cells of the developing human ovary before and during follicle
formation supports a conserved and continuing role for this factor in
somatic/germ cell interactions from the earliest stages of human ovarian
development.

PMCID: PMC2776473
PMID: 19706741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Sex Dev. 2009;3(2-3):118-35. doi: 10.1159/000223077. Epub 2009 Aug 10.

Environmental effects on fish sex determination and differentiation.

Baroiller JF(1), D'Cotta H, Saillant E.

Author information: 
(1)CIRAD, Upr20, Dept. Persyst, Campus International de Baillarguet, Montpellier,
France. baroiller@cirad.fr

Environmental factors affect the sex ratio of many gonochoristic fish species.
They can either determine sex or influence sex differentiation. Temperature is
the most common environmental cue affecting sex but density, pH and hypoxia have 
also been shown to influence the sex ratio of fish species from very divergent
orders. Differential growth or developmental rate is suggested to influence sex
differentiation in sea bass. Studies in most fish species used domestic strains
reared under controlled conditions. In tilapia and sea bass, domestic stocks and 
field-collected populations showed similar patterns of thermosensitivity under
controlled conditions. Genetic variability of thermosensitivity is seen between
populations but also between families within the same population. Furthermore, in
the Nile tilapia progeny testing of wild male breeders has strongly suggested the
existence of XX males in 2 different natural populations. Tilapia and Atlantic
silverside studies have shown that temperature sensitivity is a heritable trait
which can respond to directional (tilapia) or frequency dependent selection. In
tilapia, transitional forms within a genetic sex determination (GSD) and
environmental sex determination (ESD) continuum seem to exist. Temperature
regulates the expression of the ovarian-aromatase cyp19a1 which is consistently
inhibited in temperature masculinized gonads. Foxl2 is suppressed before cyp19a1.
Recent in vitro studies have shown that foxl2 activates cyp19a1, suggesting that 
temperature acts directly on foxl2 or further upstream. Dmrt1 up-regulation is
correlated with temperature-induced male phenotypes. Temperature through
apoptosis or germ cell proliferation could be a critical threshold for male or
female sex differentiation.

2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19684457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Biol Reprod. 2009 Dec;81(6):1073-82. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.077362. Epub
2009 Jul 15.

wnt4 Is associated with the development of ovarian tissue in the protandrous
black Porgy, Acanthopagrus schlegeli.

Wu GC(1), Chang CF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung, Taiwan.

The protandrous black porgy, Acanthopagrus schlegeli, has a striking life cycle
with sex differentiation at the juvenile stage, mono-male development, and
male-to-female sex change (with vitellogenic oocytes) at age 3 yr. In the present
study, we investigated the possible roles of wnt4 in gonadal development in a
nonmammalian model organism (protandrous black porgy), especially in relation to 
sex differentiation, ovarian growth, and sex change. Fish of various ages were
treated with estradiol (E2) or aromatase inhibitor (AI) to determine whether
manipulation of the hormonal environment had an effect on these processes.
Furthermore, a natural sex change (> or =2-yr-old fish) and a nonchemical method 
to induce an early sex change (> or =1-yr-old fish) via the removal of testicular
tissue were examined in this study. We present herein an integrative
immunohistochemical, cellular, and molecular data set describing these phenomena.
During gonadal sex differentiation, no increase in wnt4 expression was detected. 
A profile of increased wnt4 expression and decreased cyp19a1a expression was
associated with ovarian growth (proliferation of oogonia and development of
ovarian lamellae) in > or =1-yr-old fish. Both E2 and AI induced an increase in
wnt4 transcripts and resulted in ovarian development in > or =0-yr-old and > or
=1-yr-old fish. Increased wnt4 transcripts were found in ovarian tissue
undergoing development from primary oocytes to vitellogenic oocytes during the
natural sex change in > or =2-yr-old fish. Removal of testicular tissue in > or
=1-yr-old fish resulted in successful early sex change (with vitellogenic
oocytes) 6 mo after the excision. During the process of the early sex change (3
mo after testis excision), the fish ovary became active and had increased
diameter of the primary oocytes; this was in accord with increased ovarian wnt4
expression but not sf1, foxl2, and genes in the steroidogenic pathway, including 
cyp19a1a. Wnt4 staining further confirmed the profile of wnt4 expression
associated with ovarian development. The results of the present study suggest
that wnt4 has important roles in late ovarian growth (e.g., oogonia proliferation
and structure of ovarian lamellae) and the natural sex change (vitellogenic
oocytes) in the protandrous black porgy.

PMID: 19605791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mol Biol Rep. 2010 Apr;37(4):1841-7. doi: 10.1007/s11033-009-9619-y. Epub 2009
Jul 12.

Exogenous cMHM regulates the expression of DMRT1 and ER alpha in avian testes.

Yang X(1), Zheng J, Xu G, Qu L, Chen S, Li J, Yang N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology and Department of Animal Genetics
and Breeding, College of Animal Science and Technology, China Agricultural
University, 100193, Beijing, China.

The male hypemethylated (MHM) region, associated with sex-specific DNA
methylation and histone acetylation, encodes non-coding RNAs that are expressed
exclusively on Z chromosome in female chickens. The function of the MHM
non-coding RNAs is unclear yet. In order to analyze the regulation effect of MHM 
on mRNA expression of sex-dependent genes, exogenous plasmid containing chicken
MHM (cMHM) was constructed and injected into left testes of 13-week-old roosters.
Comb color of the roosters in the pEGFP-N1-cMHM group became much paler, an
indication of change in sex hormones, as compared with that of the negative
control groups at the 10 days after injection. Real-time PCR was used to
determine mRNA expression of sex-dependent genes in testes tissue. Transcription 
of ER alpha gene was significantly up-regulated in the pEGFP-N1-cMHM group
compared with that of the pEGFP-N1 and normal saline groups (P < 0.01), while
expression of DMRT1 mRNA declined severely in the pEGFP-N1-cMHM group compared
with that of normal saline groups (P < 0.05). Nevertheless, expression of other
candidate genes, such as AMH, FOXL2, SOX9, and P450arom did not change after
injection of exogenous cMHM. In conclusion, down-regulation of DMRT1 and
up-regulation of ER alpha in rooster testes treated with exogenous pEGFP-N1-cMHM 
plasmid might indicate a novel cMHM non-coding RNA-mediated mechanism in avian
sex differentiation.

PMID: 19597752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Mutagenesis. 2009 Sep;24(5):447-53. doi: 10.1093/mutage/gep028. Epub 2009 Jul 10.

FOXL2 gene mutations and blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome
(BPES): a novel mutation detected in a Chinese family and a statistic model for
summarizing previous reported records.

Xu Y(1), Lei H, Dong H, Zhang L, Qin Q, Gao J, Zou Y, Yan X.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical and Basic Medical Sciences, The First People's Hospital 
of Yunnan Province (The Kunhua Affiliated Hospital of Kunming Medical College),
Kunming 650032, People's Republic of China.

Previous studies found that the forkhead transcription factor 2 (FOXL2) gene
mutations are responsible for both types of blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus
inversus syndrome (BPES) but have not established any systematic statistic model 
for the complex and even contradictory results about genotype-phenotype
correlations between them. This study is aimed to find possible mutations of
FOXL2 gene in a Chinese family with type II BPES by using DNA sequencing and to
further clarify genotype-phenotype correlations between FOXL2 mutations and BPES 
by using a systematic statistical method, namely Multifactor Dimensionality
Reduction (MDR). A novel mutation (g.933_965dup) which could result in an
expansion of the polyalanine (polyAla) tract was detected in all patients of this
family. MDR analysis for intragenic mutations of FOXL2 gene reported in previous 
BPES studies indicated that the mutations which led to much stronger disturbance 
of amino acid sequence were responsible for more type I BPES, while other kinds
of mutation were responsible for more type II BPES. In conclusion, the present
study found a novel FOXL2 gene mutation in a Chinese BPES family and a new
general genotype-phenotype correlation tendency between FOXL2 intragenic
mutations and BPES, both of which expanded the knowledge about FOXL2 gene and
BPES.

PMID: 19592504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Endocr Rev. 2009 Aug;30(5):438-64. doi: 10.1210/er.2008-0048. Epub 2009 Jul 9.

Molecular mechanisms underlying the activation of mammalian primordial follicles.

Adhikari D(1), Liu K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Umeå University, Umeå,
Sweden.

In humans and other mammalian species, the pool of resting primordial follicles
serves as the source of developing follicles and fertilizable ova for the entire 
length of female reproductive life. One question that has intrigued biologists
is: what are the mechanisms controlling the activation of dormant primordial
follicles. Studies from previous decades have laid a solid, but yet incomplete,
foundation. In recent years, molecular mechanisms underlying follicular
activation have become more evident, mainly through the use of genetically
modified mouse models. As hypothesized in the 1990s, the pool of primordial
follicles is now known to be maintained in a dormant state by various forms of
inhibitory machinery, which are provided by several inhibitory signals and
molecules. Several recently reported mutant mouse models have shown that a
synergistic and coordinated suppression of follicular activation provided by
multiple inhibitory molecules is necessary to preserve the dormant follicular
pool. Loss of function of any of the inhibitory molecules for follicular
activation, including PTEN (phosphatase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 
10), Foxo3a, p27, and Foxl2, leads to premature and irreversible activation of
the primordial follicle pool. Such global activation of the primordial follicle
pool leads to the exhaustion of the resting follicle reserve, resulting in
premature ovarian failure in mice. In this review, we summarize both historical
and recent results on mammalian primordial follicular activation and focus on the
up-to-date knowledge of molecular networks controlling this important
physiological event. We believe that information obtained from mutant mouse
models may also reflect the molecular machinery responsible for follicular
activation in humans. These advances may provide a better understanding of human 
ovarian physiology and pathophysiology for future clinical applications.

PMID: 19589950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. PLoS Genet. 2009 Jun;5(6):e1000522. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000522. Epub 2009 
Jun 19.

Disease-causing 7.4 kb cis-regulatory deletion disrupting conserved non-coding
sequences and their interaction with the FOXL2 promotor: implications for
mutation screening.

D'haene B(1), Attanasio C, Beysen D, Dostie J, Lemire E, Bouchard P, Field M,
Jones K, Lorenz B, Menten B, Buysse K, Pattyn F, Friedli M, Ucla C, Rossier C,
Wyss C, Speleman F, De Paepe A, Dekker J, Antonarakis SE, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

To date, the contribution of disrupted potentially cis-regulatory conserved
non-coding sequences (CNCs) to human disease is most likely underestimated, as no
systematic screens for putative deleterious variations in CNCs have been
conducted. As a model for monogenic disease we studied the involvement of genetic
changes of CNCs in the cis-regulatory domain of FOXL2 in blepharophimosis
syndrome (BPES). Fifty-seven molecularly unsolved BPES patients underwent
high-resolution copy number screening and targeted sequencing of CNCs. Apart from
three larger distant deletions, a de novo deletion as small as 7.4 kb was found
at 283 kb 5' to FOXL2. The deletion appeared to be triggered by an H-DNA-induced 
double-stranded break (DSB). In addition, it disrupts a novel long non-coding RNA
(ncRNA) PISRT1 and 8 CNCs. The regulatory potential of the deleted CNCs was
substantiated by in vitro luciferase assays. Interestingly, Chromosome
Conformation Capture (3C) of a 625 kb region surrounding FOXL2 in expressing
cellular systems revealed physical interactions of three upstream fragments and
the FOXL2 core promoter. Importantly, one of these contains the 7.4 kb deleted
fragment. Overall, this study revealed the smallest distant deletion causing
monogenic disease and impacts upon the concept of mutation screening in human
disease and developmental disorders in particular.

PMCID: PMC2689649
PMID: 19543368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. BMC Dev Biol. 2009 Jun 18;9:36. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-9-36.

Foxl2 functions in sex determination and histogenesis throughout mouse ovary
development.

Garcia-Ortiz JE(1), Pelosi E, Omari S, Nedorezov T, Piao Y, Karmazin J, Uda M,
Cao A, Cole SW, Forabosco A, Schlessinger D, Ottolenghi C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, NIA/NIH-IRP, Baltimore, MD, USA. egarcia@cucs.udg.mx

BACKGROUND: Partial loss of function of the transcription factor FOXL2 leads to
premature ovarian failure in women. In animal models, Foxl2 is required for
maintenance, and possibly induction, of female sex determination independently of
other critical genes, e.g., Rspo1. Here we report expression profiling of mouse
ovaries that lack Foxl2 alone or in combination with Wnt4 or Kit/c-Kit.
RESULTS: Following Foxl2 loss, early testis genes (including Inhbb, Dhh, and
Sox9) and several novel ovarian genes were consistently dysregulated during
embryonic development. In the absence of Foxl2, expression changes affecting a
large fraction of pathways were opposite those observed in Wnt4-null ovaries,
reinforcing the notion that these genes have complementary actions in ovary
development. Loss of one copy of Foxl2 revealed strong gene dosage sensitivity,
with molecular anomalies that were milder but resembled ovaries lacking both
Foxl2 alleles. Furthermore, a Foxl2 transgene disrupted embryonic testis
differentiation and increased the levels of key female markers.
CONCLUSION: The results, including a comprehensive principal component analysis, 
1) support the proposal of dose-dependent Foxl2 function and anti-testis action
throughout ovary differentiation; and 2) identify candidate genes for roles in
sex determination independent of FOXL2 (e.g., the transcription factors IRX3 and 
ZBTB7C) and in the generation of the ovarian reserve downstream of FOXL2 (e.g.,
the cadherin-domain protein CLSTN2 and the sphingomyelin synthase SGMS2). The
gene inventory is a first step toward the identification of the full range of
pathways with partly autonomous roles in ovary development, and thus provides a
framework to analyze the genetic bases of female fertility.

PMCID: PMC2711087
PMID: 19538736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Medicina (Kaunas). 2009;45(5):357-64.

[Diagnosis and management of 46,XY mixed gonadal dysgenesis and disorder of
sexual differentiation].

[Article in Lithuanian]

Verkauskas G(1), Macianskyte D, Janciauskas D, Preiksa RT, Verkauskiene R,
Jaubert F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Kaunas University of Medicine, Kaunas,
Lithuania. gilvydas.verkauskas@kmuk.lt

OBJECTIVE: We present our experience in diagnosing, gender assignment, and
surgical management of sexual ambiguity in 46,XY mixed gonadal dysgenesis.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A retrospective study of five cases treated from 2003 to
2006 was performed. Clinical picture, operative findings, testosterone levels,
and immunohistochemistry of gonads for the expression of FOXL2, SOX9, AMH, AMHr, 
C-kit, and PLAP were analyzed.
RESULTS: All patients had ambiguous genitalia, urogenital sinus, uterus, testicle
on one side, and a streak gonad on the other. Four patients were reared as male
and one as female. Stimulation by human chorionic gonadotropin showed good penile
size and testosterone response. All patients underwent laparoscopic gonadal
biopsy and/or gonadectomy. Histological studies showed the presence of sparse
primordial follicles surrounded by embryonic sex cords in the streak portion of
gonads. Germ cells were C-kit positive in all and PLAP positive in four patients.
FOXL2 expression was detected in four streak gonads and in none of testes. AMH
expression was found only in testes. SOX9 expression was found in both
investigated testes and in three out of four streak gonads investigated.
CONCLUSIONS: 46,XY mixed gonadal dysgenesis should be differentiated from
ovotesticular and other types of 46,XY disorders of sexual differentiation by the
typical gonadal histology and internal genital structure. High testosterone level
after stimulation and good response to testosterone treatment in 46,XY mixed
gonadal dysgenesis could orient toward male sex assignment. There are different
patterns of gene expression in testicular and streak gonads with a switch to
FOXL2 positivity in streak gonads. Early gonadal and genital surgery is
recommended.

PMID: 19535881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jun 25;360(26):2719-29. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0902542. Epub 2009 
Jun 10.

Mutation of FOXL2 in granulosa-cell tumors of the ovary.

Shah SP(1), Köbel M, Senz J, Morin RD, Clarke BA, Wiegand KC, Leung G, Zayed A,
Mehl E, Kalloger SE, Sun M, Giuliany R, Yorida E, Jones S, Varhol R, Swenerton
KD, Miller D, Clement PB, Crane C, Madore J, Provencher D, Leung P, DeFazio A,
Khattra J, Turashvili G, Zhao Y, Zeng T, Glover JN, Vanderhyden B, Zhao C,
Parkinson CA, Jimenez-Linan M, Bowtell DD, Mes-Masson AM, Brenton JD, Aparicio
SA, Boyd N, Hirst M, Gilks CB, Marra M, Huntsman DG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Translational and Applied Genomics, British Columbia Cancer Agency,
Vancouver, Canada.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Jun 25;360(26):2781-3.

BACKGROUND: Granulosa-cell tumors (GCTs) are the most common type of malignant
ovarian sex cord-stromal tumor (SCST). The pathogenesis of these tumors is
unknown. Moreover, their histopathological diagnosis can be challenging, and
there is no curative treatment beyond surgery.
METHODS: We analyzed four adult-type GCTs using whole-transcriptome paired-end
RNA sequencing. We identified putative GCT-specific mutations that were present
in at least three of these samples but were absent from the transcriptomes of 11 
epithelial ovarian tumors, published human genomes, and databases of
single-nucleotide polymorphisms. We confirmed these variants by direct sequencing
of complementary DNA and genomic DNA. We then analyzed additional tumors and
matched normal genomic DNA, using a combination of direct sequencing, analyses of
restriction-fragment-length polymorphisms, and TaqMan assays.
RESULTS: All four index GCTs had a missense point mutation, 402C-->G (C134W), in 
FOXL2, a gene encoding a transcription factor known to be critical for
granulosa-cell development. The FOXL2 mutation was present in 86 of 89 additional
adult-type GCTs (97%), in 3 of 14 thecomas (21%), and in 1 of 10 juvenile-type
GCTs (10%). The mutation was absent in 49 SCSTs of other types and in 329
unrelated ovarian or breast tumors.
CONCLUSIONS: Whole-transcriptome sequencing of four GCTs identified a single,
recurrent somatic mutation (402C-->G) in FOXL2 that was present in almost all
morphologically identified adult-type GCTs. Mutant FOXL2 is a potential driver in
the pathogenesis of adult-type GCTs.

2009 Massachusetts Medical Society

PMID: 19516027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. N Engl J Med. 2009 Jun 25;360(26):2781-3. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe0903433. Epub 2009
Jun 10.

Cancer genomes on a shoestring budget.

Shendure J, Stewart CJ.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2009 Jun 25;360(26):2719-29.

PMID: 19516026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Sep 1;18(17):3324-33. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp273. Epub 2009 Jun 
10.

Towards a functional classification of pathogenic FOXL2 mutations using
transactivation reporter systems.

Dipietromaria A(1), Benayoun BA, Todeschini AL, Rivals I, Bazin C, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)UMR7592-CNRS, Institut Jacques Monod, 75013 Paris, France.

Mutations of FOXL2 are responsible for the
Blepharophimosis-Ptotsis-Epicantus-inversus Syndrome (BPES), involving complex
eyelid malformations often associated with premature ovarian failure (POF).
Loss-of-function mutations are expected to lead to BPES associated with POF,
whereas hypomorphic mutations would lead to BPES without ovarian dysfunction.
However, multiple exceptions to the genotype-phenotype correlation have been
described and missense mutations in the forkhead domain can lead to either type
of BPES. This renders almost impossible the prediction of a POF condition from a 
given genotype. Moreover, no clear-cut correlation between nuclear and/or
cytoplasmic aggregation or cytoplasmic retention of mutant FOXL2 forms and the
BPES type has been established thus far. Here, we dissect the molecular and
functional effects of 10 FOXL2 mutants, known to induce BPES associated with POF 
or not. We found a correlation between the transcriptional activity of FOXL2
variants on two different reporter promoters and the type of BPES. We used this
functional classification framework to explore the behavior of 18 missense
mutations leading to BPES of unknown type. The reporters used enabled us to
assess the risk of POF associated with these mutations. Moreover, we document a
previously overlooked correlation between subcellular mislocalization and
aggregation of mutant FOXL2 and the type of BPES, known or predicted using our
reporter assays. Thus, intranuclear aggregation and cytoplasmic mislocalization
of mutant FOXL2 may be considered as loose predictors of ovarian dysfunction. The
functional classification tool described here is a first step towards
circumventing the lack of a clear-cut genotype-phenotype correlation in BPES.

PMID: 19515849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Dec;17(12):1642-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.96. Epub 2009 Jun
10.

A novel SRY missense mutation affecting nuclear import in a 46,XY female patient 
with bilateral gonadoblastoma.

Hersmus R(1), de Leeuw BH, Stoop H, Bernard P, van Doorn HC, Brüggenwirth HT,
Drop SL, Oosterhuis JW, Harley VR, Looijenga LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Josephine Nefkens Institute, Daniel den Hoed Cancer Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

Patients with disorders of sex development (DSD), especially those with gonadal
dysgenesis and hypovirilization, are at risk of developing the so-called type II 
germ cell tumors (GCTs). Both carcinoma in situ and gonadoblastoma (GB) can be
the precursor lesion, resulting in a seminomatous or non-seminomatous invasive
cancer. SRY mutations residing in the HMG domain are found in 10-15% of 46,XY
gonadal dysgenesis cases. This domain contains two nuclear localization signals
(NLSs). In this study, we report a unique case of a phenotypical normal woman,
diagnosed as a patient with 46,XY gonadal dysgenesis, with an NLS missense
mutation, on the basis of the histological diagnosis of a unilateral GB. The
normal role of SRY in gonadal development is the upregulation of SOX9 expression.
The premalignant lesion of the initially removed gonad was positive for OCT3/4,
TSPY and stem cell factor in germ cells, and for FOXL2 in the stromal component
(ie, granulosa cells), but not for SOX9. On the basis of these findings,
prophylactical gonadectomy of the other gonad was performed, also showing a GB
lesion positive for both FOXL2 (ovary) and SOX9 (testis). The identified W70L
mutation in the SRY gene resulted in a 50% reduction in the nuclear accumulation 
of the mutant protein compared with wild type. This likely explains the
diminished SOX9 expression, and therefore the lack of proper Sertoli cell
differentiation during development. This case shows the value of the proper
diagnosis of human GCTs in identification of patients with DSD, which allows
subsequent early diagnosis and prevention of the development of an invasive
cancer, likely to be treated by chemotherapy at young age.

PMCID: PMC2987026
PMID: 19513096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2009 Sep;154(1):134-42. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2009.05.011. Epub 2009 May 27.

Molecular cloning and gene expression of Cg-Foxl2 during the development and the 
adult gametogenetic cycle in the oyster Crassostrea gigas.

Naimi A(1), Martinez AS, Specq ML, Diss B, Mathieu M, Sourdaine P.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 100 Ifremer, Physiologie et Ecophysiologie des Mollusques Marins, IFR 146 
ICORE, IBFA, Université de Caen Basse-Normandie, 14032 Caen, France.

A Foxl2 ortholog has been identified in a lophotrochozoa, the pacific oyster,
which is a successive irregular hermaphrodite mollusc. Its cDNA has been called
Cg-Foxl2 (Crassostrea gigas Foxl2) and the deduced protein sequence is 367aa
long. This sequence contains the conserved domain Forkhead box and its gene is
devoid of intron at least in the first 926 bp of the cDNA, as found for Foxl2
factors. Real time PCR and in situ hybridization have shown a gonadic male and
female Cg-Foxl2 expression which increases during the adult gametogenetic cycle
for both sexes, but with a significant increase occurring earlier in females than
in males. In females this increase corresponds to the vitellogenetic stage.
During development, a peak of Cg-DMl (a potential factor of the male gonadic
differentiation) and Oyvlg (a germ cell marker) expression and a significant
decrease of Cg-Foxl2 expression were observed after metamorphosis in
1-1.5-month-old spats, a period of development when primordial germ cells may
differentiate into germinal stem cells during the first gonadic establishment.

PMID: 19481171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Med Genet. 2009 Jul;46(7):455-7. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.065086. Epub 2009 May 7.

Functional evidence implicating FOXL2 in non-syndromic premature ovarian failure 
and in the regulation of the transcription factor OSR2.

Laissue P(1), Lakhal B, Benayoun BA, Dipietromaria A, Braham R, Elghezal H,
Philibert P, Saâd A, Sultan C, Fellous M, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U567, Institut Cochin, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: FOXL2 encodes a forkhead transcription factor whose mutations are
responsible for the blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES), 
involving craniofacial/palpebral abnormalities often associated with premature
ovarian failure (POF).
RESULTS: We describe a FOXL2 variant (p.Gly187Asp) in a case of POF without BPES.
The subcellular localisation of FOXL2-G187D was normal but its transactivation
capacity tested on two reporter promoters, one of which should be relevant to the
ovary, was significantly lower than that of normal FOXL2. However, FOXL2-G187D
was able to activate strongly a reporter construct driven by the promoter of Osr2
(odd-skipped related 2 transcription factor), which we have suggested to be a
crucial target of FOXL2 in the craniofacial region. This is compatible with the
absence of BPES in our patient.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data provide evidence in favour of the implication of FOXL2
variants in non-syndromic POF and confirm the regulatory interaction between
FOXL2 and OSR2 whose perturbation might contribute to the palpebral abnormalities
observed in BPES patients.

PMID: 19429596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Genet Test Mol Biomarkers. 2009 Apr;13(2):257-68. doi: 10.1089/gtmb.2008.0121.

Mutations of the transcription factor FOXL2 gene in Chinese patients with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Li D(1), Zeng W, Tao J, Li S, Liang C, Chen X, Mu W, Wang X, Qin Y, Jie Y, Wei W.

Author information: 
(1)Ophthalmology and Visual Sciences Key Lab, Beijing TongRen Eye Center, Beijing
TongRen Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, PR China.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal
dominant syndrome of eyelid malformations with (type I) or without (type II)
associated premature ovarian failure. Multiple mutations in the exon and the
putative core promoter region of FOXL2 gene encoding a putative forkhead
transcription factor have been linked to this disease. To examine whether FOXL2
gene mutations contribute to BPES in the Chinese patient population, we screened 
33 patients from 18 Chinese families with BPES of unknown types, together with 57
healthy individuals, including 27 relatives of the affected families. Genomic DNA
was extracted from the participants' peripheral blood leukocytes, and amplified
by polymerase chain reaction for various regions of the FOXL2 gene, followed by
sequencing analysis. Ten mutations in the FOXL2 gene were detected: four were
previously reported (g.1041_1042insC, g.1366_1367insT, g.909_938dup30, and
g.900_929dup30), and six were novel ones (g.406T>A, g.-14G>A, g.1108_1109insC,
g.2577C>T, g.1987C>A, and g.1002C>G). Among them, mutations in the coding region 
for the polyalanine tract, as well as novel mutations in the core promoter, the
3'-UTR, and in the forkhead domain were identified. Our results expanded the
spectrum of FOXL2 mutations in BPES and provided additional valuable genetic
information for this rare disease.

PMID: 19371227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Hum Genet. 2009 Jul;126(1):133-47. doi: 10.1007/s00439-009-0661-6. Epub 2009 Apr 
5.

Balanced translocations in mental retardation.

Vandeweyer G(1), Kooy RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Universiteitsplein 1,
2610 Antwerp, Belgium.

Over the past few decades, the knowledge on genetic defects causing mental
retardation has dramatically increased. In this review, we discuss the importance
of balanced chromosomal translocations in the identification of genes responsible
for mental retardation. We present a database-search guided overview of balanced 
translocations identified in patients with mental retardation. We divide those in
four categories: (1) balanced translocations that helped to identify a causative 
gene within a contiguous gene syndrome, (2) balanced translocations that led to
the identification of a mental retardation gene confirmed by independent methods,
(3) balanced translocations disrupting candidate genes that have not been
confirmed by independent methods and (4) balanced translocations not reported to 
disrupt protein coding sequences. It can safely be concluded that balanced
translocations have been instrumental in the identification of multiple genes
that are involved in mental retardation. In addition, many more candidate genes
were identified with a suspected but (as yet?) unconfirmed role in mental
retardation. Some balanced translocations do not disrupt a protein coding gene
and it can be speculated that in the light of recent findings concerning ncRNA's 
and ultra-conserved regions, such findings are worth further investigation as
these potentially may lead us to the discovery of novel disease mechanisms.

PMID: 19347365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Sex Dev. 2009;3(1):38-42. doi: 10.1159/000200080. Epub 2009 Apr 1.

Xenopus W-linked DM-W induces Foxl2 and Cyp19 expression during ovary formation.

Okada E(1), Yoshimoto S, Ikeda N, Kanda H, Tamura K, Shiba T, Takamatsu N, Ito M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, School of Science, Kitasato University, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa, Japan.

The molecular mechanisms of vertebrate ZZ/ZW-type sex-determining systems remain 
unclear. We recently indicated that a W-linked gene, DM-W is a likely
ovary-determining gene in Xenopus laevis. We first examined whether Cyp19 for
estrogen-synthesizing enzyme P450 aromatase and Foxl2 showed female-specific
expression in developing gonads. Both genes showed much higher expression in ZW
than in ZZ gonads during and after sex determination. Importantly, transgenic ZZ 
gonads expressing exogenous DM-W at the sex-determining stage showed a ZW-type
pattern of Cyp19 and Foxl2 expression. These results suggest that DM-W
up-regulates Cyp19 and Foxl2 expression to guide primary ovary development in X. 
laevis.

PMID: 19339816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jul;23(7):1001-13. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0324. Epub 2009 Mar 
26.

A novel role for the forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 in activin A-regulated
follicle-stimulating hormone beta subunit transcription.

Lamba P(1), Fortin J, Tran S, Wang Y, Bernard DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Québec,
Canada.

Selective synthesis and release of FSH from pituitary gonadotropes is regulated
by activins. Activins directly stimulate murine FSHbeta (Fshb) subunit gene
transcription through a consensus 8-bp Sma- and Mad-related protein-binding
element (SBE) in the proximal promoter. In contrast, the human FSHB promoter is
relatively insensitive to the direct effects of activins and lacks this SBE. The 
proximal porcine Fshb promoter, which is highly conserved with human, similarly
lacks the 8-bp SBE, but is nonetheless highly sensitive to activins. We used a
comparative approach to determine mechanisms mediating differential activin
induction of human, porcine, and murine Fshb/FSHB promoters. We mapped an activin
response element in the proximal porcine promoter and identified interspecies
variation in a single base pair in close proximity that conferred strong binding 
of the forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 to the porcine, but not human or
murine, promoters. Introduction of the human base pair into the porcine promoter 
abolished FOXL2 binding and activin A induction. FOXL2 conferred activin A
induction to the porcine promoter in heterologous cells, whereas knockdown of the
endogenous protein in gonadotropes inhibited the activin A response. The murine
Fshb promoter lacks the high-affinity FOXL2-binding site, but its activin
induction is FOXL2 sensitive. We identified a more proximal FOXL2-binding element
in the murine promoter, which is conserved across species. Mutation of this site 
attenuated activin A induction of both the porcine and murine promoters.
Collectively, the data indicate a novel role for FOXL2 in activin A-regulated
Fshb transcription.

PMCID: PMC2703604
PMID: 19324968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Genesis. 2009 May;47(5):289-99. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20498.

Gonadal sex differentiation and expression of Sox9a2, Dmrt1, and Foxl2 in Oryzias
luzonensis.

Nakamoto M(1), Muramatsu S, Yoshida S, Matsuda M, Nagahama Y, Shibata N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Shinshu University, Matsumoto, Nagano, Japan.

Oryzias luzonensis is closely related to the medaka, O. latipes. The sex of both 
species is determined by an XX-XY system. However, the testis determining gene
(DMY/Dmrt1bY) found in O. latipes does not exist in O. luzonensis. Instead, a
different gene is thought to act as a testis determining gene. In this study, we 
focused the gonadal sex differentiation process in O. luzonensis under different 
testis determining gene. First, we observed the gonadal development of O.
luzonensis histologically. We then analyzed the expression of Sox9a2/Sox9b,
Dmrt1, and Foxl2 during early development. Our results suggest that the sexual
differentiation of germ cells in O. luzonensis is initiated later than in O.
latipes. However, the timing of the sexual differentiation of the supporting cell
linage is similar between the species.

2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19298014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Mol Endocrinol. 2009 May;42(5):437-48. doi: 10.1677/JME-09-0011. Epub 2009 Mar 
17.

Identification of multiple dmrt1s in catfish: localization, dimorphic expression 
pattern, changes during testicular cycle and after methyltestosterone treatment.

Raghuveer K(1), Senthilkumaran B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Hyderabad, Gachibowli, Andhra
Pradesh, India.

The double sex and mab-3 related (DM) transcription factor 1 (dmrt1) plays an
important role in testicular differentiation. Here, we report cloning of multiple
dmrt1s, a full-length and two alternative spliced forms from adult catfish
(Clarias gariepinus) testis, which encode predicted proteins of 287 (dmrt1a), 253
(dmrt1b) and 233 (dmrt1c) amino acid residues respectively. Interestingly, dmrt1c
lacks the majority of the DM domain. Multiple dmrt1s (dmrt1a and dmrt1c) were
obtained from Clarias batrachus as well. Tissue distribution (transcript and
protein) of catfish dmrt1 revealed exclusive expression in testis.
Semi-quantitative RT-PCR revealed the presence of multiple dmrt1s with high
levels of dmrt1a in adult testis but not in ovary. Real-time RT-PCR analysis
during testicular cycle showed higher levels of dmrt1 transcripts in preparatory 
and pre-spawning when compared with spawning and post-spawning phases.
Immunocytochemical and immunofluorescence localization revealed the presence of
catfish Dmrt1 protein in spermatogonia and spermatocytes, which indicates
plausible role in spermatogenesis. Histological analysis indicated initiation of 
gonadal sex differentiation in catfish around 40-50 days after hatching. The
potential role for dmrt1 in testicular differentiation is evident from its
stage-dependent elevated expression in developing testis. Furthermore, dimorphic 
expressions of dmrt1s were evident at different stages of gonadal development or 
recrudescence in catfish. Treatment of methyl testosterone (MT) during early
stages of gonadal sex differentiation resulted in adult males. Interestingly, we 
also obtained MT-treated fishes having ova-testis gonads. Analysis of dmrt1,
sox9a, foxl2 and cyp19a1 expression patterns in MT-treated gonads revealed
tissue-specific pattern. These results together suggest that multiple dmrt1s are 
testis-specific markers in catfish.

PMID: 19293249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2010 Feb 1;165(3):352-66. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2009.03.002. 
Epub 2009 Mar 14.

Ovarian aromatase and estrogens: a pivotal role for gonadal sex differentiation
and sex change in fish.

Guiguen Y(1), Fostier A, Piferrer F, Chang CF.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UR1037 SCRIBE, IFR140, Ouest-Genopole, F-35000 Rennes, France.
yann.guiguen@rennes.inra.fr

The present review focuses on the roles of estrogens and aromatase (Cyp19a1a),
the enzyme needed for their synthesis, in fish gonadal sex differentiation. Based
on the recent literature, we extend the already well accepted hypothesis of an
implication of estrogens and Cyp19a1a in ovarian differentiation to a broader
hypothesis that would place estrogens and Cyp19a1a in a pivotal position to
control not only ovarian, but also testicular differentiation, in both
gonochoristic and hermaphrodite fish species. This working hypothesis states that
cyp19a1a up-regulation is needed not only for triggering but also for maintaining
ovarian differentiation and that cyp19a1a down-regulation is the only necessary
step for inducing a testicular differentiation pathway. When considering
arguments for and against, most of the information available for fish supports
this hypothesis since either suppression of cyp19a1a gene expression, inhibition 
of Cyp19a1a enzymatic activity, or blockage of estrogen receptivity are
invariably associated with masculinization. This is also consistent with reports 
on normal gonadal differentiation, and steroid-modulated masculinization with
either androgens, aromatase inhibitors or estrogen receptor antagonists,
temperature-induced masculinization and protogynous sex change in hermaphrodite
species. Concerning the regulation of fish cyp19a1a during gonadal
differentiation, the transcription factor foxl2 has been characterized as an
ovarian specific upstream regulator of a cyp19a1a promoter that would co-activate
cyp19a1a expression, along with some additional partners such as nr5a1 (sf1) or
cAMP. In contrast, upstream factors potentially down-regulating cyp19a1a during
testicular differentiation are still hypothetical, such as the dmrt1 gene, but
their definitive characterization as testicular repressors of cyp19a1a would
strongly strengthen the hypothesis that early testicular differentiation would
need active repression of cyp19a1a expression.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19289125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mech Dev. 2009 May-Jun;126(5-6):324-36. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.02.006. Epub 2009
Mar 6.

Antagonism of the testis- and ovary-determining pathways during ovotestis
development in mice.

Wilhelm D(1), Washburn LL, Truong V, Fellous M, Eicher EM, Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics and Development, Institute for Molecular
Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Qld, Australia.

Ovotestis development in B6-XY(POS) mice provides a rare opportunity to study the
interaction of the testis- and ovary-determining pathways in the same tissue. We 
studied expression of several markers of mouse fetal testis (SRY, SOX9) or ovary 
(FOXL2, Rspo1) development in B6-XY(POS) ovotestes by immunofluorescence, using
normal testes and ovaries as controls. In ovotestes, SOX9 was expressed only in
the central region where SRY is expressed earliest, resulting in testis cord
formation. Surprisingly, FOXL2-expressing cells also were found in this region,
but individual cells expressed either FOXL2 or SOX9, not both. At the poles, even
though SOX9 was not up-regulated, SRY expression was down-regulated normally as
in XY testes, and FOXL2 was expressed from an early stage, demonstrating ovarian 
differentiation in these areas. Our data (1) show that SRY must act within a
specific developmental window to activate Sox9; (2) challenge the established
view that SOX9 is responsible for down-regulating Sry expression; (3) disprove
the concept that testicular and ovarian cells occupy discrete domains in
ovotestes; and (4) suggest that FOXL2 is actively suppressed in Sertoli cell
precursors by the action of SOX9. Together these findings provide important new
insights into the molecular regulation of testis and ovary development.

PMCID: PMC2680453
PMID: 19269320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Biol Reprod. 2009 Jul;81(1):118-25. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.072314. Epub 2009
Mar 4.

Distinct transcriptional mechanisms direct expression of the rat Dmrt1 promoter
in sertoli cells and germ cells of transgenic mice.

Lei N(1), Karpova T, Hornbaker KI, Rice DA, Heckert LL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

DMRT1 is a transcription factor expressed only in Sertoli cells and
undifferentiated spermatogonia of the postnatal testis, where it is required for 
proper cellular differentiation and fertility. To elucidate the transcriptional
regulatory regions that provide DMRT1's cell-specific expression, transgenic mice
containing a LacZ reporter gene driven by variable amounts of rat Dmrt1 5'
flanking sequence, 9 kb and smaller, were evaluated. Examination of transgene
expression by RT-PCR indicated that multiple promoter regions direct Dmrt1 to the
testis and that sequences upstream of 2.8 kb are needed for both Sertoli cell
expression and limiting transcriptional influence imposed by surrounding
chromatin. Thus, whereas many of the transgenes were expressed in the testis, the
ones with smaller promoters were significantly more prone to expression at
ectopic sites or to complete silencing. Transgene expression in Sertoli cells and
germ cells was assessed by immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR following busulfan
treatment to remove germ cells. Both evaluations indicated expression of the 9-
and 3.2-kb promoters in Sertoli cells and germ cells, whereas activity of smaller
promoters was largely restricted to germ cells. In all, the present study
provides in vivo evidence that distinct promoter sequences participate in Dmrt1
regulation in somatic cells and germ cells, with the -3.2 kb/-2.8 kb region
directing expression in Sertoli cells and downstream sequences (< or =1.3 kb)
directing it in germ cells. Further exploration of the mechanisms restricting
Dmrt1 expression to the testis revealed that FOXL2, a transcription factor
required for differentiation of the ovary, repressed Dmrt1 promoter through the
-3.2 kb/-2.8 kb regulatory region, offering a potential mechanism for Dmrt1
transcriptional silencing in granulosa cells.

PMCID: PMC3093988
PMID: 19264703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Carcinogenesis. 2009 May;30(5):869-78. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgp051. Epub 2009 Feb 
23.

Dysregulation of WNT/CTNNB1 and PI3K/AKT signaling in testicular stromal cells
causes granulosa cell tumor of the testis.

Boyer A(1), Paquet M, Laguë MN, Hermo L, Boerboom D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Reproduction Animale, Université de Montréal, St
Hyacinthe, Québec J2S7C6, Canada.

Synergistic effects of dysregulation of the WNT/CTNNB1 and phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT pathways are thought to be important for the development and 
progression of many forms of cancer, including the granulosa cell tumor of the
ovary. Sustained WNT/CTNNB1 signaling in Sertoli cells causes testicular
degeneration and the formation of foci of poorly differentiated stromal cells in 
the seminiferous tubules in mice. To test if concomitant dysregulation of the
WNT/CTNNB1 and PI3K/AKT pathways could synergize to cause testicular cancer,
Pten(tm1Hwu/tm1Hwu);Ctnnb1(tm1Mmt/+);Amhr2(tm3(cre)Bhr/+) mice that express a
dominant, stable CTNNB1 mutant and lack the expression of phosphatase and tensin 
homolog (PTEN) in their Sertoli cells were generated. These mice developed
aggressive testicular cancer with 100% penetrance by 5 weeks of age, and 44% of
animals developed pulmonary metastases by 4 months, whereas
Pten(tm1Hwu/tm1Hwu);Amhr2(tm3(cre)Bhr/+) controls were phenotypically normal.
Surprisingly, the tumors could not be classified as Sertoli cell tumors, but
rather bore histologic and ultrastructural characteristics of granulosa cell
tumors of the testis (GCTT).
Pten(tm1Hwu/tm1Hwu);Ctnnb1(tm1Mmt/+);Amhr2(tm3(cre)Bhr/+) testicular tumors did
not express CYP17, CYP19, germ cell nuclear antigen, estrogen receptor 1 or
progesterone receptor, but expressed the early granulosa cell markers WNT4 and
FOXL2, confirming the diagnosis of GCTT. Immunohistochemical analyses of
Pten(tm1Hwu/tm1Hwu);Ctnnb1(tm1Mmt/+);Amhr2(tm3(cre)Bhr/+) GCTT demonstrated a
tumor marker profile similar to that reported in human GCTT. Immunoblotting
analyses revealed high levels of phosphorylation of AKT and the PI3K/AKT
signaling effector FOXO1A in
Pten(tm1Hwu/tm1Hwu);Ctnnb1(tm1Mmt/+);Amhr2(tm3(cre)Bhr/+) GCTT, suggesting the
involvement of FOXO1A in the mechanism of GCTT development. Together, these data 
provide the first insights into the molecular etiology of GCTT and the first
animal model for the study of GCTT biology.

PMCID: PMC2675650
PMID: 19237610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Gynecol Obstet Fertil. 2009 Jan;37(1):33-44. doi: 10.1016/j.gyobfe.2008.06.026.
Epub 2008 Dec 31.

[Juvenile granulosa-cell tumor: clinical and molecular expression].

[Article in French]

Kalfa N(1), Philibert P, Patte C, Thibaud E, Pienkowski C, Ecochard A,
Boizet-Bonhoure B, Fellous M, Sultan C.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'hormonologie, hôpital Lapeyronie, CHU de Montpellier, Montpellier,
France.

Ovarian sex cord-stromal tumors are rare tumors that originate from the
nongerminal cells of ovary. Two decades ago, the identification of juvenile
granulosa-cell tumors (GCT), as a specific entity inside this group, allowed a
better treatment of these tumors in children. However, little data have been
reported on the natural course of the disease and reliable prognostic factors
have not been yet defined. We here review the clinical and genetics aspects of
granulosa tumors, based on a series of 40 children. This national collaborative
study involved the French Society of Children Cancer and eight clinical
departments of pediatric endocrinology. We found that early diagnosis of a tumor,
revealed by clinical signs of hyperoestrogeny, is an important prognostic factor.
The pathophysiology of these tumors is still debatable and several cellular- and 
molecular-abnormal signals could be implicated in their development. The role of 
growth factors and oncogenes through the signaling pathway of MAP kinase is still
discussed. According to our data, FSH signaling-transduction pathway, such as a
constitutionally activated Galphas, could also be implicated in the induction of 
granulosa cell proliferation and seems to modulate the invasiveness of the tumor.
Last, we have described a low-expression pattern or an extinction of an
ovarian-determination gene, FOXL2, which is related to a worse prognosis of this 
tumor.

PMID: 19119048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2009;665:207-26.

FOXL2: at the crossroads of female sex determination and ovarian function.

Benayoun BA(1), Dipietromaria A, Bazin C, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Jacques Monod, Bâtiment Buffon, 15 rue Hélèna Brion, 75205 Paris Cx
13, France.

The gene FOXL2 encodes a forkhead transcription factor whose mutations are
responsible for the blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus-inversus syndrome. This
genetic disorder is characterized by eyelid and mild craniofacial abnormalities
often in association with premature ovarian failure. FOXL2 orthologs are found
throughout the animal phylum and its sequence is highly conserved in vertebrates.
FOXL2 is one of the earliest ovarian markers and it offers, alongwith its
targets, a model to study ovarian development and function. In this chapter, we
review recent data concemingits mutations, targets, regulation and functions.
Studies of the cellular consequences of FOXL2 mutations seem to indicate that
aggregation is a common pathogenic mechanism. However, no reliable
genotype/phenotype correlation has been established to predict the exact impact
of point mutations in the coding region of FOXL2. FOXL2 has been suggested to be 
involved in the regulation of cholesterol homeostasis, steroid metabolism,
apoptosis, reactive oxygen species detoxification and inflammation processes.
Interestingly, all these processes are not equally affected by FOXL2 mutations.
The elucidation of the impact of the FOXL2 function in the ovary will allow a
better understanding of normal ovarian development and function as well as the
pathogenic mechanisms underlying BPES.

PMID: 20429427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):7631-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806676200. Epub 2008 
Dec 23.

FoxL2 and Smad3 coordinately regulate follistatin gene transcription.

Blount AL(1), Schmidt K, Justice NJ, Vale WW, Fischer WH, Bilezikjian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, Salk Institute for
Biological Studies, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Follistatin is a transcriptional target and a modulator of activin action.
Through an autocrine/paracrine loop, activin controls follistatin levels and thus
regulates its own bioavailability. In gonadotropic alphaT3-1 cells, activin
induces follistatin transcription primarily through the action of Smad3 at an
intronic Smad-binding element (SBE1). Using a proteomics approach, we searched
for endogenous alphaT3-1 proteins that participate in SBE1-mediated
transcription. We identified FoxL2, a member of the forkhead family, as a
candidate modulator of SBE1 function. Mutations of FoxL2 are associated with the 
blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome characterized with
craniofacial defects and premature ovarian failure. FoxL2 localizes to
alpha-glycoprotein subunit- and follicle-stimulating hormone beta-positive cells 
of the adult mouse pituitary and is present in alphaT3-1 and LbetaT2 cells, but
its pituitary actions remain largely unknown. We have determined that FoxL2 binds
to a forkhead-binding element (FKHB) located just downstream of the SBE1 site of 
the follistatin gene and functions as a Smad3 partner to drive SBE1-mediated
transcription in alphaT3-1 cells treated with activin. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirm that endogenous FoxL2 and Smad3 are recruited 
to the intronic enhancer of the follistatin gene where the SBE1 and FKHB sites
are located. Exogenous FoxL2 enhances SBE1-mediated transcription, and short
hairpin RNA-mediated knockdown of endogenous FoxL2 protein compromises this
effect in alphaT3-1 cells. FoxL2 directly associates with Smad3 but not Smad2 or 
Smad4. This association between Smad3 and FoxL2 is mediated by the MH2 domain of 
Smad3 and is dependent on an intact forkhead domain in FoxL2. Altogether, these
observations highlight a novel role for FoxL2 and suggest that it may function as
a transcriptional regulator and a coordinator of Smad3 targets.

PMCID: PMC2658057
PMID: 19106105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Comp Biochem Physiol A Mol Integr Physiol. 2009 May;153(1):30-8. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpa.2008.11.018. Epub 2008 Dec 6.

Tilapia sex determination: Where temperature and genetics meet.

Baroiller JF(1), D'Cotta H, Bezault E, Wessels S, Hoerstgen-Schwark G.

Author information: 
(1)Dept Persyst, CIRAD, Upr20, Campus International de Baillarguet, Montpellier, 
France.

This review deals with the complex sex determining system of Nile tilapia,
Oreochromis niloticus, governed by the interactions between a genetic
determination and the influence of temperature, shown in both domestic and wild
populations. Naturally sex reversed individuals are strongly suggested in two
wild populations. This can be due to the masculinising temperatures which some
fry encounter during their sex differentiation period when they colonise shallow 
waters, and/or to the influence of minor genetic factors. Differences regarding
a) thermal responsiveness of sex ratios between and within Nile tilapia
populations, b) maternal and paternal effects on temperature dependent sex ratios
and c) nearly identical results in offspring of repeated matings, demonstrate
that thermosensitivity is under genetic control. Selection experiments to
increase the thermosensitivity revealed high responses in the high and low
sensitive lines. The high-line showed approximately 90% males after 2 generations
of selection whereas the weakly sensitive line had 54% males. This is the first
evidence that a surplus of males in temperature treated groups can be selected as
a quantitative trait. Expression profiles of several genes (Cyp19a, Foxl2, Amh,
Sox9a,b) from the gonad and brain were analysed to define temperature action on
the sex determining/differentiating cascade in tilapia. The coexistence of GSD
and TSD is discussed.

PMID: 19101647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Feb 15;18(4):632-44. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn389. Epub 2008 Nov
14.

Positive and negative feedback regulates the transcription factor FOXL2 in
response to cell stress: evidence for a regulatory imbalance induced by
disease-causing mutations.

Benayoun BA(1), Batista F, Auer J, Dipietromaria A, L'Hôte D, De Baere E, Veitia 
RA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U567, Team 21, Department of Genetics and Development, Paris, France.

FOXL2 is a forkhead transcription factor, essential for ovarian function, whose
mutations are responsible for the blepharophimosis syndrome, characterized by
craniofacial defects, often associated with premature ovarian failure. Here, we
show that cell stress upregulates FOXL2 expression in an ovarian granulosa cell
model. Increased FOXL2 transcription might be mediated at least partly by
self-activation. Moreover, using 2D-western blot, we show that the response of
FOXL2 to stress correlates with a dramatic remodeling of its post-translational
modification profile. Upon oxidative stress, we observe an increased recruitment 
of FOXL2 to several stress-response promoters, notably that of the mitochondrial 
manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD). Using several reporter systems, we show
that FOXL2 transactivation is enhanced in this context. Models predict that gene 
upregulation in response to a signal should eventually be counterbalanced to
restore the initial steady state. In line with this, we find that FOXL2 activity 
is repressed by the SIRT1 deacetylase. Interestingly, we demonstrate that SIRT1
transcription is, in turn, directly upregulated by FOXL2, which closes a
negative-feedback loop. The regulatory relationship between FOXL2 and SIRT1
prompted us the test action of nicotinamide, an inhibitor of sirtuins, on FoxL2
expression/activity. According to our expectations, nicotinamide treatment
increases FoxL2 transcription. Finally, we show that 11 disease-causing mutations
in the ORF of FOXL2 induce aberrant regulation of FOXL2 and/or regulation of the 
FOXL2 stress-response target gene MnSOD. Taken together, our results establish
that FOXL2 is an actor of the stress response and provide new insights into the
pathogenic consequences of FOXL2 mutations.

PMID: 19010791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2009 May;153(1):1-7. doi:
10.1016/j.cbpb.2008.10.007. Epub 2008 Oct 29.

Association of reproductive performance with SNPs of FOXL2 gene by SSCP in
Japanese flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus).

Shi B(1), Wen HS, He F, Dong SL, Ma S, Chen CF, Wang LS, Yao J, Mu XJ, Zhou YG.

Author information: 
(1)Fisheries College, Ocean University of China, 5 Yushan Road, Qingdao 266003,
China.

FOXL2 which is a putative winged helix/forkhead transcription factor gene and a
sexually dimorphic marker of ovarian differentiation plays an important role in
ovarian development, granulosa cell differentiation, and thus the proper
maintenance of ovarian function. The aims of this study were to characterize
polymorphisms within the FOXL2 gene in a population of 52 female Japanese
flounder and analyze the association of FOXL2 polymorphisms with reproductive
performance by polymerase chain reaction-single stranded conformational
polymorphism (PCR-SSCP). Results indicated that five single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), which were SNP1 [c.540A>C (p.Asn102His) and c.591A>G
(p.Asn119Asp)], SNP2 [c.864G>A (p.Lys210Glu)and c.875G>A] and SNP3 (c.1169C>A),
were identified in the FOXL2 gene. General Linear Model (GLM) analysis showed
that SNP1 in the forkhead domain was significantly associated with gonadosomatic 
index (GSI) (P<0.05). SNP2 in the downstream of forkhead domain was significantly
associated with serum 17beta-estradiol (E(2)) level (P<0.05). And SNP3 in the
3'-UTR was significantly associated with hepatosomatic index (HSI) (P<0.05).
Moreover, the evaluation of the genetic effects for both Testosterone (T) level
of diplotype D3 and GSI of diplotype D5 suggested they were significantly higher 
than those of other four diplotypes (P<0.05), respectively. These results implied
that these SNPs could influence reproductive endocrinology of female Japanese
flounder and be also used in marker-assisted selection (MAS) program to
reproductive performance in female Japanese flounder in the future.

PMID: 19007901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2010 Jun;36(2):223-35. doi: 10.1007/s10695-008-9281-7. Epub
2008 Nov 12.

Studies on feminization, sex determination, and differentiation of the Southern
catfish, Silurus meridionalis--a review.

Liu ZH(1), Zhang YG, Wang DS.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Eco-environments in Three Gorges Reservoir Region (Ministry 
of Education), School of Life Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715,
China.

The sex ratio of the feral Southern catfish was reported to be about 1:1, while
the fish obtained by artificial fertilization were always female. Hence, we
examined the possible influence of the micro-environment during artificial
insemination (pH of the ovarian fluid and concentration of the semen) and early
development (feed, hatching temperature, and water) on the sex ratio of Southern 
catfish fry. In order to examine the possibility of the occurrence of gynogenesis
during artificial propagation, cytological observations on the insemination
processes and the artificial induction of gynogenesis were also performed.
However, no male fish were obtained even in these experiments, excluding the
possibilities of these micro-environmental changes on catfish sex ratio and the
occurrence of gynogenesis during artificial propagation. Female-to-male sex
reversal was achieved by treatment with fadrozole (an aromatase inhibitor) and
tamoxifen (an estrogen receptor antagonist). Histological analyses on the gonadal
development of both female and induced male fish were subsequently performed.
Moreover, several genes involved in sex differentiation, such as dmrt1, foxl2,
and cyp19, and three subunits of gonadotropin (gth), i.e., gthalpha, lhbeta, and 
fshbeta, were isolated. Their expression patterns were studied under normal
gonadal development and sex reversal conditions. The results revealed that dmrt1,
foxl2, and cyp19a were closely related to catfish sex differentiation, and the
gth subunits were possibly related to ovarian differentiation and oocyte
development. Taken together, we hypothesized that estrogen was highly responsible
for the ovarian differentiation and feminization of catfish fry under artificial 
propagation, although the mechanism involved remains elusive.

PMID: 19002765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2009 May;20(3):271-82. doi: 10.1016/j.semcdb.2008.10.003.
Epub 2008 Oct 17.

Sex determination in amphibians.

Nakamura M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Education and Integrated Arts and Sciences, 
Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan.
nakamra@waseda.jp

The heterogametic sex is male in all mammals, whereas it is female in almost all 
birds. By contrast, there are two heterogametic types (XX/XY and ZZ/ZW) for
genetic sex determination in amphibians. Though the original heterogametic sex
was female in amphibians, the two heterogametic types were probably
interchangeable, suggesting that sex chromosomes evolved several times in this
lineage. Indeed, the frog Rana rugosa has the XX/XY and ZZ/ZW sex-determining
systems within a single species, depending on the local population in Japan. The 
XY and ZW geographic forms with differentiated sex chromosomes probably have a
common origin as undifferentiated sex chromosomes resulted from the hybridization
between the primary populations of West Japan and Kanto forms. It is clear that
the sex chromosomes are still undergoing evolution in this species group.
Regardless of the presence of a sex-determining gene in amphibians, the gonadal
sex of some species can be changed by sex steroids. Namely, sex steroids can
induce the sex reversal, with estrogens inducing the male-to-female sex reversal,
whereas androgens have the opposite effect. In R. rugosa, gonadal activity of
CYP19 (P450 aromatase) is correlated with the feminization of gonads. Of
particular interest is that high levels of CYP19 expression are observed in
indifferent gonads at time before sex determination. Increases in the expression 
of CYP19 in female gonads and CYP17 (P450 17alpha-hydroxylase/C17-20 lyase) in
male gonads suggest that the former plays an important role in phenotypic female 
determination, whereas the latter is needed for male determination. Thus,
steroids could be the key factor for sex determination in R. rugosa. In addition 
to the role of sex steroids in gonadal sex determination in this species, Foxl2
and Sox3 are capable of promoting CYP19 expression. Since both the genes are
autosomal, another factor up-regulating CYP19 expression must be recruited. The
factor, which may be located on the X or W chromosome, intervenes directly or
indirectly, in the transcriptional regulation of the CYP19 gene for feminization 
in amphibians. A factor up-regulating CYP17 expression remains to be identified.

PMID: 18996493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Hum Genet. 2008 Dec;124(5):489-98. doi: 10.1007/s00439-008-0574-9. Epub 2008 Oct 
25.

Identification of copy number variants associated with BPES-like phenotypes.

Gijsbers AC(1), D'haene B, Hilhorst-Hofstee Y, Mannens M, Albrecht B, Seidel J,
Witt DR, Maisenbacher MK, Loeys B, van Essen T, Bakker E, Hennekam R, Breuning
MH, De Baere E, Ruivenkamp CA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human and Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center,
Postzone S-6-P, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 CZ, Leiden, The Netherlands.
a.c.j.gijsbers@lumc.nl

Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a
well-characterized rare syndrome that includes an eyelid malformation associated 
with (type I) or without premature ovarian failure (type II). Patients with
typical BPES have four major characteristics: blepharophimosis, ptosis,
epicanthus inversus and telecanthus. Mutations in the FOXL2 gene, encoding a
forkhead transcription factor, are responsible for the majority of both types of 
BPES. However, many patients with BPES-like features, i.e., having at least two
major characteristics of BPES, have an unidentified cause. Here, we report on a
group of 27 patients with BPES-like features, but without an identified genetic
defect in the FOXL2 gene or flanking region. These patients were analyzed with
whole-genome high-density arrays in order to identify copy number variants (CNVs)
that might explain the BPES-like phenotype. In nine out of 27 patients (33%) CNVs
not previously described as polymorphisms were detected. Four of these patients
displayed psychomotor retardation as an additional clinical characteristic. In
conclusion, we demonstrate that BPES-like phenotypes are frequently caused by
CNVs, and we emphasize the importance of whole-genome copy number screening to
identify the underlying genetic causes of these phenotypes.

PMID: 18953567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Dev Biol. 2008 Dec 15;324(2):277-87. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.09.025. Epub 2008 
Oct 7.

Germ line control of female sex determination in zebrafish.

Siegfried KR(1), Nüsslein-Volhard C.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Department of Genetics
Spemannstrasse 35, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. kellee.siegfried@tuebingen.mpg.de

A major transition during development of the gonad is commitment from an
undifferentiated "bi-potential" state to ovary or testis fate. In mammals, the
oogonia of the developing ovary are known to be important for folliculogenesis.
An additional role in promoting ovary fate or female sex determination has been
suggested, however it remains unclear how the germ line might regulate this
process. Here we show that the germ line is required for the ovary versus testis 
fate choice in zebrafish. When the germ line is absent, the gonad adopts testis
fate. These germ line deficient testes have normal somatic structures indicating 
that the germ line influences fate determination of surrounding somatic tissues. 
In germ line deficient animals the expression of the ovary specific gene cyp19a1a
fails to be maintained whereas the testis genes sox9a and amh remain expressed.
Furthermore, we observed decreased levels of the ovary specific genes cyp19a1a
and foxL2 in germ line deficient animals prior to morphological sex
differentiation of the gonad. We propose that the germ line has a common role in 
female sex determination in fish and mammals. Additionally, we show that testis
specification is sufficient for masculinization of the fish pointing to a direct 
role of hormone signaling from the gonad in directing sex differentiation of
non-gonadal tissues.

PMID: 18930041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2008 Nov-Dec;159(2-3):170-7. doi:
10.1016/j.ygcen.2008.08.013. Epub 2008 Sep 6.

Molecular cloning and gene expression of Foxl2 in the frog Rana rugosa.

Oshima Y(1), Uno Y, Matsuda Y, Kobayashi T, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Education and Integrated Arts and Sciences, 
Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-8480, Japan.

Foxl2 is a transcription factor that plays a crucial role in the regulation of
the early development of the female gonad in mammals and fish. However, little is
known regarding its role in ovarian differentiation in amphibians. In this study,
we isolated a Foxl2 cDNA from the ovary of the frog Rana rugosa and Xenopuslaevis
and examined its expression during gonadal sex differentiation in R. rugosa.
Alignment of known Foxl2 sequences from vertebrates showed high identity of the
Foxl2 open reading frame and protein sequences, in particular the forkhead domain
and C-terminal region, with other vertebrate sequences. Among different adult
tissues, Foxl2 was expressed at its highest level in the ovary. Real-time RT-PCR 
analysis showed that Foxl2 expression was sexually dimorphic during gonadal sex
differentiation in R. rugosa. In addition, Foxl2, which was detected
immunochemically in somatic cells surrounding oocytes in the ovary, promoted R.
rugosaCYP19 transcription in luciferase promoter assays conducted in A6 cells. We
also found by FISH analysis that Foxl2 was an autosomal gene. Altogether, these
results suggest that Foxl2 probably plays a very important role in ovarian
differentiation of R. rugosa by possibly regulating CYP19 expression. The factor 
that up-regulates Foxl2 expression in female gonads still remains to be
identified.

PMID: 18805419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Sex Dev. 2008;2(3):142-51. doi: 10.1159/000143432. Epub 2008 Sep 3.

Attempt to rescue sex-reversal by transgenic expression of the PISRT1 gene in XX 
PIS-/- goats.

Boulanger L(1), Kocer A, Daniel N, Pannetier M, Chesné P, Heyman Y, Renault L,
Mandon-Pépin B, Chavatte-Palmer P, Vignon X, Vilotte JL, Cotinot C, Renard JP,
Pailhoux E.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, Jouy en Josas, France.

The Polled Intersex Syndrome (PIS mutation) in goats leads to an absence of horn 
and to an early sex-reversal of the XX gonads. This mutation is a deletion of an 
11.7-kb DNA fragment showing a tissue-specific regulatory activity. Indeed, in XX
PIS(-/-) gonads the deletion of PIS leads to the transcriptional extinction of at
least 3 neighboring genes, FOXL2, PFOXic and PISRT1. Among them, only FOXL2 is a 
'classical' gene, encoding a highly conserved transcription factor. On the other 
hand, knock-out of Foxl2 in mice results in an early blocking of follicle
formation without sex-reversal. This phenotype discrepancy leads to two
hypotheses, either FOXL2 is responsible for XX sex-reversal in goat assuming
distinct functions of its protein during ovarian differentiation in different
mammals, or other PIS-regulated genes are involved. To assess the second
possibility, PISRT1 expression was constitutively restored in XX PIS(-/-) gonads.
Six transgenic fetuses were obtained by nuclear transfer and studied at 2
developmental stages, 41 and 46 days post-reconstruction. The gonads of these
fetuses appear phenotypically identical to those of cloned non-transgenic
controls. Conclusively, this result argues for FOXL2 being responsible for the
PIS gonad-associated phenotype. Its invalidation in goat will help to better
understand this complex syndrome.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 18769074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Hum Mutat. 2009 Feb;30(2):158-69. doi: 10.1002/humu.20807.

FOXL2 mutations and genomic rearrangements in BPES.

Beysen D(1), De Paepe A, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

The FOXL2 gene is one of 10 forkhead genes, the mutations of which lead to human 
developmental disorders, often with ocular manifestations. Mutations in FOXL2 are
known to cause blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES), an autosomal dominant eyelid
malformation associated (type I) or not (type II) with ovarian dysfunction,
leading to premature ovarian failure (POF). In addition, a few mutations have
been described in patients with isolated POF. Here, we review all currently
described FOXL2 sequence variations and genomic rearrangements in BPES and POF.
Using a combined mutation detection approach, it is possible to identify the
underlying genetic defect in a major proportion (88%) of typical BPES patients.
Of all genetic defects found in our BPES cohort, intragenic mutations represent
81%. They include missense changes, frameshift and nonsense mutations, in-frame
deletions, and duplications, that are distributed along the single-exon gene.
Genomic rearrangements comprising both deletions encompassing FOXL2 and deletions
located outside its transcription unit, represent 12% and 5% of all genetic
defects in our BPES cohort, respectively. One of the challenges of genetic
testing in BPES is the establishment of genotype-phenotype correlations, mainly
with respect to the ovarian phenotype. Genetic testing should be performed in the
context of genetic counseling, however, and should be systematically complemented
by a multidisciplinary clinical follow-up. Another challenge for health care
professionals involved in BPES is the treatment of the eyelid phenotype and the
prevention or treatment of POF.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18726931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Urol. 2008 Oct;180(4 Suppl):1810-3. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2008.03.097. Epub 2008 
Aug 21.

Aberrant expression of ovary determining gene FOXL2 in the testis and juvenile
granulosa cell tumor in children.

Kalfa N(1), Fellous M, Boizet-Bonhoure B, Patte C, Duvillard P, Pienkowski C,
Jaubert F, Ecochard A, Sultan C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Endocrinologie-Gynécologie Pédiatrique, Service de Pédiatrie 1,
Hôpital Arnaud-de-Villeneuve and Service d'Hormonologie du Développement et de
Reproduction, Hôpital Lapeyronie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Montpellier,
Montpellier, France.

PURPOSE: FOXL2 is the earliest known marker of ovarian differentiation in
mammals. It is involved in ovarian somatic cell differentiation and further
follicle maintenance. FOXL2 is not implicated in determination of the male gonad 
and it is absent in the testis. We investigated whether the rare JGCTT (juvenile 
granulose cell tumor of the testis), named for its histological similarity to
ovarian tumor, could be the first illustration of aberrant expression of this
ovary determining gene in the human testis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Between 1990 and 2004, 3 boys with JGCTT were reported
from the TGM95 database of the French Society for Childhood Cancer and from 8
pediatric endocrinology centers. Orchiectomy was performed in these patients.
Immunohistochemistry of FOXL2, and co-immunofluorescence of FOXL2 and SOX9 were
performed on tumor sections.
RESULTS: Testicular tumor cells showed aberrant expression of FOXL2, which
resembled normal ovarian granulosa cells. The localization of FOXL2 expression
was nuclear without any cytoplasmic sequestration, suggesting that FOXL2 had
biological activity. Conversely SOX9, which is present in the nucleus of normal
testicular cells, was sequestered in the cytoplasm of granulosa tumor cells or
markedly under expressed in the nuclei. In this case of residual SOX9 nuclear
expression the expression of FOXL2 and SOX9 was mutually exclusive.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge we report the first human model of aberrant
intratesticular expression of an ovary determining gene along with the extinction
of SOX9 and the transdifferentiation of a testicular cell into a granulosa tumor 
cell.

PMID: 18721930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Development. 2008 Sep;135(17):2905-16. doi: 10.1242/dev.019778.

Dlx genes pattern mammalian jaw primordium by regulating both lower jaw-specific 
and upper jaw-specific genetic programs.

Jeong J(1), Li X, McEvilly RJ, Rosenfeld MG, Lufkin T, Rubenstein JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental
Neurobiology, University of California San Francisco, 1550 4th street, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA. juhee.jeong@ucsf.edu

Dlx transcription factors are implicated in patterning the mammalian jaw, based
on their nested expression patterns in the first branchial arch (primordium for
jaw) and mutant phenotypes; inactivation of Dlx1 and Dlx2 (Dlx1/2-/-) causes
defects in the upper jaw, whereas Dlx5/6(-/-) results in homeotic transformation 
of the lower jaw into upper jaw. Therefore, the 'Dlx codes' appear to regionalize
the jaw primordium such that Dlx1/2 regulate upper jaw development, while Dlx5/6 
confer the lower jaw fate. Towards identifying the genetic pathways downstream of
Dlx5/6, we compared the gene expression profiles of the wild-type and Dlx5/6(-/-)
mouse mandibular arch (prospective lower jaw). We identified 20 previously
unrecognized Dlx5/6-downstream genes, of which 12 were downregulated and 8
upregulated in the mutant. We found a Dlx-regulated transcriptional enhancer in
close proximity to Gbx2, one of the Dlx5/6-downstream genes, strongly suggesting 
that Gbx2 is a direct target of Dlx5/6. We also showed that Pou3f3 is normally
expressed in the maxillary (prospective upper jaw) but not mandibular arch, is
upregulated in the mandibular arch of Dlx5/6(-/-), and is essential for formation
of some of the maxillary arch-derived skeleton. A comparative analysis of the
morphological and molecular phenotypes of various Dlx single and double mutants
revealed that Dlx1, 2, 5 and 6 act both partially redundantly and
antagonistically to direct differential expression of downstream genes in each
domain of the first branchial arch. We propose a new model for Dlx-mediated
mammalian jaw patterning.

PMID: 18697905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Gynecol Obstet Fertil. 2008 Sep;36(9):862-71. doi: 10.1016/j.gyobfe.2008.07.002. 
Epub 2008 Aug 8.

[Genetic analysis of premature ovarian failure: role of forkhead and TGF-beta
genes].

[Article in French]

Lakhal B(1), Laissue P, Elghèzal H, Fellous M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de cytogénétique et de biologie de la reproduction, CHU
Farhat-Hached, 4000 Sousse, Tunisie.

Premature ovarian failure is a common pathology affecting 1% of women. Although
multiple etiologies have been described the majority of cases are idiopathic.
Forkhead transcription factors as FOXL2 and FOXO3A are of particular interest in 
the research of genetic factors related with the pathology as they are present in
diverse developmental pathways and ovarian physiology. Similarly, some TGF-beta
factors (i.e. BMP 15 and GDF-9) have been demonstrated to play a key role in the 
regulation, at ovarian level, of female reproduction. In recent years numerous
studies have been performed in order to elucidate the implication of these
factors in the ovarian physiopathology. The aim of this manuscript is to describe
some of these advances in the context of premature ovarian failure.

PMID: 18692424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Hum Reprod. 2008 Dec;23(12):2835-41. doi: 10.1093/humrep/den278. Epub 2008 Aug 9.

A genome-wide linkage scan in a Dutch family identifies a premature ovarian
failure susceptibility locus.

Oldenburg RA(1), van Dooren MF, de Graaf B, Simons E, Govaerts L, Swagemakers S, 
Verkerk JM, Oostra BA, Bertoli-Avella AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, CA Rotterdam, the
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Premature ovarian failure (POF) is characterized by elevated
gonadotrophins and amenorrhea before the age of 40 years and occurs approximately
in 1% of women. POF etiology is highly heterogeneous with a wide spectrum of
etiological pathogenic mechanisms including genetic causes. These mostly involve 
numerical, structural or monogenic defects on the X-chromosome. Mutations in a
small number of autosomal genes (such as FOXL2 and NOBOX) have been identified as
a cause of POF. However, in most cases, the disease underlying mechanisms are
largely unknown.
METHODS: We performed a genome-wide linkage analysis in a relatively large Dutch 
family with seven patients suffering from POF, showing a dominant pattern of
inheritance. A genome-wide analysis, using 50K single nucleotide polymorphism
arrays, was combined with conventional parametric linkage analysis.
RESULTS: We identified three genomic regions on chromosomes 5, 14 and 18 yielding
suggestive linkage (multipoint LOD score of 2.4 for each region). After inclusion
of one elder unaffected family member, only the region on chromosome 5 remains as
a putative POF locus. In addition, we investigated a second family (three living 
patients over three generations) for the regions on chromosome 5, 14 and 18.
Haplotype analysis supported only the locus on chromosome 5q14.1-q15.
CONCLUSION: We performed the first genome-wide linkage search in familial POF and
identified a region on chromosome 5q14.1-q15, which may harbor a novel POF
susceptibility gene.

PMID: 18689850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Biol Reprod. 2008 Dec;79(6):1111-20. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.069146. Epub
2008 Jul 30.

Dual roles of cyp19a1a in gonadal sex differentiation and development in the
protandrous black porgy, Acanthopagrus schlegeli.

Wu GC(1), Tomy S, Nakamura M, Chang CF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, National Taiwan Ocean University,
Keelung 202, Taiwan.

Protandrous black porgy fish, Acanthopagrus schlegeli, have a striking life
cycle, with male sex differentiation at the juvenile stage, a bisexual gonad
during first 2 yr of life, and a male-to-female sex change (with vitellogenic
oocytes) at 3 yr of age. The present study investigated the role of aromatase
(cyp19a1a/Cyp19a1a) in gonadal development in this species, especially in
relation to sexual differentiation and sex change. Fish of various ages were
treated with estradiol (E2) or aromatase inhibitor (AI) to determine whether
manipulation of the hormonal environment has an impact on these processes. We
report an integrative immunohistochemical, cellular, and molecular data set
describing these interesting phenomena. During male sex differentiation, high
levels of cyp19a1a/Cyp19a1a expression were observed in the undifferentiated
gonad (4 mo of age), in marked contrast to the low cyp19a1a/Cyp19a1a levels
detected in the differentiated testis at the age of 5-6 mo. A low dose of E2
(0.25 mg/kg feed) stimulated testicular growth and function in sexually
differentiated fish, whereas a high dose of E2 (6 mg/kg feed) induced female
development. Furthermore, administration of AI suppressed male development and
promoted female sexual differentiation. An increased number of figla transcripts 
(an oocyte-specific gene) were observed prior to cyp19a1a expression, concomitant
with the development of oogonia and early primary oocytes in the ovaries of both 
E2- and AI-treated groups. Immunohistochemical Pcna staining showed that the
regression of testicular tissue occurred prior to the development of ovarian
tissue in both E2- and AI-induced females. The importance of cyp19a1a in female
development was further demonstrated by the increase in cyp19a1a transcripts
during the naturally occurring sex change. Transcripts of foxl2 increased in the 
gonads of 2- to 3-yr-old black porgy during the early stages of the natural sex
change, followed by a gradual elevation of cyp19a1a levels. The levels of both
genes peaked in the resulting ovarian tissue. Thus, cyp19a1a/Cyp19a1a plays dual 
roles in the gonadal development, namely, in testicular development during the
initial period of sexual differentiation and later in ovarian development during 
the natural sex change.

PMID: 18667752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 24;8:72. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-72.

Cloning and expression of R-Spondin1 in different vertebrates suggests a
conserved role in ovarian development.

Smith CA(1), Shoemaker CM, Roeszler KN, Queen J, Crews D, Sinclair AH.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Melbourne Department of Paediatrics and Murdoch Childrens
Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, 3052,
Australia. craig.smith@mcri.edu.au

BACKGROUND: R-Spondin1 (Rspo1) is a novel regulator of the Wnt/beta-catenin
signalling pathway. Loss-of-function mutations in human RSPO1 cause testicular
differentiation in 46, XX females, pointing to a role in ovarian development.
Here we report the cloning and comparative expression analysis of R-SPONDIN1
orthologues in the mouse, chicken and red-eared slider turtle, three species with
different sex-determining mechanisms. Evidence is presented that this gene is an 
ancient component of the vertebrate ovary-determining pathway.
RESULTS: Gonadal RSPO1 gene expression is female up-regulated in the embryonic
gonads in each species at the onset of sexual differentiation. In the mouse
gonad, Rspo1 mRNA is expressed in the somatic cell lineage at the time of ovarian
differentiation (E12.5-E15.5), with little expression in germ cells. However, the
protein is localised in the cytoplasm and at the cell surface of both somatic
(pre-follicular) and germ cells. In the chicken embryo, RSPO1 expression becomes 
elevated in females at the time of ovarian differentiation, coinciding with
female-specific activation of the FOXL2 gene and estrogen synthesis. RSPO1
protein in chicken is localised in the outer cortical zone of the developing
ovary, the site of primordial follicle formation and germ cell differentiation.
Inhibition of estrogen synthesis with a specific aromatase inhibitor results in a
decline in chicken RSPO1 expression, indicating that RSPO1 is influenced by
estrogen. In the red-eared slider turtle, which exhibits temperature-dependent
sex determination, up-regulation of RSPO1 occurs during the temperature-sensitive
period, when gonadal development is responsive to temperature. Accordingly, RSPO1
expression is temperature-responsive, and is down-regulated in embryos shifted
from female- to male-producing incubation temperatures.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that RSPO1 is up-regulated in the embryonic
gonads of female vertebrates with different sex-determining mechanisms. In all
instances, RSPO1 is expressed in the incipient ovary. These findings suggest that
R-SPONDIN1 is an ancient, conserved part of the vertebrate ovary-determining
pathway.

PMCID: PMC2519078
PMID: 18651984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Hum Mutat. 2008 Nov;29(11):E205-19. doi: 10.1002/humu.20819.

Identification of 34 novel and 56 known FOXL2 mutations in patients with
Blepharophimosis syndrome.

Beysen D(1), De Jaegere S, Amor D, Bouchard P, Christin-Maitre S, Fellous M,
Touraine P, Grix AW, Hennekam R, Meire F, Oyen N, Wilson LC, Barel D,
Clayton-Smith J, de Ravel T, Decock C, Delbeke P, Ensenauer R, Ebinger F,
Gillessen-Kaesbach G, Hendriks Y, Kimonis V, Laframboise R, Laissue P, Leppig K, 
Leroy BP, Miller DT, Mowat D, Neumann L, Plomp A, Van Regemorter N, Wieczorek D, 
Veitia RA, De Paepe A, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES) is caused by loss-of-function mutations in the
single-exon forkhead transcription factor gene FOXL2 and by genomic
rearrangements of the FOXL2 locus. Here, we focus on 92 new intragenic FOXL2
mutations, 34 of which are novel. Specifically, we found 10 nonsense mutations
(11%), 13 missense mutations (14%), 40 deletions or insertions leading to a
frameshift (43%), and 29 in-frame changes (32%), of which 28 (30%) lead to a
polyalanine expansion. This study confirms the existence of two previously
described mutational hotspots. Moreover, we gained novel insights in
genotype-phenotype correlations, emphasizing the need to interpret
genotype-phenotype correlations individually and always in the context of further
clinical observations.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18642388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Oct 15;17(20):3118-27. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn209. Epub 2008 Jul
16.

The identification and characterization of a FOXL2 response element provides
insights into the pathogenesis of mutant alleles.

Benayoun BA(1), Caburet S, Dipietromaria A, Bailly-Bechet M, Batista F, Fellous
M, Vaiman D, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U567, Team 21, Département de Génétique et Développement, Institut
Cochin 75014, Paris, France.

The Forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 plays a crucial role in ovarian
development and maintenance. In humans, its mutations lead to craniofacial
abnormalities, isolated or associated with ovarian dysfunction. Using a
combinatorial approach, we identified and characterized a FoxL2 response element 
(FLRE) and showed that it is highly specific and that it diverges from that of
other Forkhead transcription factors. This specificity should prevent aberrant
regulation of FOXL2 targets by other members of the family and should prevent
ectopic activation of the ovarian differentiation program in testes. We provide
evidence that the FLRE is used in naturally occurring promoters. We show that
polyAlanine expansions of FOXL2, which are the most frequent pathogenic
mutations, induce a length-dependent loss of response on different artificial
promoter reporters depending on the number and sequence of the FLREs that they
contain. Thus, we provide clear mechanistic evidence explaining how the
architecture of promoters influences their sensitivity to decreased transcription
factor availability. Furthermore, we speculate that the generally absent ovarian 
phenotype of patients carrying the most frequent polyAlanine expansion should
come from its ability to properly regulate high-affinity ovarian targets. The
existence of critical high-affinity ovarian targets would be compatible with the 
role of FOXL2 in reproduction and ensure developmental and functional robustness.
Taken together, our results give mechanistic insights on the molecular
pathogenesis of FOXL2 polyAlanine expansions.

PMID: 18635577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Proteomics. 2008 Aug;8(15):3118-23. doi: 10.1002/pmic.200800084.

The post-translational modification profile of the forkhead transcription factor 
FOXL2 suggests the existence of parallel processive/concerted modification
pathways.

Benayoun BA(1), Auer J, Caburet S, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U567, Team21, Genetics and Development Department, Institut Cochin,
Paris, France.

The transcription factor Forkhead box L subfamily member 2 (FOXL2) is involved in
craniofacial development and ovarian function. Using 2-DE and immunoblotting, we 
show that it is highly modified post-translationally. The most outstanding
feature of its migration profile is the presence of two distinct modification
"trains" and the absence of intermediates. A theoretical analysis of the
modification profile of FOXL2 suggests that it undergoes parallel
processive/concerted modifications. The absence of intermediates is compatible
with the recruitment of poorly modified FOXL2 into a post-translational
"modification factory."

PMID: 18604817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Sep;22(9):2141-61. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0033. Epub 2008 Jul 
3.

Conditional deletion of the retinoblastoma (Rb) gene in ovarian granulosa cells
leads to premature ovarian failure.

Andreu-Vieyra C(1), Chen R, Matzuk MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030,
USA.

The retinoblastoma protein (RB) regulates cell proliferation and survival by
binding to the E2F family of transcription factors. Recent studies suggest that
RB also regulates differentiation in a variety of cell types, including myocytes,
neurons, adipocytes, and chondrocytes. Rb mutations have been found in ovarian
cancer; however, the role of RB in normal and abnormal ovarian function remains
unclear. To test the hypothesis that loss of Rb induces ovarian tumorigenesis, we
generated an ovarian granulosa cell conditional knockout of Rb (Rb cKO) using the
Cre/lox recombination system. Rb cKO females showed 100% survival and no ovarian 
tumor formation through 9 months of age, but they developed progressive
infertility. Prepubertal Rb cKO females showed increased ovulation rates compared
with controls, correlating with increased follicle recruitment, higher Fshr and
Kitl mRNA levels, and lower anti-Müllerian hormone levels. In contrast, the
ovulation rate of 6-wk-old females was similar to that of controls. Morphometric 
analysis of Rb cKO ovaries from 6-wk-old and older females showed increased
follicular atresia and apoptosis. Rb cKO ovaries and preantral follicles had
abnormal levels of known direct and indirect target genes of RB, including
Rbl2/p130, E2f1, Ccne2, Myc, Fos, and Tgfb2. In addition, preantral follicles
showed increased expression of the granulosa cell differentiation marker Inha,
decreased levels of Foxl2 and Cyp19a1 aromatase, and abnormal expression of the
nuclear receptors Nr5a1, Nr5a2, and Nr0b1. Taken together, our results suggest
that RB is required for the temporal-specific pattern of expression of key genes 
involved in follicular development.

PMCID: PMC2631371
PMID: 18599617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Clin Genet. 2008 Sep;74(3):279-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2008.01022.x. Epub
2008 May 19.

Dysmorphic syndrome of hereditary neuralgic amyotrophy associated with a SEPT9
gene mutation--a family study.

Laccone F(1), Hannibal MC, Neesen J, Grisold W, Chance PF, Rehder H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
franco.laccone@meduniwien.ac.at

We report a family in which two siblings presented with an apparent dysmorphic
syndrome, including hypotelorism, blepharophimosis, slight ptosis, epicanthal
folds, microstomia and dysmorphic ears. One sibling had a cleft palate.
Initially, blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) was 
suspected; however, mutation of the FOXL2 gene was not detected. Moreover, the
patients' father and paternal grandmother had experienced recurrent episodes of
unilateral brachial neuritis and were diagnosed to have hereditary neuralgic
amyotrophy (HNA). HNA is a rare, inherited form of brachial neuritis whose
phenotypic spectrum may include hypotelorism, cleft palate and other minor
dysmorphisms. HNA maps to chromosome 17q25 and is associated with mutations in
the SEPT9 gene. After confirming a heterozygous SEPT9 mutation (R88W) in the
father and his mother, it became apparent that the dysmorphic features in the
children were part of HNA and that previous complaints of the daughter,
erroneously diagnosed as pronatio dolorosa and then epiphysiolysis of the
capitellum humeri, were in fact a first neuralgic pain attack. Both children were
shown to have inherited the paternal SEPT9 mutation. Wider recognition of HNA as 
a syndromic disorder may facilitate its diagnosis in affected young persons who
may not yet have manifested episodes of brachial neuritis.

PMID: 18492087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Hum Mutat. 2008 Aug;29(8):E123-31. doi: 10.1002/humu.20809.

Differential functional effects of novel mutations of the transcription factor
FOXL2 in BPES patients.

Nallathambi J(1), Laissue P, Batista F, Benayoun BA, Lesaffre C, Moumné L,
Pandaranayaka PE, Usha K, Krishnaswamy S, Sundaresan P, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dr. G.Venkataswamy Eye Research Institute, Aravind
Medical Research Foundation, Aravind Eye Hospital, Madurai 625020, India.

Mutations of the transcription factor FOXL2, involved in cranio-facial and
ovarian development lead to the Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Epicanthus Inversus
Syndrome (BPES) in human. Here, we describe nine mutations in the open reading
frame of FOXL2. Six of them are novel: c.292T>A (p.Trp98Arg), c.323T>C
(p.Leu108Pro), c.650C>G (p.Ser217Cys) and three frameshifts. We have performed
localization and functional studies for three of them. We have observed a strong 
cytoplasmic mislocalization induced by the missense mutation p.Leu108Pro located 
in the forkhead (FKH) domain of FOXL2. In line with this, transcriptional
activity assays confirmed the loss-of-function induced by this variant.
Interestingly, the novel mutation p.Ser217Cys, mapping between the FKH and the
polyalanine domain of FOXL2 and producing a mild eyelid phenotype, led to normal 
localization and transactivation. We have also modeled the structure of the FKH
domain to explore the potential structural impact of the mutations reported here 
and other previously reported ones. This analysis shows that mutants can be
sorted into two classes: those that potentially alter protein-protein
interactions and those that might disrupt the interactions with DNA. Our findings
reveal new insights into the molecular effects of FOXL2 mutations, especially
those affecting the FKH binding domain. (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18484667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Dev Growth Differ. 2008 Jun;50 Suppl 1:S195-219. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-169X.2008.01019.x. Epub 2008 May 13.

Regulation of oocyte maturation in fish.

Nagahama Y(1), Yamashita M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Okazaki, Japan. nagahama@nibb.ac.jp

A period of oocyte growth is followed by a process called oocyte maturation (the 
resumption of meiosis) which occurs prior to ovulation and is a prerequisite for 
successful fertilization. Our studies using fish models have revealed that oocyte
maturation is a three-step induction process involving gonadotropin (LH),
maturation-inducing hormone (MIH), and maturation-promoting factor (MPF). LH acts
on the ovarian follicle layer to produce MIH (17alpha,
20beta-dihydroxy-4-pregnen-3-one, 17alpha, 20beta-DP, in most fishes). The
interaction of ovarian thecal and granulosa cell layers (two-cell type model), is
required for the synthesis of 17alpha,20beta-DP. The dramatic increase in the
capacity of postvitellogenic follicles to produce 17alpha,20beta-DP in response
to LH is correlated with decreases in P450c17 (P450c17-I) and P450 aromatase
(oP450arom) mRNA and increases in the novel form of P450c17 (P450c17-II) and
20beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20beta-HSD) mRNA. Transcription factors such
as Ad4BP/SF-1, Foxl2, and CREB may be involved in the regulation of expression of
these steroidogenic enzymes. A distinct family of G-protein-coupled
membrane-bound MIH receptors has been shown to mediate non-genomic actions of
17alpha, 20beta-DP. The MIH signal induces the de novo synthesis of cyclin B from
the stored mRNA, which activates a preexisting 35 kDa cdc2 kinase via
phosphorylation of its threonine 161 by cyclin-dependent kinase activating
kinase, thus producing the 34 kDa active cdc2 (active MPF). Upon egg activation, 
MPF is inactivated by degradation of cyclin B. This process is initiated by the
26S proteasome through the first cut in its NH(2) terminus at lysine 57.

PMID: 18482399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Jun 15;146A(12):1571-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32096.

Young-Simpson syndrome (YSS), a variant of del(1)(p36) syndrome?

Robinson DM(1), Meagher CC, Orlowski CC, Lagoe EC, Fong CT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Golisano Children's Hospital at Strong, Rochester, New York, USA.

The Young-Simpson syndrome (YSS) and 1p36 deletion syndrome are both
characterized by facial and heart abnormalities, congenital hypothyroidism, and
severe growth and developmental retardation. However, the YSS is characterized by
the presence of blepharophimosis and epicanthus inversus, findings not described 
in monosomy 1p36 patients. We describe a girl with YSS, who presented with the
typical facial findings, global retardation, congenital hypothyroidism, and
congenital dilated cardiomyopathy. Comparative genomic hybridization chromosomal 
microarray analysis showed a 1p36.3 deletion, a finding not previously reported
in other YSS cases. We propose that YSS is a variant of the 1p36 deletion
syndrome.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18470891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Gen Comp Endocrinol. 2008 May 15;157(1):75-85. doi: 10.1016/j.ygcen.2008.03.018. 
Epub 2008 Mar 25.

Molecular cloning and quantitative expression of sexually dimorphic markers Dmrt1
and Foxl2 during female-to-male sex change in Epinephelus merra.

Alam MA(1), Kobayashi Y, Horiguchi R, Hirai T, Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Sesoko Station, Tropical Biosphere Research Center, University of the Ryukyus,
Sesoko 3422, Motobu, Okinawa 905-0227, Japan. mohammad.ashraful.alam@gmail.com

The honeycomb grouper (Epinephelus merra) is one of the smallest members of the
Serranidae family and is often used to study protogynous sex change. To determine
the role of the male-determining gene Dmrt1 and the ovarian-specific gene Foxl2
in sex change, we cloned these two markers from E. merra gonads by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and rapid amplification of cDNA 
ends (RACE). Two isoforms, Dmrt1a and Dmrt1b, resulted from alternative splicing 
in the coding region, causing the insertion of one glutamine residue in Dmrt1b.
RT-PCR revealed that Dmrt1 was expressed only in the gonads, with higher levels
in the testis than in the ovary. cDNA encoding Foxl2 was isolated from the ovary;
Foxl2 was expressed extensively in the brain, pituitary, gonads, and gill, with
its highest level in the ovary, indicating a potential role for Foxl2 in the
brain-pituitary-gonad axis. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR analyses showed that
Foxl2 mRNA expression was significantly downregulated from the late transitional 
phase to the completion of sex change. Conversely, Dmrt1 expression increased
with the progression of spermatogenesis and continued until the formation of the 
testis. The expression profiles of these two sex-specific marker genes
corresponded closely with the histological process of sex change. The
down-regulation of Foxl2 most likely facilitates oocyte degeneration, whereas the
up-regulation of Dmrt1 causes the proliferation of gonial germ cells into
spermatogina and initiates sex change.

PMID: 18452918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Sex Dev. 2007;1(4):255-70. doi: 10.1159/000104775.

Expression of putative sex-determining genes during the thermosensitive period of
gonad development in the snapping turtle, Chelydra serpentina.

Rhen T(1), Metzger K, Schroeder A, Woodward R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, N. Dak. 58202,
USA. turk.rhen@und.nodak.edu

Modes of sex determination are quite variable in vertebrates. The developmental
decision to form a testis or an ovary can be influenced by one gene, several
genes, environmental variables, or a combination of these factors. Nevertheless, 
certain morphogenetic aspects of sex determination appear to be conserved in
amniotes. Here we clone fragments of nine candidate sex-determining genes from
the snapping turtle Chelydra serpentina, a species with temperature-dependent sex
determination (TSD). We then analyze expression of these genes during the
thermosensitive period of gonad development. In particular, we compare gene
expression profiles in gonads from embryos incubated at a male-producing
temperature to those from embryos at a female-producing temperature. Expression
of Dmrt1 and Sox9 mRNA increased gradually at the male-producing temperature, but
was suppressed at the female-producing temperature. This finding suggests that
Dmrt1 and Sox9 play a role in testis development. In contrast, expression of
aromatase, androgen receptor (Ar), and Foxl2 mRNA was constant at the
male-producing temperature, but increased several-fold in embryos at the
female-producing temperature. Aromatase, Ar, and Foxl2 may therefore play a role 
in ovary development. In addition, there was a small temperature effect on ER
alpha expression with lower mRNA levels found in embryos at the female-producing 
temperature. Finally, Dax1, Fgf9, and SF-1 were not differentially expressed
during the sex-determining period, suggesting these genes are not involved in sex
determination in the snapping turtle. Comparison of gene expression profiles
among amniotes indicates that Dmrt1 and Sox9 are part of a core
testis-determining pathway and that Ar, aromatase, ER alpha, and Foxl2 are part
of a core ovary-determining pathway.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 18391536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Sex Dev. 2007;1(2):114-26. doi: 10.1159/000100033.

Characterisation of urogenital ridge gene expression in the human embryonal
carcinoma cell line NT2/D1.

Knower KC(1), Sim H, McClive PJ, Bowles J, Koopman P, Sinclair AH, Harley VR.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics, Prince Henry's Institute of Medical Research,
Clayton, Australia.

The study of the mammalian sex-determining pathway has been hampered by the lack 
of cell culture systems to investigate the underlying molecular relationships
between sex-determining genes. Recent approaches using high-throughput
genome-wide studies have revealed a number of sexually dimorphic genes expressed 
in the developing mouse gonad. Here, we investigated a human testicular cell line
in terms of its expression of known sex-determining genes and newly identified
candidates. The human embryonal carcinoma cell line NT2/D1 was screened for the
expression of 46 genes with known or potential roles in the sex-determining and
differentiation pathway. Forty genes tested were expressed in NT2/D1 cells
including the testis-determining genes SRY, SOX9, SF-1, DHH and FGF9. Genes not
expressed included WT1, DAX1 and the ovary-specific genes FOXL2 and WNT4.
Cell-specific markers demonstrate that NT2/D1 cells reflect a number of cell
types in the gonad including Sertoli, Leydig and germ cells. Our results suggest 
that male pathways initiated by SRY, SOX9 and SF-1 remain intact in these cells. 
Lack of expression of ovary-specific genes is consistent with a commitment of
these cells to the male lineage. Manipulation of gene expression in this cell
line could be an important new in vitro tool for the discovery of new human
sex-determining genes.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 18391522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Apr 2;8:36. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-36.

R-spondin1 and FOXL2 act into two distinct cellular types during goat ovarian
differentiation.

Kocer A(1), Pinheiro I, Pannetier M, Renault L, Parma P, Radi O, Kim KA, Camerino
G, Pailhoux E.

Author information: 
(1)INRA, UMR 1198, ENVA, CNRS, FRE 2857, Biologie du Développement et de la
Reproduction, Jouy-en-Josas, F-78350, France. Ayhan.Kocer@jouy.inra.fr

BACKGROUND: Up to now, two loci have been involved in XX sex-reversal in mammals 
following loss-of-function mutations, PIS (Polled Intersex Syndrome) in goats and
R-spondin1 (RSPO1) in humans. Here, we analyze the possible interaction between
these two factors during goat gonad development. Furthermore, since functional
redundancy between different R-spondins may influence gonad development, we also 
studied the expression patterns of RSPO2, 3 and 4.
RESULTS: Similarly to the mouse, RSPO1 shows a sex-dimorphic expression pattern
during goat gonad development with higher levels in the ovaries. Interestingly,
the PIS mutation does not seem to influence its level of expression. Moreover,
using an RSPO1 specific antibody, the RSPO1 protein was localized in the cortical
area of early differentiating ovaries (36 and 40 dpc). This cortical area
contains the majority of germ cell that are surrounded by FOXL2 negative somatic 
cells. At latter stages (50 and 60 dpc) RSPO1 protein remains specifically
localized on the germ cell membranes. Interestingly, a time-specific relocation
of RSPO1 on the germ cell membrane was noticed, moving from a uniform
distribution at 40 dpc to a punctuated staining before and during meiosis (50 and
60 dpc respectively). Interestingly, also RSPO2 and RSPO4 show a sex-dimorphic
expression pattern with higher levels in the ovaries. Although RSPO4 was found to
be faintly and belatedly expressed, the expression of RSPO2 increases at the
crucial 36 dpc stage, as does that of FOXL2. Importantly, RSPO2 expression
appears dramatically decreased in XX PIS-/- gonads at all three tested stages
(36, 40 and 50 dpc).
CONCLUSION: During goat ovarian development, the pattern of expression of RSPO1
is in agreement with its possible anti-testis function but is not influenced by
the PIS mutation. Moreover, our data suggest that RSPO1 may be associated with
germ cell development and meiosis. Interestingly, another RSPO gene, RSPO2 shows 
a sex-dimorphic pattern of expression that is dramatically influenced by the PIS 
mutation.

PMCID: PMC2329615
PMID: 18384673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Jul 1;17(13):2030-8. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn100. Epub 2008 Mar
27.

Missense mutations in the forkhead domain of FOXL2 lead to subcellular
mislocalization, protein aggregation and impaired transactivation.

Beysen D(1), Moumné L, Veitia R, Peters H, Leroy BP, De Paepe A, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, 9000 Ghent, Belgium.

Mutations of the FOXL2 gene have been shown to cause blepharophimosis syndrome
(BPES), characterized by an eyelid malformation associated with premature ovarian
failure or not. Recently, polyalanine expansions and truncating FOXL2 mutations
have been shown to lead to protein mislocalization, aggregation and altered
transactivation. Here, we study the molecular consequences of 17 naturally
occurring FOXL2 missense mutations. Most of them map to the conserved DNA-binding
forkhead domain (FHD). The subcellular localization and aggregation pattern of
the mutant FOXL2 proteins in COS-7 cells was variable and ranged from a diffuse
nuclear distribution like the wild-type to extensive nuclear aggregation often in
combination with cytoplasmic mislocalization and aggregation. We also studied the
transactivation capacity of the mutants in FOXL2 expressing granulosa-like cells 
(KGN). Several mutants led to a loss-of-function, while others are suspected to
induce a dominant negative effect. Interestingly, one mutant that is located
outside the FHD (S217F), appeared to be hypermorphic and had no effect on
intracellular protein distribution. This mutation gives rise to a mild BPES
phenotype. In general, missense mutations located in the FHD lead to classical
BPES and cannot be correlated with expression of the ovarian phenotype. However, 
a potential predictive value of localization and transactivation assays in the
making of genotype-phenotype correlations is proposed. This is the first study to
demonstrate that a significant number of missense mutations in the FHD of FOXL2
lead to mislocalization, protein aggregation and altered transactivation, and to 
provide insights into the pathogenesis associated with missense mutations of
FOXL2 in human disease.

PMID: 18372316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Ophthalmic Genet. 2008 Mar;29(1):37-40. doi: 10.1080/13816810701867615.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome in a girl with chromosome
translocation t(2;3)(q33;q23).

Tzschach A(1), Kelbova C, Weidensee S, Peters H, Ropers HH, Ullmann R, Erdogan F,
Jurkatis J, Menzel C, Kalscheuer V, Demuth S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
tzschach@molgen.mpg.de

We report on a young female patient with the clinical features of
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES, OMIM 110100) and a
balanced chromosome translocation 46, XX, t(2;3)(q33;q23)dn.BPES is a rare
autosomal dominant congenital disorder characterized by the eponymous
oculo-facial features that are, in female patients, associated either with (type 
1 BPES) or without (type 2 BPES) premature ovarian failure. Both types of BPES
are caused by heterozygous mutations in the FOXL2 gene, which is located in
chromosome band 3q23. Chromosome aberrations such as balanced rearrangements have
only rarely been observed in BPES patients but can provide valuable information
about regulatory regions of FOXL2. The translocation in this patient broadens our
knowledge of pathogenic mechanisms in BPES and highlights the importance of
conventional cytogenetic investigations in patients with negative results of
FOXL2 mutation screening as a prerequisite for optimal management and genetic
counseling.

PMID: 18363172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. J Pathol. 2008 May;215(1):31-8. doi: 10.1002/path.2335.

FOXL2 and SOX9 as parameters of female and male gonadal differentiation in
patients with various forms of disorders of sex development (DSD).

Hersmus R(1), Kalfa N, de Leeuw B, Stoop H, Oosterhuis JW, de Krijger R,
Wolffenbuttel KP, Drop SL, Veitia RA, Fellous M, Jaubert F, Looijenga LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center Rotterdam,
Josephine Nefkens Institute, Daniel den Hoed Cancer Center, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands.

The transcription factors SOX9 and FOXL2 are required for male and female
mammalian gonadal development. We have used specific antibodies to investigate
the role of these key proteins in disorders of sex development (DSD),
specifically inter-sex states. In normal gonads, SOX9 was found to be restricted 
to the presence of (pre-)Sertoli cells, while FOXL2 was found in granulosa cells,
and in stromal cells interpreted as early ovarian stroma. Both proteins were
found within a single patient, when testicular and ovarian development was
present; and within the same gonad, when both differentiation lineages were
identified, as in ovotesticular DSD (ie hermaphrodite). Especially SOX9 was
informative to support the presence of early testicular development (ie
seminiferous tubules), expected based on morphological criteria only. In a
limited number of DSD cases, FOXL2 was found within reasonably well-developed
seminiferous tubules, but double staining demonstrated that it was never strongly
co-expressed with SOX9 in the same cell. All seminiferous tubules containing
carcinoma in situ (CIS), the malignant counterpart of a primordial germ cell, ie 
the precursor of type II germ cell tumours of the testis, seminomas and
non-seminomas, showed the presence of SOX9 and not FOXL2. In contrast,
gonadoblastomas (GBs), the precursor of the same type of cancer, in a dysgenetic 
gonad, showed expression of FOXL2 and no, or only very low, SOX9 expression.
These findings indicate that gonadal differentiation, ie testicular or ovarian,
determines the morphology of the precursor of type II germ cell tumours, CIS or
GB, respectively. We show that in DSD patients, the formation of either ovarian
or/and testicular development can be visualized using FOXL2 and SOX9 expression, 
respectively. In addition, it initiates a novel way to study the role of the
supportive cells in the development of either CIS or GB.

PMID: 18348162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 Mar 1;146A(5):661-4. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32180.

Perrault syndrome: report of four new cases, review and exclusion of candidate
genes.

Marlin S(1), Lacombe D, Jonard L, Leboulanger N, Bonneau D, Goizet C, de
Villemeur TB, Cabrol S, Houang M, Moatti L, Feldmann D, Denoyelle F.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Trousseau, Service de Génétique, APHP, Paris, France.
sandrine.marlin@trs.aphp.fr

We report on two sporadic and two familial new cases with sensorineural hearing
impairment and ovarian dysgenesis which are the cardinal signs of Perrault
syndrome in females. Only one of them has a nervous system defect. We reviewed
all the published cases of Perrault syndrome in order to define the clinical
variability and to evaluate the frequency of the neurological anomalies in this
clinical entity. Moreover we excluded GJB2, POLG, and FOXL2 as candidate genes in
Perrault syndrome.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18241061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Apr 1;17(7):1010-9. Epub 2007 Dec 24.

Differential aggregation and functional impairment induced by polyalanine
expansions in FOXL2, a transcription factor involved in cranio-facial and ovarian
development.

Moumné L(1), Dipietromaria A, Batista F, Kocer A, Fellous M, Pailhoux E, Veitia
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, INSERM U567, Team21 Genomics and
Epigenetics of Placental Diseases, Paris, France.

Polyalanine (polyAla) tract expansions have been associated with an increasing
number of human diseases. Here, we have undertaken a functional study of the
effects of polyAla expansions in the context of the transcription factor FOXL2,
involved in cranio-facial and ovarian development. Using two cellular models, we 
show that FOXL2 polyAla expansions lead to protein mislocalization and
aggregation in a length-dependent manner. The fraction of cells containing
cytoplasmic staining displays a sigmoidal relationship with respect to the length
of the polyAla tract, suggesting the existence of a threshold length above which 
protein mislocalization occurs. The existence of such a threshold might be
rationalized if we consider that the longer the polyAla tract is, the higher its 
tendency to misfolding or to inducing spurious interactions with cytoplasmic
components. To study the intranuclear dynamics of polyAla-expanded FOXL2, we
performed fluorescence recovery after photobleaching experiments. The most
unexpected result concerned the pathogenic protein containing 19 Ala residues in 
the run, which was virtually immobile, although this variant does not present a
classical aggregation pattern. Luciferase assays and real time RT-PCR of many
potential target genes showed that polyAla expansions induce different losses of 
activity according to the target promoters tested. We provide molecular
explanations for these findings. Although our main focus is the mechanisms of
pathogenesis of polyAla-expanded proteins, we discuss the potential relevance of 
polyAla length variation in micro- and macroevolution because polyAla-containing 
proteins tend to be transcription factors.

PMID: 18158309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Jan 30;282(1-2):2-11. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

The mutations and potential targets of the forkhead transcription factor FOXL2.

Moumné L(1), Batista F, Benayoun BA, Nallathambi J, Fellous M, Sundaresan P,
Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

Mutations of FOXL2, a gene encoding a forkhead transcription factor, have been
shown to cause the blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES).
This genetic disorder is characterized by eyelid and mild craniofacial
abnormalities that can appear associated with premature ovarian failure. FOXL2 is
one of the earliest ovarian markers and it offers, along with its targets, an
excellent model to study ovarian development and function in normal and
pathological conditions. In this review we summarize recent data concerning
FOXL2, its mutations and its potential targets. Indeed, many mutations have been 
described in the coding sequence of FOXL2. Among them, polyalanine expansions and
premature nonsense mutations have been shown to induce protein aggregation. In
the context of the ovary, FOXL2 has been suggested to be involved in the
regulation of cholesterol and steroid metabolism, apoptosis, reactive oxygen
species detoxification and inflammation processes. The elucidation of the impact 
of FOXL2 mutations on its function will allow a better understanding of the
pathogenic mechanisms underlying the BPES phenotype.

PMID: 18155828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Reprod Biomed Online. 2007 Nov;15(5):554-60.

Screening for FOXL2 gene mutations in women with premature ovarian failure: an
Indian experience.

Chatterjee S(1), Modi D, Maitra A, Kadam S, Patel Z, Gokrall J, Meherji P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Parel, Mumbai
400012, India.

Premature ovarian failure (POF) occurs in 1% of the general population and
affects approximately 10% of non-ovulating women, resulting in infertility and
sex steroid deficiency. The forkhead domain transcription factor (FOXL2) gene is 
one of the candidate genes associated with POF. This case-control study was
designed for mutational analysis of the coding region of the FOXL2 gene in 80
cases of POF patients, 50 controls and 17 family members of 11 index cases using 
restriction fragment length polymorphism, single-stranded conformational
polymorphism, heteroduplex analysis and direct DNA sequencing. A 738C-->T
transition and a 773C-->G transversion were detected in two of the 80 patients
and a family member of one index case, but in none of the 50 controls screened.
No other alterations in the coding region of FOXL2 gene were detected. These data
suggest that FOXL2 gene mutations are a rare occurrence in isolated POF cases and
may not be involved in the pathogenesis of POF.

PMID: 18028747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. J Genet. 2007 Aug;86(2):165-8.

FOXL2 mutations in Indian families with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus
inversus syndrome.

Nallathambi J(1), Neethirajan G, Usha K, Jitendra J, De Baere E, Sundaresan P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Dr G.Venkataswamy Eye Research Institute, Aravind
Medical Research Foundation, Aravind Eye Hospital, Madurai 625 020, India.

PMID: 17968144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Biol Reprod. 2008 Feb;78(2):333-41. Epub 2007 Oct 17.

Sexual dimorphic expression of genes in gonads during early differentiation of a 
teleost fish, the Nile tilapia Oreochromis niloticus.

Ijiri S(1), Kaneko H, Kobayashi T, Wang DS, Sakai F, Paul-Prasanth B, Nakamura M,
Nagahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Okazaki 444-8585, Japan.

The Nile tilapia, a gonochoristic teleost fish with an XX/XY sex-determining
system, provides an excellent model for studying gonadal sex differentiation
because genetic all-females and all-males are available. In this study, we used
quantitative real-time RT-PCR to determine the precise timing of the gonadal
expression of 17 genes thought to be associated with gonadal sex differentiation 
in vertebrates. Gonads were isolated from all-female and all-male tilapia before 
(5-15 days after hatching [dah]) and after (25-70 dah) morphological sex
differentiation. The transcript of aromatase (cyp19a1a), an enzyme responsible
for producing estradiol-17beta, was expressed only in XX gonads at 5 dah, with a 
marked elevation in expression thereafter. In contrast, mRNA expression of
steroid 11beta-hydroxylase (cyp11b2), an enzyme responsible for the synthesis of 
11-ketotestosterone (11-KT, a potent androgen in fish), was found in XY gonads
from 35 dah only. These results, combined with the presence of transcripts for
other steroidogenic enzymes and estrogen receptors in XX gonads at 5-7 dah, are
consistent with our earlier suggestion that estradiol-17beta plays a critical
role in ovarian differentiation in tilapia, whereas a role for 11-KT in
testicular differentiation is questionable. A close relationship between the
expression of foxl2, but not nr5a1 (Ad4BP/SF-1), and that of cyp19a1a in XX
gonads suggests an important role for Foxl2 in the transcriptional regulation of 
cyp19a1a. Dmrt1 exhibited a male-specific expression in XY gonads from 6 dah
onward, suggesting an important role for Dmrt1 in testicular differentiation.
Sox9 and amh (anti-Mullerian hormone) showed a testis-specific expression, being 
evident only in the later stages of testicular differentiation. It is concluded
that the sex-specific expression of foxl2 and cyp19a1a in XX gonads and dmrt1 in 
XY gonads during early gonadal differentiation (5-6 dah) is critical for
undifferentiated gonads to differentiate into either the ovary or testis in the
Nile tilapia.

PMID: 17942796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jun;43(6):535-9.

[Mutation analysis of FOXL2 gene and its structure protein in patients of
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Lin LX(1), Tang SJ, Wang XK, Sun Y, Wang YL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plastic Surgery, Weifang Medical College, Weifang 261042, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of mutations of
the forkhead transcription factor 2 (FOXL2) gene on the primary and secondary
structure of the coded protein and seek for the molecular mechanism of
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES).
METHODS: The genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood of 7 clinically
diagnosed BPES patients, PCR amplification of FOXL2 coding region and 5'
untranslated region were performed. Sequence analysis was performed using the PCR
or cloning products. The structure of the protein was predicted with PDH and
ExPASy software, and the difference between the normal and the mutational protein
was analyzed.
RESULTS: A 901- 930 dup 30 mutation of FOXL2 was found in two patients from a
BPES family of type II and a sporadic case, and no any mutations were detected in
normal control. Analysis of the primary structure displayed that the molecular
weight of the protein coded by the mutated gene was greater than the normal, but 
both have the same isoelectric point. Analysis of the secondary structure showed 
that FOXL2 was a transmembrane protein with a polyalanine tract which contained a
alpha-helix. When the polyalanine tract expanded, the helix region extended, as a
result, the proportion of alpha-helix increased by 4.1%, but the proportions of
beta-pleated sheet and random coil decreased correspondingly.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the 901 - 930 dup 30 mutation of FOXL2 is a 
novel finding. Moreover, this mutation causes great changes in the primary and
secondary structure of the coded protein, which may be the molecular pathogenesis
of BPES.

PMID: 17897532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Dec 1;16(23):2795-804. Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Loss of Wnt4 and Foxl2 leads to female-to-male sex reversal extending to germ
cells.

Ottolenghi C(1), Pelosi E, Tran J, Colombino M, Douglass E, Nedorezov T, Cao A,
Forabosco A, Schlessinger D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, NIA/NIH-IRP, Baltimore, USA. chris11@helix.nih.gov

The discovery that the SRY gene induces male sex in humans and other mammals led 
to speculation about a possible equivalent for female sex. However, only partial 
effects have been reported for candidate genes experimentally tested so far. Here
we demonstrate that inactivation of two ovarian somatic factors, Wnt4 and Foxl2, 
produces testis differentiation in XX mice, resulting in the formation of testis 
tubules and spermatogonia. These genes are thus required to initiate or maintain 
all major aspects of female sex determination in mammals. The two genes are
independently expressed and show complementary roles in ovary morphogenesis. In
addition, forced expression of Foxl2 impairs testis tubule differentiation in XY 
transgenic mice, and germ cell-depleted XX mice lacking Foxl2 and harboring a Kit
mutation undergo partial female-to-male sex reversal. The results are all
consistent with an anti-testis role for Foxl2. The data suggest that the relative
autonomy of the action of Foxl2, Wnt4 and additional ovarian factor(s) in the
mouse should facilitate the dissection of their respective contributions to
female sex determination.

PMID: 17728319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Oct 26;362(3):619-25. Epub 2007 Aug 20.

Characterization, expression and transcriptional regulation of P450c17-I and -II 
in the medaka, Oryzias latipes.

Zhou LY(1), Wang DS, Shibata Y, Paul-Prasanth B, Suzuki A, Nagahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Okazaki 444-8585, Japan.

Recently we reported the isolation of two types of cytochrome P450c17s (steroid
17alpha-hydroxylase/C17, 20 lyase) encoded by two different genes, from genomes
of teleost fish. In this study, we characterized the expression profile,
enzymatic activity and transcriptional regulation of P450c17-I and -II in the
medaka ovary. Similar to tilapia, medaka P450c17-I possessed both hydroxylase and
lyase activities, while P450c17-II possessed only the hydroxylase activity. In
situ hybridization and gene expression profiles during 48h prior to spawning
indicated that P450c17-I is responsible for the production of estradiol-17beta
during oocyte growth, while P450c17-II for the production of 17alpha,
20beta-dihydroxy-4-pregnen-3-one during oocyte maturation and cortisol production
in the head kidney. Luciferase assays and expression profiles of transcription
factors as revealed by real time PCR suggested that P450c17-I and -II expression 
are tightly controlled by Ad4BP/SF-1, Lrh-1, Foxl2, and Dax1 during the 48 h
prior to spawning.

PMID: 17723227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Nov;21(11):2750-63. Epub 2007 Aug 7.

Response of candidate sex-determining genes to changes in temperature reveals
their involvement in the molecular network underlying temperature-dependent sex
determination.

Shoemaker CM(1), Queen J, Crews D.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Integrative Biology, University of Texas, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

Gonadogenesis, the process of forming an ovary or a testis from a bipotential
gonad, is critical to the development of sexually reproducing adults. Although
the molecular pathway underlying vertebrate gonadogenesis is well characterized
in organisms exhibiting genotypic sex determination, it is less well understood
in vertebrates whose sex is determined by environmental factors. We examine the
response of six candidate sex-determining genes to sex-reversing temperature
shifts in a species with temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD). For the
first time, we report the regulation of FoxL2, Wnt4, Dmrt1, and Mis by
temperature, confirming their involvement in the molecular pathway underlying TSD
and placing them downstream of the action of temperature. We find evidence that
FoxL2 plays an ovarian-specific role in development, whereas Wnt4 appears to be
involved in both testis and ovary formation. Dmrt1 expression shows rapid
activation in response to a shift to male-producing temperature, whereas Mis
up-regulation is delayed. Furthermore, early repression of Mis appears critical
to ovarian development. We also investigate Dax1 and Sox9 and reveal that at the 
level of gene expression, response to temperature is comparatively later in
gonadogenesis. By examining the role of these genes in TSD, we can begin to
elucidate elements of conservation and divergence between sex-determining
mechanisms.

PMID: 17684113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Semin Reprod Med. 2007 Jul;25(4):252-63.

Transcriptional control of ovarian development in somatic cells.

Ottolenghi C(1), Colombino M, Crisponi L, Cao A, Forabosco A, Schlessinger D, Uda
M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Developmental transitions of the bipotential gonad to the embryonic ovary and
thence to the follicle-filled mature ovary are expected to be coordinated by sets
of transcription factors. We infer candidate lists here, focusing on somatic cell
fate and function. For the mouse, developmental stages of ovary differentiation
are relatively discretely phased, and provide a unique tool to investigate the
intricate mechanisms that lead to the acquisition of female reproductive
competence. Cross-platform gene expression profiles supplement functional studies
of specific genes and comparative information about human biology. Available data
suggest that: (1) peak transcription activity just precedes the two most decisive
steps of early ovary differentiation (i.e., entry into meiosis and follicle
formation); (2) alternating peak gene activities in oocytes and somatic cells may
reflect reciprocal interactions; and (3) in addition to stable states of
chromatin modification associated with morphogenesis, some features of
differentiation are labile, contingent on the expression state of critical
factors. Examples are the maintenance of somatic sex determination by continued
Foxl2 action and the reversible maintenance of follicles in a quiescent state by 
nuclear Foxo3.

PMID: 17594606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Endocrinol. 2007 Jul;194(1):223-41.

Molecular cloning of doublesex and mab-3-related transcription factor 1, forkhead
transcription factor gene 2, and two types of cytochrome P450 aromatase in
Southern catfish and their possible roles in sex differentiation.

Liu Z(1), Wu F, Jiao B, Zhang X, Hu C, Huang B, Zhou L, Huang X, Wang Z, Zhang Y,
Nagahama Y, Cheng CH, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Eco-environments in Three Gorges Reservoir Region (Ministry 
of Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China.

To address the roles of doublesex and mab-3-related transcription factor 1
(Dmrt1), forkhead transcription factor gene 2 (Foxl2), and aromatase in sex
differentiation of Southern catfish, the cDNA sequences of these genes were
isolated from the gonads. Dmrt1a and Dmrt1b were found to be expressed in the
gonads, being higher in the testis. A low expression level of Dmrt1b was also
detected in the intestine and kidney of the male. Foxl2 was found to be expressed
extensively in the brain (B), pituitary (P), gill and gonads (G), with the
highest level in the ovary, indicating the possible involvement of Foxl2 in the
B-P-G axis. Cytochrome P450 (Cyp)19b was found to be expressed in the brain,
spleen, and gonads, while Cyp19a was only expressed in the gonads and spleen.
All-female Southern catfish fry were treated with fadrozole (F), tamoxifen (TAM),
and 17beta-estradiol (E2) respectively, from 5 to 25 days after hatching (dah).
The expression levels of these genes were measured at 65 dah. In the F-, TAM-,
and FTAM-treated groups, Dmrt1a and Dmrt1b were up-regulated in the gonad,
whereas Foxl2 and Cyp19a were down-regulated, while the expression of Cyp19b in
the gonad remained unchanged. Furthermore, down-regulation of Foxl2 and Cyp19b
was also detected in the brain. In the E2-treated group, Dmrt1a and Dmrt1b were
down-regulated to an undetectable level in the gonad, whereas Foxl2 and Cyp19b
were up-regulated in the brain. Consistent with the observed changes in the
expressions of these genes, 56, 70, and 80% sex-reversed male individuals were
obtained in the F-, TAM-, and F + TAM-treated groups respectively. These results 
indicate the significant roles of Dmrt1, Foxl2, and Cyp19 in the sex
differentiation of Southern catfish.

PMID: 17592036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Gene Expr Patterns. 2007 Aug;7(7):793-7. Epub 2007 May 26.

The developmental expression of foxl2 in the dogfish Scyliorhinus canicula.

Wotton KR(1), French KE, Shimeld SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, The Tinbergen Building, South
Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PS, UK.

The FoxL2 genes are a subfamily of the Fox (forkhead box) gene family. FOXL2 is
mutated in the disorder Blepharophimosis, Ptosis, and Epicanthus Inversus
Syndrome (BPES), which is characterized by eyelid malformations, and Premature
Ovarian Failure (POF). In the mouse expression is seen in the perioptic
mesenchyme, developing eyelids, ovary and pituitary. We have isolated a foxl2
cDNA from the dogfish Scyliorhinus canicula (also known as the lesser spotted
catshark), allowing the characterisation of this gene's sequence and expression
from a lineage that diverged early in the evolution of gnathostomes. Molecular
phylogenetic analysis strongly grouped this sequence with the gnathostomes within
the FoxL2 subfamily. We demonstrate the early expression of Scyliorhinus canicula
foxl2 in the mandibular head mesoderm and later in continuous populations of
mandibular arch cells and mandibular head mesenchyme cells around the developing 
pituitary. As development proceeds expression decreases in the mesenchyme of the 
head but is seen in the mesenchyme around the eye and later in the developing
eyelids. Additionally expression is seen in regions of pharyngeal arch mesoderm
and in ectoderm from which gill buds will form. This expression is maintained in 
the developing and elongating gill buds. Thus, S. canicula foxl2 is a marker for 
the mandibular mesoderm and gill buds and its expression is conserved in the
perioptic mesenchyme, developing eyelids and pituitary.

PMID: 17591462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Aug 10;359(4):935-40. Epub 2007 Jun 8.

Follicle-stimulating hormone signaling and Foxl2 are involved in transcriptional 
regulation of aromatase gene during gonadal sex differentiation in Japanese
flounder, Paralichthys olivaceus.

Yamaguchi T(1), Yamaguchi S, Hirai T, Kitano T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials and Life Science, Graduate School of Science and
Technology, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto 860-8555, Japan.

Japanese flounder (Paralichthys olivaceus), a teleost fish that has XX
(female)/XY (male) sex determination system, exhibits temperature-dependent sex
determination. We have previously shown that high water temperature or an
aromatase inhibitor treatment causes the sex-reversal from genetic females to
phenotypic males and suppression of mRNA expression of ovary-type P450 aromatase 
(cyp19a1), a steroidogenic enzyme responsible for the conversion of androgens to 
estrogens, in Japanese flounder. In the present study, we demonstrate that high
water temperature treatment suppresses specifically mRNA expression of the
forkhead transcription factor gene foxl2, and follicle-stimulating hormone
receptor (fshr) in gonads during early sex differentiation. Moreover, transient
transfection assay shows that the flounder Foxl2 and cAMP analog can activate the
cyp19a1 gene transcription in vitro. These results strongly suggest that FSH
signaling and Foxl2 are involved in the transcriptional regulation of cyp19a1
gene during gonadal sex differentiation in Japanese flounder with
temperature-dependent sex determination.

PMID: 17574208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Mol Reprod Dev. 2008 Mar;75(3):472-6.

Sox9b/sox9a2-EGFP transgenic medaka reveals the morphological reorganization of
the gonads and a common precursor of both the female and male supporting cells.

Nakamura S(1), Aoki Y, Saito D, Kuroki Y, Fujiyama A, Naruse K, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics for Reproduction, National Institute for
Basic Biology, Okazaki, Japan.

We have established an enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) transgenic
medaka line that mimics the expression of sox9b/sox9a2 to analyze the
morphological reorganization of the gonads and characterize the sox9b-expressing 
cells during gonadal formation in this fish. After the germ cells have migrated
into the gonadal areas, a cluster of EGFP-expressing cells in the single gonadal 
primordium was found to be separated by the somatic cells along the rostrocaudal 
axis and form the bilateral lobes. We observed in these transgenic fish that EGFP
expression persists only in the somatic cells directly surrounding the germ
cells. As sex differentiation proceeds, dmrt1 and foxl2 begin to be expressed in 
the EGFP-expressing cells in the XY and the XX gonads, respectively. This
indicates that the sox9b-expressing cells reorganize into two lobes of the gonad 
and then differentiate into Sertoli or granulosa cells, as common precursors of
the supporting cells. Hence, our sox9b-EGFP medaka system will be useful in
future studies of gonadal development.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17474097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Fertil Steril. 2007 Apr;87(4):896-901.

Extinction of FOXL2 expression in aggressive ovarian granulosa cell tumors in
children.

Kalfa N(1), Philibert P, Patte C, Ecochard A, Duvillard P, Baldet P, Jaubert F,
Fellous M, Sultan C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité d'Endocrinologie-Gynécologie Pédiatrique, Service de Pédiatrie 1,
Hôpital Arnaud-de-Villeneuve, Montpellier, France.

OBJECTIVE: In the female gonad, FOXL2 is a key factor for proper differentiation 
of granulosa cells (GC) during folliculogenesis and its expression persists in
the ovary after birth. The aim of this multicentric nationwide study was to
determine whether FOXL2 expression varies during tumoral proliferation of GC
cells in juvenile ovarian GC tumors (OGCT).
DESIGN: Nationwide retrospective study.
SETTING: University Hospital of Montpellier, Department of Hormonology.
PATIENT(S): Between 1994 and 2004, 26 patients with juvenile OGCT were reported
in the TGM95 database of the French Society for Childhood Cancer (SFCE) and from 
eight pediatric endocrinology centers. Immunohistochemistry was performed using
an anti-FOXL2 antibody.
INTERVENTION(S): Immunohistochemistry studies of FOXL2 on OGCT slides.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Level of FOXL2 expression within the tumor,
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics classification, and tumor
recurrences.
RESULT(S): FOXL2 expression was absent in the GC of 10 patients and was markedly 
reduced in the cells of 4 patients. Precocious pseudopuberty was more frequently 
the revealing symptom in the children with conserved FOXL2 expression. Patients
with no or reduced expression of FOXL2 more frequently exhibited associated
hemorrhagic ascites, higher mitotic activity in the tumor, and significantly more
advanced oncologic staging. All patients requiring complementary treatment (n =
7; chemotherapy or complementary surgery) had reduced expression of FOXL2 in the 
tumor. All recurring OGCT exhibited a complete extinction of FOXL2 expression (n 
= 3).
CONCLUSION(S): These results show that FOXL2 is not expressed or is
underexpressed in juvenile OGCT with an aggressive pattern of progression, and it
thus may be a prognostic factor for these tumors.

PMID: 17430735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Zhonghua Zheng Xing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jan;23(1):48-50.

[The mutation study of the FOXL2 gene in a big Chinese family with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang SJ(1), Wang XK, Wang YL, Lin LX, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Plastic Surgery, Weifang Medical College, Weifang 261042, China. 
tsj1950@163.com

OBJECTIVE: We have studied 4 generations 12 patients in a family which has
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus-inversus syndrome (BPES) for the gene, FOXL2, 
the group also have 12 normal members in this family and other 80 normal
individuals for contrast.
METHODS: The FOXL2 gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and then
analyzed by direct genomic sequencing.
RESULTS: A 892C > T at nucleotides in FOXL2 was found in the twelve affected
patients. No mutations was found in any of the health members in the family.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXL2 may be a important pathogenesis for the disease in this
Chinese family.

PMID: 17393695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Feb 27;104(9):3330-5. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Potential targets of FOXL2, a transcription factor involved in craniofacial and
follicular development, identified by transcriptomics.

Batista F(1), Vaiman D, Dausset J, Fellous M, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U567, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 8104, and Faculté 
de Médecine René Descartes, Université Paris V UM 3, 75014 Paris, France.

FOXL2 is a gene encoding a forkhead transcription factor, whose mutations are
responsible for the blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome that
often involves premature ovarian failure. FOXL2 is one of the earliest ovarian
markers and it offers, along with its targets, an excellent model to study
ovarian development and function in normal and pathological conditions. We have
recently shown that the aromatase gene is a target of FOXL2, and only three other
targets have been reported so far. To detect potential transcriptional targets of
FOXL2, we used DNA chips and quantitative PCR to compare the transcriptomes of
granulosa-like cells overexpressing, or not, FOXL2. This analysis showed that
mediators of inflammation, apoptotic and transcriptional regulators, genes
involved in cholesterol metabolism, and genes encoding enzymes and transcription 
factors involved in reactive oxygen species detoxification were up-regulated. On 
the other hand, FOXL2 down-regulated the transcription of several genes involved 
in proteolysis and signal transduction and in transcription regulation. A
bioinformatic analysis was conducted to discriminate between potential target
promoters activated and repressed by FOXL2. In addition, the promoters of
strongly activated genes were enriched in forkhead recognition sites, suggesting 
that these genes might be direct FOXL2 targets. Altogether, these results provide
insight into the activity of FOXL2 and may help in understanding the mechanisms
of pathogenesis of FOXL2 mutations if the targets prove to be the same in the
ovary.

PMCID: PMC1805535
PMID: 17360647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Reprod Dev. 2007 Oct;74(10):1239-46.

Dax1 suppresses P450arom expression in medaka ovarian follicles.

Nakamoto M(1), Wang DS, Suzuki A, Matsuda M, Nagahama Y, Shibata N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental System Science, Graduate School of Science and
Technology, Shinshu University, Matsumoto, Japan.

Dax1 is a member of an unusual orphan nuclear receptor family, and is known to
regulate P450arom in mammals and is involved in sex differentiation in some
vertebrates. To investigate whether Dax1 is involved in the regulation of the
steroidogenic pathway for estrogen biosynthesis in medaka ovarian follicles, we
isolated Dax1 cDNA from adult medaka ovaries and analyzed its expression pattern 
in medaka gonads. In adult ovaries, Dax1 mRNA was detected only in
postvitellogenic follicles and was not detected in previtellogenic and
vitellogenic follicles. In adult testis, Dax1 mRNA was not detected. We compared 
the expression pattern of Dax1 with that of Foxl2, Ad4BP/Sf-1, P450c17, and
P450arom by in situ hybridization using adjacent sections. In contrast to Dax1
expression, these genes were co-expressed in vitellogenic follicles but were not 
detected in postvitellogenic follicles. Thus, in medaka ovarian follicles, Dax1
did not show any overlapping expression patterns against Foxl2, Ad4BP/Sf-1,
P450c17, and P450arom. Moreover, co-transfection experiments demonstrated that
Dax1 inhibits Ad4BP/Sf-1- and Foxl2-mediated P450arom expression. On the other
hand, during early sex differentiation, Dax1 mRNA was not detected in both males 
and females. Our results suggest that Dax1 down-regulates Ad4BP/Sf-1- and
Foxl2-mediated P450arom expression in medaka ovarian follicles.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17342735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Vis. 2007 Jan 26;13:108-13.

FOXL2 mutations in Chinese patients with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus
inversus syndrome.

Wang J(1), Liu J, Zhang Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Ophthalmology, Zhongshan Ophthalmic Center, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China. wjshuzi_zsu@yahoo.com.cn
<wjshuzi_zsu@yahoo.com.cn>

PURPOSE: Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is an
autosomal dominant disorder where eyelid malformation associated with (type I) or
without (type II) premature ovarian failure (POF). It is ascribed to mutations in
the forkhead transcriptional factor2 (FOXL2) gene. The purpose of this study is
to identify mutations in FOXL2 of Chinese patients with BPES.
METHODS: Genomic DNA was prepared from leucocytes of peripheral venous blood. The
coding regions and nearby intron sequences of FOXL2 were analyzed by cycle and
cloning sequencing.
RESULTS: Four mutations in FOXL2 were identified in six families, including
c.241T>C, c.650C>G, c.804dupC, and c.672_701dup. Of the four, the c.241T>C and
c.650C>G were novel and would result in missense changes of the encoded proteins,
i.e., p.Tyr81His and p.Ser217Cys, respectively. The c.672_701dup
(p.Ala224_Ala234dup) was detected in three families, indicating a mutation
hotspot. The c.804dupC (p.Gly269ArgfsX265) mutation was found in one family.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results expand the spectrum of FOXL2 mutations and confirm the
mutation hotspot in FOXL2.

PMCID: PMC2533039
PMID: 17277738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Int J Dermatol. 2007 Jan;46(1):61-3.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES).

Leon-Mateos A(1), Ginarte M, Ruiz-Ponte C, Carracedo A, Toribio J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, POVISA, Vigo, Spain. alml313@gmail.com

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a rare inherited
condition that includes characteristic eyelid malformations and sometimes reduced
fertility in females. Genetic studies have implicated mutations in the forkhead
transcription factor FOXL2 as responsible for BPES. We report a female and her
father with BPES type I, who presented the 1092-1108dup17 mutation in the FOXL2
gene. Molecular studies and the typical clinical features of BPES should allow
the dermatologist to reach an early diagnosis and permit the treatment of eyelid 
alterations and the investigation of infertility.

PMID: 17214723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2006 Dec;67(6):557-66.

[Premature ovarian failure].

[Article in French]

Christin-Maitre S(1), Pasquier M, Donadille B, Bouchard P.

Author information: 
(1)EA1533 Génétique de la reproduction, Université Paris VI, Service
d'Endocrinologie de la Reproduction, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Assistance Publique, 
Hôpitaux de Paris, 75012 Paris, France. sophie.christin-maitre@sat.aphp.fr

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is defined by at least four months of amenorrhea 
with elevated gonadotropins (usually above 40 UI/L) detected on two occasions a
few weeks apart, in a woman before the age of 40. It occurs in 1 out of 10,000 in
women below the age of 20, 1/1,000 below 30 and 1% in women before the age of 40.
In 80% of POF cases, the etiology is unknown, except for Turner syndrome. The
different etiologies identified are 1) iatrogenic following chemotherapy and/or
radiotherapy, 2) autoimmune, 3) viral, 4) genetic (RFSH, FOXL2, FRAXA, BMP15,
GDF9, GALT, 17 hydroxylase...). Management of these patients includes hormone
replacement therapy in order to avoid an increase in cardiovascular risk and
osteoporosis related to hypoestrogenism. Infertility is common, as only 3 to 10% 
of the patients will have natural conception. When fertility is desired, women
with POF should be oriented towards oocyte donation centers. Research is
currently performed in order to identify new genes involved in POF.

PMID: 17194965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Mol Endocrinol. 2007 Mar;21(3):712-25. Epub 2006 Dec 27.

Foxl2 up-regulates aromatase gene transcription in a female-specific manner by
binding to the promoter as well as interacting with ad4 binding
protein/steroidogenic factor 1.

Wang DS(1), Kobayashi T, Zhou LY, Paul-Prasanth B, Ijiri S, Sakai F, Okubo K,
Morohashi K, Nagahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Department of Developmental Biology,
National Institute for Basic Biology, Okazaki 444-8585, Japan.

Increasing evidence suggests the crucial role of estrogen in ovarian
differentiation of nonmammalian vertebrates including fish. The present study has
investigated the plausible role of Foxl2 in ovarian differentiation through
transcriptional regulation of aromatase gene, using monosex fry of tilapia. Foxl2
expression is sexually dimorphic, like Cyp19a1, colocalizing with Cyp19a1 and
Ad4BP/SF-1 in the stromal cells and interstitial cells in gonads of normal XX and
sex-reversed XY fish, before the occurrence of morphological sex differentiation.
Under in vitro conditions, Foxl2 binds to the sequence ACAAATA in the promoter
region of the Cyp19a1 gene directly through its forkhead domain and activates the
transcription of Cyp19a1 with its C terminus. Foxl2 can also interact through the
forkhead domain with the ligand-binding domain of Ad4BP/SF-1 to form a
heterodimer and enhance the Ad4BP/SF-1 mediated Cyp19a1 transcription. Disruption
of endogenous Foxl2 in XX tilapia by overexpression of its dominant negative
mutant (M3) induces varying degrees of testicular development with occasional sex
reversal from ovary to testis. Such fish display reduced expression of Cyp19a1 as
well as a drop in the serum levels of 17beta-estradiol and 11-ketotestosterone.
Although the XY fish with wild-type tilapia Foxl2 (tFoxl2) overexpression never
exhibited a complete sex reversal, there were significant structural changes,
such as tissue degeneration, somatic cell proliferation, and induction of
aromatase, with increased serum levels of 17beta-estradiol and
11-ketotestosterone. Altogether, these results suggest that Foxl2 plays a
decisive role in the ovarian differentiation of the Nile tilapia by regulating
aromatase expression and possibly the entire steroidogenic pathway.

PMID: 17192407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Bioessays. 2007 Jan;29(1):15-25.

Determination and stability of sex.

Ottolenghi C(1), Uda M, Crisponi L, Omari S, Cao A, Forabosco A, Schlessinger D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

How is the embryonic bipotential gonad regulated to produce either an ovary or a 
testis? In males, transient early activation of the Y chromosome Sry gene makes
both germ cells and soma male. However, in females, available evidence suggests
that the process of ovary sex determination may take place independently in the
germline and somatic lineages. In addition, in contrast to testis, in ovary
somatic cells, female-to-male gonadal sex reversal can occur at times throughout 
ovary development and maturation. We suggest that a single gene pathway, likely
hinging on the Foxl2 transcription factor, both initiates and maintains sex
differentiation in somatic cells of the mammalian ovary.

PMID: 17187356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Yi Chuan. 2006 Nov;28(11):1467-71.

[Advance in mutation analysis of the candidate genes in premature ovarian
failure].

[Article in Chinese]

Tan YQ(1), Cheng DH, Lu GX.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproduction and Stem Cell Engineering, Xiang-Ya School of
Medicine, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410078, China.
tanyueqiu@sina.com

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a complicated and heterogeneous disease. In
majority of cases the underlying cause is not identified. Among the known causes,
genetic aberration plays very important role. POF not only causes infertility,
also adds the risk of osteoporosis and coronary heart disease because of the low 
level estrogen. The major therapy measures in present include hormone replacement
therapy and infertility treatment with donated oocytes, but the effect is not
ideal. To identify the genes of POF is the basis for treating and preventing this
disease. A large number of candidate genes of POF are found on X chromosome and
autosomes. The present paper reviewed the advance in mutation analysis on the
candidate genes of POF, which is aimed to provide a basis to explore its
molecular mechanism.

PMID: 17098720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Hum Genet. 2007 Mar;121(1):107-12. Epub 2006 Nov 7.

A novel polyalanine expansion in FOXL2: the first evidence for a recessive form
of the blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES) associated with ovarian dysfunction.

Nallathambi J(1), Moumné L, De Baere E, Beysen D, Usha K, Sundaresan P, Veitia
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Aravind Medical Research Foundation, Aravind Eye
Hospital, Madurai, India.

The blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal dominant developmental
disorder in which craniofacial/eyelid malformations are associated (type I) or
not (type II) with premature ovarian failure (POF). Mutations in the FOXL2 gene, 
encoding a forkhead transcription factor, are responsible for both types of BPES.
Heterozygous polyalanine expansions of +10 residues (FOXL2-Ala24) account for 30%
of FOXL2 mutations and are fully penetrant for the eyelid phenotype. Here we
describe the first homozygous FOXL2 mutation leading to a polyalanine expansion
of +5 residues (FOXL2-Ala19). This novel mutation segregates in an Indian family 
where heterozygous mutation carriers are unaffected whereas homozygous
individuals have the typical BPES phenotype, with proven POF in one female.
Expression of the FOXL2-Ala19 protein in COS-7 cells revealed a significantly
higher cytoplasmic retention compared to the wild-type protein. This is the first
study providing genetic evidence for a recessive inheritance of BPES associated
with ovarian dysfunction.

PMID: 17089161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Ophthalmic Genet. 2006 Sep;27(3):79-82.

Familial blepharophimosis-like syndrome with esotropia, uveal coloboma, and short
stature.

Khan AO(1), Alam SK, Aldahmesh M, Rajab M, Meyer B.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. arif.khan@mssm.edu

BACKGROUND: Interstitial deletion of Hsa 3q involves FOXL2, the gene responsible 
for blepharophimosis-ptosis-telecanthus-epicanthus inversus (BPES). Thought to be
due to a contiguous gene syndrome, the recognizable phenotype of 3q interstitial 
deletion includes BPES facies and has not been associated with other loci.
OBJECTIVE: To describe a familial syndrome that resembles the interstitial
deletion of 3q clinically, but does not map to the FOXL2 region.
METHODS: Clinical evaluation of family members and linkage analysis.
RESULTS: Three affected siblings with a phenotype resembling that seen in 3q
interstitial deletion were studied in addition to their clinically unaffected
parents. Linkage analysis excluded FOXL2 as underlying the distinct phenotype,
observed with > 99% confidence.
CONCLUSIONS: The relevant locus in the current family, although remote from
FOXL2, is likely important to the FOXL2 functional pathway. The phenotype
observed in 3q interstitial deletion may be due to severe disruption of FOXL2
rather than to a contiguous gene syndrome.

PMID: 17050282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Genetics. 2006 Nov;174(3):1573-81. Epub 2006 Sep 1.

Amh and Dmrta2 genes map to tilapia (Oreochromis spp.) linkage group 23 within
quantitative trait locus regions for sex determination.

Shirak A(1), Seroussi E, Cnaani A, Howe AE, Domokhovsky R, Zilberman N, Kocher
TD, Hulata G, Ron M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Agricultural Research Organization, Volcani
Center, Bet Dagan, Israel.

Recent studies have revealed that the major genes of the mammalian sex
determination pathway are also involved in sex determination of fish. Several
studies have reported QTL in various species and strains of tilapia, regions
contributing to sex determination have been identified on linkage groups 1, 3,
and 23. Genes contributing to sex-specific mortality have been detected on
linkage groups 2, 6, and 23. To test whether the same genes might control sex
determination in mammals and fishes, we mapped 11 genes that are considered
putative master key regulators of sex determination: Amh, Cyp19, Dax1, Dmrt2,
Dmrta2, Fhl3l, Foxl2, Ixl, Lhx9, Sf1, and Sox8. We identified polymorphisms in
noncoding regions of these genes and genotyped these sites for 90 individuals of 
an F2 mapping family. Mapping of Dax1 joined LG16 and LG21 into a single linkage 
group. The Amh and Dmrta2 genes were mapped to two distinct regions of LG23. The 
Amh gene was mapped 5 cM from UNH879 within a QTL region for sex determination
and 2 cM from UNH216 within a QTL region for sex-specific mortality. Dmrta2 was
mapped 4 cM from UNH848 within another QTL region for sex determination. Cyp19
was mapped to LG1 far from a previously reported QTL region for sex determination
on this chromosome. Seven other candidate genes mapped to LG4, -11, -12, -14, and
-17.

PMCID: PMC1667067
PMID: 16951079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Nov;20(11):2796-805. Epub 2006 Jul 13.

FOXL2 in the pituitary: molecular, genetic, and developmental analysis.

Ellsworth BS(1), Egashira N, Haller JL, Butts DL, Cocquet J, Clay CM, Osamura RY,
Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Michigan Medical School, 4909 Buhl Building, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-0618, USA.

FOXL2 is a forkhead transcription factor expressed in the eye, ovary, and
pituitary gland. Loss of function mutations in humans and mice confirm a
functional role for FOXL2 in the eye and ovary, but its role in the pituitary is 
not yet defined. We report that FOXL2 colocalizes with the glycoprotein hormone
alpha-subunit (alphaGSU) in quiescent cells of the mouse pituitary from embryonic
d 11.5 through adulthood. FOXL2 is expressed in essentially all gonadotropes and 
thyrotropes and a small fraction of prolactin-containing cells during pregnancy, 
but not somatotropes or corticotropes. The coincident expression patterns of
FOXL2 and alphaGSU suggested that the alphaGSU gene (Cga) is a downstream target 
of FOXL2. We demonstrate that FOXL2 regulates mouse Cga transcription in
gonadotrope-derived (alphaT3-1, LbetaT2), thyrotrope-derived (alphaTSH) and
heterologous (CV-1) cells in a context-dependent manner. In addition, a
FOXL2-VP16 fusion protein is sufficient to stimulate ectopic Cga expression in
transgenic animals. Normal FOXL2 expression requires the transcription factors
Lhx3 and Lhx4 but not of Prop1. Thus, FOXL2 expression is affected by mutations
in early pituitary developmental regulatory genes, and its expression precedes
that of genes necessary for gonadotrope-specific development such as Egr1 and Sf1
(Nr5a1). These data place FOXL2 in the hierarchy of pituitary developmental
control and suggest a role in regulation of Cga gene expression.

PMID: 16840539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J AAPOS. 2006 Jun;10(3):279-80.

Blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus syndrome: clinical and
molecular analysis of a case.

Mari F(1), Giachino D, Russo L, Pilia G, Ariani F, Scala E, Chiappe F, Sampieri
K, Caporossi A, Renieri A, Lasorella G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, Molecular Biology Department, University of Siena, Siena,
Italy.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (OMIM #U10100) is a rare
autosomal-dominant disorder in which an eyelid malformation is associated (type
I) or not (type H) with premature ovarian failure in the affected female. It is
invariably characterized by 4 major features: (1) bilaterally shortened
horizontal palpebral fissure (blepharophimosis); (2) severe impairment of the
superior palpebral levator (ptosis); (3) a vertical skin fold arising from the
lower eyelid, which inserts medially in the upper lid (epicanthus inversus) and
(4) an increased inner can-thal distance with a normal outer canthal distance
(telecanthus). The mutations causing this disorder are found in the FOXL2 gene, a
forkhead transcription factor, located in 3q23. Although many patients with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome have an affected parent, a
conspicuous number of sporadic cases also have been reported. We describe here a 
sporadic case with a mutation in the FOXL2 gene that was well characterized both 
clinically and molecularly.

PMID: 16814186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Zhonghua Yan Ke Za Zhi. 2006 May;42(5):409-14.

[Mutation analysis of FOXL2 in Chinese patients with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome].

[Article in Chinese]

Qi YH(1), Li Y, Lin H, Jia HY, Su H, Gu JZ, Huang SZ, Liu YP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Harbin Medical
University, Harbin 150086, China. qi_yanhua@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To identify the genetic mutation in two Chinese families and 6
sporadic patients with belpharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome
(BPES).
METHODS: Polymorphisms of 5 satellite markers on 3q were analyzed and linkage
analysis was performed using linkage software (MLINK) in all cases of two
families. FOXL2 gene fragments were amplified by PCR and mutation was determined 
by sequencing DNA fragments in all patients.
RESULTS: The BPES locus in the pedigrees was mapped to 3q23, a 9.88 cM interval
between markers D3S3696 and D3S1744. The maximum lod scores were 2.11 (theta =
0.00) at D3S1549 and D3S3586 and 1.51 (theta = 0.00) at D3S1764. By direct
sequencing FOXL2 gene, two sporadic cases had a 30-bp in frame duplication 909 - 
938 dup 30 and one sporadic case showed a nucleotide insertion 1041 - 1042 ins C.
However, it was unable to find any causal mutation of FOXL2 in two families with 
BPES.
CONCLUSIONS: The gene responsible for BPES in two Chinese families was linked to 
D3S1549, D3S3586 and D3S1764. This is the first reported mutations of FOXL2 (909 
- 938 dup 30 and 1041 - 1042 ins C) in Chinese sporadic cases. One of the
mutations, in-frame 30-bp duplication (909 - 938 dup 30), is one of the most
common mutation hotspots in the coding region of FOXL2. In BPES families without 
FOXL2 mutation, it cannot be excluded that the disorder is caused by a position
effect in the surrounding region of FOXL2 gene or by other genes located at 3q23.

PMID: 16762234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. J Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Jun;36(3):399-413.

FOXL2 activates P450 aromatase gene transcription: towards a better
characterization of the early steps of mammalian ovarian development.

Pannetier M(1), Fabre S, Batista F, Kocer A, Renault L, Jolivet G, Mandon-Pépin
B, Cotinot C, Veitia R, Pailhoux E.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie du Développement et de la Reproduction - UMR 1198 INRA-ENVA, Bât. J
Poly, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas, France.

Previous studies have equated FOXL2 as a crucial actor in the ovarian
differentiation process in different vertebrate species. Its transcriptional
extinction in the polled intersex syndrome (PIS) leads primarily to a drastic
decrease of aromatase (CYP19) expression in the first steps of goat ovarian
development. In this study, we provide a better characterization of early ovarian
development in goat, and we provide experimental evidence demonstrating that
FOXL2 represents a direct transcriptional activator of the CYP19 gene through its
ovarian-specific promoter 2. Moreover, the ovarian location of FOXL2 and CYP19
proteins, together with their expression profiles in the female gonads, stress
the involvement of FOXL2 co-factor(s) for regulating CYP19 transcription.
Expressional analyses show that activin-betaA can be considered as a strong
candidate for being one of these FOXL2 co-factors. Finally, we discuss evidence
for a role of activin and estrogens in somatic and germinal cell proliferation
occurring before germ cell meiosis. This period, of 20 days in goat, seems to
have no equivalent in mouse. This species-specific difference could explain the
phenotype discrepancy observed between XX goat PIS(-/-) and XX mouse Foxl2(-/-).

PMID: 16720712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Curr Med Chem. 2006;13(12):1397-410.

Premature ovarian failure (POF) syndrome: towards the molecular clinical analysis
of its genetic complexity.

Fassnacht W(1), Mempel A, Strowitzki T, Vogt PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecol. Endocrinology and Reproductive Medicine, University
Women Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany.

The Premature Ovarian Failure (POF) syndrome is a very heterogeneous clinical
disorder due probably to the complex genetic networks controlling human
folliculogenesis. Clinical subgroups of POF patients whose aetiology of ovarian
failure is based on the same genetic factors are therefore difficult to
establish. Some experimental evidence suggests that these genes might be
clustered on the female sex chromosome in the POF1 and POF2 loci. This review is 
aimed to present an overview of the actual structural changes of the X chromosome
causing POF, and to present a number of X and autosomal female fertility genes
which are probably key genes in human folliculogenesis and are therefore
prominent POF candidate genes. Towards the molecular analysis of their functional
contribution to the genetic aetiology of POF in the clinic, an interdisciplinary 
scheme for their diagnostic analysis is presented in a pilot study focussed on
chromosome analyses and the expression analysis of some major POF candidate genes
(DAZL, DBX, FOXL2, INHalpha, GDF9, USP9X) in the leukocytes of 101 POF patients. 
It starts with a comprehensive and significantly improved clinical diagnostic
program for this large and heterogeneous patient group.

PMID: 16719785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Mol Genet Metab. 2006 Jul;88(3):225-34. Epub 2006 May 2.

Foxl2 function in ovarian development.

Uhlenhaut NH(1), Treier M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Unit, European Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

Foxl2 is a forkhead transcription factor essential for proper reproductive
function in females. Human patients carrying mutations in the FOXL2 gene display 
blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES), an autosomal
dominant disease associated with eyelid defects and premature ovarian failure in 
females. Recently, animal models for BPES have been developed that in combination
with a catalogue of human FOXL2 mutations provide further insight into its
molecular function. Mice homozygous mutant for Foxl2 display craniofacial
malformations and female infertility. The analysis of the murine phenotype has
revealed that Foxl2 is required for granulosa cell function. These ovarian
somatic cells surround and nourish the oocyte and play an important role in
follicle formation and activation. Mutations upstream of FOXL2 in humans, not
affecting the coding sequence itself, have also been shown to cause BPES, which
points to the existence of a distant regulatory element necessary for proper gene
expression. The same regulatory sequences may be deleted in the goat polled
intersex syndrome (PIS), in which FoxL2 expression is severely reduced. Sequence 
comparison of FoxL2 from several vertebrate species has shown that it is a highly
conserved gene involved in ovary development. Thus, the detailed understanding of
Foxl2 function and regulation and the identification of its transcriptional
targets may open new avenues for the treatment of female infertility in the
future.

PMID: 16647286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 May 26;344(1):353-61.

Molecular cloning and analysis of gonadal expression of Foxl2 in the medaka,
Oryzias latipes.

Nakamoto M(1), Matsuda M, Wang DS, Nagahama Y, Shibata N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental System Science, Graduate School of Science and
Technology, Shinshu University, Matsumoto 390-8621, Japan.

Foxl2 is a member of the winged helix/forkhead family of transcription factors
and is known to be involved in ovarian development in some vertebrates. To
address the role of Foxl2 in ovarian differentiation in medaka, we isolated Foxl2
cDNA and analyzed its expression patterns during sex differentiation. Expression 
of Foxl2 started in somatic cells surrounding germ cells in XX gonads, just after
initiation of ovarian differentiation, and was maintained in granulosa cells
throughout ovarian development. In the adult ovary, Foxl2 was expressed in
previtellogenic and vitellogenic follicles, but expression ceased in
postvitellogenic follicles. In contrast, Foxl2 mRNA could not be detected in
testes. In addition, Foxl2 and aromatase mRNAs were co-localized in some somatic 
cells located on the ventral side of developing XX gonads. Our results suggested 
that Foxl2 was not involved in ovarian determination, but was involved in
differentiation of granulosa cells in medaka.

PMID: 16630569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Med Sci (Paris). 2006 Mar;22(3):232-4.

[Translational restart downstream of a premature stop codon and protein
aggregation].

[Article in French]

Moumné L, Veitia RA.

PMID: 16527196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 Mar;12(3):145-9. Epub 2006 Feb 15.

An investigation into FOXE1 polyalanine tract length in premature ovarian
failure.

Watkins WJ(1), Harris SE, Craven MJ, Vincent AL, Winship IM, Gersak K, Shelling
AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Faculty of Medical and Health
Sciences, University of Auckland, New Zealand.

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a common condition affecting 1% of women
worldwide. There is strong evidence for genetic involvement in POF as many cases 
are familial, and mutations in several genes have been associated with POF. We
investigated variation in FOXE1 polyalanine tract length, following the
observation that polyalanine tract deletions are seen in the closely related
FOXL2 in patients with POF. In addition, polyalanine tract expansions in FOXL2
are often seen in patients with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus
syndrome (BPES), a rare eyelid disorder often associated with POF. The FOXE1
polyalanine tract shows marked variation in its length between POF patients and
normal controls, existing as an allele of 12, 14, 16, 17 or 19 alanine residues. 
We found evidence to suggest that variation in FOXE1 polyalanine tract length
predisposes to POF.

PMID: 16481406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Genomics. 2006 Jul;88(1):127-31. Epub 2006 Feb 2.

Reverse transcriptase template switching and false alternative transcripts.

Cocquet J(1), Chong A, Zhang G, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U709, Hôpital Cochin, Pavillon Baudelocque, 123 Bd de Port Royal, 75014
Paris, France.

Reverse transcriptase (RT) can switch from one template to another in a
homology-dependent manner. In the study of eukaryotic transcripts, this
propensity of RT can produce an artificially deleted cDNA, which can be wrongly
interpreted as an alternative transcript. Here, we have investigated the presence
of such template-switching artifacts in cDNA databases, by scanning a collection 
of human splice sites (Information for the Coordinates of Exons, ICE database).
We have confirmed several cases at the experimental level. Artifacts represent a 
significant portion of apparently spliced sequences using noncanonical splice
signals but are rare in the context of the whole database. However, care should
be taken in the annotation of alternative transcripts, especially when the RT
used is poorly thermostable and when the putative intron is flanked by direct
repeats, which are the substrate for template switching.

PMID: 16457984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Chin Med J (Engl). 2006 Jan 5;119(1):49-52.

Three novel FOXL2 gene mutations in Chinese patients with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Or SF(1), Tong MF, Lo FM, Lam TS.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical Genetic Service, Department of Health, Hong Kong SAR, China.

PMID: 16454982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2006 Mar;63(5):579-90.

Genetics of early mammalian folliculogenesis.

Choi Y(1), Rajkovic A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Faculty
Center, 1709 Dryden Street, Suite 1100, Houston 77030, USA.

Early ovarian folliculogenesis begins with the breakdown of germ cell clusters
and formation of primordial follicles. Primordial follicles are the smallest
ovarian follicle units continuously recruited to grow into primary and more
advanced ovarian follicles. Genes expressed in the germ cells such as Figla,
Nobox, Kit and Ntrk2, as well as genes expressed in the surrounding somatic cells
such as Foxl2, Kitl and Ngf, play critical functions during early
folliculogenesis. Transgenic mice continue to provide important insights into the
genetic pathways that regulate early mammalian folliculogenesis. Genes critical
in early folliculogenesis are important determinants of reproductive life span
and represent candidate genes for human ovarian failure.

PMID: 16416028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Mutagenesis. 2006 Jan;21(1):35-9. Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Mutation analysis of the FOXL2 gene in Chinese patients with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Tang S(1), Wang X, Lin L, Sun Y, Wang Y, Yu H.

Author information: 
(1)Plastic and Reconstructive Research Institute, Weifang Medical College,
Weifang 261042, Shandong Province, Peoples Republic of China. tsj1950@163.com

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal
dominant disorder characterized by blepharophimosis, ptosis and epicanthus
inversus. Based on the presence and absence of premature ovarian failure, two
clinical types have been distinguished. Both types of BPES have been mapped to
chromosome 3q23 and are mostly due to mutations of a forkhead transcription
factor FOXL2 gene which locates at this region. We screened for FOXL2 mutations
in Chinese patients with BPES. A novel mutation (g.901-930dup30) which could
result in an expansion of the polyalanine tract was found in two BPES type II
families and one sporadic case. In addition, a new g.952delC mutation was
identified in two patients from a BPES family of undetermined type. The
previously reported g.892C>T (p.Q219X) was also found in 12 patients from a large
BPES family of type I. No mutations were detected in three other BPES families
and three sporadic cases. So we speculate that in a fraction of the BPES patients
the genetic defect may represent a change in gene dosage or a rearrangement
outside the transcription unit of FOXL2.

PMID: 16394030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Dev Biol. 2005 Dec 15;288(2):405-19. Epub 2005 Nov 14.

TAF4b, a TBP associated factor, is required for oocyte development and function.

Falender AE(1), Shimada M, Lo YK, Richards JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA. falender@bcm.tmc.edu

Development of a fertilizable oocyte is a complex process that relies on the
precise temporal and spatial expression of specific genes in germ cells and in
surrounding somatic cells. Since female mice null for Taf4b, a TBP associated
factor, are sterile, we sought to determine when during follicular development
this phenotype was first observed. At postnatal day 3, ovaries of Taf4b null
females contained fewer (P < 0.01) oocytes than ovaries of wild type and
heterozygous Taf4b mice. However, expression of only one somatic cell marker
Foxl2 was reduced in ovaries at day 15. Despite the reduced number of follicles, 
many proceed to the antral stage, multiple genes associated with granulosa cell
differentiation and oocyte maturation were expressed in a normal pattern, and
immature Taf4b null females could be hormonally primed to ovulate and mate.
However, the ovulated cumulus oocyte complexes from the Taf4b null mice had fewer
(P < 0.01) cumulus cells, and the oocytes were functionally abnormal. GVBD and
polar body extrusion were reduced significantly (P < 0.01). The few oocytes that 
were fertilized failed to progress beyond the two-cell stage of development.
Thus, infertility in Taf4b null female mice is associated with defects in early
follicle formation, oocyte maturation, and zygotic cleavage following ovulation
and fertilization.

PMID: 16289522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Clin Genet. 2005 Dec;68(6):520-3.

Blepharophimosis and bilateral Duane syndrome associated with a FOXL2 mutation.

Vincent AL(1), Watkins WJ, Sloan BH, Shelling AN.

Author information: 
(1)Eye Department, Auckland City Hospital, New Zealand.

This case describes the novel coexistence of sporadic
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) and bilateral type I 
Duane syndrome in a female infant, with a FOXL2 mutation. Mutational analysis of 
FOXL2 demonstrated a 30-nucleotide duplication (c.672(-)701dup30) within the
polyalanine tract of FOXL2. The association of BPES and Duane syndrome represents
a novel phenotype which may suggest a greater pleiotropic effect of FOXL2 in
development. During the period of the 4-8th week of embryonic development, the
cranial nerves, their nuclei and the corresponding innervation to the extraocular
muscles develop, the extraocular muscles undergo development and differentiation.
This coincides with the period of time that FOXL2 is expressed strongly in the
developing eyelids and the surrounding tissues. Forkhead genes are transcription 
factors and likely to be involved in signal transduction pathways. This case
expands the spectrum of FOXL2 mutations associated with BPES.

PMID: 16283882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2006;112(1-2):148-51.

cDNA cloning, genomic structure, chromosomal mapping and expression analysis of
ADIPOQ (adiponectin) in chicken.

Yuan J(1), Liu W, Liu ZL, Li N.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Agrobiotechnology, China Agricultural University,
Beijing, P.R. China.

We report sequence, tissue expression and map position data for the adiponectin
gene (ADIPOQ) in chicken. This gene is involved in adipocyte differentiation in
mammals and may play similar roles in chicken. The complete coding sequence of
chicken ADIPOQ encodes a 244 amino acid protein. The coding region of the chicken
ADIPOQ is organized in two exons and spans an approximately 2.1 kb genomic
region. Domain/motif structures of the adiponectin protein among chicken and
mammalian homologs are highly conserved. Reverse transcription-PCR revealed
chicken ADIPOQ mRNA displayed high expression levels in fat tissue, heart,
stomach and skin and weak expression in muscle. Analysis of a radiation hybrid
panel indicated that ADIPOQ showed the most significant linkage to FOXL2 (LOD =
12.63, 12 cR) and ATSV (LOD = 7.53, 3 cR) both of which are located on chicken
chromosome 9. Information provided in this study will be useful in further
studies to determine the role the adiponectin gene plays in the regulation of
glucose and lipid metabolism and body weight in chicken.

Copyright 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16276104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Dec 1;14(23):3557-64. Epub 2005 Oct 11.

Deletions in the polyAlanine-containing transcription factor FOXL2 lead to
intranuclear aggregation.

Moumné L(1), Fellous M, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U709 Génomique et Epigénétique des Pathologies Placentaires and
Universités Paris V & VII, Paris 75014, France.

Mutations of FOXL2, a gene encoding a forkhead transcription factor, have been
shown to cause the blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome. This
genetic disorder is characterized by eyelid and craniofacial abnormalities
associated or not with premature ovarian failure. We have previously shown that
mutant FOXL2 with an expanded polyAlanine (polyAla) tract forms large aggregates 
both in the nucleus and in the cytoplasm of transfected cells, whereas the
wild-type protein localizes in the nucleus in a rather diffuse manner. Premature 
stop codons in FOXL2 have been considered so far as null alleles. However, we
demonstrate here that such nonsense mutations may lead to the production of
N-terminally truncated proteins by re-initiation of translation downstream of the
stop codon. Surprisingly, the truncated proteins strongly aggregate in the
nucleus, partially localize in the cytoplasm and retain a fraction of the
wild-type protein. We also show that a complete deletion of the polyAla tract of 
FOXL2 induces a significant intranuclear aggregation. Our results enlarge the
spectrum of mutations inducing FOXL2 aggregation.

PMID: 16219626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2005 Jun;2(4):653-60.

Premature ovarian failure and forkhead transcription factor FOXL2:
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome and ovarian dysfunction.

De Baere E(1), Copelli S, Caburet S, Laissue P, Beysen D, Christin-Maitre S,
Bouchard P, Veitia R, Fellous M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Recently the molecular basis of the blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus
inversus-syndrome (BPES), an autosomal dominant developmental disorder of the
eyelids and ovary, was elucidated. This syndromic form of premature ovarian
failure (POF) is caused by mutations in the gene encoding the forkhead
transcription factor FOXL2. In this manuscript we review the clinical features of
BPES, its molecular basis, the structural and functional characteristics of the
FOXL2 gene and protein, and known animal models.

PMID: 16208278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Biol Reprod. 2006 Jan;74(1):195-201. Epub 2005 Oct 5.

Homozygous inactivation of Sox9 causes complete XY sex reversal in mice.

Barrionuevo F(1), Bagheri-Fam S, Klattig J, Kist R, Taketo MM, Englert C, Scherer
G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics and Anthropology, University of Freiburg, D-79106 
Freiburg, Germany.

In the presence of the Y-chromosomal gene Sry, the bipotential mouse gonads
develop as testes rather than as ovaries. The autosomal gene Sox9, a likely and
possibly direct Sry target, can induce testis development in the absence of Sry. 
Sox9 is thus sufficient but not necessarily essential for testis induction.
Mutational inactivation of one allele of SOX9/Sox9 causes sex reversal in humans 
but not in mice. Because Sox9(-/-) embryos die around Embryonic Day 11.5 (E11.5) 
at the onset of testicular morphogenesis, differentiation of the mutant XY gonad 
can be analyzed only ex vivo in organ culture. We have therefore conditionally
inactivated both Sox9 alleles in the gonadal anlagen using the CRE/loxP
recombination system, whereby CRE recombinase is under control of the cytokeratin
19 promoter. Analysis of resulting Sox9(-/-) XY gonads up to E15.5 reveals
immediate, complete sex reversal, as shown by expression of the early
ovary-specific markers Wnt4 and Foxl2 and by lack of testis cord and Leydig cell 
formation. Sry expression in mutant XY gonads indicates that downregulation of
Wnt4 and Foxl2 is dependent on Sox9 rather than on Sry. Our results provide in
vivo proof that, in contrast to the situation in humans, complete XY sex reversal
in mice requires inactivation of both Sox9 alleles and that Sox9 is essential for
testogenesis in mice.

PMID: 16207837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Oct 28;336(3):876-81.

Transcriptional factor FOXL2 interacts with DP103 and induces apoptosis.

Lee K(1), Pisarska MD, Ko JJ, Kang Y, Yoon S, Ryou SM, Cha KY, Bae J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, College of Natural Science, Chung-Ang University, 
Seoul 156-756, Republic of Korea.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome type I is an autosomal
disorder caused by mutations in FOXL2 gene and associated with premature ovarian 
failure in women by a dominant inheritance. FOXL2 is a recently identified
protein that belongs to forkhead family transcription factor, of which signaling 
pathways are still unknown. Here, we show that FOXL2 induces apoptosis in both
Chinese hamster ovary cells and rat granulosa cells, and it interacts with DP103,
a DEAD box-containing protein. Overexpression of DP103 itself did not affect cell
viability while its coexpression with FOXL2 led to the potentiation of cell
death. Our results present previously undiscovered functions of these proteins,
an apoptotic activity of FOXL2 in the ovary and a modulating activity of DP103 by
interacting with FOXL2.

PMID: 16153597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Mol Genet Metab. 2005 Sep-Oct;86(1-2):286-92.

Pisrt1, a gene implicated in XX sex reversal, is expressed in gonads of both
sexes during mouse development.

Loffler KA(1), Combes AN, Wilhelm D, Beverdam A, Bowles J, Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Qld 4072, Australia.

XX sex reversal syndromes not involving Sry provide an opportunity to identify
and study genes important for sexual development. The polled intersex syndrome
(PIS) in goats, which shares some features with blepharophimosis, ptosis,
epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) in humans, exemplifies such syndromes. BPES
is caused by defects in the forkhead transcription factor gene FOXL2, while PIS
is caused by a large deletion of goat chromosome 1q43 that affects transcription 
of the genes Pisrt1 and Foxl2. Pisrt1 is a non-translated gene that has a
sexually dimorphic expression pattern in goats. Here, we describe the structure
and expression of the mouse Pisrt1 locus, to investigate its likely role in
ovarian development more broadly in mammals. This gene showed some sequence
similarity, and was found in a similar genomic context, to its goat and human
orthologues. Expression analyses indicated that Pisrt1 is transcribed, and its
mRNA polyadenylated and exported to the cytoplasm, but no significant open
reading frames were found in a 1.5kb mouse genomic region corresponding to goat
Pisrt1. Pisrt1 transcripts were expressed very broadly among tissues of the
developing mouse embryo, and at similar levels in male and female gonads at each 
stage examined, as determined by in situ hybridisation and RT-PCR. This profile
of expression suggests that Pisrt1 is unlikely to contribute to sex-specific
events during gonadal development in mice and that divergent pathways of ovarian 
development operate among different mammalian species.

PMID: 16137905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Eur J Endocrinol. 2005 Sep;153(3):353-8.

A new heterozygous mutation of the FOXL2 gene is associated with a large ovarian 
cyst and ovarian dysfunction in an adolescent girl with
blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Raile K(1), Stobbe H, Tröbs RB, Kiess W, Pfäffle R.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital for Children and Adolescents and.
klemens.raile@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

Blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES), an autosomal
dominant syndrome in which eyelid malformation is associated with (type I BPES)
or without premature ovarian failure (type II BPES). Mutations of a putative
winged helix/forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 account for both types of BPES. 
We report on a 16-year-old adolescent girl with blepharophimosis and ptosis.
Subsequently she developed oligomenorrhea, secondary amenorrhea for 6 months, and
an extremely large cyst of one ovary. The cyst contained 8 l of cyst fluid and
histopathology displayed a large corpus luteum cyst. Following laparotomy,
gonadotropin levels were elevated (LH 17.2 U/l, FSH 29.4 U/l) and estradiol
levels decreased (67 pmol/l). Because of clinical aspects of BPES and abnormal
ovarian function we suspected a mutation of her FOXL2 gene and found a new
in-frame mutation (904_939dup36) on one allele, leading to a 12 alanine expansion
within the polyalanine domain. We conclude that the FOXL2 mutation 904_939dup36
may account not only for blepharophimosis and ptosis but also for ovarian
dysfunction and growth of the large corpus luteum cyst. In contrast to known
FOXL2 mutations with polyalanine expansions and association with BPES type II,
clinical aspects of our girl may indicate some degree of ovarian dysfunction that
might finally lead to BPES type I with premature ovarian failure.

PMID: 16131596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Aug;22(4):372-5.

A novel mutation in the FOXL2 gene in a Chinese family with blepharophimosis,
ptosis, and epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Li WX(1), Wang XK, Sun Y, Wang YL, Lin LX, Tang SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Weifang Medical College, Weifang, Shandong, 261042 PR China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen mutations in the forkhead transcriptional factor 2 gene
(FOXL2) in six Chinese families with blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus
inversus syndrome(BPES).
METHODS: PCR amplification and direct sequencing of the FOXL2 coding region in
genomic DNA were performed in affected patients and 80 healthy controls. BLAST
analysis of the sequence was made on Internet.
RESULTS: A novel 951-953(delC) was found in the two affected patients of a
Chinese family with BPES. No mutations were found in the healthy controls. The
951-953(delC) may cause a frameshift mutation after codon 238 that exists
downstream of the forkhead domain, resulting in the production of truncated
proteins.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicated that the 951-953(delC) deletion mutation in 
the two patients resulted in truncated proteins and hence led to their BPES. To
the authors' knowledge, the 951-953(delC) in FOXL2 has not been previously
reported.

PMID: 16086270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Am J Med Genet A. 2005 Aug 15;137(1):81-7.

Interstitial deletion in 3q in a patient with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus 
inversus syndrome (BPES) and microcephaly, mild mental retardation and growth
delay: clinical report and review of the literature.

de Ru MH(1), Gille JJ, Nieuwint AW, Bijlsma JB, van der Blij JF, van Hagen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics and Human Genetics, V.U. University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

We present a boy with blepharophimosis, ptosis, epicanthus inversus,
microcephaly, mild mental retardation, and growth delay. Chromosomal analysis
revealed a male karyotype with an interstitial deletion in the long arm of
chromosome 3. DNA-analysis showed that the deletion is of maternal origin and
encompasses the region between markers D3S1535 and D3S1593. The deletion contains
not only the FOXL2 gene, but also the gene encoding ataxia-telangiectasia and
Rad3-related protein (ATR). Mutations in FOXL2 have been shown to cause
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES). ATR has been
identified as a candidate gene for Seckel syndrome, an autosomal recessive
syndrome that comprises growth retardation, microcephaly, and mental retardation.
We hypothesize that our patient has a contiguous gene syndrome and that the
non-BPES-associated abnormalities (microcephaly, mild mental retardation, and
growth delay) are the result of the deletion of the maternal ATR gene. However,
it has not yet been excluded that haploinsufficiency of some other gene in this
region plays a role.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16015581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Biol Reprod. 2005 Nov;73(5):959-66. Epub 2005 Jul 13.

Large-scale temporal gene expression profiling during gonadal differentiation and
early gametogenesis in rainbow trout.

Baron D(1), Houlgatte R, Fostier A, Guiguen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, INRA SCRIBE, IFR 140, Campus de
Beaulieu, 35000 Rennes, France.

The overall understanding of the sex differentiation cascade in vertebrates is
still growing slowly, probably because of the variety of vertebrate models used
and the number of molecular players yet to be discovered. Finding conserved
mechanisms among vertebrates should provide a better view of the key factors
involved in this process. To this end, we used real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction to produce a temporal map of fluctuations
in mRNA expression of 102 genes during sex differentiation and early
gametogenesis in the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). We used these 102
temporal gene expression patterns as a basis for a hierarchical clustering
analysis to find characteristic clusters of coexpressed genes. Analysis of some
of these gene clusters suggested a conserved overall expression profile between
the sex differentiation cascade in fish and mammals. Among these conserved
molecular mechanisms, sox9, dmrt1, amh, nr5a1, nr0b1, igf1, and igf1ra are, for
instance, characterized as early expressed genes involved in trout testicular
differentiation as it is known or suggested in mammals. On the contrary, foxl2,
fst, and lhr are characterized as early expressed genes during trout ovarian
differentiation, as also found in mammals. Apart from this high conservation, our
analysis suggests some potential new players, such as the fshb subunit gene,
which is detected here for the first time, to our knowledge, in the female
differentiating gonad of a vertebrate species and displays a specific
overexpression that coincides in timing with the occurrence of first oocyte
meioses, or the pax2 gene, which displays an early and testis-specific expression
profile.

PMID: 16014816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Reprod Nutr Dev. 2005 May-Jun;45(3):377-82.

Foxl2 gene and the development of the ovary: a story about goat, mouse, fish and 
woman.

Baron D(1), Batista F, Chaffaux S, Cocquet J, Cotinot C, Cribiu E, De Baere E,
Guiguen Y, Jaubert F, Pailhoux E, Pannetier M, Vaiman D, Vigier B, Veitia R,
Fellous M.

Author information: 
(1)Equipe Sexualité et Reproduction, INRA-SCRIBE, Département PHASE, Campus de
Beaulieu, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France. ellous@cochin.inserm.fr

Erratum in
    Reprod Nutr Dev. 2005 Nov-Dec;45(6):729. De Baeree, Elfride [corrected to De
Baere, Elfride].

In this review, we describe recent results concerning the genetics of sex
determination in mammals. Particularly, we developed the study of the FOXL2 gene 
and its implication in genetic anomalies in goats (PIS mutation) and humans
(BPES). We present the expression of FOXL2 in the ovaries of different species.

PMID: 15982462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Mamm Genome. 2005 Apr;16(4):281-9.

Characterization of Pisrt1/Foxl2 in Ellobius lutescens and exclusion as
sex-determining genes.

Baumstark A(1), Hameister H, Hakhverdyan M, Bakloushinskaya I, Just W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11,
89081, Ulm, Germany.

The rodent Ellobius lutescens is an exceptional mammal which determines male sex 
constitutively without the SRY gene and, therefore, may serve as an animal model 
for human 46,XX female-to-male sex reversal. It was suggested that other factors 
of the network of sex-determining genes determine maleness in these animals.
However, some sex-determining genes like SOX9 and SF1 have already been excluded 
by segregation analysis as primary sex-determining factors in E. lutescens. In
this work, we have cloned and characterized two genes of the PIS (polled intersex
syndrome) gene interval, which were reported as candidates in female-to-male sex 
reversal in hornless goats recently. The genes Foxl2 and Pisrt1 from that
interval were identified in E. lutescens DNA and mapped to Chromosome 8. We have 
excluded linkage of Foxl2 and Pisrt1 loci with the sex of the animals. Hence, the
involvement of this gene region in sex determination may be specific for goats
and is not a general mechanism of XX sex reversal or XX male sex determination.

PMID: 15965789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Aug;77(2):205-18. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

Deletions involving long-range conserved nongenic sequences upstream and
downstream of FOXL2 as a novel disease-causing mechanism in blepharophimosis
syndrome.

Beysen D(1), Raes J, Leroy BP, Lucassen A, Yates JR, Clayton-Smith J, Ilyina H,
Brooks SS, Christin-Maitre S, Fellous M, Fryns JP, Kim JR, Lapunzina P, Lemyre E,
Meire F, Messiaen LM, Oley C, Splitt M, Thomson J, Van de Peer Y, Veitia RA, De
Paepe A, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

The expression of a gene requires not only a normal coding sequence but also
intact regulatory regions, which can be located at large distances from the
target genes, as demonstrated for an increasing number of developmental genes. In
previous mutation studies of the role of FOXL2 in blepharophimosis syndrome
(BPES), we identified intragenic mutations in 70% of our patients. Three
translocation breakpoints upstream of FOXL2 in patients with BPES suggested a
position effect. Here, we identified novel microdeletions outside of FOXL2 in
cases of sporadic and familial BPES. Specifically, four rearrangements, with an
overlap of 126 kb, are located 230 kb upstream of FOXL2, telomeric to the
reported translocation breakpoints. Moreover, the shortest region of deletion
overlap (SRO) contains several conserved nongenic sequences (CNGs) harboring
putative transcription-factor binding sites and representing potential long-range
cis-regulatory elements. Interestingly, the human region orthologous to the 12-kb
sequence deleted in the polled intersex syndrome in goat, which is an animal
model for BPES, is contained in this SRO, providing evidence of human-goat
conservation of FOXL2 expression and of the mutational mechanism. Surprisingly,
in a fifth family with BPES, one rearrangement was found downstream of FOXL2. In 
addition, we report nine novel rearrangements encompassing FOXL2 that range from 
partial gene deletions to submicroscopic deletions. Overall, genomic
rearrangements encompassing or outside of FOXL2 account for 16% of all molecular 
defects found in our families with BPES. In summary, this is the first report of 
extragenic deletions in BPES, providing further evidence of potential long-range 
cis-regulatory elements regulating FOXL2 expression. It contributes to the
enlarging group of developmental diseases caused by defective distant regulation 
of gene expression. Finally, we demonstrate that CNGs are candidate regions for
genomic rearrangements in developmental genes.

PMCID: PMC1224524
PMID: 15962237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Jul 15;14(14):2053-62. Epub 2005 Jun 8.

Foxl2 is required for commitment to ovary differentiation.

Ottolenghi C(1), Omari S, Garcia-Ortiz JE, Uda M, Crisponi L, Forabosco A, Pilia 
G, Schlessinger D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Genetic control of female sex differentiation from a bipotential gonad in mammals
is poorly understood. We find that mouse XX gonads lacking the forkhead
transcription factor Foxl2 form meiotic prophase oocytes, but then activate the
genetic program for somatic testis determination. Pivotal Foxl2 action thus
represses the male gene pathway at several stages of female gonadal
differentiation. This suggests the possible continued involvement of
sex-determining genes in maintaining ovarian function throughout female
reproductive life.

PMID: 15944199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Genomics. 2005 Jun;85(6):715-26.

Ovarian-specific expression of a new gene regulated by the goat PIS region and
transcribed by a FOXL2 bidirectional promoter.

Pannetier M(1), Renault L, Jolivet G, Cotinot C, Pailhoux E.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie du Développement et de la Reproduction, Institut National de la
Recherche Agronomique, Bât. J. Poly, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas, France.

Studies on XX sex reversal in polled goats (PIS mutation: polled intersex
syndrome) have led to the discovery of a female-specific locus crucial for
ovarian differentiation. This genomic region is composed of at least two genes,
FOXL2 and PISRT1, sharing a common transcriptional regulatory region, PIS. In
this paper, we describe a third gene, PFOXic (promoter FOXL2 inverse
complementary), located near FOXL2 in the opposite orientation. This gene
composed of five exons encodes a 1723-bp cDNA, enclosing two repetitive elements 
in its 3' end. PFOXic mRNA encodes a putative protein of 163 amino acids with no 
homologies in any of the databases tested. The transcriptional expression of
PFOXic is driven by a bidirectional promoter also enhancing FOXL2 transcription. 
In goats, PFOXic is expressed in developing ovaries, from 36 days postcoitum
until adulthood. Ovarian-specific expression of PFOXic is regulated by the PIS
region. PFOXic is found conserved only in Bovidae. But, a human gene located in
the opposite orientation relative to FOXL2 can be considered a human PFOXic.
Finally, we discuss evidence arguing for regulation of the level of FOXL2
transcription via the bidirectional promoter and the level of transcription of
PFOXic.

PMID: 15885498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Dev Dyn. 2005 Jul;233(3):1052-5.

Aromatase inhibition reduces expression of FOXL2 in the embryonic chicken ovary.

Hudson QJ(1), Smith CA, Sinclair AH.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Children's Research Institute and Department of Paediatrics,
University of Melbourne, Royal Children's Hospital, Parkville, VIC, Australia.

P450-aromatase is the terminal estrogen-synthesizing enzyme and a key gene in
avian sex determination. Aromatase is expressed specifically in female gonads,
but not male gonads, at the onset of sexual differentiation. This enzyme shows
temporal and spatial colocalization with the forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 
in the embryonic chicken ovary, suggesting a causal link. Mutations in FOXL2 are 
associated with premature ovarian failure in humans. Foxl2 null mice also present
with premature ovarian failure. Here, we show that FOXL2 expression is reduced
but not abolished in chicken embryos subjected to experimental female to male
sex-reversal with an aromatase inhibitor. This finding suggests that FOXL2 lies
upstream of aromatase in avian sex determination, but that it responds to
depleted estrogen synthesis. The reduction in FOXL2 expression may be accounted
for by interruption of a positive feedback loop by means of estrogen, or the
influence of testis promoting factors such as SOX9 and DMRT1 in the masculinized 
gonads.

PMID: 15830351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Genomics. 2005 May;85(5):531-41.

Sense and antisense Foxl2 transcripts in mouse.

Cocquet J(1), Pannetier M, Fellous M, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM E0021 and U361, Hôpital Cochin, Pavillon Baudelocque, 123 Boulevard de 
Port Royal, 75014 Paris, France.

FOXL2 is a forkhead transcription factor involved in eyelid development and in
the development and adult function of the ovary in mammals. In mouse, we have
previously suggested the existence of two mRNA isoforms of Foxl2 that result from
an alternative polyadenylation. In this study, we characterize in depth the
structure and expression of these two variants. We also describe an antisense
transcript that overlaps the whole Foxl2 transcription unit. This antisense
transcript, called Foxl2OS (for opposite strand), yields several isoforms
resulting from alternative splicing. No significant coding region was found in
the Foxl2OS sequence. Foxl2OS displays a pattern of expression very similar to
that of Foxl2 in the gonads during development and at the adult age. RNA FISH
experiments show that both transcripts are expressed in the same cells at the
same time. We suggest that Foxl2OS is a noncoding antisense RNA that may be
involved in the regulation of Foxl2. All in all our results provide new insights 
about the organization of the murine Foxl2 locus. This might help us understand
its regulation and function.

PMID: 15820304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Endocrinology. 2005 Jul;146(7):2992-3004. Epub 2005 Apr 7.

Follicular cells acquire sertoli cell characteristics after oocyte loss.

Guigon CJ(1), Coudouel N, Mazaud-Guittot S, Forest MG, Magre S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie et Physiopathologie, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique-Unité Mixte de Recherche 7079, Université Paris VI, 7 Quai
Saint Bernard, 75005 Paris, France.

Although it has been suggested that in mammals the loss of female germ cells may 
induce the masculinization of the ovarian compartment, there has been as yet no
conclusive demonstration. To directly address that question, the present study
has been designed to determine the fate of follicular cells after oocyte loss.
Using gamma-irradiation to selectively deplete oocytes in nongrowing follicles in
female rats, we show that follicular cells in oocyte-depleted follicles survive, 
proliferate, and subsequently acquire morphological characteristics of Sertoli
cells: elongated cytoplasm, basal location of the nucleus, and specific Sertoli
cell junctions, the ectoplasmic specializations. These Sertoli-like cells
express, however, the female-specific marker FOXL2 (Forkhead L2) but not the male
sex-specific marker SOX-9 (Sry-type high-mobility-group box transcription
factor-9) underlying the maintenance of molecular characteristics of granulosa
cells. Before transdifferentiating into Sertoli-like cells, follicular cells of
oocyte-depleted follicles initiate the expression of anti-Mullerian hormone and
inhibin alpha-subunit that are typically synthesized by granulosa cells from the 
onset of follicular growth. Experimental modifications of the endocrine balance
of the irradiated females show that there is a close relationship between plasma 
FSH levels and the occurrence of Sertoli-like cells. In addition to providing
experimental evidence for the crucial role of the oocyte in granulosa cell
phenotype maintenance, these results emphasize that the transdifferentiation of
granulosa cells into Sertoli cells occurs in a multistep fashion, requiring the
maturation of granulosa cells and depending on the endocrine milieu.

PMID: 15817664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Dec;1034:117-31.

Aging of oocyte, ovary, and human reproduction.

Ottolenghi C(1), Uda M, Hamatani T, Crisponi L, Garcia JE, Ko M, Pilia G, Sforza 
C, Schlessinger D, Forabosco A.

Author information: 
(1)NIA/NIH IRP, Laboratory of Genetics, Suite 3000, Triad Technology Center, 333 
Cassell Drive, Baltimore MD 21224, USA. ottolenghich@grc.nia.nih.gov

We review age-related changes in the ovary and their effect on female fertility, 
with particular emphasis on follicle formation, follicle dynamics, and oocyte
quality. The evidence indicates that the developmental processes leading to
follicle formation set the rules determining follicle quiescence and growth. This
regulatory system is maintained until menopause and is directly affected in at
least some models of premature ovarian failure (POF), most strikingly in the
Foxl2 mouse knockout, a model of human POF with monogenic etiology
(blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome). Several lines of evidence
indicate that if the ovarian germ cell lineage maintains regenerative potential, 
as recently suggested in the mouse, a role in follicle dynamics for germ stem
cells, if any, is likely indirect or secondary. In addition, age-related
variations in oocyte quality in animal models suggest that reproductive
competence is acquired progressively and might depend on parallel growth and
differentiation of follicle cells and stroma. Genomewide analyses of the mouse
oocyte transcriptome have begun to be used to systematically investigate the
mechanisms of reproductive competence that are altered with aging. Investigative 
and therapeutic strategies can benefit from considering the role of continuous
interactions between follicle cells and oocytes from the beginning of
histogenesis to full maturation.

PMID: 15731305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2005 Jan 31;230(1-2):87-93.

The pathway to femaleness: current knowledge on embryonic development of the
ovary.

Yao HH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biosciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, IL 61802, USA. hhyao@uiuc.edu

Increasing evidence indicates that organogenesis of the ovary is not a passive
process arising by default in the absence of the testis pathway. A coordinated
interaction is actually in force between somatic cells and female germ cells in
embryonic ovaries, thus creating a unique microenvironment that facilitates the
formation of follicles. Identification of the functional roles of several novel
regulatory elements such as Figalpha, Foxl2, follistatin, and Wnt4 reveals the
complexity of early ovarian organization. Challenges await us to establish the
molecular connections of these molecules as well as to discover new candidates in
the pathway of early ovarian development.

PMCID: PMC4073593
PMID: 15664455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Genet Sel Evol. 2005;37 Suppl 1:S55-64.

Positional cloning of the PIS mutation in goats and its impact on understanding
mammalian sex-differentiation.

Pailhoux E(1), Vigier B, Schibler L, Cribiu EP, Cotinot C, Vaiman D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de biologie du développement et reproduction, Institut national de
la recherche agronomique, 78352 Jouy-en-Josas Cedex, France.
pailhoux@jouy.inra.fr

In goats, the PIS (polled intersex syndrome) mutation is responsible for both the
absence of horns in males and females and sex-reversal affecting exclusively XX
individuals. The mode of inheritance is dominant for the polled trait and
recessive for sex-reversal. In XX PIS-/- mutants, the expression of
testis-specific genes is observed very precociously during gonad development.
Nevertheless, a delay of 4-5 days is observed in comparison with normal testis
differentiation in XY males. By positional cloning, we demonstrate that the PIS
mutation is an 11.7-kb regulatory-deletion affecting the expression of two genes,
PISRT1 and FOXL2 which could act synergistically to promote ovarian
differentiation. The transcriptional extinction of these two genes leads, very
early, to testis-formation in XX homozygous PIS-/- mutants. According to their
expression profiles and bibliographic data, we propose that FOXL2 may be an
ovary-differentiating gene, and the non-coding RNA PISRT1, an anti-testis factor 
repressing SOX9, a key regulator of testis differentiation. Under this
hypothesis, SRY, the testis-determining factor would inhibit these two genes in
the gonads of XY males, to ensure testis differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3226265
PMID: 15601595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Med Genet. 2004 Dec;41(12):932-6.

A recurrent polyalanine expansion in the transcription factor FOXL2 induces
extensive nuclear and cytoplasmic protein aggregation.

Caburet S(1), Demarez A, Moumné L, Fellous M, De Baere E, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM E0021 Génomique fonctionnelle du Développement, Hôpital Cochin, 123 bd 
du Port Royal, Bâtiment Baudelocque, 75014 Paris, France.

Blepharophimosis syndrome is an autosomal dominant disease characterised by
eyelid malformations, associated or not with premature ovarian failure. It is
caused by mutations in the FOXL2 gene, which encodes a forkhead transcription
factor containing a polyalanine (polyAla) domain of 14 alanines. Expansions of
the polyAla tract from 14 to 24 residues account for 30% of the reported
mutations and lead mainly to isolated palpebral defects. We have transfected
COS-7 cells with DNA constructs driving the expression of the wildtype and mutant
FOXL2 proteins fused to the green fluorescent protein. The polyAla expansion was 
found to induce the formation of intranuclear aggregates and a mislocalisation of
the protein due to extensive cytoplasmic aggregation. These findings were
confirmed by immunofluorescence. Co-transfection experiments suggest that the
wildtype and mutant proteins can co-aggregate. We propose that the mechanism for 
the molecular pathogenesis of the polyAla expansions of FOXL2 may be its
mislocalisation concomitant with its inclusion into nuclear aggregates. This may 
diminish the pool of active protein. Potential effects of aggregation on cell
viability are under study.

PMCID: PMC1735658
PMID: 15591279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Dec;33(3):705-15.

An evolutionary and functional analysis of FoxL2 in rainbow trout gonad
differentiation.

Baron D(1), Cocquet J, Xia X, Fellous M, Guiguen Y, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)INRA-SCRIBE, Campus de Beaulieu, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France.

FOXL2 is a forkhead transcription factor involved in ovarian development and
function. Here, we have studied the evolution and pattern of expression of the
FOXL2 gene and its paralogs in fish. We found well conserved FoxL2 sequences
(FoxL2a) and divergent genes, whose forkhead domains belonged to the class L2 and
were shown to be paralogs of the FoxL2a sequences (named FoxL2b). In the rainbow 
trout, FoxL2a and FoxL2b were specifically expressed in the ovary, but displayed 
different temporal patterns of expression. FoxL2a expression correlated with the 
level of aromatase, the key enzyme in estrogen production, and an estrogen
treatment used to feminize genetically male individuals elicited the
up-regulation of both paralogs. Conversely, androgens or an aromatase inhibitor
down-regulated FoxL2a and FoxL2b in females. We speculate that there is a direct 
link between estrogens and FoxL2 expression in fish, at least during the period
where the identity of the gonad is sensitive to hormonal treatments.

PMID: 15591029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Dev Dyn. 2004 Dec;231(4):859-70.

Isolation of chicken homolog of the FOXL2 gene and comparison of its expression
patterns with those of aromatase during ovarian development.

Govoroun MS(1), Pannetier M, Pailhoux E, Cocquet J, Brillard JP, Couty I,
Batellier F, Cotinot C.

Author information: 
(1)Station de Recherches Avicoles, INRA, Nouzilly, France. govoroun@tours.inra.fr

Mutations in the forkhead transcription factor gene FOXL2 are involved in ovarian
failure, which occurs in human BPES syndrome. This syndrome presents a sexually
dimorphic expression, specific to the ovary in several vertebrates. We cloned the
open reading frame of chicken FOXL2 (cFoxL2) and studied cFoxL2 expression in
developing gonads and during adulthood to examine the role of FOXL2 in ovarian
differentiation and function in birds. The spatial and temporal dynamics of
cFoxL2 and aromatase expression were analyzed in parallel by using real-time
quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemistry in attempt to investigate the possible role of cFoxL2 in the
regulation of aromatase. The expression patterns of cFoxL2 and aromatase
transcripts were highly correlated during the sex-differentiation period
(4.7-12.7 days of incubation). Aromatase and cFoxL2 proteins were colocalized in 
the medullar part of female gonads on embryonic day 14. Fourteen days after
hatching, cFoxL2 protein was mainly detected in granulosa cells of developing
follicles. In adult ovary follicular envelopes, apart from granulosa cells,
cFoxL2 transcript and protein were detected at lower levels in theca cells where 
aromatase was present. A high level of cFoxL2 transcription was also observed in 
maturing and ovulated oocytes. Our results confirm that FoxL2 is an early
regulator of ovarian development in birds and may be involved in aromatase
transcription regulation.

Copyright (c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15517586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Hum Reprod. 2004 Dec;19(12):2767-70. Epub 2004 Sep 30.

A novel 30 bp deletion in the FOXL2 gene in a phenotypically normal woman with
primary amenorrhoea: case report.

Gersak K(1), Harris SE, Smale WJ, Shelling AN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
University Medical Centre Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia.
ksenija.gersak@mf.uni-lj.si

In a Slovene patient with primary amenorrhoea without an association with
blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES), a novel 30 bp
deletion was identified in the FOXL2 gene. We report the clinical features of
this woman who has spontaneously conceived and delivered two live healthy babies.
The novel deletion was predicted to remove 10 out of 14 alanines (A221_A230del), 
from the polyalanine tract downstream of the winged helix/forkhead domain of the 
FOXL2 protein. The patient's parents and sister were shown not to carry this
deletion. Despite seeing an anovulatory secretory pattern of FSH, follicles
developed spontaneously. Persistent and consistent monitoring have practical
implications for genetic and fertility counselling in the era when women with
premature ovarian failure usually seek ovum donation. The role of FOXL2 in the
development of infertility is still unclear, but several lines of evidence
suggest that it plays a central role in follicle development.

PMID: 15459170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Mutat Res. 2004 Oct 4;554(1-2):19-22.

A novel insertion mutation in the FOXL2 gene is detected in a big Chinese family 
with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus.

Qian X(1), Shu A, Qin W, Xing Q, Gao J, Yang J, Feng G, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nutrition Science, SIBS, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang
Road, Shanghai 200031, PR China.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES), an autosomal
dominant syndrome in which an eyelid malformation is associated (type I) or not
(type II) with premature ovarian failure (POF), has recently been ascribed to
mutations in the forkhead transcription factor 2 (FOXL2) gene. In this work, we
reveal a novel insertion mutation in the 3'UTR of the FOXL2 gene in a big Chinese
family which is to our knowledge the first BPES (type II) family reported in
China. It is the first time that a 3'UTR mutation in the FOXL2 gene has ever been
found to demonstrate a close correlation between genotype and BPES. Our result
gains a greater insight into the function of 3'UTR in the FOXL2 gene.

PMID: 15450400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Hum Mutat. 2004 Sep;24(3):189-93.

The human FOXL2 mutation database.

Beysen D(1), Vandesompele J, Messiaen L, De Paepe A, De Baere E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES; MIM# 110100) is an
autosomal dominant genetic condition in which an eyelid malformation is
associated (type I) or not associated (type II) with premature ovarian failure
(POF). In 2001, mutations in the FOXL2 gene, encoding a forkhead transcription
factor, were shown to cause both BPES type I and II. Since then, a number of
reports have appeared that describe intragenic FOXL2 mutations in BPES patients. 
In addition, a few FOXL2 variants have been reported in isolated POF patients and
XX males. Previously, our group has described a large number of FOXL2 mutations, 
thereby demonstrating the existence of two mutational hotspots in FOXL2, intra-
and interfamilial phenotypic variability in BPES families, and genotype-phenotype
correlations for a number of mutations in BPES patients. Here we describe a
locus-specific Human FOXL2 Mutation Database (http://medgen.ugent.be/foxl2/),
created using the MuStaR software. Our database contains general information
about the FOXL2 gene, as well as details about 135 intragenic mutations and
variants of FOXL2, obtained from published papers, abstracts of meetings, and
from unpublished data produced by our group. Not included in the current version 
of the database are variants residing outside the coding region of FOXL2 and
molecular cytogenetic rearrangements of the FOXL2 locus. The Human FOXL2 Mutation
Database was created to provide a unique publicly available online resource of
information about human FOXL2 mutations/variants associated with BPES and POF. It
allows remote users to submit new mutations to the database and to query the
database using a web form. It will facilitate evaluation of the pathogenicity of 
a particular mutation, as it contains data about disease-causing mutations and
polymorphisms in BPES and isolated POF patients, and a link to the known FOXL2
orthologs. Moreover, it will allow us to establish more accurate
genotype-phenotype correlations, since clinical information is contained in the
database.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15300845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Mol Vis. 2004 Jul 9;10:445-9.

Genetic analysis of a five generation Indian family with BPES: a novel missense
mutation (p.Y215C).

Kumar A(1), Babu M, Raghunath A, Venkatesh CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Reproduction, Development, and Genetics, Indian
Institute of Science, Bangalore, India. arunk00@hotmail.com

PURPOSE: Blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a rare
eye genetic disorder caused by mutations in the FOXL2 gene located at chromosome 
3q23. The purpose of the present study was to carry out genetic analysis of BPES 
in a five-generation Indian family.
METHODS: Peripheral blood samples were obtained from individuals for genomic DNA 
isolation. To determine the linkage of this family to the FOXL2 locus, haplotype 
analysis was carried out using microsatellite markers from the BPES candidate
region. Five overlapping sets of primers were used to amplify the entire coding
region of the FOXL2 gene for mutation detection. Allele-specific oligonucleotide 
hybridization (ASOH) analysis was carried out to determine segregation of the
mutation in the family and to also determine if the mutation was present in 100
ethnically matched normal control chromosomes.
RESULTS: Pedigree analysis suggested that BPES segregated in this family as an
autosomal dominant trait. Cytogenetic analysis in one patient did not reveal any 
rearrangement. Haplotype analysis suggested that this family was linked to the
FOXL2 locus on chromosome 3q23. DNA sequence analysis showed that the BPES
phenotype in this family was caused by a novel missense mutation, c.881A->G
(p.Y215C).
CONCLUSIONS: This study reports for the first time a novel missense mutation in a
five-generation Indian family with BPES. A review of the literature showed that
the total number of mutations in the FOXL2 gene described to date is 42.

PMID: 15257268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Gene. 2004 Jun 9;334:35-46.

Isolation and characterization of five Fox (Forkhead) genes from the sponge
Suberites domuncula.

Adell T(1), Müller WE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Abteilung Angewandte Molekularbiologie,
Universität, Duesbergweg 6, D-55099 Mainz, Germany.

Fox or Forkhead genes constitute a subgroup of the helix-turn-helix class of
transcription factors with a characteristic and highly conserved DNA binding
domain. To date, around 100 different Fox genes have been reported ranging from
yeast to humans; these have been classified into 18 subclasses (A to P). Fox
proteins are responsible for a wide range of functions and key roles in early
developmental processes, during organogenesis and also for the function of the
major organs and tissues in the adult. Here, we report the isolation and
phylogenetic characterization of five members of the Fox family from the sponge
Suberites domuncula. Four of them (Sd-FoxL2, Sd-FoxP, Sd-FoxD and Sd-FoxF) fall
in the root of four of the already established families of vertebrates Fox,
suggesting that in sponges, the basal group of metazoans, the main groups of Fox 
proteins were already established. We also demonstrate that they are
differentially regulated during the culture of sponge cells.

PMID: 15256253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Chromosome Res. 2004;12(5):465-74.

Conserved patterns of gene expression in mice and goats in the vicinity of the
Polled Intersex Syndrome (PIS) locus.

Nikic S(1), Vaiman D.

Author information: 
(1)U361 INSERM, Pavillon Baudelocque, Hôpital Cochin, 123 Boulevard de
Port-Royal, 75014 Paris, France.

The PIS mutation is a genomic ~12-kb deletion affecting long-range gene
transcription and causing XX sex reversal and hornlessness in goats by
simultaneous long-range action on two genes, gPISRT1 and gFOXL2. In this study, a
comparative human/mouse analysis of the orthologous region was carriedout,
permittingthe targeting of genes in the 1-Mb environment, and identification of
previously unknown mouse orthologues for Pisrt1, Bpesc1 and Chr3syt, and a human 
orthologue for PISRT1. PCR primers were defined and made it possible to analyse
tissue-specific gene expression in mice and goats for 10 and 8 genes,
respectively. The profile of expression was analysed by principal component
analysis (PCA). The results indicate that FAIM (Fas apoptotic inhibitory
molecule) is expressed similarly to FOXL2 (the primary determinant of ovary
development located 280 kb away from the PIS mutation). However, we could
demonstrate in goats that the PIS mutation has no direct effect on FAIM
expression. Therefore, FAIM could contribute to normal ovarian function by
inhibiting the apoptotic effect of Fas in the ovary but it relies on other
regulatory elements.

PMID: 15252242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jul 16;320(1):83-9.

Molecular cloning and gene expression of Foxl2 in the Nile tilapia, Oreochromis
niloticus.

Wang D(1), Kobayashi T, Zhou L, Nagahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, National Institute for Basic Biology,
Okazaki, Japan.

A Foxl2 cDNA was cloned from the Nile tilapia ovary by RT-PCR and subsequent
RACE. Alignment of known Foxl2 sequences from vertebrates confirmed the
conservation of the Foxl2 open reading frame and protein sequences, especially
the forkhead domain and C-terminal region, while some homopolymeric runs of amino
acids are found only in mammals but not in non-mammalian vertebrates. RT-PCR
revealed that Foxl2 is expressed in the tilapia brain (B), pituitary (P), gill,
and gonads (G), with the highest level of expression in the ovary, reflecting the
involvement of Foxl2 in B-P-G axis. Northern blotting and in situ hybridization
also revealed an evident sexual dimorphic expression pattern in the gonads. Foxl2
mRNA was mainly detected in the granulosa cells surrounding the oocytes. The
ovarian expression of Foxl2 in tilapia begins early during the differentiation of
the gonads and persists until adulthood, implying the involvement of Foxl2 in
fish gonad differentiation and the maintenance of ovarian function.

PMID: 15207705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Mol Hum Reprod. 2004 Aug;10(8):555-7. Epub 2004 Jun 4.

Mutations in the coding region of the FOXL2 gene are not a major cause of
idiopathic premature ovarian failure.

Bodega B(1), Porta C, Crosignani PG, Ginelli E, Marozzi A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Genetics, Medical Faculty and First Department of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Milan, Italy.

Premature ovarian failure (POF) is a heterogeneous disorder whose aetiology is
still unknown. Recently, the autosomal FOXL2 gene, highly expressed in the adult 
ovary, has been correlated with the disorder. FOXL2 mutations, causing a
truncation of the FOXL2 protein in the forkhead domain or in the poly-Ala tract
lead to blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus-inversus syndrome associated with POF 
(BPES I). Interestingly, in two out of 70 idiopathic POF patients, a 30 bp
deletion (898-927del) and a missense mutation (1009T-->A) were identified. To
further evaluate the correlation between POF and FOXL2 mutations, 120
phenotypically normal women affected by POF were analysed by direct sequencing of
the FOXL2 coding region. The analysis did not reveal any mutation in the 240
analysed chromosomes, indicating that mutations in the FOXL2 coding region are
rarely associated with non-syndromic POF.

PMID: 15181179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Genomics. 2004 May;83(5):757-64.

FOXL2 inactivation by a translocation 171 kb away: analysis of 500 kb of
chromosome 3 for candidate long-range regulatory sequences.

Crisponi L(1), Uda M, Deiana M, Loi A, Nagaraja R, Chiappe F, Schlessinger D, Cao
A, Pilia G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Neurogenetica e Neurofarmacologia, Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche, CNR, Via Jenner, Cagliari 09121, Italy.

A translocation breakpoint 171 kb 5' of the transcription start of FOXL2 causes
blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) and associated
premature ovarian failure. The breakpoint falls within another gene, MRPS22, that
has been sequenced in 500 kb of continuous DNA. MRPS22 encodes 20 exons and a
number of alternative transcripts. Three CpG islands (>91% identical) are
followed by noncoding exons 4-12 and coding exons 13-20. The 3'UTR extends into
the 3'UTR of COPB2. Based on the sequence, three reported translocations that
cause BPES all fall within intron 6 of MRPS22. Comparisons reveal conserved
segments in introns 6, 11, and 12 of human and mouse. Notably intron 11 sequence 
is also deleted in goat PIS syndrome (which combines craniofacial defects, female
infertility, and XX sex reversal). The conserved sequences are candidates for
models in which they are distant enhancers or otherwise affect higher order
chromatin structure to impose long-range cis regulation of FOXL2 expression.

PMID: 15081106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Endocrinology. 2004 Jul;145(7):3424-33. Epub 2004 Apr 1.

Forkhead l2 is expressed in the ovary and represses the promoter activity of the 
steroidogenic acute regulatory gene.

Pisarska MD(1), Bae J, Klein C, Hsueh AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Stanford University School of Medicine, 300 Pasteur Drive, Stanford, California
94305-5317, USA.

Premature ovarian failure in a subgroup of women with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus type 1 syndrome has been associated
with nonsense mutations in the gene encoding a Forkhead transcription factor,
Forkhead L2 (FOXL2). However, the exact function of FOXL2 in the ovary is
unclear. We investigated the expression of FOXL2 in the mouse ovary during
follicular development and maturation by RT-PCR and in situ hybridization. The
FOXL2 mRNA is expressed in ovaries throughout development and adulthood and is
localized to the undifferentiated granulosa cells in small and medium follicles
as well as cumulus cells of preovulatory follicles. FOXL2 belongs to a group of
transcription factors capable of interacting with specific DNA sequences in
diverse gene promoters. With the presence of multiple putative forkhead DNA
consensus sites, the promoter of the human steroidogenic acute regulatory (StAR) 
gene was used to test for regulation by FOXL2. Cotransfection studies revealed
that wild-type FOXL2 represses the activity of the StAR promoter, and the first
95 bp upstream of the transcriptional start site of the StAR gene is sufficient
for FOXL2 repression. EMSAs confirmed that FOXL2 interacts directly with this
region. Analyses using FOXL2 mutants also demonstrated the importance of the
entire alanine/proline-rich carboxyl terminus of FOXL2 for transcriptional
repression. Furthermore, these mutations produce a protein with a
dominant-negative effect that disables the transcriptional repressor activity of 
wild-type FOXL2. Dominant-negative mutations of FOXL2 could increase expression
of StAR and other follicle differentiation genes in small and medium follicles to
accelerate follicle development, resulting in increased initial recruitment of
dormant follicles and thus the premature ovarian failure phenotype.

PMID: 15059956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Jun 1;13(11):1171-81. Epub 2004 Mar 31.

Foxl2 disruption causes mouse ovarian failure by pervasive blockage of follicle
development.

Uda M(1), Ottolenghi C, Crisponi L, Garcia JE, Deiana M, Kimber W, Forabosco A,
Cao A, Schlessinger D, Pilia G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

FOXL2 mutations cause gonadal dysgenesis or premature ovarian failure (POF) in
women, as well as eyelid/forehead dysmorphology in both sexes (the
'blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome', BPES). Here we report
that mice lacking Foxl2 recapitulate relevant features of human BPES: males and
females are small and show distinctive craniofacial morphology with upper eyelids
absent. Furthermore, in mice as in humans, sterility is confined to females.
Features of Foxl2 null animals point toward a new mechanism of POF, with all
major somatic cell lineages failing to develop around growing oocytes from the
time of primordial follicle formation. Foxl2 disruption thus provides a model for
histogenesis and reproductive competence of the ovary.

PMID: 15056605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Clin Genet. 2003 Dec;64(6):485-90.

Mutational analysis of forkhead transcriptional factor 2 (FOXL2) in Korean
patients with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Cha SC(1), Jang YS, Lee JH, Kim HK, Kim SC, Kim S, Baek SH, Jung WS, Kim JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Daegu, 
Republic of Korea.

We screened for mutations in the forkhead transcription factor gene, FOXL2, in
Korean patients with sporadic or familial blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus
inversus syndrome (BPES) by polymerase chain reaction-single-stranded
conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) and direct sequencing. Five of nine BPES
families and three of seven sporadic cases were detected to have FOXL2 mutations.
We identified four types of FOXL2 mutations, two of which are novel. A new 14 bp 
deletion (939-952del14) causing a frameshift from G235W and the extension of the 
predicted protein to 527 amino acids was detected in a BPES family patient. In
addition, a novel 845C > A transversion, resulting in a nonsense mutation
(S203X), was found in a sporadic case of BPES. The previously reported in-frame
30 bp duplication (909-938dup30) was the most common mutation and was found in
eight patients of four BPES families and one sporadic case. A known 17 bp
duplication (1080-1096dup17) was observed in a sporadic BPES case. We were unable
to find a causal mutation in four BPES families and four sporadic cases. These
results suggest that in a fraction of BPES patients, the genetic defect might be 
associated with a mutation in the non-coding region of the FOXL2 gene or in other
genes.

PMID: 14986827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Development. 2004 Feb;131(4):933-42. Epub 2004 Jan 21.

The murine winged-helix transcription factor Foxl2 is required for granulosa cell
differentiation and ovary maintenance.

Schmidt D(1), Ovitt CE, Anlag K, Fehsenfeld S, Gredsted L, Treier AC, Treier M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Programme, European Molecular Biology Laboratory,
Meyerhofstrasse 1, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

Human Blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) type I is an
autosomal dominant disorder associated with premature ovarian failure (POF)
caused by mutations in FOXL2, a winged-helix/forkhead domain transcription
factor. Although it has been shown that FOXL2 is expressed in adult ovaries, its 
function during folliculogenesis is not known. Here, we show that the murine
Foxl2 gene is essential for granulosa cell differentiation and ovary maintenance.
In Foxl2(lacZ) homozygous mutant ovaries granulosa cells do not complete the
squamous to cuboidal transition leading to the absence of secondary follicles and
oocyte atresia. We further demonstrate that activin-betaA and anti-Mullerian
inhibiting hormone expression is absent or strongly diminished in Foxl2(lacZ)
homozygous mutant ovaries. Unexpectedly, two weeks after birth most if not all
oocytes expressed Gdf9 in Foxl2(lacZ) homozygous mutant ovaries, indicating that 
nearly all primordial follicles have already initiated folliculogenesis at this
stage. This activation, in the absence of functional granulosa cells, leads to
oocyte atresia and progressive follicular depletion. In addition to providing a
molecular mechanism for premature ovarian failure in BPES, these results suggest 
that granulosa cell function is not only crucial for oocyte growth but also to
maintain follicular quiescence in vivo.

PMID: 14736745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2003;101(3-4):206-11.

Structure, evolution and expression of the FOXL2 transcription unit.

Cocquet J(1), De Baere E, Gareil M, Pannetier M, Xia X, Fellous M, Veitia RA.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM E0021 and U361, Reproduction et Physiopathologie Obstétricale, Hôpital 
Cochin, Paris, France.

FOXL2 is a putative transcription factor involved in ovarian development and
function. Its mutations in humans are responsible for the blepharophimosis
syndrome, characterized by eyelid malformations and premature ovarian failure
(POF). Here we have performed a comparative sequence analysis of FOXL2 sequences 
of ten vertebrate species. We demonstrate that the entire open reading frame
(ORF) is under purifying selection leading to strong protein conservation. We
also review recent data on FOXL2 transcript and protein expression. FOXL2 has
been shown 1) to be the earliest known sex dimorphic marker of ovarian
determination/differentiation in vertebrates, 2) to have, at least in mammals, an
ovarian expression persisting until adulthood. The conservation of its sequence
and pattern of expression suggests that FOXL2 might be a key factor in the early 
development of the vertebrate female gonad and involved later in adult ovarian
function. Finally, we provide arguments for the existence of an alternative
transcript in rodents, that may arise from a differential polyadenylation.
Although it has only been demonstrated in rodents, its presence/absence in other 
species deserves further investigation.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14684984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Cytogenet Genome Res. 2003;101(3-4):199-205.

Expression studies of the PIS-regulated genes suggest different mechanisms of sex
determination within mammals.

Pannetier M(1), Servel N, Cocquet J, Besnard N, Cotinot C, Pailhoux E.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie du Développement et Reproduction, INRA Bât J. Poly, Jouy-en-Josas,
France.

In mammals, the Y-located SRY gene is known to induce testis formation from the
indifferent gonad. A related gene, SOX9, also plays a critical role in testis
differentiation in mammals, in birds and reptiles. It is now assumed that SRY
acts upstream of SOX9 in the sex determination cascade, but the regulatory link
which should exist between these two genes remains unknown. Studies on XX sex
reversal in polled goats (PIS mutation: Polled Intersex Syndrome) have led to the
discovery of a female-specific locus crucial for ovarian differentiation. This
genomic region is composed of at least two genes, FOXL2 and PISRT1, which share a
common transcriptional regulatory region, PIS. In this review, we present the
expression pattern of these PIS-regulated genes in mice. The FOXL2 expression
profile of mice is similar to that described in goats in accordance with a
conserved role of this ovarian differentiating gene in mammals. On the contrary, 
the PISRT1 expression profile is different between mice and goats, suggesting
different mechanisms of the primary switch in the testis determination process
within mammals. A model based on two different modes of SOX9 regulation in mice
and other mammals is proposed in order to integrate our results into the current 
scheme of gonad differentiation.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 14684983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2003 Aug 29;206(1-2):93-111.

The gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) receptor activating sequence (GRAS) is 
a composite regulatory element that interacts with multiple classes of
transcription factors including Smads, AP-1 and a forkhead DNA binding protein.

Ellsworth BS(1), Burns AT, Escudero KW, Duval DL, Nelson SE, Clay CM.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Reproduction and Biotechnology Laboratory, Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO 80523, USA.

Activin responsiveness of the murine GnRH receptor gene promoter is mediated at a
regulatory element we termed the GnRH receptor activating sequence (GRAS). Here, 
we have sought to define the complex of transcription factors that interact at
this element. Consistent with activin regulation at GRAS, gel shift analyses and 
yeast one-hybrid assays reveal Smad4 interaction at the 5' end of GRAS. While
overexpression of Smad3 activates a GRAS reporter, Smad3 binding at GRAS was not 
detectable. A functional interaction of Smad3 at GRAS was, however, detectable in
yeast expressing Smad4. Thus, Smad3 interaction at GRAS appears to be dependent
on the presence of Smad4. Mutations located at the 3' end of GRAS do not affect
Smad binding but eliminate functional activity. Thus, Smad binding alone cannot
account for the functional attributes of GRAS. Consistent with this notion, we
find that AP-1 binding is immediately juxtaposed to and, in fact, partially
overlaps the Smad binding site. Finally, a recently identified member of the
forkhead family of transcription factors, FoxL2, is also capable of interacting
at GRAS. Furthermore, FoxL2 activation at GRAS is lost with mutation of either
the 5' Smad binding site or a putative forkhead binding site located at the 3'
end of the element. We suggest that GRAS is a composite regulatory element whose 
functional activity is dependent on the organization of a multi-protein complex
consisting of Smads, AP-1 and a member of the forkhead family of DNA binding
proteins.

PMID: 12943993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Hum Mutat. 2003 Sep;22(3):222-8.

Comparative analysis of the FOXL2 gene and characterization of mutations in BPES 
patients.

Udar N(1), Yellore V, Chalukya M, Yelchits S, Silva-Garcia R, Small K; BPES
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Jules Stein Eye Institute, University of California, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA.

Bleparophimosis ptosis epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a rare disorder
characterized by eyelid malformation and in some cases associated with premature 
ovarian failure. Although the familial form is autosomal dominant, many cases are
also sporadic. The mutations causing this disorder were found in a
winged/forkhead transcription factor gene named FOXL2. We have sequenced the
mouse homolog for the FOXL2 gene and identified the Fugu rubripes (pufferfish)
ortholog from the database. By alignment of the three sequences, we found an
almost complete conservation of the forkhead domain in the three species. There
is 95% and 61% conservation at the protein level between human-mouse and
human-pufferfish, respectively. The polyalanine and polyproline tracts within the
gene are absent in Fugu rubripes. An overview identifies four breaks in the
conservation of the gene within these species. Using a direct sequencing
approach, we performed mutation analysis from DNA of nine affected individuals
from familial and sporadic cases. The mutations are distributed throughout the
coding region of the FOXL2 gene. We identified five novel mutations: g.292delG
(E19fsX149); g.530G>A (W98X); g.548A>G (H104R); g.652G>T (E139X); and
g.1178_1185del8 (A314fsX530). In addition we also identified two known mutations 
g.823C>T (Q196X) and g.1092_1108dup17, the latter in individuals from three
unrelated pedigrees.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12938087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Endocrinology. 2003 Jul;144(7):3237-43.

Etiology of ovarian failure in blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus inversus
syndrome: FOXL2 is a conserved, early-acting gene in vertebrate ovarian
development.

Loffler KA(1), Zarkower D, Koopman P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, Brisbane,
Queensland 4072, Australia.

Blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is a human disorder
caused by mutations in the forkhead transcription factor gene FOXL2 and is
characterized by facial dysmorphology combined in some cases with ovarian
failure. To better understand the role of FOXL2 in the etiology of ovarian
failure in BPES, we examined its expression in embryonic ovaries of mice,
chickens, and red-eared slider turtles, representatives of three phylogenetically
distant vertebrate groups that have different mechanisms of sex determination.
Expression of Foxl2 was detected in early ovaries of all three species around the
time of sex determination and was associated with both somatic and germ cell
populations in mice. Expression was sexually dimorphic in all cases. Sequence
analysis of turtle and chicken FoxL2 orthologues indicated an unusually high
degree of structural conservation during evolution. FoxL2 was found to be
autosomal in chickens, and therefore unlikely to represent the dominant
ovarian-determining gene that has been postulated to exist as a possible
explanation for female heterogamety in birds. Our observations suggest that BPES 
may result from early abnormalities in regulating the development of the fetal
ovary, rather than premature degeneration of the postnatal or adult ovary.
Further, our results suggest that FOXL2 is a highly conserved early regulator of 
vertebrate ovarian development.

PMID: 12810580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Clin Genet. 2003 Feb;63(2):117-20.

Sporadic and familial blepharophimosis -ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome:
FOXL2 mutation screen and MRI study of the superior levator eyelid muscle.

Dollfus H(1), Stoetzel C, Riehm S, Lahlou Boukoffa W, Bediard Boulaneb F, Quillet
R, Abu-Eid M, Speeg-Schatz C, Francfort JJ, Flament J, Veillon F, Perrin-Schmitt 
F.

Author information: 
(1)LGME du CNRS, U-184 INSERM, Faculté de Médecine, Clinique Ophtalmologique and 
Département de Radiologie, Hôpitaux Universitaires de Strasbourg, Strasbourg,
France. Helene.Dollfus@medecine.u-strasbg.FR

The analysis of the FOXL2 gene (3q23) in a series of two families and two
sporadic cases affected with Blepharophimosis-Ptosis-Epicanthus Inversus Syndrome
(BPES) is presented. This study detected two novel FOXL2 mutations (missence and 
nonsens mutations) and confirmed the recurrence of a previously described
duplication. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) of the orbit, in one family, showed
absence or hypotrophy of the eyelid superior levator muscle suggesting a possible
role of FOXL2 in the development of this extra-ocular muscle.

PMID: 12630957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Biol Reprod. 2003 Mar;68(3):985-95.

Expression profiles and chromosomal localization of genes controlling meiosis and
follicular development in the sheep ovary.

Mandon-Pépin B(1), Oustry-Vaiman A, Vigier B, Piumi F, Cribiu E, Cotinot C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Biologie du développement et Biotechnologies, INRA, 78350 Jouy en Josas,
France. pepin@jouy.inra.fr

In female sheep fetuses, two of the most crucial stages of ovarian development
are prophase of meiosis I and follicle formation. In the present study, sheep
ovaries collected on Days 25, 38, 49, 56, 67, 75, 94, and 120 of gestation, at
birth, and in adulthood were tested by reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) for the expression of 14 genes known to be involved in the
ovarian differentiation in diverse organisms. The aim of this study was to
determine 1) the expression pattern of six genes involved in germ cell
development or meiosis (DMC1, SPO11, MSH4, MSH5, DAZL, and Boule) and five
ovary-derived factors (OVOL1, SIAH2, DIAPH2, FOXL2, and FGF9), 2) the onset of
gene expression for several members of the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP)
pathway involved in follicular development (GDF9, BMP15, BMPR-IB), and 3) the
chromosomal localization of seven of these genes in the sheep genome. The RT-PCR 
analysis revealed that the two germline-specific genes, DAZL and Boule, were
expressed between 49 and 94 days postcoitum (dpc) with a similar pattern to
typical meiosis genes (DMC1, MSH4, and MSH5), suggesting their possible
participation in prophase of meiosis I. GDF9 and OVOL1 gene transcription started
at 56 dpc and extended until birth, while BMP15 presented a more restricted
window of expression between 94 dpc and birth, corresponding to the formation of 
first growing follicles. The homologous ovine genes for SPO11, DMC1, MSH5, DAZL, 
FGF9, DIAPH2, and SIAH2 were located on OAR 13q21-22, 3q35, 20q22, 19q13, 10q15, 
Xq44, and 1q41-42, respectively. In sheep, quantitative trait loci affecting
female reproductive capacities are currently being detected. The ontology and
precise mapping of ovarian genes will be useful to identify potential candidate
genes that might underlie these effects.

PMID: 12604652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Mar 1;117A(2):143-6.

FOXL2-mutations in blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES);
challenges for genetic counseling in female patients.

Fokstuen S(1), Antonarakis SE, Blouin JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, University of Geneva Medical School and
University Hospitals, Geneva, Switzerland. siv.fokstuen@hcuge.ch

Mutations in the forkhead transcription factor gene 2 (FOXL2) were recently
reported to cause blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES)
types I and II. Evidence was provided that BPES type I (eyelid abnormalities and 
female infertility) is caused by mutations resulting in a truncated FOXL2
protein. In contrast, mutant FOXL2 proteins, either with inserted aminoacids in
the forkhead domain or polyalanine tract, or with novel aminoacids at the
carboxyl end, were found in BPES type II, in which fertility is generally normal.
We report a 32-year-old female patient with sporadic BPES and a history of
menstrual cycle irregularities and periods of secondary amenorrhoea. A
heterozygous frameshift mutation (c959-960insG) was found in the FOXL2 gene,
resulting in a predicted FOXL2 protein with 212 novel aminoacids in the carboxyl 
end, suggesting BPES type II despite menstrual irregularities. The clinical
presentations of our patient and of three female patients with BPES type II in
the report of De Baere et al. [2001: Hum Mol Genet 10:1591-1600.] indicate
phenotypic overlap between BPES type I and II. These observations do not support 
a clear-cut prediction of female fertility based on the FOXL2 molecular defect.
As a consequence, FOXL2 mutation testing in female patients of child-bearing age 
with BPES should be handled with caution, and a two-step genetic counseling
approach, including an initial pre-test information session, is proposed.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12567411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 Feb;72(2):478-87. Epub 2003 Jan 14.

FOXL2 and BPES: mutational hotspots, phenotypic variability, and revision of the 
genotype-phenotype correlation.

De Baere E(1), Beysen D, Oley C, Lorenz B, Cocquet J, De Sutter P, Devriendt K,
Dixon M, Fellous M, Fryns JP, Garza A, Jonsrud C, Koivisto PA, Krause A, Leroy
BP, Meire F, Plomp A, Van Maldergem L, De Paepe A, Veitia R, Messiaen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
Elfride.DeBaere@rug.ac.be

Blepharophimosis syndrome (BPES), an autosomal dominant syndrome in which an
eyelid malformation is associated (type I) or not (type II) with premature
ovarian failure (POF), has recently been ascribed to mutations in FOXL2, a
putative forkhead transcription factor gene. We previously reported 22 FOXL2
mutations and suggested a preliminary genotype-phenotype correlation. Here, we
describe 21 new FOXL2 mutations (16 novel ones) through sequencing of open
reading frame, 5' untranslated region, putative core promoter, and fluorescence
in situ hybridization analysis. Our study shows the existence of two mutational
hotspots: 30% of FOXL2 mutations lead to polyalanine (poly-Ala) expansions, and
13% are a novel out-of-frame duplication. In addition, this is the first study to
demonstrate intra- and interfamilial phenotypic variability (both BPES types
caused by the same mutation). Furthermore, the present study allows a revision of
the current genotype-phenotype correlation, since we found exceptions to it. We
assume that for predicted proteins with a truncation before the poly-Ala tract,
the risk for development of POF is high. For mutations leading to a truncated or 
extended protein containing an intact forkhead and poly-Ala tract, no predictions
are possible, since some of these mutations lead to both types of BPES, even
within the same family. Poly-Ala expansions may lead to BPES type II. For
missense mutations, no correlations can be made yet. Microdeletions are
associated with mental retardation. We conclude that molecular testing may be
carefully used as a predictor for POF risk in a limited number of mutations.

PMCID: PMC379240
PMID: 12529855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Med Genet. 2002 Dec;39(12):916-21.

Evolution and expression of FOXL2.

Cocquet J, Pailhoux E, Jaubert F, Servel N, Xia X, Pannetier M, De Baere E,
Messiaen L, Cotinot C, Fellous M, Veitia RA.

PMCID: PMC1757225
PMID: 12471206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Nov 15;113(1):47-51.

Mutations in FOXL2 underlying BPES (types 1 and 2) in Colombian families.

Ramírez-Castro JL(1), Pineda-Trujillo N, Valencia AV, Muñetón CM, Botero O,
Trujillo O, Vásquez G, Mora BE, Durango N, Bedoya G, Ruiz-Linares A.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Genética Medica, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Antioquia,
Medellín, Colombia.

We report the genetic characterization of one family with
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) type 1 and two
families with BPES type 2 from a historically isolated population in northwest
Colombia. Linkage and haplotype analyses indicate that BPES in these families is 
linked to 3q23. Mutation screening of FOXL2 in the family with BPES type 1
revealed a novel 394C --> T nonsense mutation which deletes the forkhead DNA
binding domain. The two families with BPES type 2 both carry an in-frame 30 bp
duplication that leads to the elongation of a polyalanine tract. This duplication
has been previously reported in Europe, where recurrent mutation has been
demonstrated in unrelated familial and sporadic BPES cases. The recurrent nature 
of this duplication seems to relate to the secondary structure of this DNA
region. The genotype-phenotype correlation seen in the Colombian families is
consistent with the recent proposal that BPES type 1 is caused by truncating
mutations leading to haploinsufficiency, while BPES type 2 is due to mutations
generating elongated protein products.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12400065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Aug 15;111(3):328-33.

Genes and translocations involved in POF.

Schlessinger D(1), Herrera L, Crisponi L, Mumm S, Percesepe A, Pellegrini M,
Pilia G, Forabosco A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, Maryland
21224, USA. schlessingerd@grc.nia.nih.gov

Changes at a single autosomal locus and many X-linked loci have been implicated
in women with gonadal dysgenesis [premature ovarian failure (POF) with deficits
in ovarian follicles]. For the chromosome 3 locus, a forkhead transcription
factor gene (FOXL2) has been identified, in which lesions result in decreased
follicles by haploinsufficiency. In contrast, sporadic X; autosomal
translocations are distributed at many points on the X, but concentrate in a
critical region on Xq. The association of the breakpoints with genes involved in 
ovarian function is thus far weak (in four analyzed cases) and has not been
related to pathology in other POF patients. While many more translocations can be
analyzed in detail as the human genome sequence is refined, it remains possible
that translocations like X monosomy (Turner syndrome) lead to POF not by
interrupting specific genes important in ovarian development, but by causing
aberrations in pairing or X-inactivation during folliculogenesis. It is noted
that the critical region has unusual features, neighboring the X-inactivation
center and including an 18 Mb region of very low recombination. These suggest
that chromosome dynamics in the region may be sensitive to structural changes,
and when modified by translocations might provoke apoptosis at meiotic
checkpoints. Choices among models for the etiology of POF should be feasible
based on studies of ovarian follicle development and attrition in mouse models.
Studies would prominently include gene expression profiling of
developmental-specific pathways in nascent ovaries with controlled levels of
Foxl2 and interacting proteins, or with defined changes in the X chromosome.

Published 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12210333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Med Genet. 2002 Aug;39(8):e43.

FOXL2 mutation screening in a large panel of POF patients and XX males.

De Baere E, Lemercier B, Christin-Maitre S, Durval D, Messiaen L, Fellous M,
Veitia R.

PMCID: PMC1735205
PMID: 12161610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Hum Reprod. 2002 Aug;8(8):729-33.

Identification of novel mutations in FOXL2 associated with premature ovarian
failure.

Harris SE(1), Chand AL, Winship IM, Gersak K, Aittomäki K, Shelling AN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, National Women's Hospital, Auckland,
Finland.

Premature ovarian failure (POF) affects approximately 1% of women and is known to
be caused by sex chromosome abnormalities, iatrogenic agents and autoimmune
diseases, but in the majority of cases the cause is unknown. However, several
families have been identified as having an inherited predisposition to POF,
suggesting a genetic component to the condition in these cases. The FOXL2 gene of
70 POF patients from New Zealand and Slovenia was screened for mutations. In a
Slovenian POF patient, a novel 30 bp deletion was identified that was predicted
to remove 10 out of 14 alanines (A221_A230del), from the polyalanine tract
downstream of the winged helix/forkhead domain of the FOXL2 protein. A novel
single nucleotide substitution, 772(1009)T>A, which is predicted to change amino 
acid 258 from tyrosine to asparagine (Y258N), was identified in a New Zealand POF
patient. Neither mutation was identified in 200 normal control chromosomes from
100 control samples. Three previously unreported single nucleotide substitutions,
considered to be non-functional polymorphisms, were also identified.

PMID: 12149404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Genet Test. 2001 Winter;5(4):335-8.

Two families with blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome have
mutations in the putative forkhead transcription factor FOXL2.

Bell R(1), Murday VA, Patton MA, Jeffery S.

Author information: 
(1)The Medical Genetics Unit, St. George's Hospital Medical School, Tooting,
London SW17 ORE, UK.

Blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal
dominant disorder that is characterized by distinctive eyelid abnormalities. Two 
clinical subtypes have been described in which type I, but not type II, is
associated with premature ovarian failure. Both types of BPES are linked to
3q22-23, and the gene has recently been identified as the putative forkhead
transcription factor FOXL2. We report mutation screening of FOXL2 in two families
with this condition. The two mutations detected were frameshift mutations
resulting from a small insertion or duplication within the gene. Both mutations
would result in the production of novel carboxyl terminii, one terminating the
predicted protein earlier than the wild type, and the other giving rise to a
larger protein product, assuming these proteins or their mRNA were not degraded. 
Based on the present data, this would suggest that the first family should be
type I and the second, type II. Although there is evidence of infertility in the 
first family, all 3 females in the youngest generation have normal pelvic
ultrasound and hormone levels, suggesting that the divide between types I and II 
may not be as distinct as has been suggested.

PMID: 11960581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Ophthalmic Genet. 2002 Mar;23(1):43-7.

A novel mutation in the FOXL2 gene in a patient with blepharophimosis syndrome:
differential role of the polyalanine tract in the development of the ovary and
the eyelid.

Kosaki K(1), Ogata T, Kosaki R, Sato S, Matsuo N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
kkosaki@med.keio.ac.jp

Blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) is an autosomal
dominant disorder characterized by abnormalities of the eyelids. We herein report
a 12-year-old girl with BPES who had bilateral blepharophimosis, ptosis,
hypertelorism, and downslanting palpebral fissures. Mutation analysis revealed
the insertion of a cytosine (dup 1036C) within a wild-type run of six cytosines. 
A comparison of the phenotypic outcomes of the previously described mutations and
the dup 1036C mutation reported herein suggest that the outcome is largely
dependent on the involvement of the polyalanine tract (residues 221 to 231). We
suggest that the polyalanine tract may have a differential role in eyelid and
ovarian development and function. Further work is required to clarify whether
ovarian function can be predicted on the basis of genotype.

PMID: 11910558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Hum Genet. 2001;46(12):733-6.

Heterozygous 17-bp deletion in the forkhead transcription factor gene, FOXL2, in 
a Japanese family with blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Yamada T(1), Hayasaka S, Matsumoto M, Budu, Esa T, Hayasaka Y, Endo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Toyama Medical and Pharmaceutical University,
Japan. md991012@st.toyama-mpu.ac.jp

We examined mutations in the forkhead transcription factor gene, FOXL2, in three 
members a Japanese family with autosomal dominant
blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) and in 100 healthy
controls. The FOXL2 was analyzed by direct genomic sequencing. A novel 17-bp
deletion at nucleotides 1092-1108 in FOXL2 was found in the three affected
patients. No mutation was found in any of the 100 healthy controls. The 17-bp
deletion in FOXL2 may be involved in the pathogenesis of BPES in Japanese
patients.

PMID: 11776388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Eur J Endocrinol. 2002 Jan;146(1):15-8.

Lessons from studies of complex genetic disorders: identification of FOXL2--a
novel transcription factor on the wing to fertility.

Führer D(1).

Author information: 
(1)III Department of Medicine, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
fued@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

PMID: 11751061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Dev Dyn. 2001 Nov;222(3):328-40.

Time course of female-to-male sex reversal in 38,XX fetal and postnatal pigs.

Pailhoux E(1), Parma P, Sundström J, Vigier B, Servel N, Kuopio T, Locatelli A,
Pelliniemi LJ, Cotinot C.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Biologie du Développement et Biotechnologies, INRA, Jouy en Josas,
France. pailhoux@biotec.jouy.inra.fr

In an attempt to understand the etiology of intersexuality in pigs, we thoroughly
analyzed the gonads of 38,XX (SRY negative) female to male sex-reversed animals
at different developmental stages: during fetal life [50 and 70 days postcoitum
(dpc)], just after birth [35 days postpartum (dpp)] and during adulthood. For
each animal studied, we performed parallel histological and ultrastructural
analyses on one gonad and RT-PCR analysis on the other gonad in order to define
the expression profiles of sexually regulated genes: SOX9, 3beta-HSD, P450
aromatase, AMH, FOXL2, and Wnt4. Light and electron microscopic examination
showed that testicular cords differentiated in XX sex-reversed gonads but were
hypoplastic. Although the testicular cords contained gonia at the fetal stages,
the germ cells had all died through apoptosis within a few weeks after birth.
Ultrastructurally normal Leydig cells also differentiated, but later, and
enclosed whorl-like residual bodies. At the fetal stages, three of the six genes 
studied in the intersex gonads presented, as early as 50 dpc, a modified
expression profile corresponding to an elevated expression of SOX9 and the
beginning of AMH and P450 aromatase gene transcription. In addition to genes
involved in the testicular pathway, the same gonads expressed FOXL2, an
ovarian-specific factor. The ovaries of true hermaphrodites were ineffective in
ensuring correct folliculogenesis and presented abnormal expression profiles of
ovarian specific genes after birth. These results indicate that the genes
involved in this pathology act very early during gonadogenesis and affect the
ovary-differentiating pathway with variable expressivity from ovarian germ cell
depletion through to trans-differentiation into testicular structures.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11747069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nat Genet. 2001 Dec;29(4):453-8.

A 11.7-kb deletion triggers intersexuality and polledness in goats.

Pailhoux E(1), Vigier B, Chaffaux S, Servel N, Taourit S, Furet JP, Fellous M,
Grosclaude F, Cribiu EP, Cotinot C, Vaiman D.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement et Biotechnologies, Département de
Physiologie Animale INRA, Centre de Recherches de Jouy-en-Josas, 78352
Jouy-en-Josas, Paris, France.

Mammalian sex determination is governed by the presence of the sex determining
region Y gene (SRY) on the Y chromosome. Familial cases of SRY-negative XX sex
reversal are rare in humans, often hampering the discovery of new sex-determining
genes. The mouse model is also insufficient to correctly apprehend the
sex-determination cascade, as the human pathway is much more sensitive to gene
dosage. Other species might therefore be considered in this respect. In goats,
the polled intersex syndrome (PIS) mutation associates polledness and
intersexuality. The sex reversal affects exclusively the XX individuals in a
recessive manner, whereas the absence of horns is dominant in both sexes. The
syndrome is caused by an autosomal gene located at chromosome band 1q43 (ref. 9),
shown to be homologous to human chromosome band 3q23 (ref. 10). Through a
positional cloning approach, we demonstrate that the mutation underlying PIS is
the deletion of a critical 11.7-kb DNA element containing mainly repetitive
sequences. This deletion affects the transcription of at least two genes: PISRT1,
encoding a 1.5-kb mRNA devoid of open reading frame (ORF), and FOXL2, recently
shown to be responsible for blepharophimosis ptosis epicanthus inversus syndrome 
(BPES) in humans. These two genes are located 20 and 200 kb telomeric from the
deletion, respectively.

PMID: 11726932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Jul 15;10(15):1591-600.

Spectrum of FOXL2 gene mutations in blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus
(BPES) families demonstrates a genotype--phenotype correlation.

De Baere E(1), Dixon MJ, Small KW, Jabs EW, Leroy BP, Devriendt K, Gillerot Y,
Mortier G, Meire F, Van Maldergem L, Courtens W, Hjalgrim H, Huang S, Liebaers I,
Van Regemorter N, Touraine P, Praphanphoj V, Verloes A, Udar N, Yellore V,
Chalukya M, Yelchits S, De Paepe A, Kuttenn F, Fellous M, Veitia R, Messiaen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, B-9000 Ghent,
Belgium.

Mutations in FOXL2, a forkhead transcription factor gene, have recently been
shown to cause blepharophimosis-ptosis-epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES) types 
I and II, a rare genetic disorder. In BPES type I a complex eyelid malformation
is associated with premature ovarian failure (POF), whereas in BPES type II the
eyelid defect occurs as an isolated entity. In this study, we describe the
identification of novel mutations in the FOXL2 gene in BPES types I and II
families, in sporadic BPES patients, and in BPES families where the type could
not be established. In 67% of the patients studied, we identified a mutation in
the FOXL2 gene. In total, 21 mutations (17 of which are novel) and one
microdeletion were identified. Thirteen of these FOXL2 mutations are unique. In
this study, we demonstrate that there is a genotype--phenotype correlation for
either types of BPES by the finding that mutations predicted to result in a
truncated protein either lacking or containing the forkhead domain lead to BPES
type I. In contrast, duplications within or downstream of the forkhead domain,
and a frameshift downstream of them, all predicted to result in an extended
protein, cause BPES type II. In addition, in 30 unrelated patients with isolated 
POF no causal mutations were identified in FOXL2. Our study provides further
evidence that FOXL2 haploinsufficiency may cause BPES types I and II by the
effect of a null allele and a hypomorphic allele, respectively. Furthermore, we
propose that in a fraction of the BPES patients the genetic defect does not
reside within the coding region of the FOXL2 gene and may be caused by a position
effect.

PMID: 11468277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Nat Genet. 2001 Feb;27(2):159-66.

The putative forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 is mutated in
blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome.

Crisponi L(1), Deiana M, Loi A, Chiappe F, Uda M, Amati P, Bisceglia L, Zelante
L, Nagaraja R, Porcu S, Ristaldi MS, Marzella R, Rocchi M, Nicolino M,
Lienhardt-Roussie A, Nivelon A, Verloes A, Schlessinger D, Gasparini P, Bonneau
D, Cao A, Pilia G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerca sulle Talassemie ed Anemie Mediterranee CNR, and
Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche e Biotecnologie, Ospedale Regionale per le
Microcitemie, Università degli Studi di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2001 Feb;27(2):132-4.

In type I blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES), eyelid
abnormalities are associated with ovarian failure. Type II BPES shows only the
eyelid defects, but both types map to chromosome 3q23. We have positionally
cloned a novel, putative winged helix/forkhead transcription factor gene, FOXL2, 
that is mutated to produce truncated proteins in type I families and larger
proteins in type II. Consistent with an involvement in those tissues, FOXL2 is
selectively expressed in the mesenchyme of developing mouse eyelids and in adult 
ovarian follicles; in adult humans, it appears predominantly in the ovary. FOXL2 
represents a candidate gene for the polled/intersex syndrome XX sex-reversal
goat.

PMID: 11175783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Nat Genet. 2001 Feb;27(2):132-4.

A fork in the road to fertility.

Prueitt RL(1), Zinn AR.

Author information: 
(1)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, The University of Texas
Southwestern Medical School, 5323 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, Texas 75390,
USA.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2001 Feb;27(2):159-66.

Haploinsufficiency of FOXL2, a new forkhead transcription factor, causes
blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus syndrome (BPES), a rare developmental
disorder affecting the eyelid and sometimes the ovary. A new study implicates
FOXL2 as the first human gene required for the maintenance of ovarian follicles. 
The discovery of FOXL2 may provide insight into the causes of idiopathic
premature ovarian failure, a disease that burdens many infertile couples.

PMID: 11175772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


