
1. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8441. [Epub ahead of print]

Aberrantly activated Gli2-KIF20A axis is crucial for growth of hepatocellular
carcinoma and predicts poor prognosis.

Shi C(1), Huang D(1), Lu N(2), Chen D(1), Zhang M(1), Yan Y(3), Deng L(4), Lu
Q(5), Lu H(6), Luo S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Experimental Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (4)Institute of Translational Medicine,
Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi, China. (5)Department of Epidemiology and 
Biostatistics, School of Public Health, Nanchang University, Nanchang, Jiangxi,
China. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and Tulane Cancer
Center, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, LA, USA.

Glioma-associated oncogene 2 (Gli2), a primary transcriptional regulator of
Hedgehog (Hh) signaling, is essential for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) growth
and survival. However, the underlying molecular mechanism and crucial downstream 
targets of Gli2 in human HCC are not fully understood. Here, we report the
identification of kinesin family member 20A (KIF20A) as a novel downstream target
of Gli2, which is important for HCC proliferation and tumor growth. Inhibition of
Hh signaling leads to a remarkable decrease of KIF20A expression in HCC cells,
whereas overexpression of Gli2 elevates KIF20A expression by activating Forkhead 
Box M1 (FoxM1)-MMB complex-mediated transcription of this kinesin gene.
Gli2-induced HCC cell growth requires enhanced expression of KIF20A, and
knockdown of Gli2 or KIF20A represses the proliferation of HCC cells in vitro and
in vivo. Correlated with these results, analyses of clinical HCC samples show
that Gli2, FoxM1 and KIF20A are highly elevated in primary HCC samples and
represent significant risk factors for HCC recurrence and survival.CONCLUSION:
KIF20A is an important downstream target gene of Hh signaling. And, the
Gli2-KIF20A axis is essential for the proliferation and growth of human HCC
cells. Our study also suggests Gli2-KIF20A axis as a potential target for future 
therapeutic intervention and as an independent prognostic biomarker for HCC.

PMID: 27036048  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2016 Apr 4;38(4):1435-1446. [Epub ahead of print]

The Tumor Suppressive Role of MiRNA-509-5p by Targeting FOXM1 in Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer.

Ma N, Zhang W, Qiao C, Luo H, Zhang X, Liu D, Zang S, Zhang L, Bai J.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Deregulation of microRNAs (miRNAs) expression is a frequent
event in cancer development and progression. Recent studies have implied that
abnormal expression of miRNAs is frequently observed in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC). Here, we examined the levels and biological functions of
miR-509-5p in NSCLC.
METHODS: The levels of miR-509-5p were measured by real-time quantitative PCR
(RT-PCR) in NSCLC cell lines and NSCLC tissues along with adjacent normal
tissues. Cell viability was analyzed by MTT and colony formation assay. Cell
migration and invasion were evaluated by transwell and wound healing assay. In
addition, we predicted the putative targets of miR-509-5p by bioinformatics
analyses. Moreover, by luciferase-reporter assay, we analyzed the relationship
between miR-509-5p and the target in NSCLC cells.
RESULTS: miR-509-5p expression was significantly reduced in NSCLC tissues
compared with adjacent normal tissues. In addition, miR-509-5p decreased cell
proliferation, migration and invasive capability of NSCLC cells. Moreover, we
found that FOXM1 was a putative target of miR-509-5p. Enforced miR-509-5p
expression in NSCLC cells reduced both mRNA and protein levels of FOXM1.
Furthermore, dual-luciferase reporter assay showed miR-509-5p could bind to the
3' untranslational regions of FOXM1 mRNA. Furthermore, overexpression of FOXM1
reversed cell viability, migration, invasion and vimentin levels suppressed by
miR-509-5p mimics in H1299 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: miR-509-5p exerts tumor-suppressive effects by attenuating FOXM1 in 
NSCLC. Collectively, these findings provide further evidence that miR-509-5p may 
be considered as a novel and potential target for the diagnosis, prognosis and
treatment of NSCLC.

© 2016 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 27035590  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 28. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.8419. [Epub ahead of print]

FOXM1 promotes invasion and migration of colorectal cancer cells partially
dependent on HSPA5 transactivation.

Luo X(1), Yao J(2), Nie P(3), Yang Z(4), Feng H(4), Chen P(1), Shi X(1), Zou
Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Affiliated Luoyang Central Hospital of Zhengzhou
University, Luoyang, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Boji-Affiliated
Hospital (Zengcheng People's Hospital), Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.
(3)KingMed Diagnostics and KingMed School of Laboratory Medicine, Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (4)Department of Medcine, The Affiliated
Luoyang Central Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Luoyang, China. (5)MOE Key
Laboratory of Laser Life Science and Institute of Laser Life Science, Joint
Laboratory of Laser Oncology with Cancer Center of Sun Yat-sen University,
College of Biophotonics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.

In this study, to investigate whether endoplastic reticulum (ER) stress
correlated with FOXM1 in colorectal cancer, we analysed the mRNA levels of FOXM1 
and ER stress markers HSPA5 and spliced XBP1 by qRT-PCR. FOXM1 mRNA levels were
found to positively correlate with HSPA5 in colorectal cancer. However, no
significant correlation between FOXM1 and spliced XBP1 mRNA levels was found.
Theses results suggested the positive correlation between FOXM1 and HSPA5 in
colorectal cancer was not associated with ER stress. Next, we provided evidences 
that FOXM1 promoted HSPA5 transcription by directly binding to and stimulating
HSPA5 promoter. Moreover, a FOXM1-binding site mapped between -1019 and -1012 bp 
of the proximal HSPA5 promoter was identified. In addition, we found that
enhancement of cell migration and invasion by FOXM1 was significantly attenuated 
by depletion of HSPA5 in colorectal cancer cell. Furthermore, FOXM1 triggered
colorectal cancer cell migration and invasion was involved in activities of
cell-surface HSPA5. Lastly, our results suggested FOXM1 facilitated the
activities and expressions of MMP2 and 9 associated with cell-surface HSPA5 in
colorectal cancer cells. Moreover, statistically significant positive
correlations between FOXM1 and MMP2 mRNA expression, between HSPA5 and MMP2 were 
found in colorectal cancer tissue specimens. Together, our results suggested that
FOXM1-HSPA5 signaling might be considered as a novel molecular target for
designing novel therapeutic regimen to control colorectal cancer metastasis and
progression.

PMID: 27034162  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2016 Mar 23;38(3):179-84. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-3766.2016.03.004.

[Expression and significance of FoxM1 in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma cells
in vitro and in vivo].

[Article in Chinese]

Gai L(1), Mao GX(1), Liu J(1), Huang H(2), Wang X(3), Yao NH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Affliated Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong
226001, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, Nantong 226001, China. (3)Institute of Neuroregeneration, Nantong
University, Nantong 226001, China. (4)Department of Radiotherapy, Affiliated
Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong 226001, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression and significance of FoxM1 in esophageal 
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cell lines and tissues.
METHODS: Western blot assay was used to detect the expression of FoxM1 in human
esophageal epithelial cells and esophageal squamous cell cancer cell lines TE1,
TE10, TE11 and Eca109 cells. To determine whether down-regulation of FoxM1
expression could inhibit the aggressive phenotype of ESCC cells, we knocked down 
the expression of FoxM1 by using FoxM1-shRNA in TE1 cells. Then we detected the
cell proliferation, migration and invasion of TE1 cells by MTT assay, scratch
assay and transwell assay. Furthermore, the effect of FoxM1 knockdown on
tumorigenicity in nude mice was evaluated. Finally, immunohistochemical staining 
was used to detect the expression of FoxM1 in 99 cases of ESCC tissues and
adjacent normal esophageal tissues. <U+03C7>(2) test was used to analyze the
correlations between the expression of FoxM1 and clinicopathologic
characteristics and prognosis of ESCC patients.
RESULTS: Western blot data showed that FoxM1 expression was lower in normal
esophageal epithelial cells and highly expressed in four esophageal cancer cell
lines, especially in TE1 cells. Knockdown of FoxM1 inhibited the growth, invasion
and migration of TE1 cells and reduced their tumorigenicity in nude mice.The
positive expression rate of FoxM1 in ESCC was 61.6% (61/99), significantly higher
than that in the paired adjacent normal tissues (24.2%, 24/99) (P<0.05). The
positive expression rate of FoxM1 in ESCC tissues was 61.6% (61/99),
significantly higher than that in the paired adjacent normal tissues (24.2%,
24/99) (P<0.05). FoxM1 expression was significantly and positively correlated
with lymph node metastasis, clinical stage and invasive depth (P<0.05). The
median survival time was 42.3 months in 38 cases of patients with negative FoxM1 
expression, and 33.0 months in 61 cases of positive FoxM1 expression, and the
difference was statistically significant (P=0.036).
CONCLUSIONS: FoxM1 is highly expressed in ESCC, and significantly correlated with
the initiation, development and prognosis of esophageal cancer. FOXM1 might be an
indicator to predict the prognosis and serve as a potential target for therapy in
esophageal cancer.

PMID: 26988822  [PubMed - in process]


5. Osteoarthritis Cartilage. 2016 Mar 10. pii: S1063-4584(16)01065-7. doi:
10.1016/j.joca.2016.03.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Gene expression changes in damaged osteoarthritic cartilage identify a signature 
of non-chondrogenic and mechanical responses.

Dunn SL(1), Soul J(2), Anand S(3), Schwartz JM(4), Boot-Handford RP(5),
Hardingham TE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. 
Electronic address: sara.dunn@manchester.ac.uk. (2)Wellcome Trust Centre for
Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
jamie.soul@postgrad.manchester.ac.uk. (3)Stockport NHS Foundation Trust,
Manchester, UK. Electronic address: sanjayanand@doctors.org.uk. (4)Wellcome Trust
Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic
address: jean-marc.Schwartz@manchester.ac.uk. (5)Wellcome Trust Centre for
Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
ray.boothandford@manchester.ac.uk. (6)Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix
Research, University of Manchester, UK. Electronic address:
tim.hardingham@manchester.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: Joint degeneration in osteoarthritis (OA) is characterised by damage 
and loss of articular cartilage. The pattern of loss is consistent with damage
occurring only where the mechanical loading is high. We have investigated using
RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) and systems analyses the changes that occur in damaged
OA cartilage by comparing it with intact cartilage from the same joint.
METHODS: Cartilage was obtained from eight OA patients undergoing total knee
replacement. RNA was extracted from cartilage on the damaged distal medial
condyle (DMC) and the intact posterior lateral condyle (PLC). RNA-seq was
performed to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs) and systems analyses 
applied to identify dysregulated pathways.
RESULTS: In the damaged OA cartilage, there was decreased expression of
chondrogenic genes SOX9, SOX6, COL11A2, COL9A1/2/3, ACAN and HAPLN1; increases in
non-chondrogenic genes COL1A1, COMP and FN1; an altered pattern of secreted
proteinase expression; but no expression of major inflammatory cytokines. Systems
analyses by PhenomeExpress revealed significant sub-networks of DEGs including
mitotic cell cycle, Wnt signalling, apoptosis and matrix organisation that were
influenced by a core of altered transcription factors (TFs), FOSL1, AHR, E2F1 and
FOXM1.
CONCLUSIONS: Gene expression changes in damaged cartilage suggested a signature
non-chondrogenic response of altered matrix protein and secreted proteinase
expression. There was evidence of a damage response in this late OA cartilage,
which surprisingly showed features detected experimentally in the early response 
of cartilage to mechanical overload. PhenomeExpress analysis identified a hub of 
DEGs linked by a core of four differentially regulated TFs.

Copyright © 2016 Osteoarthritis Research Society International. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26973327  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Mod Pathol. 2016 Mar 11. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2016.48. [Epub ahead of print]

Expression profiling of small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors identifies
subgroups with clinical relevance, prognostic markers and therapeutic targets.

Andersson E(1), Arvidsson Y(1), Swärd C(2), Hofving T(1), Wängberg B(2),
Kristiansson E(3), Nilsson O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sahlgrenska Cancer Center, Department of Pathology, Institute of Biomedicine, 
Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden.
(2)Department of Surgery, Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy at 
the University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden. (3)Department of Mathematical
Sciences, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden.

We wanted to define the transcriptome of small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors
in order to identify clinically relevant subgroups of tumors, prognostic markers 
and novel targets for treatment. Genome-wide expression profiling was conducted
on tumor biopsies from 33 patients with well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors
of the distal ileum and metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis. Unsupervised
hierarchical clustering analysis identified three groups of tumors. The largest
group, comprising half of the tumors, was characterized by longer patient
survival and higher expression of neuroendocrine markers, including SSTR2. Tumors
with higher grade (G2/3) or gain of chromosome 14 were associated with shorter
patient survival and increased expression of cell cycle-promoting genes. Pathway 
analysis predicted the prostaglandin E receptor 2 (PTGER2) as the most
significantly activated regulator in tumors of higher grade, whereas Forkhead box
M1 (FOXM1) was the most significantly activated regulator in tumors with gain of 
chromosome 14. Druggable genes identified from expression profiles included
clinically proven SSTR2 and also novel targets, for example, receptor tyrosine
kinases (RET, FGFR1/3, PDGFRB and FLT1), epigenetic regulators, molecular
chaperones and signal transduction molecules. Evaluation of candidate drug
targets on neuroendocrine tumors cells (GOT1) showed significant inhibition of
tumor cell growth after treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors or inhibitors
of HDAC, HSP90 and AKT. In conclusion, we have defined the transcriptome of small
intestinal neuroendocrine tumors and identified novel subgroups with clinical
relevance. We found specific gene expression patterns associated with tumor grade
and chromosomal alterations. Our data also suggest novel prognostic biomarkers
and therapies for these patients.Modern Pathology advance online publication, 11 
March 2016; doi:10.1038/modpathol.2016.48.

PMID: 26965582  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. J Hepatol. 2016 Mar 3. pii: S0168-8278(16)30006-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jhep.2016.02.040. [Epub ahead of print]

Car-driven regeneration protects liver from failure following tissue loss and
bears therapeutic potential.

Tschuor C(1), Kachaylo E(1), Perparim L(1), Raptis DA(1), Linecker M(1), Tian
Y(1), Herrmann U(2), Grabliauskaite K(1), Weber A(3), Columbano A(4), Graf R(1), 
Humar B(5), Clavien PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of the Swiss HPB and Transplantation Center, Department of Surgery,
University Hospital Zürich, Switzerland. (2)Department of Neuropathology,
University Hopital Zürich, Switzerland. (3)Institute of Surgical Pathology,
University Hopital Zürich, Switzerland. (4)Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Cagliari, Italy. (5)Laboratory of the Swiss HPB and Transplantation
Center, Department of Surgery, University Hospital Zürich, Switzerland.
Electronic address: bostjan.humar@usz.ch. (6)Laboratory of the Swiss HPB and
Transplantation Center, Department of Surgery, University Hospital Zürich,
Switzerland. Electronic address: clavien@access.uzh.ch.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Liver can recover following resection. If tissue loss is too
excessive, however, liver failure will develop as is known from the
Small-for-Size-Syndrome (SFSS). The molecular processes underlying liver failure 
are ill-understood. Here, we explored the role and the clinical potential of
Nr1i3 (constitutive androstane receptor, Car) in liver failure following
hepatectomy.
METHODS: Activators of Car, various hepatectomies, Car(-/-) mice, humanized CAR
mice, human tissue and ex vivo liver slice cultures were used to study Car in the
SFSS. Pathways downstream of Car were investigated by in vivo siRNA knockdown.
RESULTS: Excessive tissue loss causing liver failure is associated with deficient
induction of Car. Re-activation of Car by an agonist normalizes all features
associated with experimental SFSS. The beneficial effects of Car activation are
relayed through Foxm1, an essential promoter of the hepatocyte cell cycle.
Deficiency in the CAR-FOXM1 axis likewise is evident in human SFSS. Activation of
human CAR mitigates SFSS in humanized CAR mice and improves the culture of human 
liver slices.
CONCLUSIONS: Impaired hepatic Car-Foxm1 signaling provides a first molecular
characterization of liver that fails to recover after tissue loss. Our findings
place deficient regeneration as a principal cause behind the SFSS and suggest CAR
agonists may bear clinical potential against liver failure.
LAY ABSTRACT: The unique regenerative capacity of liver has its natural limits.
Following too excessive tissue loss, such as through extended resection in the
clinic, liver failure may develop. This entity is known as Small-for-Size
Syndrome (SFSS) and represents the most frequent cause of death due to liver
surgery. Here we show that deficient induction of the protein Car, a central
regulator of liver function and growth, is a cause of liver failure following
extended resection; re-activation of Car through pharmacological means is
sufficient to prevent or rescue from the SFSS.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26948495  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Int J Breast Cancer. 2016;2016:9768183. doi: 10.1155/2016/9768183. Epub 2016 Jan 
31.

The Role of Forkhead Box Protein M1 in Breast Cancer Progression and Resistance
to Therapy.

Saba R(1), Alsayed A(2), Zacny JP(2), Dudek AZ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Presence Saint Joseph Hospital, 2900 North Lakeshore Drive, Chicago, IL 60657,
USA. (2)University of Illinois Hospital and Health Sciences System, UI Cancer
Center, Medical Center Administration Building (M/C 700), 914 South Wood Street, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is a transcription factor that has been implicated in
normal cell growth and proliferation through control of cell cycle transition and
mitotic spindle. It is implicated in carcinogenesis of various malignancies where
it is activated by either amplification, increased stability, enhanced
transcription, dysfunction of regulatory pathways, or activation of PI3K/AKT,
epidermal growth factor receptor, Raf/MEK/MAPK, and Hedgehog pathways. This
review describes the role of FOXM1 in breast cancer. This includes how FOXM1
impacts on different subtypes of breast cancer, that is, luminal/estrogen
receptor positive (ER+), expressing human epidermal growth factor receptor 2
(HER2), basal-like breast cancer (BBC), and triple negative breast cancer (TNBC).
The review also describes different tested preclinical therapeutic strategies
targeting FOXM1. Developing clinically applicable therapies that specifically
inhibit FOXM1 activity is a logical next step in biomarker-driven approaches
against breast cancer but will not be without its challenges due to the unique
properties of this transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC4752991
PMID: 26942015  [PubMed]


9. J Clin Pathol. 2016 Mar 3. pii: jclinpath-2016-203656. doi:
10.1136/jclinpath-2016-203656. [Epub ahead of print]

Molecular interactions of polo-like kinase 1 in human cancers.

Weng Ng WT(1), Shin JS(2), Roberts TL(3), Wang B(4), Lee CS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Discipline of Pathology, School of Medicine, Western Sydney University,
Sydney, Australia Centre for Oncology Education and Research Translation
(CONCERT), Ingham Institute for Applied Medical Research, Sydney, Australia
Cancer Pathology and Cell Biology Laboratory, Ingham Institute for Applied
Medical Research, Sydney, Australia. (2)Discipline of Pathology, School of
Medicine, Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia Centre for Oncology
Education and Research Translation (CONCERT), Ingham Institute for Applied
Medical Research, Sydney, Australia Cancer Pathology and Cell Biology Laboratory,
Ingham Institute for Applied Medical Research, Sydney, Australia Molecular
Medicine Research Group, School of Medicine, Western Sydney University, Sydney,
Australia Department of Anatomical Pathology, Liverpool Hospital, Sydney,
Australia. (3)Centre for Oncology Education and Research Translation (CONCERT),
Ingham Institute for Applied Medical Research, Sydney, Australia Molecular
Medicine Research Group, School of Medicine, Western Sydney University, Sydney,
Australia. (4)Discipline of Pathology, School of Medicine, Western Sydney
University, Sydney, Australia Centre for Oncology Education and Research
Translation (CONCERT), Ingham Institute for Applied Medical Research, Sydney,
Australia South Western Sydney Clinical School, University of New South Wales,
Sydney, Australia. (5)Discipline of Pathology, School of Medicine, Western Sydney
University, Sydney, Australia Centre for Oncology Education and Research
Translation (CONCERT), Ingham Institute for Applied Medical Research, Sydney,
Australia Cancer Pathology and Cell Biology Laboratory, Ingham Institute for
Applied Medical Research, Sydney, Australia Molecular Medicine Research Group,
School of Medicine, Western Sydney University, Sydney, Australia Department of
Anatomical Pathology, Liverpool Hospital, Sydney, Australia South Western Sydney 
Clinical School, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia Cancer
Pathology, Bosch Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) is an essential protein in communicating cell-cycle
progression and DNA damage. Overexpression of PLK1 has been validated as a marker
for poor prognosis in many cancers. PLK1 knockdown decreases the survival of
cancer cells. PLK1 is therefore an attractive target for anticancer treatments.
Several inhibitors have been developed, and some have been clinically tested to
show additive effects with conventional therapies. Upstream regulation of PLK1
involves multiple interactions of proteins such as FoxM1, E2F and p21. Other
cancer-related proteins such as pRB and p53 also indirectly influence PLK1
expression. With the high mutation rates of these genes seen in cancers, they may
be associated with PLK1 deregulation. This raises the question of whether PLK1
overexpression is a cause or a consequence of oncogenesis. In addition,
hypomethylation of the CpG island of the PLK1 promoter region contributes to its 
upregulation. PLK1 expression can be affected by many factors; thus, it is
possible that PLK1 deregulation in each individual patient tumours could be due
to different underlying mechanisms.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 26941182  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. Mol Cancer. 2016 Mar 2;15(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s12943-016-0506-6.

Erratum to: 'Deregulation of the FOXM1 target gene network and its coregulatory
partners in oesophageal adenocarcinoma'.

Wiseman EF(1,)(2), Chen X(1,)(3), Han N(1,)(4), Webber A(1), Ji Z(1), Sharrocks
AD(5), Ang YS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. (2)Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences,
University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK. (3)Present address: The
EMBL-European Bioinformatics Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK. (4)Present address: Gurdon Institute and Department of
Pathology, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2 1QN, UK. (5)Faculty of Life
Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road,
Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. a.d.sharrocks@manchester.ac.uk.

PMCID: PMC4774172
PMID: 26936268  [PubMed - in process]


11. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb 16. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4896. [Epub ahead of print]

Forkhead box O1 promotes INS-1 cell apoptosis by reducing the expression of CD24.

Ma Y(1), Wang X(1), Peng Y(1), Ding X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai First People's Hospital, 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200080, P.R. China.

Type 2 diabetes seriously affects human health and burdens public health systems.
Pancreatic ß-cell apoptosis contributes to a reduction in ß-cell mass, which is
responsible for the occurrence of type 2 diabetes. However, the mechanism that
underlies this effect remains unclear. In the present study, the role of forkhead
box O1 (Foxo1) was investigated (which is a key regulatory factor in ß-cell
function) in the apoptotic behavior of ß-cells and a potential underlying
mechanism was determined. It was demonstrated that Foxo1 overexpression
significantly reduced the proliferation of INS-1 cells and increased the
apoptosis of INS-1 cells, in contrast to foxm1, foxp, foxa1, foxc and foxb1
overexpression. The present study aimed to investigate potential underlying
mechanisms using bioinformatics, including Gene Set Enrichment Analysis, and
biological experiments, including flow cytometry, cell counting kit-8,
immunofluorescence, western blotting, reverse transcription-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction analysis and lentiviral transfection. Further
experiments conclusively showed that cluster of differentiation (CD)24 expression
was significantly decreased when INS-1 cells were treated with Foxo1. Animal
experiments showed high CD24 expression in the pancreatic islets of diabetic
Goto-Kakizaki rats. Moreover, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis showed that CD24
expression was associated with the adaptive immune response of ß-cells. Finally, 
no significant differences in the proliferation and apoptosis of CD24
overexpressing INS-1 cells were observed after Foxo1 treatment. These results
suggested that Foxo1 overexpression in ß-cells was able to increase apoptosis by 
inhibiting CD24 expression. This study may provide an approach for the treatment 
and prevention of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 26935354  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 26. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7755. [Epub ahead of print]

Oncogenic roles of TOPK and MELK, and effective growth suppression by small
molecular inhibitors in kidney cancer cells.

Kato T(1), Inoue H(1), Imoto S(2), Tamada Y(2), Miyamoto T(3), Matsuo Y(3),
Nakamura Y(1,)(4), Park JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. (2)Human 
Genome Center, Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan. (3)OncoTherapy Science Inc., Kawasaki, Japan. (4)Department of Surgery,
The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

T-lymphokine-activated killer cell-originated protein kinase (TOPK) and maternal 
embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK) have been reported to play critical roles 
in cancer cell proliferation and maintenance of stemness. In this study, we
investigated possible roles of TOPK and MELK in kidney cancer cells and found
their growth promotive effect as well as some feedback mechanism between these
two molecules. Interestingly, the blockade of either of these two kinases
effectively caused downregulation of forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) activity
which is known as an oncogenic transcriptional factor in various types of cancer 
cells. Small molecular compound inhibitors against TOPK (OTS514) and MELK
(OTS167) effectively suppressed the kidney cancer cell growth, and the
combination of these two compounds additively worked and showed the very strong
growth suppressive effect on kidney cancer cells. Collectively, our results
suggest that both TOPK and MELK are promising molecular targets for kidney cancer
treatment and that dual blockade of OTS514 and OTS167 may bring additive
anti-tumor effects with low risk of side effects.

PMID: 26933922  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 29. pii: clincanres.2535.2015. [Epub ahead of print]

Inhibition of FOXM1-Mediated DNA repair by Imipramine Blue Suppresses Breast
Cancer Growth and Metastasis.

Rajamanickam S(1), Panneerdoss S(2), Gorthi A(3), Timilsina S(4), Onyeagucha
B(4), Kovalsky D(5), Ivanov D(5), Hanes MA(6), Vadlamudi RK(7), Chen Y(8), Bishop
AJ(9), Arbiser JL(10), Rao MK(11).

Author information: 
(1)Greehey Children'es Cancer Research Institute, The University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio. (2)Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute,
UT Health Sceince Center at San Antonio. (3)GCCRI, UTHSCSA. (4)Department of Cell
& Structural Biology/Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute, The University
of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio. (5)Department of Biochemistry, The
University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio. (6)Laboratory Animal
Resources, University of Texas Health Science Center San Antonio. (7)Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio. (8)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of Texas
Health Science Center at San Antonio. (9)Cellular and Structural Biology,
UTHSCSA. (10)Dept of Dermatology, Emory Univ. School of Medicine. (11)Greehey
Children's Cancer Research Institute, Department of Cellular and Structural
Biology, The University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio
RaoM@uthscsa.edu.

PURPOSE: The approaches aimed at inhibiting the ability of cancer cells to repair
DNA strand breaks have emerged as promising targets for treating cancers. Here,
we assessed the potential of imipramine blue (IB), a novel analogue of
anti-depressant imipramine, to suppress breast cancer growth and metastasis by
inhibiting the ability of breast cancer cells to repair DNA strand breaks by
homologous recombination.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effect of IB on breast cancer growth and metastasis was 
assessed in vitro as well as in preclinical mouse models. Besides, the
therapeutic efficacy and safety of IB was determined in ex-vivo explants from
breast cancer patients. The mechanism of action of IB was evaluated by performing
gene expression, drug-protein interaction, cell cycle and DNA repair studies.
RESULTS: We show that the systemic delivery of IB using nanoparticle-based
delivery approach suppressed breast cancer growth and metastasis without inducing
toxicity in preclinical mouse models. Using ex-vivo explants from breast cancer
patients, we demonstrated that IB inhibited breast cancer growth without
affecting normal mammary epithelial cells. Furthermore, our mechanistic studies
revealed that IB may interact and inhibit the activity of proto-oncogene FoxM1
and associated signaling that play critical roles in homologous
recombination-mediated DNA repair.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings highlight the potential of IB to be applied as a safe
regimen for treating breast cancer patients. Given that FoxM1 is an established
therapeutic target for several cancers, the identification of a compound that
inhibits FoxM1 and FoxM1-mediated DNA repair has immense translational potential 
for treating many aggressive cancers.

Copyright ©2016, American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26927663  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 24. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7672. [Epub ahead of print]

FOXM1 regulates expression of eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase and promotes 
proliferation, invasion and tumorgenesis of human triple negative breast cancer
cells.

Hamurcu Z(1,)(2,)(3), Ashour A(1), Kahraman N(1), Ozpolat B(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA. (2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical
Biology, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey. (3)Betül-Ziya Eren Genome and Stem 
Cell Center, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey. (4)Center for RNA Interference 
and Non-Coding RNA, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
Texas, USA.

Eukaryotic elongation factor 2 kinase (eEF2K), an emerging molecular target for
cancer therapy, contributes to cancer proliferation, cell survival,
tumorigenesis, and invasion, disease progression and drug resistance. Although
eEF2K is highly up-regulated in various cancers, the mechanism of gene regulation
has not been elucudated. In this study, we examined the role of Forkhead Box M1
(FOXM1) proto-oncogenic transcription factor in triple negative breast cancer
(TNBC) cells and the regulation of eEF2K. We found that FOXM1 is highly
upregulated in TNBC and its knockdown by RNA inteference (siRNA) significantly
inhibited eEF2K expression and suppressed cell proliferation, colony formation,
migration, invasion and induced apoptotic cell death, recapitulating the effects 
of eEF2K inhibition. Knockdown of FOXM1 inhibited regulators of cell cycle,
migration/invasion and survival, including cyclin D1, Src and MAPK-ERK signaling 
pathways, respectively. We also demonstrated that FOXM1 (1B and 1C isoforms)
directly binds to and transcriptionally regulates eEF2K gene expression by
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and luciferase gene reporter assays.
Furthermore, in vivo inhibition of FOXM1 by liposomal siRNA-nanoparticles
supressed growth of MDA-MB-231 TNBC tumor xenografts in orthotopic models. In
conclusion, our study provides the first evidence about the transcriptional
regulation of eEF2K in TNBC and the role of FOXM1 in mediating breast cancer cell
proliferation, survival, migration/invasion, progression and tumorgenesis and
highlighting the potential of FOXM1/eEF2K axis as a molecular target in breast
and other cancers.

PMID: 26918606  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. EMBO J. 2016 Mar 15;35(6):668-84. doi: 10.15252/embj.201592810. Epub 2016 Feb 24.

Wnt-induced deubiquitination FoxM1 ensures nucleus ß-catenin transactivation.

Chen Y(1), Li Y(2), Xue J(1), Gong A(1), Yu G(1), Zhou A(1), Lin K(1), Zhang
S(1), Zhang N(1), Gottardi CJ(3), Huang S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA Cell Engineering Research Center and
Department of Cell Biology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
(3)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine,
Chicago, IL, USA. (4)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA Program in Cancer Biology, The
University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston,
TX, USA suhuang@mdanderson.org.

A key step of Wnt signaling activation is the recruitment of ß-catenin to the Wnt
target-gene promoter in the nucleus, but its mechanisms are largely unknown.
Here, we identified FoxM1 as a novel target of Wnt signaling, which is essential 
for ß-catenin/TCF4 transactivation. GSK3 phosphorylates FoxM1 on serine 474 which
induces FoxM1 ubiquitination mediated by FBXW7. Wnt signaling activation inhibits
FoxM1 phosphorylation by GSK3-Axin complex and leads to interaction between FoxM1
and deubiquitinating enzyme USP5, thereby deubiquitination and stabilization of
FoxM1. FoxM1 accumulation in the nucleus promotes recruitment of ß-catenin to Wnt
target-gene promoter and activates the Wnt signaling pathway by protecting the
ß-catenin/TCF4 complex from ICAT inhibition. Subsequently, the USP5-FoxM1 axis
abolishes the inhibitory effect of ICAT and is required for Wnt-mediated tumor
cell proliferation. Therefore, Wnt-induced deubiquitination of FoxM1 represents a
novel and critical mechanism for controlling canonical Wnt signaling and cell
proliferation.

© 2016 The Authors.

PMID: 26912724  [PubMed - in process]


16. Methods Mol Biol. 2016;1395:39-53. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-3347-1_3.

In Vitro Methods for Studying the Mechanisms of Resistance to DNA-Damaging
Therapeutic Drugs.

Khongkow P(1), Middleton AK(1), Wong JP(1), Kandola NK(1), Kongsema M(1), de
Moraes GN(1), Gomes AR(1), Lam EW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK. (2)Department of Surgery and 
Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road,
London, W12 0NN, UK. eric.lam@imperial.ac.uk.

Most commonly used anticancer drugs exert their effects mainly by causing DNA
damage. The enhancement in DNA damage response (DDR) is considered a key
mechanism that enables cancer cells to survive through eliminating the damaged
DNA lesions and thereby developing resistance to DNA-damaging agents. This
chapter describes the four experimental approaches for studying DDR and genotoxic
drug resistance, including the use of <U+03B3>-H2AX and comet assays to monitor DNA
damage and repair capacity as well as the use of clonogenic and ß-galactosidase
staining assays to assess long-term cell fate after DNA-damaging treatment.
Finally, we also present examples of these methods currently used in our
laboratory for studying the role of FOXM1 in DNA damage-induced senescence and
epirubicin resistance.

PMID: 26910067  [PubMed - in process]


17. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 11. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7321. [Epub ahead of print]

SIRT1 at the crossroads of AKT1 and ERß in malignant pleural mesothelioma cells.

Pinton G(1), Zonca S(1), Manente AG(1), Cavaletto M(2), Borroni E(3), Daga A(4), 
Jithesh PV(5), Fennell D(6), Nilsson S(7,)(8), Moro L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Piemonte Orientale "A.
Avogadro", 28100 Novara, Italy. (2)Department of Sciences and Technological
Innovation, University of Piemonte Orientale "A. Avogadro", 15121 Alessandria,
Italy. (3)Department of Health Sciences, University of Piemonte Orientale "A.
Avogadro", 28100 Novara, Italy. (4)Department of Integrated Oncological
Therapies, IRCCS San Martino-IST, 16132 Genova, Italy. (5)Division of Biomedical 
Informatics Research, Sidra Medical and Research Center, 26999 Doha, Qatar.
(6)Department of Cancer Studies, Cancer Research UK Leicester Centre, University 
of Leicester, LE1 7RH Leicester, UK. (7)Department of Biosciences and Nutrition, 
Karolinska Institutet, S-141 57 Huddinge, Sweden. (8)Karo Bio AB, Novum, S-141 57
Huddinge, Sweden.

In this report, we show that malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM) patients whose 
tumors express high levels of AKT1 exhibit a significantly worse prognosis,
whereas no significant correlation with AKT3 expression is observed. We provide
data that establish a phosphorylation independent role of AKT1 in affecting MPM
cell shape and anchorage independent cell growth in vitro and highlight the AKT1 
isoform-specific nature of these effects.We describe that AKT1 activity is
inhibited by the loss of SIRT1-mediated deacetylation and identify, by mass
spectrometry, 11 unique proteins that interact with acetylated AKT1.Our data
demonstrate a role of the AKT1/SIRT1/FOXM1 axis in the expression of the tumor
suppressor ERß. We further demonstrate an inhibitory feedback loop by ERß,
activated by the selective agonist KB9520, on this axis both in vitro and in
vivo.Our data broaden the current knowledge of ERß and AKT isoform-specific
functions that could be valuable in the design of novel and effective therapeutic
strategies for MPM.

PMID: 26885609  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Dec 1;8(12):15836-44. eCollection 2015.

Quantitative proteomic analysis identifies new effectors of FOXM1 involved in
breast cancer cell migration.

Ye X(1), Zhang Y(2), He B(3), Meng Y(1), Li Y(1), Gao Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine
Shanghai 200120, China. (2)Department of Oncology, East Hospital, Dalian Medical 
University Shanghai 200120, China. (3)Research Center for Translational Medicine,
East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine Shanghai 200120, China.

The Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor plays important roles in
tumorigenesis and tumor metastasis in multiple human carcinomas. However, the
underlying mechanisms for FOXM1 function remain to be classified. In the present 
study, we employed quantitative proteomic approach to search new downstream
targets of FOXM1 in breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells. A total of 4125 proteins were
identified and quantified by label-free quantitation, of which 318 proteins were 
significantly changed (with P-value <0.05) between FOXM1 knockdown cells and
control cells. Among them, three proteins ACSL4, CGGBP1 and PGRMC2 were
significantly downregulated with FOXM1 reduction by western blot analysis.
Further functional assays revealed that knockdown of the three proteins in
MDA-MB-231 cells attenuated the ability of cell migration, consistent with the
phenotype of FOXM1 knockdown. These results suggest that new potential downstream
effectors of FOXM1 were identified by proteomic approach, and may provide new
potential therapeutic targets in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4730067
PMID: 26884854  [PubMed - in process]


19. Theranostics. 2016 Jan 1;6(2):219-30. doi: 10.7150/thno.13178. eCollection 2016.

BET Bromodomain Inhibition as a Therapeutic Strategy in Ovarian Cancer by
Downregulating FoxM1.

Zhang Z(1), Ma P(2), Jing Y(2), Yan Y(3), Cai MC(4), Zhang M(5), Zhang S(6), Peng
H(2), Ji ZL(4), Di W(5), Gu Z(3), Gao WQ(7), Zhuang G(8).

Author information: 
(1)1. State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical
Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China; 2. State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and
Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer Institute, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (2)1. State Key Laboratory of
Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical Stem Cell Research Center, Ren 
Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 
(3)3. GenenDesign Co., Ltd, Shanghai, China. (4)4. State Key Laboratory of
Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen,
Fujian, China. (5)5. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Ren Ji Hospital,
School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; 6. Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Gynecologic Oncology, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (6)7. School of Biomedical
Engineering & Med-X Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
China. (7)1. State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med X
Clinical Stem Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; 7. School of Biomedical Engineering &
Med-X Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (8)1.
State Key Laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Renji-Med X Clinical Stem
Cell Research Center, Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China; 6. Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gynecologic Oncology, 
Ren Ji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
China.

Ovarian cancer is responsible for the highest mortality among all gynecologic
malignancies, and novel therapies are urgently needed to improve patient outcome.
Here we performed an integrative genomic analysis and identified the bromodomain 
and extraterminal domain (BET) protein BRD4 as a potential therapeutic target in 
ovarian cancer. Suppression of BRD4 using small-molecule BET inhibitors JQ1 and
I-BET151, or dual kinase-bromodomain inhibitor volasertib, led to robust and
broad antitumor effects across all subclasses of ovarian cancer. In contrast to
many other cancers which are susceptible to BET inhibition due to downregulation 
of super-enhancer-dependent MYC transcript, we discovered that JQ1-sensitive
ovarian cancer cells exhibited marked disruption of Forkhead box protein M1
(FoxM1) pathway, a key driver of ovarian carcinoma. These in vitro findings were 
further supported by in vivo efficacies of JQ1 targeting both cell line-based and
patient-derived xenograft models. Our data establish a new treatment strategy
against ovarian cancer by employing epigenetic vulnerabilities, and provide a
mechanistic rationale for the clinical investigation of BET bromodomain
inhibitors in this deadly disease.

PMCID: PMC4729770
PMID: 26877780  [PubMed - in process]


20. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 15. doi: 10.1038/onc.2016.14. [Epub ahead of print]

HGF/Met and FOXM1 form a positive feedback loop and render pancreatic cancer
cells resistance to Met inhibition and aggressive phenotypes.

Cui J(1), Xia T(2), Xie D(3), Gao Y(3), Jia Z(1), Wei D(1), Wang L(1), Huang
S(4), Quan M(1,)(3), Xie K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of
Gastroenterology, Shanghai Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Tongji 
University Affiliated East Hospital, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF)/Met signaling has critical roles in pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) development and progression and is considered a
potential therapeutic target for this disease. However, the mechanism of aberrant
activation of HGF/Met signaling and resistance to Met inhibition in PDA remains
unclear. The mechanistic role of cross talk between Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) and
HGF/Met signaling in promotion of PDA growth and resistance to Met inhibition was
examined using cell culture, molecular biology and mouse models; and the
relevance of our experimental and mechanistic findings were validated using human
PDA tissues. Met was markedly overexpressed in both PDA cell lines and pancreatic
tumor specimens, and the expression of Met correlated directly with that of FOXM1
in human tumor specimens. Mechanistically, FOXM1 bound to the promoter region of 
the Met gene and transcriptionally increased the expression of Met. Increased
expression of FOXM1 enhanced the activation of HGF/Met signaling and its
downstream pathways, including retrovirus-associated DNA sequences/extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase 1/2, phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT and signal transducer 
and activator of transcription 3. Furthermore, activation of HGF/Met signaling
increased the expression and transcriptional activity of FOXM1, and the cross
talk between FOXM1 and HGF/Met signaling promoted PDA growth and resistance to
Met inhibition. Collectively, our findings identified a positive feedback loop
formed by FOXM1 and HGF/Met and revealed that this loop is a potentially
effective therapeutic target for PDA.Oncogene advance online publication, 15
February 2016; doi:10.1038/onc.2016.14.

PMID: 26876216  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


21. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 10. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7297. [Epub ahead of print]

Effective growth-suppressive activity of maternal embryonic leucine-zipper kinase
(MELK) inhibitor against small cell lung cancer.

Inoue H(1), Kato T(1), Olugbile S(1), Tamura K(1), Chung S(2), Miyamoto T(2),
Matsuo Y(2), Salgia R(1), Nakamura Y(1), Park JH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
(2)OncoTherapy Science, Inc., Kawasaki, 213-0012, Japan.

Maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK), that plays a critical role in
maintenance of cancer stem cells (CSCs), is predominantly expressed in various
types of human cancer including small cell lung cancer (SCLC). SCLC usually
acquires resistance to anti-cancer drugs and portends dismal prognosis. We have
delineated roles of MELK in development/progression of SCLC and examined
anti-tumor efficacy of OTS167, a highly potent MELK inhibitor, against SCLC. MELK
expression was highly upregulated in both SCLC cell lines and primary tumors.
siRNA-mediated MELK knockdown induced significant growth inhibition in SCLC cell 
lines. Concordantly, treatment with OTS167 exhibited strong cytotoxicity against 
eleven SCLC cell lines with IC50 of < 10 nM. As similar to siRNA knockdown,
OTS167 treatment induced cytokinetic defects with intercellular bridges, and in
some cell lines we observed formation of neuronal protrusions accompanied with
increase of a neuronal differentiation marker (CD56), indicating that the
compound induced differentiation of cancer cells to neuron-like cells.
Furthermore, the MELK inhibition decreased its downstream FOXM1 activity and Akt 
expression in SCLC cells, and led to apoptotic cell death. OTS167 appeared to be 
more effective to CSCs as measured by the sphere formation assay, thus MELK
inhibition might become a promising treatment modality for SCLC.

PMID: 26871945  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Dev Dyn. 2016 Feb 12. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24393. [Epub ahead of print]

ß-Catenin and Kras/Foxm1 signaling pathway are critical to restrict Sox9 in basal
cells during pulmonary branching morphogenesis.

Ustiyan V(1), Zhang Y(1), Perl AT(1), Whitsett JA(1,)(2), Kalin TV(1),
Kalinichenko VV(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pulmonary Biology, Perinatal Institute of Cincinnati Children's
Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (2)Divisions of Developmental Biology, 
Perinatal Institute of Cincinnati Children's Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Lung morphogenesis is regulated by interactions between the canonical
Wnt/ß-catenin and Kras/ERK/Foxm1 signaling pathways that establish
proximal-peripheral patterning of lung tubules. How these interactions influence 
the development of respiratory epithelial progenitors to acquire airway as
compared to alveolar epithelial cell fate is unknown. During branching
morphogenesis, SOX9 transcription factor is normally restricted from conducting
airway epithelial cells and is highly expressed in peripheral, acinar progenitor 
cells that serve as precursors of alveolar type 2 (AT2) and AT1 cells as the lung
matures.
RESULTS: To identify signaling pathways that determine proximal-peripheral cell
fate decisions, we used the SFTPC gene promoter to delete or overexpress key
members of Wnt/ß-catenin and Kras/ERK/Foxm1 pathways in fetal respiratory
epithelial progenitor cells. Activation of ß-catenin enhanced SOX9 expression in 
peripheral epithelial progenitors, whereas deletion of ß-catenin inhibited SOX9. 
Surprisingly, deletion of ß-catenin caused accumulation of atypical SOX9-positive
basal cells in conducting airways. Inhibition of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling by
Kras(G12D) or its downstream target Foxm1 stimulated SOX9 expression in basal
cells. Genetic inactivation of Foxm1 from Kras(G12D) -expressing epithelial cells
prevented the accumulation of SOX9-positive basal cells in developing airways.
CONCLUSIONS: Interactions between the Wnt/ß-catenin and the Kras/ERK/Foxm1
pathways are essential to restrict SOX9 expression in basal cells. This article
is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26869074  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb 5. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2016.4875. [Epub ahead of print]

Overexpressed transcription factor FOXM1 contributes to the progression of
colorectal cancer.

Zhang H(1), Zhong H(1), Li L(1), Ji W(1), Zhang X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Weifang Medical
University, Weifang, Shandong 261031, P.R. China.

Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is a characteristic proliferation-associated
transcription factor, which is overexpressed in various types of human cancer.
The aim of the present study was to determine the expression of FOXM1 in a large 
collection of colorectal cancer (CRC) samples. Between March 2012 and
January 2014, 96 patients with histologically diagnosed CRC were recruited into
the current study. Using immunohistochemistry, reverse transcription-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction and western blotting, mRNA and protein expression
levels of FOXM1 in CRC tissue samples were determined. The function of FOXM1 in
the CRC cells was evaluated by small interfering RNA-mediated depletion of FOXM1,
followed by analyses of cell proliferation and invasion. High levels of staining 
for FOXM1 were observed in significantly more CRC tissue samples: 85.42% (82/96) 
of CRC tissue samples compared with 18.75% (18/96) of adjacent normal mucosa
tissue samples. Silencing FOXM1 inhibited the proliferation of LoVo cells, which 
express a relatively high level of FOXM1, and the invasion and migration of LoVo 
cells were also markedly suppressed. The data from the present study suggested
that the pathogenesis of human CRC may be mediated by FOXM1, and that FOXM1
inhibition may provide a promising therapeutic strategy for CRC.

PMID: 26861549  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


24. Circulation. 2016 Mar 15;133(11):1093-103. doi:
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.115.020918. Epub 2016 Feb 2.

Endothelial p110<U+03B3>PI3K Mediates Endothelial Regeneration and Vascular Repair After
Inflammatory Vascular Injury.

Huang X(1), Dai Z(1), Cai L(1), Sun K(1), Cho J(1), Albertine KH(1), Malik AB(1),
Schraufnagel DE(1), Zhao YY(2).

Author information: 
(1)From Department of Pharmacology (X.H., Z.D., L.C., K.S., J.C., A.B.M.,
Y.-Y.Z.), Center for Lung and Vascular Biology (X.H., Z.D., L.C., K.S., A.B.M.,
Y.-Y.Z.), Department of Medicine (D.E.S.), University of Illinois College of
Medicine, Chicago; and Departments of Pediatrics and Medicine, University of Utah
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City (K.H.A.). (2)From Department of Pharmacology
(X.H., Z.D., L.C., K.S., J.C., A.B.M., Y.-Y.Z.), Center for Lung and Vascular
Biology (X.H., Z.D., L.C., K.S., A.B.M., Y.-Y.Z.), Department of Medicine
(D.E.S.), University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago; and Departments of
Pediatrics and Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City
(K.H.A.). yyzhao@uic.edu.

BACKGROUND: The integrity of endothelial monolayer is a sine qua non for vascular
homeostasis and maintenance of tissue-fluid balance. However, little is known
about the signaling pathways regulating regeneration of the endothelial barrier
after inflammatory vascular injury.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using genetic and pharmacological approaches, we
demonstrated that endothelial regeneration selectively requires activation of
p110<U+03B3>PI3K signaling, which thereby mediates the expression of the endothelial
reparative transcription factor Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1). We observed that FoxM1
induction in the pulmonary vasculature was inhibited in mice treated with a
p110<U+03B3>-selective inhibitor and in Pik3cg(-/-) mice after lipopolysaccharide
challenge. Pik3cg(-/-) mice exhibited persistent lung inflammation induced by
sepsis and sustained increase in vascular permeability. Restoration of expression
of either p110<U+03B3> or FoxM1 in pulmonary endothelial cells of Pik3cg(-/-) mice
restored endothelial regeneration and normalized the defective vascular repair
program. We also observed diminished expression of p110<U+03B3> in pulmonary vascular
endothelial cells of patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome,
suggesting that impaired p110<U+03B3>-FoxM1 vascular repair signaling pathway is a
critical factor in persistent leaky lung microvessels and edema formation in the 
disease.
CONCLUSIONS: We identify p110<U+03B3> as the critical mediator of endothelial
regeneration and vascular repair after sepsis-induced inflammatory injury. Thus, 
activation of p110<U+03B3>-FoxM1 endothelial regeneration may represent a novel strategy
for the treatment of inflammatory vascular diseases.

© 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4792690 [Available on 2017-03-15]
PMID: 26839042  [PubMed - in process]


25. Mol Cancer Ther. 2016 Mar;15(3):460-70. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0456. Epub 
2016 Feb 1.

T-Type Ca2+ Channel Inhibition Sensitizes Ovarian Cancer to Carboplatin.

Dziegielewska B(1), Casarez EV(2), Yang WZ(1), Gray LS(3), Dziegielewski J(4),
Slack-Davis JK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,
Virginia. (2)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer Biology,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia. (3)Cavion LLC,
Charlottesville, Virginia. (4)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia. Cancer Center, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, Virginia. (5)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Cancer
Biology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia. Cancer Center,
University of Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia. jks6a@virginia.edu.

Ovarian cancer is the deadliest gynecologic cancer, due in large part to the
diagnosis of advanced stage disease, the development of platinum resistance, and 
inadequate treatment alternatives. Recent studies by our group and others have
shown that T-type calcium (Ca(2+)) channels play a reinforcing role in cancer
cell proliferation, cell-cycle progression, and apoptosis evasion. Therefore, we 
investigated whether T-type Ca(2+) channels affect ovarian tumor growth and
response to platinum agents. Inhibition of T-type Ca(2+) channels with mibefradil
or by silencing expression resulted in growth suppression in ovarian cancer cells
with a simultaneous increase in apoptosis, which was accompanied by decreased
expression of the antiapoptotic gene survivin (BIRC5). Analysis of intracellular 
signaling revealed mibefradil reduced AKT phosphorylation, increased the levels
and nuclear retention of FOXO transcription factors that repress BIRC5
expression, and decreased the expression of FOXM1, which promotes BIRC5
expression. Combining carboplatin with mibefradil synergistically increased
apoptosis in vitro. Importantly, mibefradil rendered platinum-resistant ovarian
tumors sensitive to carboplatin in a mouse model of peritoneal metastasis.
Together, the data provide rationale for future use of T-type channel antagonists
together with platinum agents for the treatment of ovarian cancer. Mol Cancer
Ther; 15(3); 460-70. ©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4783280 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26832797  [PubMed - in process]


26. Tumour Biol. 2016 Feb 1. [Epub ahead of print]

Trichostatin A potentiates TRAIL-induced antitumor effects via inhibition of
ERK/FOXM1 pathway in gastric cancer.

Li L(1,)(2), Fan B(2), Zhang LH(2,)(3), Xing XF(1), Cheng XJ(1), Wang XH(3), Guo 
T(1), Du H(1), Wen XZ(4), Ji JF(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Division of Gastrointestinal Cancer Translational Research
Laboratory, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute, #52 Fu-Cheng Road,
Hai-Dian District, Beijing, 100142, China. (2)Department of Gastrointestinal
Surgery, Peking University Cancer Hospital & Institute Beijing, #52 Fu-Cheng
Road, Hai-Dian District, Beijing, 100142, China. (3)The Tissue Bank, Peking
University Cancer Hospital & Institute, Fu-Cheng Road, Beijing, China. (4)Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), 
Division of Gastrointestinal Cancer Translational Research Laboratory, Peking
University Cancer Hospital & Institute, #52 Fu-Cheng Road, Hai-Dian District,
Beijing, 100142, China. wenxz@bjmu.edu.cn. (5)Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis
and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Division of Gastrointestinal 
Cancer Translational Research Laboratory, Peking University Cancer Hospital &
Institute, #52 Fu-Cheng Road, Hai-Dian District, Beijing, 100142, China.
jiafuji@outlook.com. (6)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Peking University
Cancer Hospital & Institute Beijing, #52 Fu-Cheng Road, Hai-Dian District,
Beijing, 100142, China. jiafuji@outlook.com.

Tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) is an ideal
apoptosis inducer and believed to have promise in cancer therapy, yet part of
cancer cells exhibit resistance to TRAIL-mediated apoptosis. This necessitates
the exploration of agents that resensitizes cancer cells to TRAIL. In our study, 
we found that Trichostatin A (TSA), an histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor,
augmented TRAIL-induced apoptosis in gastric cancer cells in a caspase-dependent 
manner. Besides, upregulation of DR5 and downregulation of anti-apoptotic
proteins including XIAP, Mcl-1, Bcl-2 and Survivin also contributed to this
synergism. Noticeably, TSA treatment inhibited Forkhead boxM1 (FOXM1), which
expression level showed negative correlation with TRAIL sensitivity. Similarly,
silencing of FOXM1 by small interfering RNA (siRNA) resensitized cancer cells to 
TRAIL and strengthened the TRAIL-augmenting effect of TSA. In addition, we
demonstrated the depletion of FOXM1 was a consequence of the inactivation of ERK 
mediated by TSA. Collectively, it was first shown that TSA potentiated TRAIL
sensitivity via ERK/FOXM1 pathway in gastric cancer cells. FOXM1 might serve as a
biomarker for predicting sensitivity to TRAIL.

PMID: 26831669  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. Mol Cell Biochem. 2016 Feb;413(1-2):179-87. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2651-4. Epub 
2016 Jan 28.

Pin1 modulates chemo-resistance by up-regulating FoxM1 and the involvements of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway in cervical cancer.

Wang T(1), Liu Z(2), Shi F(2), Wang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiaton Oncology, First Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, 
Xi'an, 710061, China. twangrad@163.com. (2)Department of Radiaton Oncology, First
Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, China.

The prolyl isomerase Pin1, which is frequently highly expressed in many different
cancers, can directly regulate cell proliferation and the cell cycle. However,
the role of Pin1 in chemo-resistance remains to be elucidated in cervical cancer.
The purpose of the present study was to investigate the role of Pin1 in the
chemo-resistance of cervical cancer. The cisplatin resistance was assessed using 
the MTT assay. Pin1, FoxM1, ß-catenin, Cyclin D1, and c-myc expression levels
were detected by RT-qPCR or Western blot. The results showed that Pin1 expression
displayed a similar expression pattern with the resistance to cisplatin in five
cervical cell lines. Knockdown of Pin1 significantly increased the sensitivity to
cisplatin in HeLa cells, while Pin1 overexpression decreased the sensitivity to
cisplatin in Me180 cells. Knockdown of Pin1 significantly down-regulated FoxM1
expression in HeLa cells, while Pin1 overexpression showed a contrary effect in
Me180 cells. Besides, overexpression of Pin1 markedly increased the protein
expression of ß-catenin and its target genes cyclin D1 and c-myc. FoxM1 siRNA
remarkably reversed the promotory effect of pcDNA-Pin1(+) on ß-catenin and its
target genes cyclin D1 and c-myc in Me180 cells. Furthermore, we also found that 
FoxM1 siRNA and IWP-2 markedly decreased cell viability, and IWP-2 decreased cell
viability to the maximum extent in the Me180 cells co-transfected with
pcDNA-Pin1(+) and FoxM1 siRNA. Taken together, these data suggest that Pin1
contributes to cisplatin resistance, partly by up-regulating FoxM1 and
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway involved in cervical cancer.

PMID: 26820938  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2016 Jan 26;108(6). pii: djv426. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv426.

Role of Increased n-acetylaspartate Levels in Cancer.

Zand B(1), Previs RA(1), Zacharias NM(1), Rupaimoole R(1), Mitamura T(1),
Nagaraja AS(1), Guindani M(1), Dalton HJ(1), Yang L(1), Baddour J(1), Achreja
A(1), Hu W(1), Pecot CV(1), Ivan C(1), Wu SY(1), McCullough CR(1), Gharpure
KM(1), Shoshan E(1), Pradeep S(1), Mangala LS(1), Rodriguez-Aguayo C(1), Wang
Y(1), Nick AM(1), Davies MA(1), Armaiz-Pena G(1), Liu J(1), Lutgendorf SK(1),
Baggerly KA(1), Eli MB(1), Lopez-Berestein G(1), Nagrath D(1), Bhattacharya
PK(1), Sood AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine (BZ, RAP, RR,
TM, ASN, HJD, WH, CI, SYW, KMG, SP, LSM, AMN, GAP, AKS), Cancer Systems Imaging
(NMZ, CRM, PKB), Biostatistics (MG), Cancer Medicine (CVP), Center for RNA
Interference and Non-Coding RNA (CI, LSM, CRA, GLB, AKS), Cancer Biology (YS,
MBE, GLB, AKS), Experimental Therapeutics (CRA, GLB), Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology (YW, KAB), Melanoma Medical Oncology (MAD), and Pathology
(JL), University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Department
of Nanomedicine and Bioengineering, UT Health, Houston, TX (GLB, AKS);
Departments of Psychology, Urology, and Obstetrics and Gynecology, the University
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA (SKL); Laboratory for Systems Biology of Human Diseases
(LY, JB, AA, DN), Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (LY, JB,
AA, DN), and Department of Bioengineering (DN), Rice University, Houston, TX.
(2)Departments of Gynecologic Oncology and Reproductive Medicine (BZ, RAP, RR,
TM, ASN, HJD, WH, CI, SYW, KMG, SP, LSM, AMN, GAP, AKS), Cancer Systems Imaging
(NMZ, CRM, PKB), Biostatistics (MG), Cancer Medicine (CVP), Center for RNA
Interference and Non-Coding RNA (CI, LSM, CRA, GLB, AKS), Cancer Biology (YS,
MBE, GLB, AKS), Experimental Therapeutics (CRA, GLB), Bioinformatics and
Computational Biology (YW, KAB), Melanoma Medical Oncology (MAD), and Pathology
(JL), University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX; Department
of Nanomedicine and Bioengineering, UT Health, Houston, TX (GLB, AKS);
Departments of Psychology, Urology, and Obstetrics and Gynecology, the University
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA (SKL); Laboratory for Systems Biology of Human Diseases
(LY, JB, AA, DN), Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering (LY, JB,
AA, DN), and Department of Bioengineering (DN), Rice University, Houston, TX.
asood@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: The clinical and biological effects of metabolic alterations in
cancer are not fully understood.
METHODS: In high-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) samples (n = 101), over 170 
metabolites were profiled and compared with normal ovarian tissues (n = 15). To
determine NAT8L gene expression across different cancer types, we analyzed the
RNA expression of cancer types using RNASeqV2 data available from the open access
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) website
(http://www.cbioportal.org/public-portal/). Using NAT8L siRNA, molecular
techniques and histological analysis, we determined cancer cell viability,
proliferation, apoptosis, and tumor growth in in vitro and in vivo (n = 6-10
mice/group) settings. Data were analyzed with the Student's t test and
Kaplan-Meier analysis. Statistical tests were two-sided.
RESULTS: Patients with high levels of tumoral NAA and its biosynthetic enzyme,
aspartate N-acetyltransferase (NAT8L), had worse overall survival than patients
with low levels of NAA and NAT8L. The overall survival duration of patients with 
higher-than-median NAA levels (3.6 years) was lower than that of patients with
lower-than-median NAA levels (5.1 years, P = .03). High NAT8L gene expression in 
other cancers (melanoma, renal cell, breast, colon, and uterine cancers) was
associated with worse overall survival. NAT8L silencing reduced cancer cell
viability (HEYA8: control siRNA 90.61%±2.53, NAT8L siRNA 39.43%±3.00, P < .001;
A2780: control siRNA 90.59%±2.53, NAT8L siRNA 7.44%±1.71, P < .001) and
proliferation (HEYA8: control siRNA 74.83%±0.92, NAT8L siRNA 55.70%±1.54, P <
.001; A2780: control siRNA 50.17%±4.13, NAT8L siRNA 26.52%±3.70, P < .001), which
was rescued by addition of NAA. In orthotopic mouse models (ovarian cancer and
melanoma), NAT8L silencing reduced tumor growth statistically significantly
(A2780: control siRNA 0.52 g±0.15, NAT8L siRNA 0.08 g±0.17, P < .001; HEYA8:
control siRNA 0.79 g±0.42, NAT8L siRNA 0.24 g±0.18, P = .008, A375-SM: control
siRNA 0.55 g±0.22, NAT8L siRNA 0.21 g±0.17g, P = .001). NAT8L silencing
downregulated the anti-apoptotic pathway, which was mediated through FOXM1.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that the NAA pathway has a prominent role in 
promoting tumor growth and represents a valuable target for anticancer
therapy.Altered energy metabolism is a hallmark of cancer (1). Proliferating
cancer cells have much greater metabolic requirements than nonproliferating
differentiated cells (2,3). Moreover, altered cancer metabolism elevates unique
metabolic intermediates, which can promote cancer survival and progression (4,5).
Furthermore, emerging evidence suggests that proliferating cancer cells exploit
alternative metabolic pathways to meet their high demand for energy and to
accumulate biomass (6-8).

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26819345  [PubMed - in process]


29. FEBS Lett. 2016 Feb;590(4):445-52. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12071. Epub 2016 Feb 8.

F-box protein FBXL2 inhibits gastric cancer proliferation by ubiquitin-mediated
degradation of forkhead box M1.

Li LQ(1), Pan D(1), Chen H(1), Zhang L(1), Xie WJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Fujian 
Medical University, Fuzhou, China.

F-box/LRR-repeat protein 2 (FBXL2), a component of Skp-Cullin-F box (SCF)
ubiquitin E3 ligase, has been shown to inhibit tumorigenesis by targeting and
ubiquitinating several oncoproteins. However, its role in gastric cancer remains 
poorly understood. Here, by tandem mass spectrometry, we show that FBXL2
interacts with forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor. As a result, FBXL2
promotes ubiquitination and degradation of FoxM1 in gastric cancer cells.
Furthermore, overexpression of FBXL2 inhibits, while its deficiency promotes cell
proliferation and invasion. Expression levels of cell-cycle regulators (Cdc25B
and p27), which are down-stream target effectors of FoxM1, are also regulated by 
FBXL2. Therefore, our results uncover a previous unknown network involving FBXL2 
and FoxM1 in the regulation of gastric cancer growth.

© 2016 Federation of European Biochemical Societies.

PMID: 26790640  [PubMed - in process]


30. J Breast Cancer. 2015 Dec;18(4):323-8. doi: 10.4048/jbc.2015.18.4.323. Epub 2015 
Dec 23.

High MicroRNA-370 Expression Correlates with Tumor Progression and Poor Prognosis
in Breast Cancer.

Sim J(1), Ahn H(1), Abdul R(1), Kim H(1), Yi KJ(1), Chung YM(1), Chung MS(2),
Paik SS(1), Song YS(1), Jang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Surgery, Hanyang University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: Deregulation of microRNA-370 (miR-370) has been reported in various
cancers, in which it can act as either an oncogene or a tumor suppressor gene.
However, the clinicopathologic significance of miR-370 expression in breast
cancer has not been studied.
METHODS: The expression of miR-370 was determined with quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction in 60 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded primary breast 
cancer tissues. Additionally, the protein expression levels of previously known
targets of miR-370, such as FOXM1, FOXO1, and FOXO3a, were detected using
immunohistochemistry. Finally, we analyzed its correlation with target protein
expression, clinicopathologic features, and clinical outcome.
RESULTS: High levels of miR-370 expression correlated with lymph node metastasis 
(p=0.009), advanced stage (p=0.002), and frequent perineural invasion (p=0.042). 
Moreover, patients with high miR-370 expression had poor disease-free survival
compared with the low-expression group. However, no correlation was observed
between miR-370 and its target protein expression.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that upregulation of miR-370 in breast cancer is
correlated with breast cancer progression and that it might be a potential
biomarker for predicting clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4705083
PMID: 26770238  [PubMed]


31. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Oct 1;8(10):12775-83. eCollection 2015.

miR-204 inhibits invasion and epithelial-mesenchymal transition by targeting
FOXM1 in esophageal cancer.

Sun Y(1), Yu X(1), Bai Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Qiqihar Medical University Qiqihar 161006,
Heilongjiang, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), endogenous noncoding small RNAs, have been reported to play
crucial roles in epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in cancers. Deregulation
of microRNA-204 (miR-204) has been documented in many cancers, but its role in
the development of esophageal cancer (EC) has not been studied. Here, we reported
the role of miR-204 in invasion and EMT in EC. We identified an inverse
correlation between miR-204 expression level and the invasion and EMT phenotype
of EC cells, and up-regulation of miR-204 inhibited invasion and EMT phenotype of
EC cells. Furthermore, we showed that forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) was a
direct target gene of miR-204, and miR-204 regulated invasion and EMT in EC by
acting directly on the 3'UTR of FOXM1 mRNA and suppressing its protein
expression. We also explored the anti-tumor effect of miR-204, and found that
overexpression of miR-204 suppressed the growth of esophageal tumors in vivo.
These findings suggest that miR-204 might be a suppressor of invasion and EMT in 
EC, which offers a novel potential therapeutic target for EC.

PMCID: PMC4680412
PMID: 26722467  [PubMed - in process]


32. Gene. 2016 Mar 10;578(2):263-73. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.12.039. Epub 2015 Dec
21.

Microarray-based gene expression profiling reveals genes and pathways involved in
the oncogenic function of REG3A on pancreatic cancer cells.

Xu Q(1), Fu R(1), Yin G(1), Liu X(1), Liu Y(2), Xiang M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. (2)Synergy
Innovation Center of Biological Peptide Antidiabetics of Hubei Province, School
of Life Science, Wuchang University of Technology, Wuhan 430223, China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China. Electronic
address: xiangming@mails.tjmu.edu.cn.

We previously reported that regenerating islet-derived protein 3 alpha (REG3A)
exacerbates pancreatic malignancies. The mechanism of this effect has not been
clearly elucidated. Here we first identified key differentially expressed genes
(DEGs) and signal pathways in the pancreatic cancer cell line SW1990, compared to
two control cell lines, by microarray analysis. We then identified key genes and 
pathways regulated by REG3A or the cytokine IL6 in SW1990 cells. Afterwards,
these DEGs induced by REG3A or IL6 were subjected to KEGG pathway enrichment
analysis and GO function analysis by the DAVID online tool. Ultimately, we
constructed protein-protein interaction networks among the DEGs by Cytoscape.
Among the three pancreatic cell lines, SW1990 exhibited highly deterioration with
the activation of genes and pathways related to proliferation, survival,
angiogenesis, and invasion. As a result, 50 DEGs enriched in 11 pathways were
identified in REG3A-treated SW1990 cells, and 28 DEGs enriched in 9 pathways were
detected in IL6-treated cells. Overall, results of microarray analysis followed
by qRT-PCR and Western blotting suggest that REG3A regulates pancreatic cell
growth by increasing the expression of at least 8 genes: JAK1, STAT3, IL10,
FOXM1, KRAS, MYC, CyclinD1, and c-fos; and activation of at least 4 signal
pathways: TGFß, PDGF, angiogenesis and RAS. Similar results were obtained with
IL6 treatment. Regulation network analysis confirmed the cell growth related
DEGs, and further uncovered three transcription factor families with immune
functions regulated by REG3A.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26719042  [PubMed - in process]


33. Biochem Pharmacol. 2015 Dec 11. pii: S0006-2952(15)00761-3. doi:
10.1016/j.bcp.2015.12.006. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeting transcription factors by small compounds-Current strategies and future 
implications.

Hagenbuchner J(1), Ausserlechner MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics II, Medical University Innsbruck, Innrain 66, A-6020 
Innsbruck, Austria. (2)Department of Pediatrics I, Medical University Innsbruck, 
Innrain 66, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria. Electronic address:
michael.j.ausserlechner@i-med.ac.at.

Transcription factors are central regulators of gene expression and critically
steer development, differentiation and death. Except for ligand-activated nuclear
receptors, direct modulation of transcription factor function by small molecules 
is still widely regarded as "impossible". This "un-druggability" of non-ligand
transcription factors is due to the fact that the interacting surface between
transcription factor and DNA is huge and subject to significant changes during
DNA-binding. Besides some "success studies" with compounds that directly
interfere with DNA binding, drug targeting approaches mostly address
protein-protein interfaces with essential co-factors, transcription factor
dimerization partners, chaperone proteins or proteins that regulate subcellular
shuttling. An alternative strategy represent DNA-intercalating, alkylating or
DNA-groove-binding compounds that either block transcription factor-binding or
change the 3D-conformation of the consensus DNA-strand. Recently, much interest
has been focused on chromatin reader proteins that steer the recruitment and
activity of transcription factors to a gene transcription start site. Several
small compounds demonstrate that these epigenetic reader proteins are exciting
new drug targets for inhibiting lineage-specific transcription in cancer therapy.
In this research update we will discuss recent advances in targeting
transcription factors with small compounds, the challenges that are related to
the complex function and regulation of these proteins and also the possible
future directions and applications of transcription factor drug targeting.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26686579  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


34. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 18;10(12):e0143826. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0143826.
eCollection 2015.

Genome Wide Methylome Alterations in Lung Cancer.

Mullapudi N(1), Ye B(2), Suzuki M(3), Fazzari M(3), Han W(1), Shi MK(1),
Marquardt G(1), Lin J(4), Wang T(5), Keller S(6), Zhu C(7), Locker JD(7), Spivack
SD(1,)(3,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Pulmonary, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, 
New York, United States of America. (2)Department of Bioinformatics, Albert
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.
(3)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
United States of America. (4)Department of Epidemiology & Population Health,
Division of Biostatistics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, 
United States of America. (5)Department of Epidemiology & Population Health,
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.
(6)Department of Cardiovascular &Thoracic Surgery, Montefiore Medical Center,
Bronx, New York, United States of America. (7)Department of Pathology, Montefiore
Medical Center, Bronx, New York, United States of America.

Aberrant cytosine 5-methylation underlies many deregulated elements of cancer.
Among paired non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC), we sought to profile DNA
5-methyl-cytosine features which may underlie genome-wide deregulation. In one of
the more dense interrogations of the methylome, we sampled 1.2 million CpG sites 
from twenty-four NSCLC tumor (T)-non-tumor (NT) pairs using a
methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme- based HELP-microarray assay. We found
225,350 differentially methylated (DM) sites in adenocarcinomas versus adjacent
non-tumor tissue that vary in frequency across genomic compartment, particularly 
notable in gene bodies (GB; p<2.2E-16). Further, when DM was coupled to
differential transcriptome (DE) in the same samples, 37,056 differential loci in 
adenocarcinoma emerged. Approximately 90% of the DM-DE relationships were
non-canonical; for example, promoter DM associated with DE in the same direction.
Of the canonical changes noted, promoter (PR) DM loci with reciprocal changes in 
expression in adenocarcinomas included HBEGF, AGER, PTPRM, DPT, CST1, MELK; DM GB
loci with concordant changes in expression included FOXM1, FERMT1, SLC7A5, and
FAP genes. IPA analyses showed adenocarcinoma-specific promoter DMxDE overlay
identified familiar lung cancer nodes [tP53, Akt] as well as less familiar nodes 
[HBEGF, NQO1, GRK5, VWF, HPGD, CDH5, CTNNAL1, PTPN13, DACH1, SMAD6, LAMA3, AR].
The unique findings from this study include the discovery of numerous candidate
The unique findings from this study include the discovery of numerous candidate
methylation sites in both PR and GB regions not previously identified in NSCLC,
and many non-canonical relationships to gene expression. These DNA methylation
features could potentially be developed as risk or diagnostic biomarkers, or as
candidate targets for newer methylation locus-targeted preventive or therapeutic 
agents.

PMCID: PMC4684329
PMID: 26683690  [PubMed - in process]


35. Life Sci. 2016 Jan 1;144:194-201. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2015.12.001. Epub 2015 Dec
2.

Forkhead box transcription factors in embryonic heart development and congenital 
heart disease.

Zhu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Biology, Hunan University, 1 
Denggao Road, Yuelu District, Changsha, Hunan 410082, PR China. Electronic
address: zhuh6477@126.com.

Embryonic heart development is a very complicated process regulated precisely by 
a network composed of many genes and signaling pathways in time and space.
Forkhead box (Fox, FOX) proteins are a family of transcription factors
characterized by the presence of an evolutionary conserved "forkhead"or
"winged-helix" DNA-binding domain and able to organize temporal and spatial gene 
expression during development. They are involved in a wide variety of cellular
processes, such as cell cycle progression, proliferation, differentiation,
migration, metabolism and DNA damage response. An abundance of studies in model
organisms and systems has established that Foxa2, Foxc1/c2, Foxh1 and Foxm1,
Foxos and Foxps are important components of the signaling pathways that instruct 
cardiogenesis and embryonic heart development, playing paramount roles in heart
development. The previous studies also have demonstrated that mutations in some
of the forkhead box genes and the aberrant expression of forkhead box gene are
heavily implicated in the congenital heart disease (CHD) of humans. This review
primarily focuses on the current understanding of heart development regulated by 
forkhead box transcription factors and molecular genetic mechanisms by which
forkhead box factors modulate heart development during embryogenesis and
organogenesis. This review also summarizes human CHD related mutations in
forkhead box genes as well as the abnormal expression of forkhead box gene, and
discusses additional possible regulatory mechanisms of the forkhead box genes
during embryonic heart development that warrant further investigation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26656470  [PubMed - in process]


36. Leukemia. 2015 Dec 9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.334. [Epub ahead of print]

FOXM1 is a therapeutic target for high-risk multiple myeloma.

Gu C(1,)(2), Yang Y(1,)(3), Sompallae R(2,)(4), Xu H(3), Tompkins VS(2), Holman
C(2), Hose D(5,)(6), Goldschmidt H(5,)(6), Tricot G(3,)(7), Zhan F(3,)(7), Janz
S(2,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Basic Medical College, Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine, Nanjing,
People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Pathology, The University of Iowa
Roy J and Lucille A Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA, USA. (3)Department
of Internal Medicine, The University of Iowa Roy J and Lucille A Carver College
of Medicine, Iowa City, IA, USA. (4)Iowa Institute of Human Genetics, University 
of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (5)Medizinische Klinik V, Universitätsklinikum
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Nationales Centrum für Tumorerkrankungen,
Heidelberg, Germany. (7)Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, The University of
Iowa Roy J and Lucille A Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA, USA.

The transcription factor forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is a validated oncoprotein in
solid cancers, but its role in malignant plasma cell tumors such as multiple
myeloma (MM) is unknown. We analyzed publicly available MM data sets and found
that overexpression of FOXM1 prognosticates inferior outcome in a subset (~15%)
of newly diagnosed cases, particularly patients with high-risk disease based on
global gene expression changes. Follow-up studies using human myeloma cell lines 
(HMCLs) as the principal experimental model system demonstrated that enforced
expression of FOXM1 increased growth, survival and clonogenicity of myeloma
cells, whereas knockdown of FOXM1 abolished these features. In agreement with
that, constitutive upregulation of FOXM1 promoted HMCL xenografts in laboratory
mice, whereas inducible knockdown of FOXM1 led to growth inhibition. Expression
of cyclin-dependent kinase 6 (CDK6) and NIMA-related kinase 2 (NEK2) was
coregulated with FOXM1 in both HMCLs and myeloma patient samples, suggesting
interaction of these three genes in a genetic network that may lend itself to
targeting with small-drug inhibitors for new approaches to myeloma therapy and
prevention. These results establish FOXM1 as high-risk myeloma gene and provide
support for the design and testing of FOXM1-targeted therapies specifically for
the FOXM1(High) subset of myeloma.Leukemia advance online publication, 26 January
2016; doi:10.1038/leu.2015.334.

PMID: 26648534  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


37. PLoS One. 2015 Dec 7;10(12):e0144241. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0144241.
eCollection 2015.

Investigation of FOXM1 as a Potential New Target for Melanoma.

Miyashita A(1), Fukushima S(1), Nakahara S(1), Yamashita J(1), Tokuzumi A(1), Aoi
J(1), Ichihara A(1), Kanemaru H(1), Jinnin M(1), Ihn H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology and Plastic Surgery, Faculty of Life Sciences,
Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku, Kumamoto, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that immunotherapies and molecular targeted therapies
are effective for advanced melanoma. Non-antigen-specific immunotherapies such as
immunocheckpoint blockades have been shown to be effective in the treatment of
advanced melanoma. However, the response rates remain low. To improve their
efficacy, they should be combined with antigen-specific immunotherapy. Elevated
expression of the transcription factor, Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1), has been
reported in various human cancers, and it has been shown to have potential as a
target for immunotherapy. The purpose of this study was to investigate the FOXM1 
expression in human melanoma samples and cell lines, to evaluate the relationship
between the FOXM1 expression and the clinical features of melanoma patients and
to investigate the association between the FOXM1 and MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways
in melanoma cell lines. We conducted the quantitative reverse transcription PCR
(qRT-PCR) and Western blotting analyses of melanoma cell lines, and investigated 
melanoma and nevus tissue samples by qRT-PCR and immunohistochemistry. We
performed MEK siRNA and PI3K/AKT inhibitor studies and FOXM1 siRNA studies in
melanoma cell lines. We found that FOXM1 was expressed in all of the melanoma
cell lines, and was expressed in 49% of primary melanomas, 67% of metastatic
melanomas and 10% of nevi by performing immunohistochemical staining. Metastatic 
melanoma samples exhibited significantly higher mRNA levels of FOXM1 (p = 0.004).
Primary melanomas thicker than 2 mm were also more likely to express FOXM1.
Patients whose primary melanoma expressed FOXM1 had a significantly poorer
overall survival compared to patients without FOXM1 expression (p = 0.024).
Downregulation of FOXM1 by siRNA significantly inhibited the proliferation of
melanoma cells, and blockade of the MAPK and PI3K/AKT pathways decreased the
FOXM1 expression in melanoma cell lines. In conclusion, FOXM1 is considered to be
a new therapeutic target for melanoma.

PMCID: PMC4671728
PMID: 26640950  [PubMed - in process]


38. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Sep 15;8(9):15563-8. eCollection 2015.

Forkhead box protein M1 predicts outcome in human osteosarcoma.

Fan CL(1), Jiang J(2), Liu HC(1), Yang D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang
University Nanchang 330006, China. (2)Department of Orthopedics, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University Nanchang 330006, China ; Department of
Orthopedics, The People's Hospital of Shangrao Shangrao 334000, China.

PURPOSE: In the present study, we examined both FOXM1 mRNA and protein expression
by Real-time quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blot and investigate the
expression of the human FOXM1 by Immunohistochemistry (IHC), and identify their
potential roles in prognosis for patients with osteosarcoma.
METHODS: FOXM1 mRNA and protein expression levels were detected by RT-PCR and
Western blot assays, respectively. Then, IHC was performed to analyze the
association of FOXM1 expression in 83 osteosarcoma tissues with
clinicopathological factors and survival of patients.
RESULTS: The expression levels of FOXM1 mRNA were found to be significantly
increased in osteosarcoma tissues compared to noncancerous bone tissues (P =
0.0313). Simultaneously, western blot analysis showed that the protein level of
FOXM1 in osteosarcoma tissues was significantly higher than that in noncancerous 
bone tissues. Kaplan-Meier analysis with the log-rank test indicated that high
FOXM1 expression had a significant impact on overall survival (P = 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data showed that FoxM1 was upregulated in osteosarcoma tissues, 
and high expression of FoxM1 was correlated with a poor prognosis of patients
with osteosarcoma. FoxM1 may function as a valuable prognostic biomarker for
osteosarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4658938
PMID: 26629049  [PubMed]


39. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Dec 1. doi: 10.1002/mc.22443. [Epub ahead of print]

CD44 is functionally crucial for driving lung cancer stem cells metastasis
through Wnt/ß-catenin-FoxM1-Twist signaling.

Su J(1), Wu S(1), Wu H(1), Li L(2), Guo T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Bozhou People's Hospital, Bozhou, Anhui
Province, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The 2nd 
Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, Anhui Province, People's Republic of
China.

A novel paradigm in tumor biology suggests that non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) metastasis is driven by lung cancer stem cell-like cells (LCSCs), but the
underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we aim to investigate biological
function of CD44 in regulating metastatic trait of LCSCs and its underlying
mechanisms. In this study, we found that CD133(+) CD44(+) cells which were
derived from primary lung adenocarcinoma (LAC) possessed cancer stem cell-like
features. Furthermore, CD44 was demonstrated functionally crucial to drive
metastatic potential of CD133(+) CD44(+) LCSCs by in vitro and in vivo
experiments. In patient cohorts, high level of CD44 predicted increased
probability of metastasis. Significantly, microarray revealed that FoxM1 and key 
proteins of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway were up-regulated in CD133(+) CD44(+) LCSCs
compared with those in CD133(+) CD44(-) cells. Then, we demonstrated that CD44
promoted metastatic activity in CD133(+) CD44(+) LCSCs through Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway and FoxM1 was the downstream target of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. Meanwhile, 
our findings indicated that FoxM1 promoted metastatic activity in CD133(+)
CD44(+) LCSCs by inducing EMT and Twist was a direct transcriptional target of
FoxM1. Collectively, CD44, both a functional biomarker and therapeutic target,
promoted CD133(+) CD44(+) LCSCs metastasis by Wnt/ß-catenin-FoxM1-Twist
signaling. This study provided support for the missing link between EMT and CSCs 
surface-marker and supplied a promising approach for elimination of LCSCs by
targeting CD44-Wnt/ß-catenin-FoxM1-Twist signaling. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals,
Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26621583  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


40. Histopathology. 2015 Nov 30. doi: 10.1111/his.12909. [Epub ahead of print]

Prognostic significance of Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) expression and antitumor
effect of FOXM1 inhibition in melanoma.

Ito T(1,)(2), Kohashi K(1), Yamada Y(1), Maekawa A(1), Kuda M(1), Furue M(2), Oda
Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Department of Dermatology, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

AIMS: Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is a transcription factor that regulates cell-cycle
progression and tumor progression, but limited information is available regarding
its clinical significance in melanoma. The aim of this study was to investigate
the potency of FOXM1 as a therapeutic target in melanoma.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated 60 melanoma clinical samples and a melanoma 
WM266-4 cell line using immunohistochemical staining and molecular biological
approaches. Patients with a FOXM1-overexpressing melanoma had significantly
shorter survival (both for melanoma-specific survival [MSS] and disease-free
survival [DFS]) than the other patients (P<0.001, respectively). The FOXM1
overexpression was also an adverse prognostic factor for both MSS and DFS on the 
Cox multivariate analyses (HR 3.96, 95%CI 1.12-14.27, P=0.032; HR 3.21, 95%CI
1.08-9.67, P=0.037, respectively). FOXM1 inhibition using siRNA and an inhibitor 
(thiostrepton) each suppressed the cell proliferation of the melanoma cell line. 
Furthermore, FOXM1 inhibition improved the chemosensitivity to dacarbazine,
whereas it reduced cell migration and invasion. These results suggest that FOXM1 
plays important roles in tumor progression and the chemoresistance of melanoma.
CONCLUSION: We have shown the prognostic impact of FOXM1 on melanoma patients.
FOXM1 inhibition may be a potential therapeutic option for advanced melanoma.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26619071  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


41. Nat Genet. 2016 Jan;48(1):59-66. doi: 10.1038/ng.3457. Epub 2015 Nov 30.

Integrated genomic characterization of IDH1-mutant glioma malignant progression.

Bai H(1,)(2), Harmanci AS(2,)(3), Erson-Omay EZ(2,)(3), Li J(4), Coskun S(2,)(3),
Simon M(5), Krischek B(6), Özduman K(7), Omay SB(2,)(3), Sorensen EA(8), Turcan
S(9), Bakirciglu M(7), Carrión-Grant G(2,)(3), Murray PB(10), Clark
VE(1,)(2,)(3), Ercan-Sencicek AG(2,)(3), Knight J(1,)(11), Sencar L(2,)(3),
Altinok S(2,)(3), Kaulen LD(2,)(3), Gülez B(2,)(3), Timmer M(6), Schramm J(5),
Mishra-Gorur K(1,)(2,)(3,)(12,)(13), Henegariu O(1,)(2,)(3,)(12,)(13), Moliterno 
J(2,)(3), Louvi A(3,)(12,)(13), Chan TA(9,)(14), Tannheimer SL(8), Pamir MN(7),
Vortmeyer AO(4), Bilguvar K(1,)(2,)(11,)(13), Yasuno K(2,)(3), Günel
M(1,)(2,)(3,)(12,)(13,)(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. 
(2)Program in Brain Tumor Research, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA. (4)Department of Pathology, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA. (5)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Bonn
Medical School, Bonn, Germany. (6)Department of General Neurosurgery, University 
Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (7)Department of Neurosurgery, Acibadem
University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. (8)Translational Medicine,
Biomarkers, Gilead Sciences, Inc., Foster City, California, USA. (9)Human
Oncology and Pathogenesis Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York, USA. (10)Department of Pharmacology, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA. (11)Yale Center for Genome Analysis, Yale School of
Medicine, Orange, Connecticut, USA. (12)Department of Neurobiology, Yale School
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. (13)Yale Program on Neurogenetics, Yale
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA. (14)Department of Medicine,
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New York, USA. (15)Yale
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut,
USA.

Gliomas represent approximately 30% of all central nervous system tumors and 80% 
of malignant brain tumors. To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying the 
malignant progression of low-grade gliomas with mutations in IDH1 (encoding
isocitrate dehydrogenase 1), we studied paired tumor samples from 41 patients,
comparing higher-grade, progressed samples to their lower-grade counterparts.
Integrated genomic analyses, including whole-exome sequencing and copy number,
gene expression and DNA methylation profiling, demonstrated nonlinear clonal
expansion of the original tumors and identified oncogenic pathways driving
progression. These include activation of the MYC and RTK-RAS-PI3K pathways and
upregulation of the FOXM1- and E2F2-mediated cell cycle transitions, as well as
epigenetic silencing of developmental transcription factor genes bound by
Polycomb repressive complex 2 in human embryonic stem cells. Our results not only
provide mechanistic insight into the genetic and epigenetic mechanisms driving
glioma progression but also identify inhibition of the bromodomain and
extraterminal (BET) family as a potential therapeutic approach.

PMID: 26618343  [PubMed - in process]


42. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Sep 1;8(9):10250-60. eCollection 2015.

MicroRNA-370 directly targets FOXM1 to inhibit cell growth and metastasis in
osteosarcoma cells.

Duan N(1), Hu X(2), Yang X(3), Cheng H(1), Zhang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Hong-Hui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University
College of Medicine Xi'an 710054, Shaanxi Province, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedics, Ninth Hospital of Xi'an Xi'an 710054, Shaanxi
Province, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Orthopaedics, Xi'an
Jiaotong University Xi'an 710061, Shaanxi Province, People's Republic of China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous, non-coding, small RNAs, which play a critical 
role in regulating varieties of the biological and pathologic processes. Several 
reports have indicated that miR-370 acts as a tumor suppressor in varieties of
tumors. However, the roles of miR-370 in osteosarcoma have not been reported. In 
this study, our objective was to explore the biological functions and its
molecular mechanism of miR-370 in osteosarcoma cell lines, finding a therapeutic 
target of osteosarcoma. Our data demonstrated that miR-370 was evidently reduced 
in osteosarcoma cell lines, whereas FOXM1 expression was markedly increased.
Up-regulation of miR-370 suppressed proliferation, arrested cell cycle and
induced apoptosis in osteosarcoma cells. Besides, invasion and EMT of
osteosarcoma cells was also inhibited by introduction of miR-370. Next, we found 
that FOXM1 expression was significantly reduced by up-regulation of miR-370.
Bioinformatics analysis predicted that the FOXM1 was a potential target gene of
miR-370. Luciferase reporter assay further confirmed that miR-370 could directly 
target the 3' UTR of FOXM1. Overexpression of FOXM1 in osteosarcoma cells
transfected with miR-370 mimic partially reversed the effects of miR-370. In
conclusion, miR-370 inhibited cell growth and metastasis in osteosarcoma cells by
down-regulation of FOXM1.

PMCID: PMC4637548
PMID: 26617733  [PubMed - in process]


43. Nat Prod Commun. 2015 Sep;10(9):1603-6.

Siomycin A Induces Apoptosis in Human Lung Adenocarcinoma A549 Cells by
Suppressing the Expression of FoxM1.

Guo X, Liu A, Hua H, Lu H, Zhang D, Lin Y, Sun Q, Zhu X, Yan G, Zhao F.

Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1), a transcription factor of the Forkhead family, is
demonstrated to be critical for proliferation, apoptosis, migration and invasion 
of lung cancer. In this study, we extensively investigated the anticancer effect 
of siomycin A, which was identified as an inhibitor of FoxM1 transcriptional
activity, on human lung adenocarcinoma A549 cells. Our study indicated that
treatment with siomycin A resulted in the suppression of FoxM1 expression, which 
consequently contributed to its effect of cell growth inhibition and cell
apoptosis induction in A549 cells. Then the molecular mechanism of siomycin A's
apoptotic action on A549 cells was further investigated. The results revealed
that siomycin A induced apoptosis by influencing the downstream events of FoxM1, 
including inhibiting the expression of Bcl-2 and Mcl-1, as well as leading to
caspase-3 cleavage. Taken together, our findings may be useful for understanding 
the mechanism of action of siomycin A on lung cancer cells and provide new
insights into the possible application of such a compound in lung cancer therapy 
in the future.

PMID: 26594769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 1;76(3):664-74. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0828. Epub
2015 Nov 20.

Elucidation and Pharmacological Targeting of Novel Molecular Drivers of
Follicular Lymphoma Progression.

Bisikirska B(1), Bansal M(1), Shen Y(1), Teruya-Feldstein J(2), Chaganti R(3),
Califano A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York. Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York,
New York. (3)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York. (4)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University, New York, 
New York. ac2248@cumc.columbia.edu.

Follicular lymphoma, the most common indolent subtype of non-Hodgkin lymphoma, is
associated with a relatively long overall survival rate ranging from 6 to 10
years from the time of diagnosis. However, in 20% to 60% of follicular lymphoma
patients, transformation to aggressive diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
reduces median survival to only 1.2 years. The specific functional and genetic
determinants of follicular lymphoma transformation remain elusive, and genomic
alterations underlying disease advancement have only been identified for a subset
of cases. Therefore, to identify candidate drivers of follicular lymphoma
transformation, we performed systematic analysis of a B-cell-specific regulatory 
model exhibiting follicular lymphoma transformation signatures using the Master
Regulator Inference algorithm (MARINa). This analysis revealed FOXM1, TFDP1,
ATF5, HMGA1, and NFYB to be candidate master regulators (MR) contributing to
disease progression. Accordingly, validation was achieved through synthetic
lethality assays in which RNAi-mediated silencing of MRs individually or in
combination reduced the viability of (14;18)-positive DLBCL (t-DLBCL) cells.
Furthermore, specific combinations of small-molecule compounds targeting
synergistic MR pairs induced loss of viability in t-DLBCL cells. Collectively,
our findings indicate that MR analysis is a valuable method for identifying bona 
fide contributors to follicular lymphoma transformation and may therefore guide
the selection of compounds to be used in combinatorial treatment strategies.
Cancer Res; 76(3); 664-74. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4738055 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26589882  [PubMed - in process]


45. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 5;7(1):293-307. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6344.

miR-671-5p inhibits epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition by downregulating FOXM1 
expression in breast cancer.

Tan X(1), Fu Y(1), Chen L(1), Lee W(1), Lai Y(2), Rezaei K(3), Tabbara S(3),
Latham P(3), Teal CB(4), Man YG(5), Siegel RS(6), Brem RF(7), Fu SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine (Division of Genomic Medicine), The George Washington
University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA.
(2)Department of Statistics, The George Washington University, Washington, DC,
USA. (3)Department of Pathology, The George Washington University School of
Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA. (4)Department of Surgery, The 
George Washington University School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, 
DC, USA. (5)Research Lab and International Collaboration, Bon Secours Cancer
Institute, Bon Secours Health System, Richmond, VA, USA. (6)Department of
Medicine (Division of Hematology/Oncology), The George Washington University
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, Washington, DC, USA. (7)Department of
Radiology, The George Washington University School of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Washington, DC, USA.

MicroRNA (miRNA) dysfunction is associated with a variety of human diseases,
including cancer. Our previous study showed that miR-671-5p was deregulated
throughout breast cancer progression. Here, we report for the first time that
miR-671-5p is a tumor-suppressor miRNA in breast tumorigenesis. We found that
expression of miR-671-5p was decreased significantly in invasive ductal carcinoma
(IDC) compared to normal in microdissected formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded
(FFPE) tissues. Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1), an oncogenic transcription factor, was
predicted as one of the direct targets of miR-671-5p, which was subsequently
confirmed by luciferase assays. Forced expression of miR-671-5p in breast cancer 
cell lines downregulated FOXM1 expression, and attenuated the proliferation and
invasion in breast cancer cell lines. Notably, overexpression of miR-671-5p
resulted in a shift from epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) to
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) phenotypes in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer
cells and induced S-phase arrest. Moreover, miR-671-5p sensitized breast cancer
cells to cisplatin, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and epirubicin exposure. Host cell
reactivation (HCR) assays showed that miR-671-5p reduces DNA repair capability in
post-drug exposed breast cancer cells. cDNA microarray data revealed that
differentially expressed genes when miR-671-5p was transfected are associated
with cell proliferation, invasion, cell cycle, and EMT. These data indicate that 
miR-671-5p functions as a tumor suppressor miRNA in breast cancer by directly
targeting FOXM1. Hence, miR-671-5p may serve as a novel therapeutic target for
breast cancer management.

PMID: 26588055  [PubMed - in process]


46. BMC Res Notes. 2015 Nov 14;8:676. doi: 10.1186/s13104-015-1658-y.

FOXM1 and polo-like kinase 1 are co-ordinately overexpressed in patients with
gastric adenocarcinomas.

Dibb M(1,)(2), Han N(3), Choudhury J(4), Hayes S(5,)(6), Valentine H(7), West
C(8), Sharrocks AD(9), Ang YS(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. martyn.dibb@nhs.net. (2)Faculty of Medical 
and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK.
martyn.dibb@nhs.net. (3)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester,
Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.
namshik.han@gmail.com. (4)Department of Histopathology, Salford Royal Foundation 
Trust, Stott Lane, Salford, M6 8HD, UK. jamil.choudhury@srft.nhs.uk. (5)Faculty
of Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
UK. Stephen.hayes@srft.nhs.uk. (6)Department of Histopathology, Salford Royal
Foundation Trust, Stott Lane, Salford, M6 8HD, UK. Stephen.hayes@srft.nhs.uk.
(7)School of Cancer and Enabling Sciences, Christie Hospital, Manchester Academic
Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
Helen.valentine@manchester.ac.uk. (8)School of Cancer and Enabling Sciences,
Christie Hospital, Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK. Catharine.west@manchester.ac.uk. (9)Faculty of Life
Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road,
Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. Andrew.d.sharrocks@manchester.ac.uk. (10)Faculty of
Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
UK. yeng.ang@srft.nhs.uk. (11)GI Science Centre, Salford Royal NHS FT, University
of Manchester, Stott Lane, Salford, M6 8HD, UK. yeng.ang@srft.nhs.uk.

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancers present late in life with advanced disease and carry 
a poor prognosis. Polo-like Kinase 1 (PLK1) is a mitotic kinase with regulatory
functions during G2/M and mitosis in the cell cycle. In mammalian cells, there is
an intricate co-regulatory relationship between PLK1 and the forkhead
transcription factor FOXM1. It has been demonstrated that individually either
PLK1 or FOXM1 expression predicts poorer survival. However, the co-expression of 
both of these markers in gastric adenocarcinomas has not been reported
previously.
METHODS: We aimed to assess the expression of PLK1 and FOXM1 in Gastric
adenocarcinomas in a Western Population, to examine whether there is a
relationship of PLK1 to FOXM1 in cancer samples. We assess both the protein and
mRNA expression in this patient population by Tissue Microarray
immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry was performed on biopsy samples from 79 patients
with gastric cancer. Paired normal controls were available in 47 patients. FOXM1 
expression was significantly associated with gastric adenocarcinoma (p = 0.001). 
PLK1 and FOXM1 co-expression was demonstrated in 6/8 (75 %) tumours when analysed
by RT-PCR. FOXM1 is overexpressed in a large proportion of gastric carcinomas at 
the protein level and FOXM1 and PLK1 are concomitantly overexpressed at the mRNA 
level in this cancer type.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has demonstrated that FOXM1 and its target gene PLK1 are 
coordinately overexpressed in a proportion of gastric adenocarcinomas. This
suggests that chemotherapeutic treatments that target this pathway may be of
clinical utility.

PMCID: PMC4650505
PMID: 26576650  [PubMed - in process]


47. Tumour Biol. 2015 Nov 12. [Epub ahead of print]

STAT3:FOXM1 and MCT1 drive uterine cervix carcinoma fitness to a lactate-rich
microenvironment.

Silva LS(1,)(2), Goncalves LG(3), Silva F(1,)(2), Domingues G(1,)(2), Maximo
V(4,)(5), Ferreira J(2), Lam EW(6), Dias S(7), Felix A(1,)(2), Serpa J(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Estudos de Doenças Crónicas (CEDOC), NOVA Medical School/Faculdade
de Ciências Médicas, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. (2)Instituto 
Português de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil (IPOLFG), Lisbon, Portugal.
(3)Instituto de Tecnologia Quimica e Biológica (ITQB) António Xavier,
Universidade NOVA, Oeiras, Portugal. (4)Medical Faculty, University of Porto,
Porto, Portugal. (5)Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology of the
University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Porto, Portugal. (6)Department of Surgery and
Cancer, Imperial College London, London, UK. (7)Instituto de Medicina Molecular
da Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. (8)Centro de Estudos de Doenças
Crónicas (CEDOC), NOVA Medical School/Faculdade de Ciências Médicas, Universidade
Nova de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal. jacinta.serpa@fcm.unl.pt. (9)Instituto
Português de Oncologia de Lisboa Francisco Gentil (IPOLFG), Lisbon, Portugal.
jacinta.serpa@fcm.unl.pt.

Uterine cervix cancer is the second most common malignancy in women worldwide
with human papillomavirus (HPV) as the etiologic factor. The two main
histological variants, squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) and adenocarcinomas (AC),
resemble the cell morphology of exocervix and endocervix, respectively. Cancer
metabolism is a cancer hallmark conditioned by the microenvironment. As uterine
cervix homeostasis is dependent on lactate, we hypothesized lactate plays a role 
in uterine cervix cancer progression. Using in vitro (SiHa-SCC and HeLa-AC) and
BALB-c/SCID models, we demonstrated that lactate metabolism is linked to
histological types, with SCC predominantly consuming and AC producing lactate.
MCT1 is a key factor, allowing lactate consumption and being regulated in vitro
by lactate through the FOXM1:STAT3 pathway. In vivo models showed that SCC (SiHa)
expresses MCT1 and is dependent on lactate to grow, whereas AC (HeLa) expresses
MCT1 and MCT4, with higher growth capacities. Immunohistochemical analysis of
tissue microarrays (TMA) from human cervical tumors showed that MCT1 expression
associates with the SCC type and metastatic behavior of AC, whereas MCT4
expression concomitantly increases from in situ SCC to invasive SCC and is
significantly associated with the AC type. Consistently, FOXM1 expression is
statistically associated with MCT1 positivity in SCC, whereas the expression of
FOXO3a, a FOXM1 functional antagonist, is linked to MCT1 negativity in AC. Our
study reinforces the role of the microenvironment in the metabolic adaptation of 
cancer cells, showing that cells that retain metabolic features of their normal
counterparts are positively selected by the organ's microenvironment and will
survive. In particular, MCT1 was shown to be a key element in uterine cervix
cancer development; however, further studies are needed to validate MCT1 as a
suitable therapeutic target in uterine cervix cancer.

PMID: 26563366  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


48. Cancer Sci. 2016 Jan;107(1):95-102. doi: 10.1111/cas.12846. Epub 2016 Jan 12.

Expression of Forkhead box M1 in soft tissue leiomyosarcoma: Clinicopathologic
and in vitro study using a newly established cell line.

Maekawa A(1), Kohashi K(1), Setsu N(2), Kuda M(1), Iura K(1), Ishii T(1),
Matsunobu T(2), Nakatsura T(3), Iwamoto Y(2), Oda Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, Fukuoka, Japan. (2)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate School 
of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. (3)Division of Cancer
Immunotherapy, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Japan.

Leiomyosarcoma (LMS) of soft tissue is a sarcoma with smooth-muscle
differentiation, and conventional chemotherapy does not improve its outcome. The 
application of novel antitumor agents and precise prognostication has been
demanded. The expression of the protein Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1), a member of the 
FOX family, is considered an independent predictor of poor survival in many
cancers and sarcomas. However, the expression status of FOXM1 in LMS is poorly
understood. The purposes of this study were to examine the correlation between
the expression of FOXM1 and clinicopathologic or prognostic factors and to
clarify the efficacy of FOXM1 target therapy in LMS. We evaluated the
immunohistochemical expressions of FOXM1 using 123 LMS tumor specimens.
Univariate and multivariate survival analyses revealed that FOXM1 expression was 
associated with poor prognosis in LMS. An in vitro study was then carried out to 
examine the antitumor effect of a FOXM1 inhibitor (thiostrepton) and siRNA on a
novel LMS cell line, TC616. We also assessed the efficacy of the combined use of 
doxorubicin and thiostrepton. Thiostrepton showed dose-dependent antitumor
activity and TC616 cells treated with the combination of thiostrepton and
doxorubicin showed lower proliferation compared to those treated with either drug
individually. FOXM1 interruption by siRNA decreased cell proliferation and
increased chemosensitivity. In conclusion, FOXM1 has potential to be a
therapeutic target for LMS.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by John Wiley & Sons Australia, Ltd 
on behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4724818
PMID: 26560505  [PubMed - in process]


49. J Biol Chem. 2016 Jan 1;291(1):142-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.678227. Epub 2015 Nov
11.

A Novel Function of Molecular Chaperone HSP70: SUPPRESSION OF ONCOGENIC FOXM1
AFTER PROTEOTOXIC STRESS.

Halasi M(1), Váraljai R(2), Benevolenskaya E(2), Gartel AL(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Medicine and. (2)Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, 
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612. (3)From the
Departments of Medicine and Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612 agartel@uic.edu.

The oncogenic transcription factor FOXM1 is overexpressed in the majority of
human cancers, and it is a potential target for anticancer therapy. We identified
proteasome inhibitors as the first type of drugs that target FOXM1 in cancer
cells. Here we found that HSP90 inhibitor PF-4942847 and heat shock also suppress
FOXM1. The common effector, which was induced after treatment with proteasome and
HSP90 inhibitors or heat shock, was the molecular chaperone HSP70. We show that
HSP70 binds to FOXM1 following proteotoxic stress and that HSP70 inhibits FOXM1
DNA-binding ability. Inhibition of FOXM1 transcriptional autoregulation by HSP70 
leads to the suppression of FOXM1 protein expression. In addition, HSP70
suppression elevates FOXM1 expression, and simultaneous inhibition of FOXM1 and
HSP70 increases the sensitivity of human cancer cells to anticancer drug-induced 
apoptosis. Overall, we determined the unique and novel mechanism of FOXM1
suppression by proteasome inhibitors.

© 2016 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4697151 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26559972  [PubMed - in process]


50. Tumour Biol. 2015 Nov 9. [Epub ahead of print]

FOXM1 expression in rhabdomyosarcoma: a novel prognostic factor and therapeutic
target.

Kuda M(1), Kohashi K(1), Yamada Y(1), Maekawa A(1), Kinoshita Y(2), Nakatsura
T(3), Iwamoto Y(4), Taguchi T(2), Oda Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. (2)Department
of Pediatric Surgery, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kyushu University,
3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582, Japan. (3)Division of Cancer
Immunotherapy, National Cancer Center Hospital East, 6-5-1 Kashiwanoha, Kashiwa, 
Chiba, 277-8577, Japan. (4)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Graduate School of
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka,
812-8582, Japan. (5)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Graduate School of Medical 
Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, 812-8582,
Japan. oda@surgpath.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp.

The transcription factor Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is known to play critical roles 
in the development and progression of various types of cancer, but the clinical
significance of FOXM1 expression in rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is unknown. This study
aimed to determine the role of FOXM1 in RMS. We investigated the expression
levels of FOXM1 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and angiogenesis in
a large series of RMS clinical cases using immunohistochemistry (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>92), and we 
performed clinicopathologic and prognostic analyses. In vitro studies were
conducted to examine the effect of FOXM1 knock-down on VEGF expression, cell
proliferation, migration, and invasion in embryonal RMS (ERMS) and alveolar RMS
(ARMS) cell lines, using small interference RNA (siRNA). High FOXM1 expression
was significantly increased in the cases of ARMS, which has an adverse prognosis 
compared to ERMS (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0310). The ERMS patients with high FOXM1 expression
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>25) had a significantly shorter survival than those with low FOXM1
expression (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>24; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0310). FOXM1 expression was statistically correlated
with VEGF expression in ERMS at the protein level as shown by
immunohistochemistry and at the mRNA level by RT-PCR. The in vitro study
demonstrated that VEGF mRNA levels were decreased in the FOXM1 siRNA-transfected 
ERMS and ARMS cells. FOXM1 knock-down resulted in a significant decrease of cell 
proliferation and migration in all four RMS cell lines and invasion in three of
the four cell lines. Our results indicate that FOXM1 overexpression may be a
prognostic factor of RMS and that FOXM1 may be a promising therapeutic target for
the inhibition of RMS progression.

PMID: 26553361  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


51. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2015 Nov 7;108(2). pii: djv326. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djv326.
Print 2016 Feb.

ST3GAL1-Associated Transcriptomic Program in Glioblastoma Tumor Growth, Invasion,
and Prognosis.

Chong YK(1), Sandanaraj E(1), Koh LW(1), Thangaveloo M(1), Tan MS(1), Koh GR(1), 
Toh TB(1), Lim GG(1), Holbrook JD(1), Kon OL(1), Nadarajah M(1), Ng I(1), Ng
WH(1), Tan NS(1), Lim KL(1), Tang C(2), Ang BT(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research (YKC, ES, LWHK, MT, MSYT, GRHK, TBT, GGYL, KLL, CT),
Department of Neuroradiology (MN), and Department of Neurosurgery (IN, WHN, BTA),
National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore; Department of Physiology (YKC, KLL,
BTA) and Department of Biochemistry (OLK), Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine,
National University of Singapore, Singapore; Singapore Institute for Clinical
Sciences (ES, JDH, BTA) and Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (NST), Agency
for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore; School of Biological
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (ES, LWHK, MSYT, NST);
Division of Medical Sciences, Humphrey Oei Institute of Cancer Research, National
Cancer Centre, Singapore (OLK, CT); Duke-National University of Singapore
Graduate Medical School, Singapore (IN, WHN, KLL, CT, BTA). (2)Department of
Research (YKC, ES, LWHK, MT, MSYT, GRHK, TBT, GGYL, KLL, CT), Department of
Neuroradiology (MN), and Department of Neurosurgery (IN, WHN, BTA), National
Neuroscience Institute, Singapore; Department of Physiology (YKC, KLL, BTA) and
Department of Biochemistry (OLK), Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, Singapore; Singapore Institute for Clinical Sciences
(ES, JDH, BTA) and Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (NST), Agency for
Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore; School of Biological
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (ES, LWHK, MSYT, NST);
Division of Medical Sciences, Humphrey Oei Institute of Cancer Research, National
Cancer Centre, Singapore (OLK, CT); Duke-National University of Singapore
Graduate Medical School, Singapore (IN, WHN, KLL, CT, BTA). carol_tang@nni.com.sg
beng_ti_ang@nni.com.sg yuk_kien_chong@nni.com.sg.

BACKGROUND: Cell surface sialylation is associated with tumor cell invasiveness
in many cancers. Glioblastoma is the most malignant primary brain tumor and is
highly infiltrative. ST3GAL1 sialyltransferase gene is amplified in a subclass of
glioblastomas, and its role in tumor cell self-renewal remains unexplored.
METHODS: Self-renewal of patient glioma cells was evaluated using clonogenic,
viability, and invasiveness assays. ST3GAL1 was identified from differentially
expressed genes in Peanut Agglutinin-stained cells and validated in REMBRANDT (n 
= 390) and Gravendeel (n = 276) clinical databases. Gene set enrichment analysis 
revealed upstream processes. TGFß signaling on ST3GAL1 transcription was assessed
using chromatin immunoprecipitation. Transcriptome analysis of ST3GAL1 knockdown 
cells was done to identify downstream pathways. A constitutively active FoxM1
mutant lacking critical anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome ([APC/C]-Cdh1)
binding sites was used to evaluate ST3Gal1-mediated regulation of FoxM1 protein. 
Finally, the prognostic role of ST3Gal1 was determined using an orthotopic
xenograft model (3 mice groups comprising nontargeting and 2 clones of ST3GAL1
knockdown in NNI-11 [8 per group] and NNI-21 [6 per group]), and the correlation 
with patient clinical information. All statistical tests on patients' data were
two-sided; other P values below are one-sided.
RESULTS: High ST3GAL1 expression defines an invasive subfraction with
self-renewal capacity; its loss of function prolongs survival in a mouse model
established from mesenchymal NNI-11 (P < .001; groups of 8 in 3 arms:
nontargeting, C1, and C2 clones of ST3GAL1 knockdown). ST3GAL1 transcriptomic
program stratifies patient survival (hazard ratio [HR] = 2.47, 95% confidence
interval [CI] = 1.72 to 3.55, REMBRANDT P = 1.92 x 10<U+207B>8; HR = 2.89, 95% CI = 1.94
to 4.30, Gravendeel P = 1.05 x 10<U+207B>¹¹), independent of age and histology, and
associates with higher tumor grade and T2 volume (P = 1.46 x 10<U+207B>4). TGFß
signaling, elevated in mesenchymal patients, correlates with high ST3GAL1
(REMBRANDT gliomacor = 0.31, P = 2.29 x 10<U+207B>¹°; Gravendeel gliomacor = 0.50, P =
3.63 x 10<U+207B>²°). The transcriptomic program upon ST3GAL1 knockdown enriches for
mitotic cell cycle processes. FoxM1 was identified as a statistically
significantly modulated gene (P = 2.25 x 10<U+207B>5) and mediates ST3Gal1 signaling via
the (APC/C)-Cdh1 complex.
CONCLUSIONS: The ST3GAL1-associated transcriptomic program portends poor
prognosis in glioma patients and enriches for higher tumor grades of the
mesenchymal molecular classification. We show that ST3Gal1-regulated self-renewal
traits are crucial to the sustenance of glioblastoma multiforme growth.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

PMCID: PMC4755447
PMID: 26547933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. BMC Genomics. 2015 Nov 6;16:907. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-2160-6.

Genome-wide miR-155 and miR-802 target gene identification in the hippocampus of 
Ts65Dn Down syndrome mouse model by miRNA sponges.

Bofill-De Ros X(1,)(2), Santos M(3,)(4), Vila-Casadesús M(1,)(3), Villanueva
E(1), Andreu N(2,)(3), Dierssen M(2,)(5), Fillat C(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Rosselló
149-153, 08036, Barcelona, Spain. (2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain. (3)Bioinformatics Platform,
CIBERehd, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Present address: Institute of Biology,
Otto-von-Guericke University, Magdeburg, Germany. (5)Cellular and Systems
Neurobiology, Systems Biology Programme, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG),
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. (6)Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Rosselló 149-153, 08036, Barcelona,
Spain. cfillat@clinic.ub.es. (7)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain. cfillat@clinic.ub.es.

BACKGROUND: Down syndrome (DS) or trisomy 21 is the result of a genetic dosage
imbalance that translates in a broad clinical spectrum. A major challenge in the 
study of DS is the identification of functional genetic elements with wide impact
on phenotypic alterations. Recently, miRNAs have been recognized as major
contributors to several disease conditions by acting as post-transcriptional
regulators of a plethora of genes. Five chromosome 21 (HSA21) miRNAs have been
found overexpressed in DS individuals and could function as key elements in the
pathophysiology. Interestingly, in the trisomic Ts65Dn DS mouse model two of
these miRNAs (miR-155 and miR-802) are also triplicated and overexpressed in
brain.
RESULTS: In the current work, we interrogated the impact of miR-155 and miR-802
upregulation on the transcriptome of Ts65Dn brains. We developed a lentiviral
miRNA-sponge strategy (Lv-miR155-802T) to identify in vivo relevant miR-155 and
miR-802 target mRNAs. Hippocampal injections of lentiviral sponges in Ts65Dn mice
normalized the expression of miR-155 and miR-802 and rescued the levels of their 
targets methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 gene (Mecp2), SH2 (Src homology
2)-containing inositol phosphatase-1 (Ship1) and Forkhead box protein M1 (FoxM1).
Transcriptomic data of Lv-miR155-802T miRNA-sponge treated hippocampi correlated 
with candidate targets highlighting miRNA dosage-sensitive genes. Significant
associations were found in a subset of genes (Rufy2, Nova1, Nav1, Thoc1 and
Sumo3) that could be experimentally validated.
CONCLUSIONS: The lentiviral miRNA-sponge strategy demonstrated the genome-wide
regulatory effects of miR-155 and miR-802. Furthermore, the analysis combining
predicted candidates and experimental transcriptomic data proved to retrieve
genes with potential significance in DS-hippocampal phenotype bridging with DS
other neurological-associated diseases such as Alzheimer's disease.

PMCID: PMC4636806
PMID: 26546125  [PubMed - in process]


53. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Dec;14(12):2712-21. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-15-0206.
Epub 2015 Oct 29.

Targeting the Neurokinin-1 Receptor Compromises Canonical Wnt Signaling in
Hepatoblastoma.

Ilmer M(1), Garnier A(2), Vykoukal J(1), Alt E(3), von Schweinitz D(2), Kappler
R(2), Berger M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery,
Research Laboratories, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig Maximilians
University Munich, Munich, Germany. (3)Department of Medicine, Tulane University 
Health Science Center, New Orleans, Louisiana. (4)Department of Pediatric
Surgery, Research Laboratories, Dr. von Hauner Children's Hospital, Ludwig
Maximilians University Munich, Munich, Germany. michael.fabian.berger@gmail.com.

The substance P (SP)/NK-1 receptor (NK1R) complex represents an intriguing
anticancer target for a variety of tumors, including hepatoblastoma (HB).
Therefore, NK1R antagonists, such as the clinical drug aprepitant, recently have 
been proposed as potent anticancer agents. However, very little is known
regarding the molecular basis of NK1R inhibition in cancer. Using reverse phase
protein array, Western blot, Super TOP/FOP, confocal microscopy, and sphere
formation ability (SFA) assays, we identified the AKT and Wnt signaling pathways 
as the key targets of aprepitant in three human HB cell lines (HepT1, HepG2, and 
HuH6). Following NK1R blockage, we observed decreased phosphorylation of p70S6K
and 4E-BP1/2 and inhibition of the canonical Wnt pathway with subsequent decrease
of HB cell growth. This effect was dependent of high baseline Wnt activity either
by mutational status of ß-catenin or extrinsic Wnt activation. Wnt inhibition
seemed to be strengthened by disruption of the FOXM1-ß-catenin complex.
Furthermore, treatment of HB cells with aprepitant led to reduced expression of
(liver) stemness markers (AFP, CD13, SOX2, NANOG, and OCT4) and SFA when grown
under cancer stem cell conditions. Taken together, we show for the first time
that targeting the SP/NK1R signaling cascade inhibits canonical Wnt signaling in 
HB cells. These findings reveal important insight into the molecular mechanisms
of the SP/NK1R complex as a critical component in a model of pediatric liver
cancer and may support the development of novel therapeutic interventions for HB 
and other Wnt-activated cancers.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26516161  [PubMed - in process]


54. Genetics. 2015 Dec;201(4):1341-8. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.180125. Epub 2015 Oct
28.

A Gene Regulatory Program in Human Breast Cancer.

Li R(1), Campos J(2), Iida J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Windber Research Institute, Windber, Pennsylvania 15963 The Jackson
Laboratory, Bar Harbor, Maine 04609 renhua.li10@gmail.com. (2)Windber Research
Institute, Windber, Pennsylvania 15963.

Molecular heterogeneity in human breast cancer has challenged diagnosis,
prognosis, and clinical treatment. It is well known that molecular subtypes of
breast tumors are associated with significant differences in prognosis and
survival. Assuming that the differences are attributed to subtype-specific
pathways, we then suspect that there might be gene regulatory mechanisms that
modulate the behavior of the pathways and their interactions. In this study, we
proposed an integrated methodology, including machine learning and information
theory, to explore the mechanisms. Using existing data from three large cohorts
of human breast cancer populations, we have identified an ensemble of 16 master
regulator genes (or MR16) that can discriminate breast tumor samples into four
major subtypes. Evidence from gene expression across the three cohorts has
consistently indicated that the MR16 can be divided into two groups that
demonstrate subtype-specific gene expression patterns. For example, group 1 MRs, 
including ESR1, FOXA1, and GATA3, are overexpressed in luminal A and luminal B
subtypes, but lowly expressed in HER2-enriched and basal-like subtypes. In
contrast, group 2 MRs, including FOXM1, EZH2, MYBL2, and ZNF695, display an
opposite pattern. Furthermore, evidence from mutual information modeling has
congruently indicated that the two groups of MRs either up- or down-regulate
cancer driver-related genes in opposite directions. Furthermore, integration of
somatic mutations with pathway changes leads to identification of canonical
genomic alternations in a subtype-specific fashion. Taken together, these studies
have implicated a gene regulatory program for breast tumor progression.

Copyright © 2015 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4676531 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26510790  [PubMed - in process]


55. Nat Commun. 2015 Oct 29;6:8704. doi: 10.1038/ncomms9704.

POH1 deubiquitylates and stabilizes E2F1 to promote tumour formation.

Wang B(1), Ma A(1), Zhang L(1), Jin WL(2), Qian Y(1), Xu G(1), Qiu B(3), Yang
Z(1), Liu Y(1), Xia Q(3), Liu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key laboratory of Oncogenes and Related Genes, Shanghai Cancer
Institute, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200032, China. (2)Institute of Nano Biomedicine and Engineering,
Department of Instrument Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory for Thin Film
and Microfabrication Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Electronic
Information and Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai
200240, China. (3)Department of Liver Surgery, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong 
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200217, China.

Hyperactivation of the transcriptional factor E2F1 occurs frequently in human
cancers and contributes to malignant progression. E2F1 activity is regulated by
proteolysis mediated by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. However, the
deubiquitylase that controls E2F1 ubiquitylation and stability remains undefined.
Here we demonstrate that the deubiquitylase POH1 stabilizes E2F1 protein through 
binding to and deubiquitylating E2F1. Conditional knockout of Poh1 alleles
results in reduced E2F1 expression in primary mouse liver cells. The
POH1-mediated regulation of E2F1 expression strengthens E2F1-downstream
prosurvival signals, including upregulation of Survivin and FOXM1 protein levels,
and efficiently facilitates tumour growth of liver cancer cells in nude mice.
Importantly, human hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) recapitulate POH1 regulation 
of E2F1 expression, as nuclear abundance of POH1 is increased in HCCs and
correlates with E2F1 overexpression and tumour growth. Thus, our study suggests
that the hyperactivated POH1-E2F1 regulation may contribute to the development of
liver cancer.

PMID: 26510456  [PubMed - in process]


56. Oncogene. 2015 Oct 26. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.411. [Epub ahead of print]

Peroxiredoxin II promotes hepatic tumorigenesis through cooperation with
Ras/Forkhead box M1 signaling pathway.

Park YH(1,)(2,)(3), Kim SU(1,)(2,)(3), Kwon TH(1), Kim JM(4), Song IS(5), Shin
HJ(1), Lee BK(1), Bang DH(6), Lee SJ(7), Lee DS(8), Chang KT(2), Kim BY(9), Yu
DY(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Aging Intervention Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea. (2)National Primate Research Center, Korea
Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea. (3)Department
of Functional Genomics, University of Science and Technology, Daejeon, Korea.
(4)School of Medicine, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Korea.
(5)Cardiovascular and Metabolic Disease Center, Inje University, Busan, Korea.
(6)School of Medicine, Wonkwang University, Iksan, Korea. (7)Research Institute
for Natural Sciences, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. (8)College of Natural
Sciences, Kyungpook National University, Daegu, Korea. (9)World Class Institute, 
Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Ochang, Korea.

The current study was carried out to define the involvement of Peroxiredoxin
(Prx) II in progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and the underlying
molecular mechanism(s). Expression and function of Prx II in HCC was determined
using H-ras(G12V)-transformed HCC cells (H-ras(G12V)-HCC cells) and the tumor
livers from H-ras(G12V)-transgenic (Tg) mice and HCC patients. Prx II was
upregulated in H-ras(G12V)-HCC cells and H-ras(G12V)-Tg mouse tumor livers, the
expression pattern of which highly similar to that of forkhead Box M1 (FoxM1).
Moreover, either knockdown of FoxM1 or site-directed mutagenesis of FoxM1-binding
site of Prx II promoter significantly reduced Prx II levels in H-ras(G12V)-HCC
cells, indicating FoxM1 as a direct transcription factor of Prx II in HCC.
Interestingly, the null mutation of Prx II markedly decreased the number and size
of tumors in H-ras(G12V)-Tg livers. Consistent with this, knockdown of Prx II in 
H-ras(G12V)-HCC cells reduced the expression of cyclin D1, cell proliferation,
anchorage-independent growth and tumor formation in athymic nude mice, whereas
overexpression of Prx II increased or aggravated the tumor phenotypes.
Importantly, the expression of Prx II was correlated with that of FoxM1 in HCC
patients. The activation of extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK) pathway and
the expression of FoxM1 and cyclin D1 were highly dependent on Prx II in
H-ras(G12V)-HCC cells and H-ras(G12V)-Tg livers. Prx II is
FoxM1-dependently-expressed antioxidant in HCC and function as an enhancer of
Ras(G12V) oncogenic potential in hepatic tumorigenesis through activation of
ERK/FoxM1/cyclin D1 cascade.Oncogene advance online publication, 26 October 2015;
doi:10.1038/onc.2015.411.

PMID: 26500057  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


57. Integr Cancer Ther. 2015 Oct 19. pii: 1534735415611747. [Epub ahead of print]

Bitter Melon (Momordica charantia) Extract Inhibits Tumorigenicity and Overcomes 
Cisplatin-Resistance in Ovarian Cancer Cells Through Targeting AMPK Signaling
Cascade.

Yung MM(1), Ross FA(2), Hardie DG(2), Leung TH(1), Zhan J(3), Ngan HY(1), Chan
DW(4).

Author information: 
(1)The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, P R China. (2)University of
Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK. (3)Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, P R China. (4)The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, P R China dwchan@hku.hk.

OBJECTIVE: Acquired chemoresistance is a major obstacle in the clinical
management of ovarian cancer. Therefore, searching for alternative therapeutic
modalities is urgently needed. Bitter melon (Momordica charantia) is a
traditional dietary fruit, but its extract also shows potential medicinal values 
in human diabetes and cancers. Here, we sought to investigate the extract of
bitter melon (BME) in antitumorigenic and cisplatin-induced cytotoxicity in
ovarian cancer cells.
METHODS: Three varieties of bitter melon were used to prepare the BME. Ovarian
cancer cell lines, human immortalized epithelial ovarian cells (HOSEs), and nude 
mice were used to evaluate the cell cytotoxicity, cisplatin resistance, and tumor
inhibitory effect of BME. The molecular mechanism of BME was examined by Western 
blotting.
RESULTS: Cotreatment with BME and cisplatin markedly attenuated tumor growth in
vitro and in vivo in a mouse xenograft model, whereas there was no observable
toxicity in HOSEs or in nude mice in vivo. Interestingly, the antitumorigenic
effects of BME varied with different varieties of bitter melon, suggesting that
the amount of antitumorigenic substances may vary. Studies of the molecular
mechanism demonstrated that BME activates AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) in 
an AMP-independent but CaMKK (Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase)-dependent manner, exerting anticancer effects through activation of AMPK 
and suppression of the mTOR/p70S6K and/or the AKT/ERK/FOXM1 (Forkhead Box M1)
signaling cascade.
CONCLUSION: BME functions as a natural AMPK activator in the inhibition of
ovarian cancer cell growth and might be useful as a supplement to improve the
efficacy of cisplatin-based chemotherapy in ovarian cancer.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26487740  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


58. Genom Data. 2014 Oct 22;3:19-23. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2014.10.012. eCollection
2015.

Small molecule inhibition of FOXM1: How to bring a novel compound into genomic
context.

Marsico G(1), Gormally MV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK, Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge CB2
0RE, UK.

Deregulation of transcription factor (TF) networks is emerging as a major
pathogenic event in many human cancers (Darnell, 2002 [1]; Libermann and Zerbini,
2006 [2]; Laoukili et al., 2007 [3]). Small molecule intervention is an
attractive avenue to understand TF regulatory mechanisms in healthy and disease
state, as well as for exploiting these targets therapeutically (Koehler et al.,
2003 [4]; Berg, 2008 [5]; Koehler, 2010 [6]). However, because of their
physico-chemical properties, TF targeting has been proven to be difficult
(Verdine and Walensky, 2007 [7]). The TF FOXM1 is an important mitotic player
(Wonsey and Follettie, 2005 [8]; Laoukili et al., 2005 [9]; McDonald, 2005 [10]) 
also implicated in cancer progression (Laoukili et al., 2007 [3]; Teh, 2011 [11];
Koo, 2012 [12]) and drug resistance development (Kwok et al., 2010 [13]; Carr et 
al., [14]). Therefore, its inhibition is an attractive goal for cancer therapy.
Here, we describe a computational biology approach, by giving detailed insights
into methodologies and technical results, which was used to analyze the
transcriptional RNA-Seq data presented in our previous work (Gormally et al.,
2014 [20]). Our Bioinformatics analysis shed light on the cellular effect of a
novel FOXM1 inhibitor (FDI-6) newly identified through a biophysical screen. The 
data for this report is available at the public GEO repository (accession number 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE58626).

PMCID: PMC4535965
PMID: 26484143  [PubMed]


59. Cancer Res. 2015 Nov 15;75(22):4778-89. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-1952. Epub 
2015 Oct 19.

Merlin/NF2 Suppresses Pancreatic Tumor Growth and Metastasis by Attenuating the
FOXM1-Mediated Wnt/ß-Catenin Signaling.

Quan M(1), Cui J(1), Xia T(2), Jia Z(3), Xie D(4), Wei D(3), Huang S(5), Huang
Q(6), Zheng S(7), Xie K(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First People's
Hospital, Shanghai, PR China. Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and
Nutrition, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, PR China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology and Nutrition, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. (4)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong University
Affiliated First People's Hospital, Shanghai, PR China. (5)Department of
Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. 
(6)Department of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First People's
Hospital, Shanghai, PR China. kepxie@mdanderson.org qhuang2007@gmail.com
zhenghoho@aliyun.com. (7)Pathology Department of Affiliated Hospital, Hainan
Provincial Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Intervention, Hainan Medical
College, Haikou, Hainan, PR China. kepxie@mdanderson.org qhuang2007@gmail.com
zhenghoho@aliyun.com. (8)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and
Nutrition, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
kepxie@mdanderson.org qhuang2007@gmail.com zhenghoho@aliyun.com.

Merlin, the protein encoded by the NF2 gene, is a member of the band 4.1 family
of cytoskeleton-associated proteins and functions as a tumor suppressor for many 
types of cancer. However, the roles and mechanism of Merlin expression in
pancreatic cancer have remained unclear. In this study, we sought to determine
the impact of Merlin expression on pancreatic cancer development and progression 
using human tissue specimens, cell lines, and animal models. Decreased expression
of Merlin was pronounced in human pancreatic tumors and cancer cell lines.
Functional analysis revealed that restored expression of Merlin inhibited
pancreatic tumor growth and metastasis in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, Merlin 
suppressed the expression of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling downstream genes and the
nuclear expression of ß-catenin protein, and overexpression of Forkhead box M1
(FOXM1) attenuated the suppressive effect of Merlin on Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.
Mechanistically, Merlin decreased the stability of FOXM1 protein, which plays
critical roles in nuclear translocation of ß-catenin. Collectively, these
findings demonstrated that Merlin critically regulated pancreatic cancer
pathogenesis by suppressing FOXM1/ß-catenin signaling, suggesting that targeting 
novel Merlin/FOXM1/ß-catenin signaling is an effective therapeutic strategy for
pancreatic cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4651817 [Available on 2016-11-15]
PMID: 26483206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nutr Cancer. 2015;67(8):1324-32. doi: 10.1080/01635581.2015.1082113. Epub 2015
Oct 16.

Inhibitory Effects of Enterolactone on Growth and Metastasis in Human Breast
Cancer.

Xiong XY(1,)(2), Hu XJ(2), Li Y(3), Liu CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)a State Key Laboratory of Food Science and Technology, Department of Life
Science and Food Engineering, Nanchang University , Nanchang , China. (2)b
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Nanchang University , Nanchang , China. (3)c The Institute of
Translational Medicine, Nanchang University , Nanchang , China.

A lignan-rich diet is associated with a lower risk of human breast cancer.
Enterolactone, an active polyphenol metabolites of lignan, was reported to have
an antitumor effect. We investigated the mechanism for the effect of
enterolactone against human breast cancer. Cellular changes, and associated genes
induced by enterolactone, were investigated in MDA-MB-231 cells. Enterolactone
showed an antiproliferative effect, and its IC50 was 261.9 ± 10.5 µM for a
treatment period of 48 hr. The mRNA levels of the genes related to cell
proliferation, Ki67, PCNA, and FoxM1, were reduced. Enterolactone induced
accumulation of cells in the S phase, and a lower expression of Cyclin E1, Cyclin
A2, Cyclin B1, and Cyclin B2 genes. There were almost no changes in the
transcription levels of the genes that participate in G0/G1 phase regulation,
CDK4, CDK6, and Cyclin D1. Furthermore, enterolactone interfered with the
cytoskeleton by downregulating phosphorylation of the FAK/paxillin pathway,
inhibiting migration and invasion of cells. The results suggest that
enterolactone exerts an antitumor effect by regulating the expression of genes
associated with cell proliferation and the cell cycle and by blocking the
FAK/paxillin signaling pathway. These findings provide new insights into the
molecular mechanisms behind the antitumor effect of enterolactone.

PMID: 26473769  [PubMed - in process]


121. Diabetologia. 2015 Aug;58(8):1836-44. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3635-3. Epub 2015
May 29.

The FOXP1, FOXP2 and FOXP4 transcription factors are required for islet alpha
cell proliferation and function in mice.

Spaeth JM(1), Hunter CS, Bonatakis L, Guo M, French CA, Slack I, Hara M, Fisher
SE, Ferrer J, Morrisey EE, Stanger BZ, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, 723 Light Hall, 2215 Garland Avenue, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Several forkhead box (FOX) transcription factor family members
have important roles in controlling pancreatic cell fates and maintaining beta
cell mass and function, including FOXA1, FOXA2 and FOXM1. In this study we have
examined the importance of FOXP1, FOXP2 and FOXP4 of the FOXP subfamily in islet 
cell development and function.
METHODS: Mice harbouring floxed alleles for Foxp1, Foxp2 and Foxp4 were crossed
with pan-endocrine Pax6-Cre transgenic mice to generate single and compound Foxp 
mutant mice. Mice were monitored for changes in glucose tolerance by IPGTT, serum
insulin and glucagon levels by radioimmunoassay, and endocrine cell development
and proliferation by immunohistochemistry. Gene expression and glucose-stimulated
hormone secretion experiments were performed with isolated islets.
RESULTS: Only the triple-compound Foxp1/2/4 conditional knockout (cKO) mutant had
an overt islet phenotype, manifested physiologically by hypoglycaemia and
hypoglucagonaemia. This resulted from the reduction in glucagon-secreting alpha
cell mass and function. The proliferation of alpha cells was profoundly reduced
in Foxp1/2/4 cKO islets through the effects on mediators of replication (i.e.
decreased Ccna2, Ccnb1 and Ccnd2 activators, and increased Cdkn1a inhibitor).
Adult islet Foxp1/2/4 cKO beta cells secrete insulin normally while the remaining
alpha cells have impaired glucagon secretion.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Collectively, these findings reveal an important role
for the FOXP1, 2, and 4 proteins in governing postnatal alpha cell expansion and 
function.

PMCID: PMC4785827
PMID: 26021489  [PubMed - in process]


122. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 9;112(23):E3050-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1508057112. Epub 2015 May 26.

Systematic transcriptome analysis reveals tumor-specific isoforms for ovarian
cancer diagnosis and therapy.

Barrett CL(1), DeBoever C(2), Jepsen K(3), Saenz CC(4), Carson DA(5), Frazer
KA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Moores Cancer Center, Department of Pediatrics and Rady Children's Hospital.
(2)Moores Cancer Center, Bioinformatics and Systems Biology. (3)Institute for
Genomic Medicine. (4)Department of Medicine. (5)Moores Cancer Center, Department 
of Medicine, Sanford Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, University of
California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 dcarson@ucsd.edu. (6)Moores Cancer
Center, Department of Pediatrics and Rady Children's Hospital, Institute for
Genomic Medicine.

Tumor-specific molecules are needed across diverse areas of oncology for use in
early detection, diagnosis, prognosis and therapy. Large and growing public
databases of transcriptome sequencing data (RNA-seq) derived from tumors and
normal tissues hold the potential of yielding tumor-specific molecules, but
because the data are new they have not been fully explored for this purpose. We
have developed custom bioinformatic algorithms and used them with 296 high-grade 
serous ovarian (HGS-OvCa) tumor and 1,839 normal RNA-seq datasets to identify
mRNA isoforms with tumor-specific expression. We rank prioritized isoforms by
likelihood of being expressed in HGS-OvCa tumors and not in normal tissues and
analyzed 671 top-ranked isoforms by high-throughput RT-qPCR. Six of these
isoforms were expressed in a majority of the 12 tumors examined but not in 18
normal tissues. An additional 11 were expressed in most tumors and only one
normal tissue, which in most cases was fallopian or colon. Of the 671 isoforms,
the topmost 5% (n = 33) ranked based on having tumor-specific or highly
restricted normal tissue expression by RT-qPCR analysis are enriched for
oncogenic, stem cell/cancer stem cell, and early development loci--including
ETV4, FOXM1, LSR, CD9, RAB11FIP4, and FGFRL1. Many of the 33 isoforms are
predicted to encode proteins with unique amino acid sequences, which would allow 
them to be specifically targeted for one or more therapeutic
strategies--including monoclonal antibodies and T-cell-based vaccines. The
systematic process described herein is readily and rapidly applicable to the more
than 30 additional tumor types for which sufficient amounts of RNA-seq already
exist.

PMCID: PMC4466751
PMID: 26015570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. BMC Med Genomics. 2015 May 26;8:25. doi: 10.1186/s12920-015-0101-5.

Molecular subtypes of urothelial carcinoma are defined by specific gene
regulatory systems.

Eriksson P(1), Aine M(2), Veerla S(3), Liedberg F(4), Sjödahl G(5), Höglund M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund
University, Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. pontus.eriksson@med.lu.se.
(2)Division of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund
University, Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. mattias.aine@med.lu.se. (3)Division
of Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University,
Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. srinivas.veerla@med.lu.se. (4)Division of
Urological Research, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University,
Malmö, Skåne, SE-205 02, Sweden. Fredrik.liedberg@med.lu.se. (5)Division of
Urological Research, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund University,
Malmö, Skåne, SE-205 02, Sweden. Gottfrid.sjodahl@med.lu.se. (6)Division of
Oncology and Pathology, Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Lund University,
Lund, Skåne, SE-223 81, Sweden. mattias.hoglund@med.lu.se.

BACKGROUND: Molecular stratification of bladder cancer has revealed gene
signatures differentially expressed across tumor subtypes. While these signatures
provide important insights into subtype biology, the transcriptional regulation
that governs these signatures is not well characterized.
METHODS: In this study, we use publically available ChIP-Seq data on regulatory
factor binding in order to link transcription factors to gene signatures defining
molecular subtypes of urothelial carcinoma.
RESULTS: We identify PPARG and STAT3, as well as ADIRF, a novel regulator of
fatty acid metabolism, as putative mediators of the SCC-like phenotype. We link
the PLK1-FOXM1 axis to the rapidly proliferating Genomically Unstable and
SCC-like subtypes and show that differentiation programs involving PPARG/RXRA,
FOXA1/GATA3 and HOXA/HOXB are differentially expressed in UC molecular subtypes. 
We show that gene signatures and regulatory systems defined in urothelial
carcinoma operate in breast cancer in a subtype specific manner, suggesting
similarities at the gene regulatory level of these two tumor types.
CONCLUSIONS: At the gene regulatory level Urobasal, Genomically Unstable and
SCC-like tumors represents three fundamentally different tumor types. Urobasal
tumors maintain an apparent urothelial differentiation axis composed of
PPARG/RXRA, FOXA1/GATA3 and anterior HOXA and HOXB genes. Genomically Unstable
and SCC-like tumors differ from Urobasal tumors by a strong increase of
proliferative activity through the PLK1-FOXM1 axis operating in both subtypes.
However, whereas SCC-like tumors evade urothelial differentiation by a block in
differentiation through strong downregulation of PPARG/RXRA, FOXA1/GATA3, our
data indicates that Genomically Unstable tumors evade differentiation in a more
dynamic manner.

PMCID: PMC4446831
PMID: 26008846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Cancer. 2015 Apr 28;6(6):538-41. doi: 10.7150/jca.11766. eCollection 2015.

Mutual Regulation of FOXM1, NPM and ARF Proteins.

Pandit B(1), Gartel AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60612,
USA.

ARF, NPM and FOXM1 proteins interact with each other in mammalian cells. We
showed previously that proteasome inhibitors suppress not only FOXM1 expression, 
but also the expression of ARF and NPM proteins. Using RNA interference we found 
that the depletion of each of these proteins by RNAi in human cancer HeLa cells
leads to down-regulation of the two other partners, suggesting that these
proteins stabilize each other in human cancer cells. Since the suppression of
FOXM1 is one of hallmarks of proteasome inhibition, suppression of ARF and NPM by
proteasome inhibitors may be explained in part as a secondary effect of
downregulation of FOXM1 that modulate stability of ARF and NPM1 proteins.

PMCID: PMC4439939
PMID: 26000045  [PubMed]


125. Strahlenther Onkol. 2015 Aug;191(8):649-55. doi: 10.1007/s00066-015-0840-4. Epub 
2015 May 19.

Expression of Aurora-B and FOXM1 predict poor survival in patients with
nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Huang PY(1), Li Y, Luo DH, Hou X, Zeng TT, Li MQ, Mai HQ, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Cancer Medicine, Guangzhou, P.R. China.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this work was to investigate the relationship between
Aurora-B, FOXM1, and clinical outcomes in patients with nasopharyngeal carcinoma 
(NPC) who were treated with a combination of induction chemotherapy and
radiotherapy.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The expression of Aurora-B and FOXM1 were investigated by
immunohistochemistry using a tissue microarray (TMA) containing samples from 166 
NPC patients who were treated with cisplatin (DDP) + fluorouracil (5-FU)
induction chemotherapy and radiotherapy between 1999 and 2005. The relationship
of Aurora-B, FOXM1, and survival of these NPC patients was analyzed.
RESULTS: Informative TMA results were obtained in 91 tumor cases for Aurora-B and
93 tumor cases for FOXM1. The 8-year failure-free survival rate (FFS) for the
Aurora-B-negative and Aurora-B-positive group was 65.6 and 37.3%, respectively (p
= 0.024), and the 8-year distant FFS (D-FFS) rate was 65.6 and 41.5%,
respectively (p = 0.047). The 8-year overall survival (OS) in the FOXM1-negative 
group was moderately higher than in the FOXM1-positive group (58.4 vs 39.1%, p = 
0.081). Cox regression analysis revealed that for FFS, Aurora-B expression was a 
significant prognostic factor (p = 0.025), while for D-FFS, Aurora-B expression
was a marginally significant prognostic factor (p = 0.056). When FOXM1 expression
was analyzed, the Cox regression analyses showed that FOXM1 expression was a
marginally significant prognostic factor (p = 0.056) for OS. Correlation analysis
showed that Aurora-B and FOXM1 expression had no significant correlation.
CONCLUSION: Aurora-B and FOXM1 were both adverse prognostic markers for NPC
patients treated with chemoradiotherapy. However, the two markers had no
significant correlation.

PMID: 25986250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Jan 15;5(2):589-602. eCollection 2015.

High-level SAE2 promotes malignant phenotype and predicts outcome in gastric
cancer.

Shao DF(1), Wang XH(2), Li ZY(1), Xing XF(3), Cheng XJ(3), Guo T(3), Du H(3), Hu 
Y(2), Dong B(4), Ding N(1), Li L(1), Li S(1), Li QD(1), Wen XZ(3), Zhang LH(1),
Ji JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Beijing Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Peking University School of Oncology Beijing, China. (2)The Tissue
Bank, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Beijing Cancer Hospital & Institute, Peking University School of
Oncology Beijing, China. (3)Department of Gastrointestinal Translational
Research, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry
of Education), Beijing Cancer Hospital & Institute, Peking University School of
Oncology Beijing, China. (4)Department of Pathology, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Beijing Cancer
Hospital & Institute, Peking University School of Oncology Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The SUMO pathway has been shown to play an important role in
tumorigenesis. This report analyzed the involvement of the sole SUMO-Activating
Enzyme Subunit 2 (SAE2) in human gastric cancer (GC) progression and prognosis.
METHODS: Expression of SAE2 was examined by Quantigene Plex, western blotting and
immunohistochemistry. The expression of SAE2 and c-MYC were detected in parallel 
in 276 cases. The molecular mechanisms of SAE2 expression and its effects on cell
growth, colony formation, migration and invasion were also explored by CCK8
assay, colony formation experiment, transwell chamber assay with or without
matrigel, immunoprecipitation and in vivo tumorigenesis and tumor metastasis.
RESULTS: SAE2 was markedly overexpressed in GC cell lines and primary tumor
samples of GC, and significantly correlated with deeper tumor depth, distant
metastasis, higher pathological stage and stratified survival in human GC. SAE2
positivity was independently associated with a worse outcome in multivariate
analysis. Knockdown of SAE2 expression inhibited the proliferation, migration,
and invasion of SAE2-overexpressing GC cells. Consistent with the in vitro
results, down-regulation of SAE2 in human GC BGC823 cells significantly reduced
the tumorigenic and metastatic potential of the cells in vivo. SAE2 protein was
significantly associated with the higher expression of c-MYC in primary GC
tissues. Moreover, FoxM1 was SUMOylated in GC and that inhibition of SAE2
resulted in a decrease in SUMO1-FoxM1 levels compared with those in the controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that SAE2 has a pivotal role in the
aggressiveness of GC, and highlight its usefulness as a prognostic factor in GC.

PMCID: PMC4396028
PMID: 25973299  [PubMed]


127. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Feb 1;8(2):1515-24. eCollection 2015.

Up-regulation of miR-877 induced by paclitaxel inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma 
cell proliferation though targeting FOXM1.

Huang X(1), Qin J(1), Lu S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center of Liver Transplantation, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
Medical University, The Key Laboratory of Living Donor Liver Transplantation,
Ministry of Health Nanjing 210029, China.

Paclitaxel is an effective chemotherapeutic agent for treatment of cancer
patients, and frequently, clinical outcome is influenced by paclitaxel
sensitivity. Despite this, our understanding of the molecular basis of paclitaxel
response is incomplete. Recently, it has been shown that microRNAs (miRNAs)
influence messenger RNA (mRNA) transcriptional control and can contribute to
human carcinogenesis. In the present study, our objective was to identify miR-877
associated with HCC cell lines response to paclitaxel and to evaluate these
miRNAs as therapeutic targets to increase paclitaxel sensitivity. We measured the
expression of miR-877 in paclitaxel-treated HCC cell lines. We verified that
miR-877 was up-regulated in paclitaxel-induced HCC cells by real-time PCR. We
further investigated the role and mechanisms of miR-877. Over-expression of
miR-877 in HCC cells partially restores paclitaxel sensitivity. The proliferation
activity and the colony formation activity of HCC cells were both inhibited after
transfected with miR-877. MiRNA targets prediction algorithms imply FOXM1 serves 
as a target gene for miR-877. A fluorescent reporter assay confirmed that miR-877
binds specifically to the predicted site of the FOXM1 mRNA 3'-untranslated region
(3'UTR). When miR-877 was overexpressed in HCC cells, the protein levels of FOXM1
was downregulated. These results indicate that miR-877 could influence the
sensitivity of paclitaxel treatment in hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines by
targeting FOXM1.

PMCID: PMC4396225
PMID: 25973036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Inflamm Res. 2015 Jul;64(7):471-86. doi: 10.1007/s00011-015-0820-2. Epub 2015 May
12.

Transcriptional profiling and targeted proteomics reveals common molecular
changes associated with cigarette smoke-induced lung emphysema development in
five susceptible mouse strains.

Cabanski M(1), Fields B, Boue S, Boukharov N, DeLeon H, Dror N, Geertz M, Guedj
E, Iskandar A, Kogel U, Merg C, Peck MJ, Poussin C, Schlage WK, Talikka M, Ivanov
NV, Hoeng J, Peitsch MC.

Author information: 
(1)Philip Morris International Research and Development, Philip Morris Products
S.A, Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000, Neuchâtel, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Mouse models are useful for studying cigarette smoke (CS)-induced
chronic pulmonary pathologies such as lung emphysema. To enhance translation of
large-scale omics data from mechanistic studies into pathophysiological changes, 
we have developed computational tools based on reverse causal reasoning (RCR).
OBJECTIVE: In the present study we applied a systems biology approach leveraging 
RCR to identify molecular mechanistic explanations of pathophysiological changes 
associated with CS-induced lung emphysema in susceptible mice.
METHODS: The lung transcriptomes of five mouse models (C57BL/6, ApoE (-/-) , A/J,
CD1, and Nrf2 (-/-) ) were analyzed following 5-7 months of CS exposure.
RESULTS: We predicted 39 molecular changes mostly related to inflammatory
processes including known key emphysema drivers such as NF-<U+03BA>B and TLR4 signaling,
and increased levels of TNF-a, CSF2, and several interleukins. More importantly, 
RCR predicted potential molecular mechanisms that are less well-established,
including increased transcriptional activity of PU.1, STAT1, C/EBP, FOXM1, YY1,
and N-COR, and reduced protein abundance of ITGB6 and CFTR. We corroborated
several predictions using targeted proteomic approaches, demonstrating increased 
abundance of CSF2, C/EBPa, C/EBPß, PU.1, BRCA1, and STAT1.
CONCLUSION: These systems biology-derived candidate mechanisms common to
susceptible mouse models may enhance understanding of CS-induced molecular
processes underlying emphysema development in mice and their relevancy for human 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

PMCID: PMC4464601
PMID: 25962837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Oncol Rep. 2015 Jun;33(6):3171-7. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3938. Epub 2015 Apr 28.

FOXM1-mediated downregulation of uPA and MMP9 by 3,3'-diindolylmethane inhibits
migration and invasion of human colorectal cancer cells.

Jin H(1), Li XJ(1), Park MH(2), Kim SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute for Medical Sciences, Chonbuk National
University Medical School, Jeonju, Republic of Korea. (2)Catholic University of
Pusan, Busan, Republic of Korea.

Although 3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM) has been suggested to reduce the risk of
colorectal cancer, the underlying biological mechanism is not clearly understood.
In the present study, we investigated the effect of DIM on the migratory and
invasive activities of the human colorectal cancer cell lines DLD-1 and HCT116.
DIM significantly inhibited the migration and invasion of colorectal cancer cells
as assessed by wound healing and Matrigel invasion assays. The migratory ability 
of the DLD-1 and HCT116 cells was significantly reduced by DIM at 24 and 48 h.
DIM also significantly inhibited the invasion rate of the DLD-1 and HCT116 cells 
in a dose-dependent manner. The mRNA expression levels of urokinase type
plasminogen activator (uPA) and matrix metalloprotease 9 (MMP9) were
significantly attenuated, whereas expression of E-cadherin mRNA was significantly
enhanced, following DIM treatment. DIM also decreased the protein levels of uPA
and MMP9, yet significantly increased E-cadherin protein expression. In addition,
DIM significantly reduced the mRNA and protein levels of FOXM1 in the DLD-1 and
HCT116 cells. Our results suggest that DIM can influence the cell migratory and
invasive properties of human colorectal cancer cells and may decrease the
invasive capacity of colorectal cancer through downregulation of uPA and MMP9
mediated by suppression of the transcription factor FOXM1.

PMID: 25962429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Oncogene. 2016 Feb 25;35(8):990-1002. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.152. Epub 2015 May
11.

Paclitaxel targets FOXM1 to regulate KIF20A in mitotic catastrophe and breast
cancer paclitaxel resistance.

Khongkow P(1), Gomes AR(1), Gong C(1,)(2), Man EP(2), Tsang JW(3), Zhao F(1,)(2),
Monteiro LJ(1), Coombes RC(1), Medema RH(4), Khoo US(2), Lam EW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, London, UK. (2)Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of
Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (3)Department of
Clinical Oncology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China. (4)Division of Cell Biology, The Netherlands Cancer
Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

FOXM1 has been implicated in taxane resistance, but the molecular mechanism
involved remains elusive. In here, we show that FOXM1 depletion can sensitize
breast cancer cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts into entering
paclitaxel-induced senescence, with the loss of clonogenic ability, and the
induction of senescence-associated ß-galactosidase activity and flat cell
morphology. We also demonstrate that FOXM1 regulates the expression of the
microtubulin-associated kinesin KIF20A at the transcriptional level directly
through a Forkhead response element (FHRE) in its promoter. Similar to FOXM1,
KIF20A expression is downregulated by paclitaxel in the sensitive MCF-7 breast
cancer cells and deregulated in the paclitaxel-resistant MCF-7Tax(R) cells.
KIF20A depletion also renders MCF-7 and MCF-7Tax(R) cells more sensitive to
paclitaxel-induced cellular senescence. Crucially, resembling paclitaxel
treatment, silencing of FOXM1 and KIF20A similarly promotes abnormal mitotic
spindle morphology and chromosome alignment, which have been shown to induce
mitotic catastrophe-dependent senescence. The physiological relevance of the
regulation of KIF20A by FOXM1 is further highlighted by the strong and
significant correlations between FOXM1 and KIF20A expression in breast cancer
patient samples. Statistical analysis reveals that both FOXM1 and KIF20A protein 
and mRNA expression significantly associates with poor survival, consistent with 
a role of FOXM1 and KIF20A in paclitaxel action and resistance. Collectively, our
findings suggest that paclitaxel targets the FOXM1-KIF20A axis to drive abnormal 
mitotic spindle formation and mitotic catastrophe and that deregulated FOXM1 and 
KIF20A expression may confer paclitaxel resistance. These findings provide
insights into the underlying mechanisms of paclitaxel resistance and have
implications for the development of predictive biomarkers and novel
chemotherapeutic strategies for paclitaxel resistance.

PMCID: PMC4538879
PMID: 25961928  [PubMed - in process]


131. PLoS One. 2015 May 11;10(5):e0126762. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0126762.
eCollection 2015.

Revealing the Molecular Portrait of Triple Negative Breast Tumors in an
Understudied Population through Omics Analysis of Formalin-Fixed and
Paraffin-Embedded Tissues.

Vaca-Paniagua F(1), Alvarez-Gomez RM(2), Maldonado-Martínez HA(3),
Pérez-Plasencia C(4), Fragoso-Ontiveros V(5), Lasa-Gonsebatt F(6), Herrera LA(7),
Cantú D(7), Bargallo-Rocha E(8), Mohar A(6), Durand G(9), Forey N(9), Voegele
C(9), Vallée M(9), Le Calvez-Kelm F(9), McKay J(9), Ardin M(10), Villar S(10),
Zavadil J(10), Olivier M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Group of Molecular Mechanisms and Biomarkers, International Agency for
Research on Cancer, Lyon, France; Subdirección de Investigación Básica, Instituto
Nacional de Cancerología, México D.F., México; Unidad de Biomedicina,
FES-Iztacala, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM), México D.F.,
México. (2)Unidad de Genómica y Secuenciación Masiva (UGESEM), Instituto Nacional
de Cancerología, México D.F., México. (3)Departamento de Patología Molecular,
Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, México D.F., México. (4)Subdirección de
Investigación Básica, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, México D.F., México;
Unidad de Biomedicina, FES-Iztacala, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México
(UNAM), México D.F., México; Unidad de Genómica y Secuenciación Masiva (UGESEM), 
Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, México D.F., México. (5)Subdirección de
Investigación Básica, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, México D.F., México;
Unidad de Genómica y Secuenciación Masiva (UGESEM), Instituto Nacional de
Cancerología, México D.F., México. (6)Departamento de Epidemiología, Instituto
Nacional de Cancerología, México D.F., México. (7)Unidad de Investigaciones
Biomédicas en Cáncer, Instituto Nacional de Cancerología, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México (UNAM),
México D.F., México. (8)Departamento de Tumores Mamarios, Instituto Nacional de
Cancerología, México D.F., México. (9)Group of Genetic Cancer Susceptibility,
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France. (10)Group of Molecular
Mechanisms and Biomarkers, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon,
France.

Triple negative breast cancer (TNBC), defined by the lack of expression of the
estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor and human epidermal receptor 2, is an
aggressive form of breast cancer that is more prevalent in certain populations,
in particular in low- and middle-income regions. The detailed molecular features 
of TNBC in these regions remain unexplored as samples are mostly accessible as
formalin-fixed paraffin embedded (FFPE) archived tissues, a challenging material 
for advanced genomic and transcriptomic studies. Using dedicated reagents and
analysis pipelines, we performed whole exome sequencing and miRNA and mRNA
profiling of 12 FFPE tumor tissues collected from pathological archives in
Mexico. Sequencing analyses of the tumor tissues and their blood pairs identified
TP53 and RB1 genes as the most frequently mutated genes, with a somatic mutation 
load of 1.7 mutations/exome Mb on average. Transcriptional analyses revealed an
overexpression of growth-promoting signals (EGFR, PDGFR, VEGF, PIK3CA, FOXM1), a 
repression of cell cycle control pathways (TP53, RB1), a deregulation of
DNA-repair pathways, and alterations in epigenetic modifiers through miRNA:mRNA
network de-regulation. The molecular programs identified were typical of those
described in basal-like tumors in other populations. This work demonstrates the
feasibility of using archived clinical samples for advanced integrated genomics
analyses. It thus opens up opportunities for investigating molecular features of 
tumors from regions where only FFPE tissues are available, allowing retrospective
studies on the search for treatment strategies or on the exploration of the
geographic diversity of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4427337
PMID: 25961742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Oncotarget. 2015 May 30;6(15):13241-54.

CDC20 maintains tumor initiating cells.

Xie Q(1), Wu Q(1), Mack SC(1), Yang K(1,)(2), Kim L(1), Hubert CG(1), Flavahan
WA(1,)(3,)(4,)(5), Chu C(1,)(6), Bao S(1,)(2), Rich JN(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (2)Department of Molecular
Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (3)Department of Pathology and Center for
Cancer Research, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02114, USA. (4)Broad Institute of Harvard and Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (5)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA. (6)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of
Surgery, Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital, Kaohsiung 80756, Taiwan.

Glioblastoma is the most prevalent and lethal primary intrinsic brain tumor.
Glioblastoma displays hierarchical arrangement with a population of self-renewing
and tumorigenic glioma tumor initiating cells (TICs), or cancer stem cells. While
non-neoplastic neural stem cells are generally quiescent, glioblastoma TICs are
often proliferative with mitotic control offering a potential point of fragility.
Here, we interrogate the role of cell-division cycle protein 20 (CDC20), an
essential activator of anaphase-promoting complex (APC) E3 ubiquitination ligase,
in the maintenance of TICs. By chromatin analysis and immunoblotting, CDC20 was
preferentially expressed in TICs relative to matched non-TICs. Targeting CDC20
expression by RNA interference attenuated TIC proliferation, self-renewal and in 
vivo tumor growth. CDC20 disruption mediated its effects through induction of
apoptosis and inhibition of cell cycle progression. CDC20 maintains TICs through 
degradation of p21CIP1/WAF1, a critical negative regulator of TICs. Inhibiting
CDC20 stabilized p21CIP1/WAF1, resulting in repression of several genes critical 
to tumor growth and survival, including CDC25C, c-Myc and Survivin.
Transcriptional control of CDC20 is mediated by FOXM1, a central transcription
factor in TICs. These results suggest CDC20 is a critical regulator of TIC
proliferation and survival, linking two key TIC nodes-FOXM1 and
p21CIP1/WAF1-elucidating a potential point for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC4537011
PMID: 25938542  [PubMed - in process]


133. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2015 Jul;19(7):865-7. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2015.1042366. Epub 2015 May 4.

Is there potential to target FOXM1 for 'undruggable' lung cancers?

Kalinichenko VV(1), Kalin TV.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Pulmonary Biology ,
3333 Burnet Ave, MLC 7009, Cincinnati, OH 45229 , USA +1 513 636 4822 ; +1 513
636 2423 ; Vladimir.Kalinichenko@cchmc.org.

Published studies with transgenic mice convincingly showed that Forkhead Box
transcription factor M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor is an important component of
the KRAS/ERK signaling pathway in respiratory epithelial cells. FOXM1 is required
for oncogenic KRAS signaling in mouse lung cancer models and therefore, clear
potential exists to target FOXM1 in human NSCLC driven by activated KRAS
mutations. To date, several approaches to inhibit FOXM1 in cancer cells have been
explored. These include siRNA/shRNA-mediated inhibition of Foxm1 mRNA,
sequestration of FOXM1 protein in nucleoli using ARF peptide, inhibition of FOXM1
binding to its target promoter DNAs by the FDI-6 small-molecule compound and
inhibition of proteasomes by thiazole antibiotics. Additional studies are needed 
to determine if inhibition of FOXM1 is beneficial for treatment of KRAS mutant
NSCLCs in human patients and to develop effective delivery systems for FOXM1
inhibitors. If successful, additional strategies can be explored to screen for
novel FOXM1 inhibitors, such as targeting FOXM1 nuclear localization, nuclear
export or protein-protein interactions with activating kinases and co-activator
proteins. Altogether, inhibition of FOXM1, either alone or in combination with
other anticancer drugs, could be beneficial for treatment of KRAS mutant NSCLCs
that are resistant to conventional chemotherapy.

PMID: 25936405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2015 May 3;34:40. doi: 10.1186/s13046-015-0158-1.

Short hairpin RNA- mediated gene knockdown of FOXM1 inhibits the proliferation
and metastasis of human colon cancer cells through reversal of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transformation.

Yang K(1), Jiang L(2), Hu Y(3), Yu J(4), Chen H(5), Yao Y(6), Zhu X(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 215006, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, China. ykk0821010030@163.com.
(2)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 215006, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, China. jianglinhuaaaa@163.com.
(3)Department of Laparoscopic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 215006, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, China. huyoulove@163.com.
(4)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 215006, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, China. yujing0509@163.com.
(5)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 215006, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, China. suzhouwheat2@163.com.
(6)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 215006, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, China. yaoyizhou2014@163.com.
(7)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow
University, 215006, Suzhou, Jiangsu Province, China. professorzxg@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is an oncogenic transcription factor and 
plays a significant role in cell EMT, proliferation, metastasis in a multitude of
human solid tumors including colorectal cancer (CRC). However, the underlying
molecular mechanisms by which FoxM1 contributes to epithelial-to-mesenchymal
(EMT) and metastasis have not been fully elucidated in CRC.
METHODS: In our study, we investigated FOXM1 protein expression in 87 CRC tissue 
specimens, invasive lymph nodes and adjacent paired normal colorectal tissues by 
immunohistochemical analysis. Then we transfected FOXM1 specific shRNA into SW620
cells to examine effect of FOXM1 on proliferation, colony formation, migration
and invasion in vitro. Western blotting and real-time PCR were used to detect the
protein and mRNA expression of FOXM1 and EMT-related markers.
RESULTS: FOXM1 was overexpressed in CRC tissues, invasive lymph nodes and CRC
cell lines. FoxM1 overexpression was significantly associated with lymph node
metastasis (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), and tumor recurrence (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). Moreover,
downregulation of FOXM1 in SW620 cells by shRNA approach inhibited cell growth,
clonogenicity, migration and invasion in vitro. In addition, decreased FOXM1
expression in SW620 cells reversed the acquisition of EMT phenotype by
up-regulating E-cadherin, as well as reduction Vimentin and Snail expressions at 
protein and mRNA levels.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXM1 may regulate CRC cells metastasis through EMT program and
FOXM1 may be a potential target for treatment of CRC.

PMCID: PMC4427949
PMID: 25935853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Genes Dev. 2015 May 1;29(9):961-74. doi: 10.1101/gad.257568.114. Epub 2015 Apr
27.

Structural mechanisms of DREAM complex assembly and regulation.

Guiley KZ(1), Liban TJ(1), Felthousen JG(2), Ramanan P(1), Litovchick L(3), Rubin
SM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California at Santa
Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA; (2)Division of Hematology, Oncology, and
Palliative Care, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA; Massey Cancer Center, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA. (3)Division of
Hematology, Oncology, and Palliative Care, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA; Massey 
Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia 23298, USA
srubin@ucsc.edu llitovchick@vcu.edu. (4)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
University of California at Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA;
srubin@ucsc.edu llitovchick@vcu.edu.

The DREAM complex represses cell cycle genes during quiescence through
scaffolding MuvB proteins with E2F4/5 and the Rb tumor suppressor paralog p107 or
p130. Upon cell cycle entry, MuvB dissociates from p107/p130 and recruits B-Myb
and FoxM1 for up-regulating mitotic gene expression. To understand the
biochemical mechanisms underpinning DREAM function and regulation, we
investigated the structural basis for DREAM assembly. We identified a sequence in
the MuvB component LIN52 that binds directly to the pocket domains of p107 and
p130 when phosphorylated on the DYRK1A kinase site S28. A crystal structure of
the LIN52-p107 complex reveals that LIN52 uses a suboptimal LxSxExL sequence
together with the phosphate at nearby S28 to bind the LxCxE cleft of the pocket
domain with high affinity. The structure explains the specificity for p107/p130
over Rb in the DREAM complex and how the complex is disrupted by viral
oncoproteins. Based on insights from the structure, we addressed how DREAM is
disassembled upon cell cycle entry. We found that p130 and B-Myb can both bind
the core MuvB complex simultaneously but that cyclin-dependent kinase
phosphorylation of p130 weakens its association. Together, our data inform a
novel target interface for studying MuvB and p130 function and the design of
inhibitors that prevent tumor escape in quiescence.

© 2015 Guiley et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4421984
PMID: 25917549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Cell Biochem. 2015 Aug;406(1-2):31-41. doi: 10.1007/s11010-015-2421-3. Epub
2015 Apr 24.

A FOXM1 related long non-coding RNA contributes to gastric cancer cell migration.

Cai H(1), Chen J, He B, Li Q, Li Y, Gao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
150 Ji-Mo Road, Shanghai, 200120, China.

Long non-coding RNAs (LncRNAs) have been reported that play important roles in
the progression and metastasis of some carcinomas. In the present study, we
identified a new LncRNA, FRLnc1, from a microarray analysis in which those
LncRNAs were regulated by FOXM1, an oncogene widely studied in most malignancies.
Quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) results in gastric cancer cell lines
indicated FRLnc1 expression is positively correlated with FOXM1 level, supporting
the microarray data. Furthermore, the RNA level of FRLnc1 is upregulated in 49%
(20/41) of cancer samples compared with neighboring non-cancerous stomach
tissues. The in vitro functional analyses demonstrated that FRLnc1 knockdown by
RNA interference suppressed cell migration in MGC803 and AGS cells, whereas
FRLnc1 overexpression promoted cell migration in BGC823 and SGC7901 cells.
Moreover, FRLnc1 could enhance the distant metastasis of SGC7901 cells by tail
vein injection approach in mice. We also identified TGFß1 and Twist as the
downstream effectors of FRLnc1 in the regulation of cell migration by qRT-PCR
analysis. Taken together, our findings suggest that FRLnc1 is involved in gastric
cancer cell migration and for the first time set up the link between FOXM1 and
LncRNA in cancer.

PMID: 25907137  [PubMed - in process]


137. Drug Des Devel Ther. 2015 Apr 8;9:2033-47. doi: 10.2147/DDDT.S79313. eCollection 
2015.

Quinoline-based clioquinol and nitroxoline exhibit anticancer activity inducing
FoxM1 inhibition in cholangiocarcinoma cells.

Chan-On W(1), Huyen NT(2), Songtawee N(3), Suwanjang W(1), Prachayasittikul S(3),
Prachayasittikul V(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research and Innovation, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
(2)Department of Clinical Microbiology and Applied Technology, Mahidol
University, Bangkok, Thailand. (3)Center of Data Mining and Biomedical
Informatics, Faculty of Medical Technology, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.

PURPOSE: Fork head box M1 (FoxM1) is an oncogenic transcription factor frequently
elevated in numerous cancers, including cholangiocarcinoma (CCA). A growing body 
of evidence documents its diverse functions contributing to tumorigenesis and
cancer progression. As such, discovery of agents that can target FoxM1 would be
valuable for the treatment of CCA. The quinoline-based compounds, namely
clioquinol (CQ) and nitroxoline (NQ), represent a new class of anticancer drug.
However, their efficacy and underlying mechanisms have not been elucidated in
CCA. In this study, anticancer activities and inhibitory effects of CQ and NQ on 
FoxM1 signaling were explored using CCA cells.
METHODS: The effects of CQ and NQ on cell viability and proliferation were
evaluated using the colorimetric
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl)-5-(3-carboxymethoxyphenyl)-(4-sulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazo
lium (MTS assay). Colony formation and cell migration affected by CQ and NQ were 
investigated using a clonogenic and a wound healing assay, respectively. To
demonstrate the agents' effects on FoxM1 signaling, expression levels of the
target genes were quantitatively determined using real-time polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULTS: CQ and NQ significantly inhibited cell survival of HuCCT1 and Huh28 in a
dose- and a time-dependent fashion. Further investigations using the rapidly
proliferating HuCCT1 cells revealed significant suppression of cell proliferation
and colony formation induced by low doses of the compounds. Treatment of CQ and
NQ repressed expression of cyclin D1 but enhanced expression of p21. Most
importantly, upon CQ and NQ treatment, expression of oncogenic FoxM1 was markedly
decreased concomitant with downregulation of various FoxM1's downstream targets
including cdc25b, CENP-B, and survivin. In addition, the compounds distinctly
impaired HuCCT1 migration as well as inhibited expression of matrix
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 and MMP-9.
CONCLUSION: Collectively, this study reports for the first time the anticancer
effects of CQ and NQ against CCA cells, and highlights new insights into the
mechanism of actions of the quinoline-based compounds to disrupt FoxM1 signaling.

PMCID: PMC4396583
PMID: 25897210  [PubMed - in process]


138. Mol Cancer. 2015 Mar 26;14:69. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0339-8.

Deregulation of the FOXM1 target gene network and its coregulatory partners in
oesophageal adenocarcinoma.

Wiseman EF(1,)(2), Chen X(3,)(4), Han N(5,)(6), Webber A(7), Ji Z(8), Sharrocks
AD(9), Ang YS(10).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. elizabeth.wiseman@ymail.com. (2)Faculty of 
Medical and Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester,
UK. elizabeth.wiseman@ymail.com. (3)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of
Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.
xichen@ebi.ac.uk. (4)Present address: The EMBL-European Bioinformatics Institute,
Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridge, CB10 1SD, UK. xichen@ebi.ac.uk.
(5)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK. namshik.han@gmail.com. (6)Present address: 
Gurdon Institute and Department of Pathology, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge, CB2
1QN, UK. namshik.han@gmail.com. (7)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of
Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.
Aaron.webber@manchester.ac.uk. (8)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of
Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.
Zongling.Ji@manchester.ac.uk. (9)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of
Manchester, Michael Smith Building, Oxford Road, Manchester, M13 9PT, UK.
a.d.sharrocks@manchester.ac.uk. (10)Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences,
University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester, UK. Yeng.Ang@srft.nhs.uk.

BACKGROUND: Survival rates for oesophageal adenocarcinoma (OAC) remain
disappointingly poor and current conventional treatment modalities have minimal
impact on long-term survival. This is partly due to a lack of understanding of
the molecular changes that occur in this disease. Previous studies have indicated
that the transcription factor FOXM1 is commonly upregulated in this cancer type
but the impact of this overexpression on gene expression in the context of OAC is
largely unknown. FOXM1 does not function alone but works alongside the
antagonistically-functioning co-regulatory MMB and DREAM complexes.
METHODS: To establish how FOXM1 affects gene expression in OAC we have identified
the FOXM1 target gene network in OAC-derived cells using ChIP-seq and determined 
the expression of both its coregulatory partners and members of this target gene 
network in OAC by digital transcript counting using the Nanostring gene
expression assay.
RESULTS: We find co-upregulation of FOXM1 with its target gene network in OAC.
Furthermore, we find changes in the expression of its coregulatory partners,
including co-upregulation of LIN9 and, surprisingly, reduced expression of LIN54.
Mechanistically, we identify LIN9 as the direct binding partner for FOXM1 in the 
MMB complex. In the context of OAC, both coregulator (eg LIN54) and target gene
(eg UHRF1) expression levels are predictive of disease stage.
CONCLUSIONS: Together our data demonstrate that there are global changes to the
FOXM1 regulatory network in OAC and the expression of components of this network 
help predict cancer prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4392876
PMID: 25889361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Clin Transl Med. 2015 Mar 19;4:13. doi: 10.1186/s40169-015-0054-5. eCollection
2015.

Psoriasis drug development and GWAS interpretation through in silico analysis of 
transcription factor binding sites.

Swindell WR(1), Sarkar MK(1), Stuart PE(1), Voorhees JJ(1), Elder JT(1), Johnston
A(1), Gudjonsson JE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Michigan School of Medicine, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109-2200 USA.

BACKGROUND: Psoriasis is a cytokine-mediated skin disease that can be treated
effectively with immunosuppressive biologic agents. These medications, however,
are not equally effective in all patients and are poorly suited for treating mild
psoriasis. To develop more targeted therapies, interfering with transcription
factor (TF) activity is a promising strategy.
METHODS: Meta-analysis was used to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs)
in the lesional skin from psoriasis patients (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>237). We compiled a dictionary 
of 2935 binding sites representing empirically-determined binding affinities of
TFs and unconventional DNA-binding proteins (uDBPs). This dictionary was screened
to identify "psoriasis response elements" (PREs) overrepresented in sequences
upstream of psoriasis DEGs.
RESULTS: PREs are recognized by IRF1, ISGF3, NF-kappaB and multiple TFs with
helix-turn-helix (homeo) or other all-alpha-helical (high-mobility group)
DNA-binding domains. We identified a limited set of DEGs that encode proteins
interacting with PRE motifs, including TFs (GATA3, EHF, FOXM1, SOX5) and uDBPs
(AVEN, RBM8A, GPAM, WISP2). PREs were prominent within enhancer regions near
cytokine-encoding DEGs (IL17A, IL19 and IL1B), suggesting that PREs might be
incorporated into complex decoy oligonucleotides (cdODNs). To illustrate this
idea, we designed a cdODN to concomitantly target psoriasis-activated TFs (i.e., 
FOXM1, ISGF3, IRF1 and NF-kappaB). Finally, we screened psoriasis-associated SNPs
to identify risk alleles that disrupt or engender PRE motifs. This identified
possible sites of allele-specific TF/uDBP binding and showed that PREs are
disproportionately disrupted by psoriasis risk alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified new TF/uDBP candidates and developed an approach that 
(i) connects transcriptome informatics to cdODN drug development and (ii)
enhances our ability to interpret GWAS findings. Disruption of PRE motifs by
psoriasis risk alleles may contribute to disease susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC4392043
PMID: 25883770  [PubMed]


140. Curr Cancer Drug Targets. 2015;15(5):423-34.

An Integrative Analysis of the Putative Gefitinib-resistance Related Genes in a
Lung Cancer Cell Line Model System.

Han X, Liu M, Wang S, Lv G, Ma L, Zeng C(1), Shi Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Genome Variation and Precision Biomedicine, Beijing
Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100101, China.
czeng@big.ac.cn. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer Institute/Hospital,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College; Beijing Key
Laboratory of Clinical Study on Anticancer Molecular Targeted Drugs, Beijing
100021, China. syuankai@cicams.ac.cn.

The epidermal growth factor receptor-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (EGFRTKI), such
as gefitinib and erlotinib have improved the survival of patients with nonsmall
cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Unfortunately, acquired resistance will eventually
develop in most patients who initially respond to the therapy. Currently known
molecular mechanisms for such an acquired resistance may interpret only about 70%
of clinical cases. In this study, using NSCLC cell model H1650, we constructed a 
gefitinib resistant cell line H1650GR through long term drug exposure with
increased doses. RNA sequencing and whole genome SNP array were applied to
investigate the transcriptome and genome alterations possibly involved in
gefitinib resistance. By comparing the expression profiles between H1650GR and
H1650 cells, we identified a large set of differentially expressed genes (DEGs), 
including FOXM1. In the PI3K/AKT pathway, AKT activity was predicted to be
inhibited. However, genes that play important roles in gefitinib-induced
apoptosis, including TP53, FOXO3 and BAD, were not up-regulated. Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA) canonical pathway analysis showed that p53 signaling was
inhibited in H1650GR cells, with down-regulation of pro-apoptosis genes FAS,
PUMA, NOXA, and upregulation of anti-apoptosis genes BIRC5/Survivin. Besides, a
large number of immune response-related genes were differently expressed, the
role of which in gefitinib resistance requires further investigation. Whole
genome copy number alterations (CNAs) were also analyzed and NOXA was located in 
the H1650GR unique copy number loss region, 18q21. Our results suggested that the
much higher EGFR-TKI resistance in H1650GR may be produced by the integration of 
multi-aspect factors.

PMID: 25877381  [PubMed - in process]


141. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):11281-94.

FoxM1 promotes breast tumorigenesis by activating PDGF-A and forming a positive
feedback loop with the PDGF/AKT signaling pathway.

Yu G(1,)(2), Zhou A(1), Xue J(1), Huang C(3), Zhang X(2), Kang SH(1), Chiu WT(1),
Tan C(1), Xie K(3,)(4), Wang J(2), Huang S(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Medical Oncology, Changzheng Hospital,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (3)Departments of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA. (4)Program in Cancer Biology, The University of Texas Graduate 
School of Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.

The autocrine platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF)/PDGF receptor (PDGFR)
signaling pathway promotes breast cancer tumorigenesis, but the mechanisms for
its dysregulation in breast cancer are largely unknown. In the study, we
identified PDGF-A as a novel transcriptional target of FoxM1. FoxM1 directly
binds to two sites in the promoter of PDGF-A and activates its transcription.
Mutation of these FoxM1-binding sites diminished PDGF-A promoter activity.
Increased FoxM1 resulted in the upregulation of PDGF-A, which led to activation
of the AKT pathway and increased breast cancer cell proliferation and
tumorigenesis, whereas knockdown of FoxM1 does the opposite. Blocking AKT
activation with a phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT inhibitor decreased FoxM1-induced
cell proliferation. Moreover, PDGF/AKT pathway upregulates the expression of
FoxM1 in breast cancer cells. Knockdown of PDGF-A or blockade of AKT activation
inhibited the expression of FoxM1 in breast cancer cells. Furthermore, expression
of FoxM1 significantly correlated with the expression of PDGF-A and the activated
AKT signaling pathway in human breast cancer specimens. Our study demonstrates a 
novel positive regulatory feedback loop between FoxM1 and the PDGF/AKT signaling 
pathway; this loop contributes to breast cancer cell growth and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC4484456
PMID: 25869208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Neoplasma. 2015;62(3):464-9. doi: 10.4149/neo_2015_055.

Expression of CDCA8 correlates closely with FOXM1 in breast cancer: public
microarray data analysis and immunohistochemical study.

Jiao DC, Lu ZD, Qiao JH, Yan M, Cui SD, Liu ZZ.

Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) is an oncogenic transcription factor implicated in breast
cancer progression and metastasis. However, the clinical significance of FOXM1
and its associated signaling genes in human breast cancer still needed to be
clarified. In this study, we first analyzed the co-expression gene pattern of
FOXM1 in three breast cancer gene expression microarray datasets from the
Oncomine database. Cell division cycle associated 8 (CDCA8) gene was identified
to correlate closely with FOXM1. In silico analysis further indicated that CDCA8 
overexpressed in breast cancer tissues compared with the normal controls is
significantly associated with the triple-negative phenotype. Experimentally, we
performed a immunohistochemical study to detect the expression of CDCA8 in 112
breast cancer samples, and evaluated its clinicopathological and prognostic
significance. We found that CDCA8 was frequently over-expressed in breast cancer 
tissues, and increased expression of CDCA8 was positively associated with FOXM1
expression, triple-negative phenotype and shorter overall survival. Moreover, we 
also found that combination of CDCA8 and FOXM1 showed a higher hazard ratio than 
the individual markers. Our results suggest that FOXM1-CDCA8 signature might be
involved in breast cancer progression, and serves as a potential prognostic
factor and a promising therapeutical target.

PMID: 25866227  [PubMed - in process]


143. RNA. 2015 Jun;21(6):1055-65. doi: 10.1261/rna.048132.114. Epub 2015 Apr 7.

Concordant dysregulation of miR-5p and miR-3p arms of the same precursor microRNA
may be a mechanism in inducing cell proliferation and tumorigenesis: a lung
cancer study.

Mitra R(1), Lin CC(1), Eischen CM(2), Bandyopadhyay S(3), Zhao Z(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37203, USA. (2)Department of Pathology,
Microbiology and Immunology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA. (3)Machine Intelligence Unit, Indian Statistical Institute,
Kolkata 700108, India. (4)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee 37203, USA Department of
Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, Tennessee
37232, USA Department of Psychiatry, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee 37212, USA Center for Quantitative Sciences, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

A precursor microRNA (miRNA) has two arms: miR-5p and miR-3p (miR-5p/-3p).
Depending on the tissue or cell types, both arms can become functional. However, 
little is known about their coregulatory mechanisms during the tumorigenic
process. Here, by using the large-scale miRNA expression profiles of five cancer 
types, we revealed that several of miR-5p/-3p arms were concordantly dysregulated
in each cancer. To explore possible coregulatory mechanisms of concordantly
dysregulated miR-5p/-3p pairs, we developed a robust computational framework and 
applied it to lung cancer data. The framework deciphers miR-5p/-3p coregulated
protein interaction networks critical to lung cancer development. As a novel part
in the method, we uniquely applied the second-order partial correlation to
minimize false-positive regulations. Using 279 matched miRNA and mRNA expression 
profiles extracted from tumor and normal lung tissue samples, we identified 17
aberrantly expressed miR-5p/-3p pairs that potentially modulate the gene
expression of 35 protein complexes. Functional analyses revealed that these
complexes are associated with cancer-related biological processes, suggesting the
oncogenic potential of the reported miR-5p/-3p pairs. Specifically, we revealed
that the reduced expression of miR-145-5p/-3p pair potentially contributes to
elevated expression of genes in the "FOXM1 transcription factor network" pathway,
which may consequently lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation. Subsequently, the
regulation of miR-145-5p/-3p in the FOXM1signaling pathway was validated by a
cohort of 104 matched miRNA and protein (reverse-phase protein array) expression 
profiles in lung cancer. In summary, our computational framework provides a novel
tool to study miR-5p/-3p coregulatory mechanisms in cancer and other diseases.

© 2015 Mitra et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the RNA
Society.

PMCID: PMC4436660 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25852169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Cancer Res. 2015 Jun 1;75(11):2337-48. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2800. Epub
2015 Apr 1.

FoxM1 Drives a Feed-Forward STAT3-Activation Signaling Loop That Promotes the
Self-Renewal and Tumorigenicity of Glioblastoma Stem-like Cells.

Gong AH(1), Wei P(2), Zhang S(3), Yao J(4), Yuan Y(5), Zhou AD(2), Lang FF(2),
Heimberger AB(2), Rao G(2), Huang S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. Department of Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Neurosurgery,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. Program in
Cancer Biology, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences at
Houston, Houston, Texas. (4)Department of Neuro-oncology, The University of Texas
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (5)Department of Biostatistics, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (6)Department of
Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. 
Program in Cancer Biology, The University of Texas Graduate School of Biomedical 
Sciences at Houston, Houston, Texas. suhuang@mdanderson.org.

The growth factor PDGF controls the development of glioblastoma (GBM), but its
contribution to the function of GBM stem-like cells (GSC) has been little
studied. Here, we report that the transcription factor FoxM1 promotes PDGFA-STAT3
signaling to drive GSC self-renewal and tumorigenicity. In GBM, we found a
positive correlation between expression of FoxM1 and PDGF-A. In GSC and mouse
neural stem cells, FoxM1 bound to the PDGF-A promoter to upregulate PDGF-A
expression, acting to maintain the stem-like qualities of GSC in part through
this mechanism. Analysis of the human cancer genomic database The Cancer Genome
Atlas revealed that GBM expresses higher levels of STAT3, a PDGF-A effector
signaling molecule, as compared with normal brain. FoxM1 regulated STAT3
transcription through interactions with the ß-catenin/TCF4 complex. FoxM1
deficiency inhibited PDGF-A and STAT3 expression in neural stem cells and GSC,
abolishing their stem-like and tumorigenic properties. Further mechanistic
investigations defined a FoxM1-PDGFA-STAT3 feed-forward pathway that was
sufficient to confer stem-like properties to glioma cells. Collectively, our
findings showed how FoxM1 activates expression of PDGF-A and STAT3 in a pathway
required to maintain the self-renewal and tumorigenicity of glioma stem-like
cells.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4452436 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25832656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Korean Med Sci. 2015 Apr;30(4):390-7. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2015.30.4.390. Epub
2015 Mar 19.

Increased expression of forkhead box M1 is associated with aggressive phenotype
and poor prognosis in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer.

Ahn H(1), Sim J(1), Abdul R(1), Chung MS(2), Paik SS(1), Oh YH(1), Park CK(1),
Jang K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul,
Korea. (2)Department of Surgery, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul, 
Korea.

Fox transcription factors play a critical role in the regulation of a variety of 
biological processes. While FoxM1 behaves like the oncogenic transcription
factor, FoxO3a is known as a tumor suppressor by inhibiting FoxM1. This study
aimed to investigate the clinicopathological significance of FoxM1 and FoxO3a
expression in breast cancer. Expression of FoxM1 and FoxO3a were analyzed by
immunohistochemical staining on tissue microarray sections from 236 breast cancer
patients, and correlated with various clinicopathological characteristics.
Overexpression of FoxM1 correlated with adverse clinicopathological features,
such as larger tumor size, lymph node metastasis, advanced tumor stage, and
lymphovascular invasion. The Kaplan-Meier survival curves revealed no prognostic 
significance of FoxM1 expression. However, in subgroup analyses with patients of 
estrogen receptor (ER) positive breast cancers, FoxM1 overexpression associated
with poor disease free and overall survival. No association was found between
FoxO3a and FoxM1 expression. Regarding clinicopathological variables, the only
association between histologic grade and FoxO3a was observed. In conclusion,
FoxM1 overexpression was significantly associated with aggressive phenotypes and 
poor prognosis of ER-positive breast cancer. These findings suggest the possible 
role of FoxM1 as a prognostic biomarker and putative target of anti-cancer
therapy.

PMCID: PMC4366959
PMID: 25829806  [PubMed - in process]


146. J Hepatol. 2015 Aug;63(2):429-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2015.03.023. Epub 2015 Mar 
28.

Essential roles of FoxM1 in Ras-induced liver cancer progression and in cancer
cells with stem cell features.

Kopanja D(1), Pandey A(1), Kiefer M(1), Wang Z(1), Chandan N(1), Carr JR(2),
Franks R(3), Yu DY(4), Guzman G(5), Maker A(6), Raychaudhuri P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics (M/C 669), University of
Illinois, College of Medicine, 900 S. Ashland Ave., Chicago, IL 60607, United
States. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics (M/C 669),
University of Illinois, College of Medicine, 900 S. Ashland Ave., Chicago, IL
60607, United States; Department of Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, CA, United States. (3)Transgenic Production Facility, University of
Illinois, College of Medicine, 909 S. Wolcott Ave, Chicago, IL 60612, United
States. (4)Laboratory of Human Genomics, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience
and Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of
Pathology, University of Illinois, College of Medicine, 840 S. Wood St, Chicago, 
IL 60612, United States. (6)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois,
College of Medicine, 909 S. Wolcott Ave, Chicago, IL 60612, United States.
(7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics (M/C 669), University of
Illinois, College of Medicine, 900 S. Ashland Ave., Chicago, IL 60607, United
States; Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, 820 S. Damen Ave., Chicago, IL 60612,
United States. Electronic address: pradip@uic.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Overexpression of FoxM1 correlates with poor prognosis in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Moreover, the Ras-signaling pathway is found to
be ubiquitously activated in HCC through epigenetic silencing of the
Ras-regulators. We investigated the roles of FoxM1 in Ras-driven HCC, and on HCC 
cells with stem-like features.
METHODS: We employed a transgenic mouse model that expresses the oncogenic Ras in
the liver. That strain was crossed with a strain that harbor floxed alleles of
FoxM1 and the MxCre gene that allows conditional deletion of FoxM1. FoxM1 alleles
were deleted after development of HCC, and the effects on the tumors were
analyzed. Also, FoxM1 siRNA was used in human HCC cell lines to determine its
role in the survival of the HCC cells with stem cell features.
RESULTS: Ras-driven tumors overexpress FoxM1. Deletion of FoxM1 inhibits HCC
progression. There was increased accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in
the FoxM1 deleted HCC cells. Moreover, FoxM1 deletion caused a disproportionate
loss of the CD44+ and EpCAM+ HCC cells in the tumors. We show that FoxM1 directly
activates expression of CD44 in human HCC cells. Moreover, the human HCC cells
with stem cell features are addicted to FoxM1 for ROS-regulation and survival.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide genetic evidence for an essential role of FoxM1
in the progression of Ras-driven HCC. In addition, FoxM1 is required for the
expression of CD44 in HCC cells. Moreover, FoxM1 plays a critical role in the
survival of the HCC cells with stem cell features by regulating ROS.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4508215 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25828473  [PubMed - in process]


147. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 10;6(10):7390-407.

The SNP rs6500843 in 16p13.3 is associated with survival specifically among
chemotherapy-treated breast cancer patients.

Fagerholm R(1), Schmidt MK(2), Khan S(1), Rafiq S(3), Tapper W(3), Aittomäki
K(4), Greco D(1), Heikkinen T(1), Muranen TA(1), Fasching PA(5,)(6), Janni W(7), 
Weinshilboum R(8), Loehberg CR(9), Hopper JL(10), Southey MC(11), Keeman R(2),
Lindblom A(12), Margolin S(13), Mannermaa A(14,)(15,)(16), Kataja V(17),
Chenevix-Trench G(18); kConFab Investigators, Lambrechts D(19,)(20), Wildiers
H(21), Chang-Claude J(22), Seibold P(22), Couch FJ(23), Olson JE(24), Andrulis
IL(25,)(26), Knight JA(27,)(28), García-Closas M(29,)(30), Figueroa J(31),
Hooning MJ(32), Jager A(32), Shah M(33), Perkins BJ(33), Luben R(34), Hamann
U(35), Kabisch M(35), Czene K(36), Hall P(36), Easton DF(37,)(38), Pharoah
PD(33,)(37), Liu J(39), Eccles D(3), Blomqvist C(40), Nevanlinna H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. (2)Netherlands Cancer Institute, Antoni
van Leeuwenhoek hospital, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)Faculty of Medicine,
University of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. (5)Department of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen, Friedrich-Alexander University
Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany. (6)Department of Medicine, Division of
Hematology and Oncology, University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA, USA. (7)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Ulm,
Ulm, Germany. (8)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Department of Molecular
Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Mayo
Medical School-Mayo Foundation, Rochester, MN, USA. (9)University Breast Center
Franconia, Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, University Hospital Erlangen,
Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Comprehensive Cancer Center
Erlangen-EMN, Erlangen, Germany. (10)Centre for Epidemiology and Biostatistics,
Melbourne School of Population and Global Health, The University of Melbourne,
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (11)Department of Pathology, The University of
Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (12)Department of Molecular Medicine
and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (13)Department of Oncology
- Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (14)School of Medicine,
Institute of Clinical Medicine, Pathology and Forensic Medicine, University of
Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland. (15)Cancer Center of Eastern Finland,
University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio, Finland. (16)Imaging Center, Department of
Clinical Pathology, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland. (17)Cancer
Center, Kuopio University Hospital, Kuopio, Finland. (18)Department of Genetics, 
QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane, Australia. (19)Vesalius
Research Center (VRC), VIB, Leuven, Belgium. (20)Laboratory for Translational
Genetics, Department of Oncology, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(21)Multidisciplinary Breast Center, Medical Oncology, University Hospital
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (22)Division of Cancer Epidemiology, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (23)Department of Laboratory
Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (24)Department of Health
Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (25)Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum
Research Institute of Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. (26)Department
of Molecular Genetics, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (27)Prosserman
Centre for Health Research, Lunenfeld-Tanenbaum Research Institute of Mount Sinai
Hospital, Toronto, ON, Canada. (28)Division of Epidemiology, Dalla Lana School of
Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada. (29)Division of
Genetics and Epidemiology, Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UK.
(30)Breakthrough Breast Cancer Research Centre, Division of Breast Cancer
Research, The Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK. (31)Division of Cancer
Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute, Rockville, MD, USA.
(32)Department of Medical Oncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, 3008 AE
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (33)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology,
Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, UK. (34)Clinical Gerontology,
Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
UK. (35)Molecular Genetics of Breast Cancer, German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (36)Department of Medical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (37)Centre for Cancer
Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (38)Centre for Cancer Genetic Epidemiology, Department 
of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (39)Human Genetics Division,
Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore. (40)Department of Oncology, University 
of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, HUS, Finland.

We have utilized a two-stage study design to search for SNPs associated with the 
survival of breast cancer patients treated with adjuvant chemotherapy. Our
initial GWS data set consisted of 805 Finnish breast cancer cases (360 treated
with adjuvant chemotherapy). The top 39 SNPs from this stage were analyzed in
three independent data sets: iCOGS (n=6720 chemotherapy-treated cases), SUCCESS-A
(n=3596), and POSH (n=518). Two SNPs were successfully validated: rs6500843 (any 
chemotherapy; per-allele HR 1.16, 95% C.I. 1.08-1.26, p=0.0001,
p(adjusted)=0.0091), and rs11155012 (anthracycline therapy; per-allele HR 1.21,
95% C.I. 1.08-1.35, p=0.0010, p(adjusted)=0.0270). The SNP rs6500843 was found to
specifically interact with adjuvant chemotherapy, independently of standard
prognostic markers (p(interaction)=0.0009), with the rs6500843-GG genotype
corresponding to the highest hazard among chemotherapy-treated cases (HR 1.47,
95% C.I. 1.20-1.80). Upon trans-eQTL analysis of public microarray data, the
rs6500843 locus was found to associate with the expression of a group of genes
involved in cell cycle control, notably AURKA, the expression of which also
exhibited differential prognostic value between chemotherapy-treated and
untreated cases in our analysis of microarray data. Based on previously published
information, we propose that the eQTL genes may be connected to the rs6500843
locus via a RBFOX1-FOXM1 -mediated regulatory pathway.

PMCID: PMC4480688
PMID: 25823661  [PubMed - in process]


148. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Jun;14(6):1434-44. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0846. Epub
2015 Mar 25.

Genome-wide siRNA Screen Identifies the Radiosensitizing Effect of Downregulation
of MASTL and FOXM1 in NSCLC.

Nagel R(1), Stigter-van Walsum M(1), Buijze M(1), van den Berg J(2), van der
Meulen IH(3), Hodzic J(4), Piersma SR(5), Pham TV(5), Jiménez CR(5), van
Beusechem VW(3), Brakenhoff RH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, VU University Medical
Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, VU
University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (3)RNA Interference
Functional Oncogenomics Laboratory, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the 
Netherlands. Department of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center,
Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (4)Department of Medical Oncology, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (5)OncoProteomics Laboratory,
Department of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (6)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, VU University
Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. rh.brakenhoff@vumc.nl.

Lung cancer is the most common cancer worldwide and on top of that has a very
poor prognosis, which is reflected by a 5-year survival rate of 5% to 15%.
Radiotherapy is an integral part of most treatment regimens for this type of
tumor, often combined with radiosensitizing cytotoxic drugs. In this study, we
identified many genes that could potentially be exploited for targeted
radiosensitization using a genome-wide siRNA screen in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) cells. The screen identified 433 siRNAs that potentially sensitize lung
cancer cells to radiation. Validation experiments showed that knockdown of
expression of Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) or microtubule-associated serine/threonine 
kinase-like (MASTL) indeed causes radiosensitization in a panel of NSCLC cells.
Strikingly, this effect was not observed in primary human fibroblasts, suggesting
that the observed radiosensitization is specific for cancer cells.
Phosphoproteomics analyses with and without irradiation showed that a number of
cell-cycle-related proteins were significantly less phosphorylated after MASTL
knockdown in comparison to the control, while there were no changes in the levels
of phosphorylation of DNA damage response proteins. Subsequent analyses showed
that MASTL knockdown cells respond differently to radiation, with a significantly
shortened G2-M phase arrest and defects in cytokinesis, which are followed by a
cell-cycle arrest. In summary, we have identified many potential therapeutic
targets that could be used for radiosensitization of NSCLC cells, with MASTL
being a very promising and druggable target to combine with radiotherapy.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25808837  [PubMed - in process]


149. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 10;6(10):8185-99.

FOXM1: A novel drug target in gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumors.

Briest F(1,)(2), Berg E(3), Grass I(1,)(2), Freitag H(1), Kaemmerer D(4), Lewens 
F(1), Christen F(1,)(5), Arsenic R(6), Altendorf-Hofmann A(7), Kunze A(8), Sänger
J(8), Knösel T(9), Siegmund B(1), Hummel M(3), Grabowski P(1,)(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Infectious Diseases, Rheumatology CC13,
Medizinische Klinik 1, CBF, Germany. (2)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry,
Freie Universität (FU) Berlin, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology, CBF, Charité -
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany. (4)Department of General and Visceral
Surgery, Zentralklinik Bad Berka GmbH, Germany. (5)Institute of Biology,
Humboldt-Universität Berlin, Germany. (6)Institute of Pathology, CCM,
Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Germany. (7)Department of General, Visceral
and Vascular Surgery, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität (FSU) Jena, Germany.
(8)Institute of Pathology, Bad Berka, Germany. (9)Institute of Pathology,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU), Munich, Germany. (10)Department of Internal
Oncology and Hematology, Zentralklinik Bad Berka GmbH, Germany.

Gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine neoplasms (GEP-NENs) are heterogeneous
tumors that need to be molecularly defined to obtain novel therapeutic options.
Forkheadbox protein M1 (FOXM1) is a crucial transcription factor in neoplastic
cells and has been associated with differentiation and proliferation. We found
that FOXM1 is strongly associated with tumor differentiation and occurrence of
metastases in gastrointestinal NENs. In vitro inhibition by the FOXM1 inhibitor
siomycin A led to down-regulation of mitotic proteins and resulted in a strong
inhibitory effect. Siomycin A decreased mitosis rate, induced apoptosis in
GEP-NEN cell lines and exerts synergistic effects with chemotherapy. FOXM1 is
associated with clinical outcome and FOXM1 inhibition impairs survival in vitro. 
We therefore propose FOXM1 as novel therapeutic target in GEP-NENs.

PMCID: PMC4480744
PMID: 25797272  [PubMed - in process]


150. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Jan 15;8(1):464-71. eCollection 2015.

Role and mechanism of Sophoridine on proliferation inhibition in human glioma
U87MG cell line.

Wang WX(1), Sun ZH(2), Chen HM(3), Xu BN(2), Wang FY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital Beijing 100853, China
; Department of Neurosurgery, Chinese PLA NO. 180 Hospital Quanzhou 362000,
China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital Beijing
100853, China. (3)Department of Neurosurgery, Chinese PLA NO. 180 Hospital
Quanzhou 362000, China.

Sophoridine, a natural product obtained from medicinal plants, which has a
variety of pharmacological effects, including anti-cancer effects, and
selectively induces apoptotic cell death in a variety of human cancer cells in
vitro and in vivo; however, its mechanism of action needs to be further
elaborated. In this study, we investigated the effects of Sophoridine on the
induction of apoptosis in human Glioma U87MG cells. Here, we found that
Sophoridine can significantly inhibited cell proliferation, G2/M phase arrest,
induced cell apoptosis and caused reactive oxygen species (ROS) generation and
GSH content reduction. Sophoridine also triggered significant down-regulated the 
expression of p27, CDK2, Survivin, Livin, Bcl-2, E2F1 and the transcriptional
activity of FoxM1, NF-<U+03BA>b and AP-1, meanwhile, up-regulated the expression of
caspase-3/8, p53, Smac, c-JNK and p38-MAPK. Moreover, we found that Sophoridine
significantly inhibited ubiquitin-proteasome in tumor cells. In conclusion,
Sophoridine shows obvious anti-cancer activity on glioma cells by inducing cell
apoptosis, inducing ROS accumulation, and activating mitochondrial signal
pathways. Eventually, we believe Sophoridine could be used as a new drug for the 
treatment of glioma.

PMCID: PMC4358473
PMID: 25785018  [PubMed]


151. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jul;12(1):1457-64. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3469. Epub 2015 Mar
11.

Inhibition of Forkhead box protein M1 by thiostrepton increases chemosensitivity 
to doxorubicin in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Wang JY(1), Jia XH(1), Xing HY(2), Li YJ(3), Fan WW(4), Li N(1), Xie SY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical
University, Binzhou, Shandong 256603, P.R. China. (2)Department of Respiration,
Binzhou People's Hospital, Binzhou, Shandong 256603, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Key Laboratory of Tumour Molecular Biology,
Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, Shandong 264003, P.R. China. (4)Department of
Pediatrics, Women and Children Hospital of Qingdao, Qingdao, Shandong 266011,
P.R. China.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an aggressive type of blood
malignancy, deriving from T-cell progenitors in the thymus, and comprises 10-15% 
of pediatric and 25% of adult primary ALL cases. Despite advances, 20% of
pediatric and the majority of adult patients with T-ALL succumb to mortality from
resistant or relapsed disease, and the survival rate for patients with resistant 
or relapsed T-ALL remains poor. Alterations in the expression of Forkhead box
protein M1 (FoxM1) have been detected in several types of cancer, and the
inhibition of FoxM1 has been investigated as therapeutic strategy in cancer. The 
present study investigated the effects of the inhibition of FoxM1 by thiostrepton
in human T-ALL Jurkat cells. The cells were treated with different concentrations
of thiostrepton, either alone or in combination with doxorubicin. Cell viability 
was measured using CCK-8 assays and the cell cycle distribution, apoptosis and
cell-associated mean fluorescence intensity of intracellular doxorubicin were
assessed using flow cytometric analysis. The mRNA and protein expression levels
were detected by reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction and
western blot analyses. The inhibition of FoxM1 by thiostrepton significantly
decreased the proliferation of the Jurkat cells proliferation in a time- and
dose-dependent manner. Cell arrest at the G2/M phase, and apoptosis was
significantly increased in the thiostrepton-treated Jurkat cells. Thiostrepton
reduced the half maximal inhibitory concentration of doxorubicin in the Jurkat
cells, and significantly enhanced the cytotoxicity of doxorubicin within the
Jurkat cells by enhancing doxorubicin-induced apoptosis and increasing the
accumulation of intracellular doxorubicin. Furthermore, the inhibition of FoxM1
by thiostrepton enhanced doxorubicin-induced apoptosis, possibly through a
caspase-3-dependent pathway, and increased the accumulation of intracellular
doxorubicin, possibly through downregulating the expression of glutathione
S-transferase pi. Collectively, the results of the present study suggested that
targeting FoxM1 with thiostrepton resulted in potent antileukemia activity and
chemosensitizing effects in human T-ALL Jurkat cells.

PMID: 25760224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nat Commun. 2015 Mar 10;6:6471. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7471.

Identification of FOXM1 as a therapeutic target in B-cell lineage acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Buchner M(1), Park E(2), Geng H(1), Klemm L(1), Flach J(3), Passegué E(3),
Schjerven H(1), Melnick A(4), Paietta E(5), Kopanja D(6), Raychaudhuri P(6),
Müschen M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA. (2)1] Department of Laboratory Medicine,
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94143, USA [2] 
Department of Haematology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 OAH, UK. (3)The
Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
Department of Medicine, Hem/Onc Division, University of California San Francisco,
San Francisco, California 94143, USA. (4)Division of Hematology and Oncology,
Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10021, USA. (5)Montefiore
Medical Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10466, USA. 
(6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

Despite recent advances in the cure rate of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), 
the prognosis for patients with relapsed ALL remains poor. Here we identify FOXM1
as a candidate responsible for an aggressive clinical course. We show that FOXM1 
levels peak at the pre-B-cell receptor checkpoint but are dispensable for normal 
B-cell development. Compared with normal B-cell populations, FOXM1 levels are 2- 
to 60-fold higher in ALL cells and are predictive of poor outcome in ALL
patients. FOXM1 is negatively regulated by FOXO3A, supports cell survival, drug
resistance, colony formation and proliferation in vitro, and promotes
leukemogenesis in vivo. Two complementary approaches of pharmacological FOXM1
inhibition-(i) FOXM1 transcriptional inactivation using the thiazole antibiotic
thiostrepton and (ii) an FOXM1 inhibiting ARF-derived peptide-recapitulate the
findings of genetic FOXM1 deletion. Taken together, our data identify FOXM1 as a 
novel therapeutic target, and demonstrate feasibility of FOXM1 inhibition in ALL.

PMCID: PMC4366523
PMID: 25753524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Carcinogenesis. 2015 Apr;36(4):498-507. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgv018. Epub 2015 Mar
5.

All-trans retinoic acid downregulates ALDH1-mediated stemness and inhibits tumour
formation in ovarian cancer cells.

Young MJ(1), Wu YH(2), Chiu WT(3), Weng TY(1), Huang YF(2), Chou CY(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and Department of Obstetrics &
Gynaecology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University and Hospital,
Tainan 704, Taiwan and Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of
Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 704, Taiwan. (2)Department of
Obstetrics & Gynaecology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University and
Hospital, Tainan 704, Taiwan and. (3)Department of Biomedical Engineering,
College of Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 704, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Engineering, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan 704, Taiwan chougyn@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1) is a cancer stem-like cell (CSC) marker in human
cancers; however, the specific ALDH1-regulated function and its underlying
signalling pathways have not been fully demonstrated. Here, we investigated the
ALDH1-regulated function and its underlying signalling and tested whether
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) can suppress ALDH1-regulated tumour behaviour in
ovarian cancer cells. By modulating ALDH1 expression using flow cytometry
enrichment and exogenous overexpression or knockdown, we showed that the ALDH1
activity is positively correlated with stemness in ovarian cancer cells according
to measures such as sphere formation and CSC marker expression as well as
tumourigenesis in a mouse xenograft model. The findings indicate that the ALDH1
directly regulates the functions of ovarian cancer cells. We also showed that
ALDH1 can regulate the expression of FoxM1 and Notch 1, which are involved in the
downstream signalling of ALDH1-mediated biofunctions. Inhibition of FoxM1 by
Thiostrepton and of Notch1 by DAPT downregulated the sphere formation ability of 
cells. ATRA reduced ALDH1 expression, suppressed tumour formation and inhibited
sphere formation, cell migration and invasion in ALDH1-abundant ovarian cancer
cells. We conclude that ATRA downregulates ALDH1/FoxM1/Notch1 signalling and
suppresses tumour formation in ovarian cancer cells.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25742746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Oncol Rep. 2015 May;33(5):2402-10. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3834. Epub 2015 Mar 4.

Targeting FoxM1 inhibits proliferation, invasion and migration of nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma through the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition pathway.

Yu C(1), Chen L(1), Yie L(1), Wei L(1), Wen T(1), Liu Y(1), Chen H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery, The First Affiliated
Hospital, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, P.R. China.

High expression levels of the forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor are
associated with metastasis and poor prognosis of malignancies. However, little is
known concerning its function in nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). The present
study aimed to investigate the impact of FoxM1 inhibition on the migration and
invasion of NPC cells and the potential mechanisms. The effects of FoxM1
inhibitor treatment and FoxM1 silencing on the proliferation, migration and
invasion of NPC CNE-1 and CNE-2 cells were examined by CCK-8, Transwell
migration/invasion and colony formation assays. The effects of stable FoxM1
silencing on the growth and lung metastasis of implanted NPC were evaluated. The 
relative levels of FoxM1, zinc finger E-box binding homeobox 2 (ZEB2), Snail2 and
E-cadherin in the different groups of NPC cells and tumors were determined by
quantitative real-time PCR, western blotting and immunohistochemical assays.
Treatment with thiostrepton, FoxM1 inhibitor, significantly reduced the survival 
of NPC cells. Treatment with thiostrepton and/or knockdown of FoxM1 inhibited the
anchorage-independent proliferation, migration and invasion of NPC cells.
Inhibition of FoxM1 also increased the relative levels of E-cadherin, but reduced
ZEB2 and Snail2 expression in NPC cells. Stable FoxM1 silencing inhibited the
growth and lung metastasis of implanted NPC in vivo, which was associated with
increased levels of E-cadherin, but decreased ZEB2 and Snail2 expression in the
NPC tumors. In conclusion, our data clearly indicate that knockdown of FoxM1
inhibited the growth and metastasis of human NPC by modulating
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), and FoxM1 may be a potential target
for the intervention of NPC.

PMID: 25738652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 20;6(8):6040-52.

Initiation of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) in a murine
4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide and alcohol carcinogenesis model.

Osei-Sarfo K(1), Urvalek AM(1), Tang XH(1), Scognamiglio T(2), Gudas LJ(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, USA. (3)The 
Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, USA.

Esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCCs) are very common, aggressive tumors,
and are often associated with alcohol and tobacco abuse. Because ESCCs exhibit
high recurrence rates and are diagnosed at late stages, identification of
prognostic and drug targets for prevention and treatment is critical. We used the
4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide (4-NQO) murine model of oral carcinogenesis and the
Meadows-Cook model of alcohol abuse to assess changes in the expression of
molecular markers during the initial stages of ESCC. Combining these two models, 
which mimic chronic alcohol and tobacco abuse in humans, we detected increased
cellular proliferation (EGFR and Ki67 expression), increased canonical Wnt
signaling and downstream elements (ß-catenin, FoxM1, and S100a4 protein levels), 
changes in cellular adhesive properties (reduced E-cadherin in the basal layer of
the esophageal epithelium), and increased levels of phosphorylated ERK1/2 and
p38. Additionally, we found that treatment with ethanol alone increased the
numbers of epithelial cells expressing solute carrier family 2 (facilitated
glucose transporter, member 1) (SLC2A1) and carbonic anhydrase IX (CAIX), and
increased the phosphorylation of p38. Thus, we identified both 4-NQO- and
ethanol-specific targets in the initial stages of esophageal carcinogenesis,
which should lead to the development of potential markers and therapeutic targets
for human ESCC.

PMCID: PMC4467420
PMID: 25714027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Oncol Res. 2014;22(1):29-37. doi: 10.3727/096504014X14078436004987.

FOXM1 regulated by ERK pathway mediates TGF-ß1-induced EMT in NSCLC.

Kong FF(1), Zhu YL, Yuan HH, Wang JY, Zhao M, Gong XD, Liu F, Zhang WY, Wang CR, 
Jiang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Shanghai 3rd People's Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China.

FOXM1, a member of the Forkhead transcriptional family, plays an important role
in the EMT process, and transforming growth factor-ß1 (TGF-ß1) has been
identified as the most potent factor that can independently induce EMT in various
types of cancer cells. Here we examine the important role of FOXM1 in
TGF-ß1-induced EMT and investigate the mechanism underlying the relationship
between TGF-ß1 and FOXM1. Lentivirus-mediated transfection was used to stably
upregulate the expression of FOXM1, and a small interfering RNA (siRNA) was
introduced to silence the expression of FOXM1. Transwell and wound-healing assays
were then performed to assess the invasion and motility potential of non-small
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells. The NSCLC cell lines exhibited EMT
characteristics, including an elongated fibroblastoid shape, induced expression
of EMT marker proteins, and increased migratory and invasive potential after
induction with TGF-ß1. The overexpression of FOXM1 enhanced TGF-ß1-induced EMT in
NSCLC cells. Knockdown of FOXM1 reversed TGF-ß1-induced EMT in NSCLC cell lines
but had no effect on the phosphorylation level of ERK. Additionally, U0126, an
ERK signaling inhibitor, exerted a reversible effect on TGF-ß1-induced EMT and
inhibited FOXM1 expression. FOXM1 regulated by the ERK pathway can mediate
TGF-ß1-induced EMT in NSCLC and is a potential target for the treatment of NSCLC.

PMID: 25700356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 28;6(6):3988-4004.

miR-34a induces cellular senescence via modulation of telomerase activity in
human hepatocellular carcinoma by targeting FoxM1/c-Myc pathway.

Xu X(1), Chen W(1), Miao R(1), Zhou Y(1), Wang Z(1), Zhang L(1), Wan Y(1), Dong
Y(2), Qu K(1), Liu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Increasing evidence suggests that miRNAs can act as either tumor suppressors or
oncogenes in carcinogenesis. In the present study, we identified the role of
miR-34a in regulating telomerase activity, with subsequent effect on cellular
senescence and viability. We found the higher expression of miR-34a was
significantly correlated with the advanced clinicopathologic parameters in
hepatocellular carcinoma. Furthermore, tumor tissues of 75 HCC patients
demonstrated an inverse correlation between the miR-34a level and telomere
indices (telomere length and telomerase activity). Transient introduction of
miR-34a into HCC cell lines inhibited the telomerase activity and telomere
length, which induced senescence-like phenotypes and affected cellular viability.
We discovered that miR-34a potently targeted c-Myc and FoxM1, both of which were 
involved in the activation of telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT)
transcription, essential for the sustaining activity of telomerase to avoid
senescence. Taken together, our results demonstrate that miR-34a functions as a
potent tumor suppressor through the modulation of telomere pathway in cellular
senescence.

PMCID: PMC4414168
PMID: 25686834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Tumour Biol. 2015 Jul;36(7):5001-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3151-6. Epub 2015 Feb
14.

MicroRNA-211, a direct negative regulator of CDC25B expression, inhibits
triple-negative breast cancer cells' growth and migration.

Song GQ(1), Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pancreatic and Breast Surgery, Shengjing Hospital of China
Medical University, 36 Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang, Liaoning,
110004, People's Republic of China.

The non-coding microRNAs (miRNAs) have tissue- and disease-specific expression
patterns. Dysregulation of miRNAs has been associated with initiation and
progression of oncogenesis in humans. The abnormal expression of CDC25B
phosphatases detected in a number of tumors implies that their dysregulation is
involved in malignant transformation. Using miRNA target prediction software, we 
found that miR-211 could target the 3'UTR sequence of CDC25B. To shed light on
their roles of miR-211 in breast cancer, the expression of miR-211 was examined
by real-time RT-PCR in breast cancer and normal tissues. MiR-211 is significantly
downregulated in breast cancer. MiR-211 re-expression suppressed cell growth,
cell cycle, migration, and invasion in triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) cell 
line MDA-MB231. Luciferase expression from a reporter vector containing the
CDC25B -3'UTR was decreased when this construct was transfected with miR-211. The
over-expression of miR-211 suppressed the endogenous CDC25B protein level in TNBC
cells. For the first time, we demonstrate that miRNA-211 is a direct negative
regulator of CDC25B expression in TNBC cells, alters other related target
proteins CCNB1 and FOXM1, and then inhibits breast cancer cells growth,
migration, and invasion and lead G2/M arrest. The transcriptional loss of miR-211
and the resultant increase in CDC25B expression facilitate increased genomic
instability at an early stage of tumor development.

PMID: 25680404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Reprod Sci. 2015 Oct;22(10):1220-8. doi: 10.1177/1933719115572484. Epub 2015 Feb 
11.

Adiposity Alters Genes Important in Inflammation and Cell Cycle Division in Human
Cumulus Granulosa Cell.

Merhi Z(1), Polotsky AJ(2), Bradford AP(2), Buyuk E(3), Chosich J(2), Phang T(2),
Jindal S(3), Santoro N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, NYU
Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USA Division of Reproductive Endocrinology 
and Infertility, University of Vermont College of medicine, Burlington, VT, USA
zom00@hotmail.com. (2)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility,
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Colorado, Denver, CO, USA.
(3)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology and Women's Health, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether obesity alters genes important in cellular growth
and inflammation in human cumulus granulosa cells (GCs).
METHODS: Eight reproductive-aged women who underwent controlled ovarian
hyperstimulation followed by oocyte retrieval for in vitro fertilization were
enrolled. Cumulus GC RNA was extracted and processed for microarray analysis on
Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 chips. Gene expression data were validated 
on GCs from additional biologically similar samples using quantitative real-time 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Comparison in gene expression was made
between women with body mass index (BMI) <25 kg/m(2) (group 1; n = 4) and those
with BMI =25 kg/m(2) (group 2; n = 4).
RESULTS: Groups 1 and 2 had significantly different BMI (21.4 ± 1.4 vs 30.4 ± 2.7
kg/m(2), respectively; P = .02) but did not differ in age (30.5 ± 1.7 vs 32.7 ±
0.3 years, respectively; P = .3). Comparative analysis of gene expression
profiles by supervised clustering between group 1 versus group 2 resulted in the 
selection of 7 differentially expressed genes: fibroblast growth factor 12
(FGF-12), protein phosphatase 1-like (PPM1L), zinc finger protein multitype 2
(ZFPM2), forkhead box M1 (FOXM1), cell division cycle 20 (CDC20), interleukin 1
receptor-like 1 (IL1RL1), and growth arrest-specific protein 7 (GAS7). FOXM1,
CDC20, and GAS7 were downregulated while FGF-12 and PPM1L were upregulated in
group 2 when compared to group 1. Validation with RT-PCR confirmed the microarray
data except for ZFPM2 and IL1RL. As BMI increased, expression of FOXM1
significantly decreased (r = -.60, P = .048).
CONCLUSIONS: Adiposity is associated with changes in the expression of genes
important in cellular growth, cell cycle progression, and inflammation. The
upregulation of the metabolic regulator gene PPM1L suggests that adiposity
induces an abnormal metabolic follicular environment, potentially altering
folliculogenesis and oocyte quality.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25676576  [PubMed - in process]


160. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(1):23-9.

FoxM1 as a novel therapeutic target for cancer drug therapy.

Xu XS(1), Miao RC, Wan Y, Zhang LQ, Qu K, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, China E-mail : liuchangdoctor@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Current cancer therapy mainly focuses on identifying novel targets
crucial for tumorigenesis. The FoxM1 is of preference as an anticancer target,
due to its significance in execution of mitosis, cell cycle progression, as well 
as other signal pathways leading to tumorigenesis. FoxM1 is partially regulated
by oncoproteins or tumor suppressors, which are often mutated, lost, or
overexpressed in human cancer. Since sustaining proliferating signaling is an
important hallmark of cancer, FoxM1 is overexpressed in a series of human
malignancies. Alarge- scale gene expression analysis also identified FoxM1 as a
differentially-expressed gene in most solid tumors. Furthermore, overexpressed
FoxM1 is correlated with the prognosis of cancer patients, as verified in a
series of malignancies by Cox regression analysis. Thus, extensive studies have
been conducted to explore the roles of FoxM1 in tumorigenesis, making it an
attractive target for anticancer therapy. Several antitumor drugs have been
reported to target or inhibit FoxM1 expression in different cancers, and
down-regulation of FoxM1 also abrogates drug resistance in some cancer cell
lines, highlighting a promising future for FoxM1 application in the clinic.

PMID: 25640357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Oncol Rep. 2015 Apr;33(4):2031-6. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3758. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane potentiates paclitaxel-induced antitumor effects on gastric
cancer cells through the Akt/FOXM1 signaling cascade.

Jin H(1), Park MH(2), Kim SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Institute for Medical Sciences, Chonbuk National
University Medical School, Jeonju, Republic of Korea. (2)Catholic University of
Pusan, Busan, Republic of Korea.

Gastric cancer is the fourth most common cancer and is one of the leading causes 
of cancer-related mortality worldwide. Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is overexpressed
in gastric cancer, suggesting that it is important in gastric cancer oncogenesis.
However, no studies have investigated the role of 3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM), a 
component of cruciferous vegetables, in the regulation of FOXM1 and its signaling
pathway in gastric cancer. Here, we report for the first time that DIM
effectively downregulated Akt/FOXM1 in gastric cancer cells. Combination
treatment with DIM and paclitaxel significantly and dose-dependently inhibited
the proliferation of SNU638 cells when compared to treatment with DIM or
paclitaxel alone. Colony formation of SNU638 cells was significantly attenuated
by treatment with DIM and paclitaxel, and DIM potentiated the inhibition of
colony formation in SNU638 cells by paclitaxel when compared to treatment with a 
single agent. Treatment with DIM plus paclitaxel substantially increased
apoptosis as indicated by increased levels of cleaved polyADP-ribose polymerase
(PARP) and cleaved caspase-9 protein. DIM dose-dependently sensitized gastric
cancer cells through downregulation of FOXM1 and potentiated the effects of
paclitaxel. FOXM1 effector genes such as CDK4, p53 and cyclin D1 were
downregulated in gastric cancer cells by combination treatment with DIM and
paclitaxel. In addition, DIM significantly and dose-dependently inhibited
phosphorylation of Akt and potentiated paclitaxel-induced inhibition of Akt
function in gastric cancer cells. Therefore, our results indicate that DIM
effectively potentiates the efficacy of chemotherapeutic agents such as
paclitaxel by downregulation of the Akt/FOXM1 signaling cascade in gastric cancer
cells. Our findings suggest that DIM enhances the therapeutic efficacy of
paclitaxel in gastric cancer and is a potential clinical anticancer agent for the
prevention and/or treatment of gastric cancer.

PMID: 25633416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Am J Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;5(1):140-54. eCollection 2015.

High-level SAE2 promotes malignant phenotype and predicts outcome in gastric
cancer.

Shao DF(1), Wang XH(2), Li ZY(1), Xing XF(3), Cheng XJ(3), Guo T(3), Du H(3), Hu 
Y(2), Dong B(4), Ding N(1), Li L(1), Li S(1), Li QD(1), Wen XZ(3), Zhang LH(1),
Ji JF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Surgery, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Beijing Cancer Hospital &
Institute, Peking University School of Oncology Beijing, China. (2)The Tissue
Bank, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of
Education), Beijing Cancer Hospital & Institute, Peking University School of
Oncology Beijing, China. (3)Department of Gastrointestinal Translational
Research, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry
of Education), Beijing Cancer Hospital & Institute, Peking University School of
Oncology Beijing, China. (4)Department of Pathology, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education), Beijing Cancer
Hospital & Institute, Peking University School of Oncology Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: The SUMO pathway has been shown to play an important role in
tumorigenesis. This report analyzed the involvement of the sole SUMO-Activating
Enzyme Subunit 2 (SAE2) in human gastric cancer (GC) progression and prognosis.
METHODS: Expression of SAE2 was examined by Quantigene Plex, western blotting and
immunohistochemistry. The expression of SAE2 and c-MYC were detected in parallel 
in 276 cases. The molecular mechanisms of SAE2 expression and its effects on cell
growth, colony formation, migration and invasion were also explored by CCK8
assay, colony formation experiment, transwell chamber assay with or without
matrigel, immunoprecipitation and in vivo tumorigenesis and tumor metastasis.
RESULTS: SAE2 was markedly overexpressed in GC cell lines and primary tumor
samples of GC, and significantly correlated with deeper tumor depth, distant
metastasis, higher pathological stage and stratified survival in human GC. SAE2
positivity was independently associated with a worse outcome in multivariate
analysis. Knockdown of SAE2 expression inhibited the proliferation, migration,
and invasion of SAE2-overexpressing GC cells. Consistent with the in vitro
results, down-regulation of SAE2 in human GC BGC823 cells significantly reduced
the tumorigenic and metastatic potential of the cells in vivo. SAE2 protein was
significantly associated with the higher expression of c-MYC in primary GC
tissues. Moreover, FoxM1 was SUMOylated in GC and that inhibition of SAE2
resulted in a decrease in SUMO1-FoxM1 levels compared with those in the controls.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that SAE2 has a pivotal role in the
aggressiveness of GC, and highlight its usefulness as a prognostic factor in GC.

PMCID: PMC4300690
PMID: 25628926  [PubMed]


163. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;35(2):499-515. doi: 10.1159/000369715. Epub 2015 Jan
16.

MicroRNA-149 suppresses colorectal cancer cell migration and invasion by directly
targeting forkhead box transcription factor FOXM1.

Xu K(1), Liu X, Mao X, Xue L, Wang R, Chen L, Chu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing Clinical School of
Southern Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, PR China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The aim of this study is to investigate the clinicopathological 
and prognostic values of miR-149 expression and its roles in colorectal cancer
(CRC) progression.
METHODS: qRT-PCR was performed to detect miR-149 expression in CRC cell lines or 
tissues. Also, the clinical significance of miR-149 expression was investigated. 
The study further explored whether miR-149 inhibits migration and invasion of CRC
cells by targeting the mammalian Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1).
RESULTS: miR-149 was significantly downregulated in CRC tissues, and low miR-149 
expression was observed to be significantly correlated with lymph node or distant
metastasis and advanced TNM stage of CRC patients. Patients with low miR-149
expression showed poorer prognosis than those with high miR-149 expression, and
multivariate analyses indicated that status of miR-149 expression might be an
independent prognostic factor. Gain- and loss - of - function assays indicated
that miR-149 significantly inhibited growth, migration and invasion of CRC cells 
by targeting FOXM1. Furthermore, FOXM1 was significantly uiregulated in CRC
tissues and inversely correlated with miR-149 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: mR-149 was an independent prognostic factor and could inhibit
migration and invasion of CRC cells, at least partially by targeting FOXM1.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25613903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Cancer Biol Ther. 2015;16(2):185-6. doi: 10.4161/15384047.2014.987566.

Targeting FOXM1 auto-regulation in cancer.

Gartel AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine ; University of Illinois at Chicago ; Chicago , IL
USA.

PMCID: PMC4622879
PMID: 25603426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Feb 10;4(2):226-38. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.12.006.
Epub 2015 Jan 15.

EZH2 protects glioma stem cells from radiation-induced cell death in a
MELK/FOXM1-dependent manner.

Kim SH(1), Joshi K(1), Ezhilarasan R(2), Myers TR(3), Siu J(1), Gu C(1),
Nakano-Okuno M(1), Taylor D(1), Minata M(1), Sulman EP(2), Lee J(4), Bhat KP(5), 
Salcini AE(3), Nakano I(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (2)Department of Radiation
Oncology, The University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, 
USA. (3)Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen, 
Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. (4)Department of Stem Cell Biology
and Regenerative Medicine, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, The University of Texas, MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department of Neurological
Surgery, The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, OH 43210, USA. Electronic address: ichiro.nakano@osumc.edu.

Glioblastoma (GBM)-derived tumorigenic stem-like cells (GSCs) may play a key role
in therapy resistance. Previously, we reported that the mitotic kinase MELK binds
and phosphorylates the oncogenic transcription factor FOXM1 in GSCs. Here, we
demonstrate that the catalytic subunit of Polycomb repressive complex 2, EZH2, is
targeted by the MELK-FOXM1 complex, which in turn promotes resistance to
radiation in GSCs. Clinically, EZH2 and MELK are coexpressed in GBM and
significantly induced in postirradiation recurrent tumors whose expression is
inversely correlated with patient prognosis. Through a gain-and loss-of-function 
study, we show that MELK or FOXM1 contributes to GSC radioresistance by
regulation of EZH2. We further demonstrate that the MELK-EZH2 axis is
evolutionarily conserved in Caenorhabditis elegans. Collectively, these data
suggest that the MELK-FOXM1-EZH2 signaling axis is essential for GSC
radioresistance and therefore raise the possibility that MELK-FOXM1-driven EZH2
signaling can serve as a therapeutic target in irradiation-resistant GBM tumors.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4325196
PMID: 25601206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2015 Apr;15(4):471-90. doi: 10.1586/14737159.2015.1002772. 
Epub 2015 Jan 19.

Immunohistochemistry-based prognostic biomarkers in NSCLC: novel findings on the 
road to clinical use?

Lindskog C(1), Edlund K, Mattsson JS, Micke P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, 
Uppsala University, 751 85 Uppsala, Sweden.

Prognostication of non-small cell lung cancer is principally based on stage, age 
and performance status. This review provides an overview of 342 potential
prognostic biomarkers in non-small cell lung cancer described between January
2008 and June 2013, evaluating the association between immunohistochemical
protein expression and survival endpoint. Numerous studies proposed prognostic
biomarkers, but many were only evaluated in a single patient cohort, and a large 
number of biomarkers revealed inconclusive findings when analyzed in more than
one study. Only 26 proteins first described after 2008 (ALDH1A1, ANXA1, BCAR1,
CLDN1, EIF4E, EZH2, FOLR1, FOXM1, IL7R, IL12RB2, KIAA1524, CRMP1, LOX, MCM7,
MTA1, MTDH, NCOA3, NDRG2, NEDD9, NES, PBK, PPM1D, SIRT1, SLC7A5, SQSTM1 and WNT1)
demonstrated a consistent prognostic association in two or more independent
patient cohorts, thus qualifying as promising candidates for diagnostic use.
Raised quality standards for study design and antibody validation, and
integration of preclinical findings with clinical needs are clearly warranted.

PMID: 25599124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Breast Cancer Manag. 2014;3(5):423-431.

Resistance to HER2-targeted therapies: a potential role for FOXM1.

Peake BF(1), Nahta R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular & Systems Pharmacology Program, Graduate Division of Biological and 
Biomedical Sciences, Emory University. (2)Molecular & Systems Pharmacology
Program, Graduate Division of Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Emory
University ; Cancer Biology Program, Graduate Division of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences, Emory University ; Department of Pharmacology, Emory
University ; Department of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Emory University ;
Winship Cancer Institute, Emory University.

Despite the tremendous efficacy of trastuzumab against HER2-overexpressing
metastatic breast cancers, a significant fraction of women demonstrate
progressive disease during treatment. Multiple mechanisms have been proposed to
mediate trastuzumab resistance. In this mini-review, we discuss the evidence
supporting FOXM1 as a mediator of resistance and potential new therapeutic target
in trastuzumab-refractory breast cancer. FOXM1 expression is significantly
elevated in multiple breast cancer data sets. Some studies suggest a direct
correlation between FOXM1 and HER2 expression levels. In addition, overexpression
of FOXM1 reduces the sensitivity of HER2-positive breast cancer cells to
trastuzumab or lapatinib. Conversely, knockdown or pharmacological inhibition of 
FOXM1 rescues resistance to HER2-targeted therapies. Current pre-clinical
information supports further investigation of the role of FOXM1 in
trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4294221
PMID: 25598845  [PubMed]


168. Pac Symp Biocomput. 2015:132-43.

Unsupervised feature construction and knowledge extraction from genome-wide
assays of breast cancer with denoising autoencoders.

Tan J(1), Ung M, Cheng C, Greene CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Quantitative Biomedical Sciences, Norris
Cotton Cancer Center, The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
03755, USA.

Big data bring new opportunities for methods that efficiently summarize and
automatically extract knowledge from such compendia. While both supervised
learning algorithms and unsupervised clustering algorithms have been successfully
applied to biological data, they are either dependent on known biology or limited
to discerning the most significant signals in the data. Here we present denoising
autoencoders (DAs), which employ a data-defined learning objective independent of
known biology, as a method to identify and extract complex patterns from genomic 
data. We evaluate the performance of DAs by applying them to a large collection
of breast cancer gene expression data. Results show that DAs successfully
construct features that contain both clinical and molecular information. There
are features that represent tumor or normal samples, estrogen receptor (ER)
status, and molecular subtypes. Features constructed by the autoencoder
generalize to an independent dataset collected using a distinct experimental
platform. By integrating data from ENCODE for feature interpretation, we discover
a feature representing ER status through association with key transcription
factors in breast cancer. We also identify a feature highly predictive of patient
survival and it is enriched by FOXM1 signaling pathway. The features constructed 
by DAs are often bimodally distributed with one peak near zero and another near
one, which facilitates discretization. In summary, we demonstrate that DAs
effectively extract key biological principles from gene expression data and
summarize them into constructed features with convenient properties.

PMCID: PMC4299935
PMID: 25592575  [PubMed - in process]


169. Hepatology. 2015 May;61(5):1615-26. doi: 10.1002/hep.27686. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

Cannabinoid receptor 1 promotes hepatocellular carcinoma initiation and
progression through multiple mechanisms.

Mukhopadhyay B(1), Schuebel K, Mukhopadhyay P, Cinar R, Godlewski G, Xiong K,
Mackie K, Lizak M, Yuan Q, Goldman D, Kunos G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physiologic Studies, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD.

Comment in
    Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 Jun;27(6):747-8.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has high mortality and no adequate treatment.
Endocannabinoids interact with hepatic cannabinoid 1 receptors (CB1Rs) to promote
hepatocyte proliferation in liver regeneration by inducing cell cycle proteins
involved in mitotic progression, including Forkhead Box M1. Because this protein 
is highly expressed in HCC and contributes to its genesis and progression, we
analyzed the involvement of the endocannabinoid/CB1R system in murine and human
HCC. Postnatal diethylnitrosamine treatment induced HCC within 8 months in
wild-type mice but fewer and smaller tumors in CB1R(-/-) mice or in wild-type
mice treated with the peripheral CB1R antagonist JD5037, as monitored in vivo by 
serial magnetic resonance imaging. Genome-wide transcriptome analysis revealed
CB1R-dependent, tumor-induced up-regulation of the hepatic expression of CB1R,
its endogenous ligand anandamide, and a number of tumor-promoting genes,
including the GRB2 interactome as well as Forkhead Box M1 and its downstream
target, the tryptophan-catalyzing enzyme indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase. Increased
indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase activity and consequent induction of
immunosuppressive T-regulatory cells in tumor tissue promote immune
tolerance.CONCLUSION: The endocannabinoid/CB1R system is up-regulated in
chemically induced HCC, resulting in the induction of various tumor-promoting
genes, including indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase; and attenuation of these changes by
blockade or genetic ablation of CB1R suppresses the growth of HCC and highlights 
the therapeutic potential of peripheral CB1R blockade.

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases. This article 
has been contributed to by U.S. Government employees, and their work is in the
public domain in the U.S.A.

PMCID: PMC4406817 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25580584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Cancer Res Ther. 2014 Oct-Dec;10(4):1076-81. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.137988.

Comparison of clinicopathological parameters with FoxM1 expression in renal cell 
carcinoma.

Kocarslan S(1), Guldur ME, Ekinci T, Ciftci H, Ozardali HI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Harran University, Sanliurfa,
Turkey.

AIM: To investigate the relationships between expression of forkhead box M1
(FoxM1) and clinicopathologic parameters and Ki-67 expression in patients with
renal cell carcinoma (RCC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 67 cases of RCC including 47 cases of clear
cell RCC (ccRCC), five cases of papillary RCC (pRCC), eight cases of chromophobe 
RCC (chRCC), four cases of unclassified (with sarcomatoid pattern) RCC (sRCC),
and three cases of multilocular RCC (mRCC) were included to this study. The
expression of FoxM1 protein was assessed in 67 samples of RCC using
immunohistochemical methods and the relationship between the expression levels of
FoxM1 with clinicopathological characteristics and Ki-67 expression of RCC
patients. For statistical analysis, the cases were grouped into the ccRCC and
non-ccRCC group.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry analyses showed that FoxM1 protein expression in 47
ccRCC samples was significantly correlated with tumor size, stage, nuclear grade,
capsule invasion, perinephric fat invasion, and Ki-67 expression (P<0.05 for
all); whereas, no correlations were found in patients' age, gender, and lymph
node metastasis (P>0.05 for all). In 20 non-ccRCC; overexpression of FoxM1 was
strongly associated with tumor size (P<0.05). There was no relationship between
FoxM1 expression with other clinicopathological parameters and Ki-67 expression
in non-ccRCC (P>0.05 for all).
CONCLUSION: This study showed that FoxM1 have a progressive oncogenic role in
ccRRC. Our results suggested that higher expression of FoxM1 in tumor tissues
predicts a locally aggressive behavior and poor outcome of patients with ccRCC,
but not in patient with non-ccRCC.

PMID: 25579557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Jan 7;21(1):196-213. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i1.196.

FoxM1 overexpression promotes epithelial-mesenchymal transition and metastasis of
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Meng FD(1), Wei JC(1), Qu K(1), Wang ZX(1), Wu QF(1), Tai MH(1), Liu HC(1), Zhang
RY(1), Liu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fan-Di Meng, Ji-Chao Wei, Kai Qu, Zhi-Xin Wang, Ming-Hui Tai, Hao-Chen Liu,
Rui-Yao Zhang, Chang Liu, Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First
Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061,
Shaanxi Province, China.

AIM: To investigate the expression of forkhead box protein M1 (FoxM1) in the
process of epithelial mesenchymal transition in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
and its role in metastasis.
METHODS: FoxM1 and E-cadherin expression in HCC tissue microarray specimens was
evaluated by immunohistochemical staining, and statistical methods were applied
to analyze the correlation between FoxM1 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT). Kaplan-Meier analysis of the correlation between the FoxM1 expression
level and recurrence or overall survival of HCC patients was performed. The
expression of FoxM1, E-cadherin and snail homologue 1 (SNAI1) in HCC cell lines
was evaluated by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and
Western blot. Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) was used to induce EMT and stimulate
cell migration in HCC cells. The expression of FoxM1 and SNAI1 was regulated by
transfection with plasmids pcDNA3.1 and siRNAs in vitro. The occurrence of EMT
was evaluated by Transwell assay, morphologic analysis and detection of the
expression of EMT markers (E-cadherin and vimentin). Luciferase and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays were used to evaluate whether SNAI1 is a direct
transcriptional target of FoxM1.
RESULTS: FoxM1 expression was increased significantly in HCC compared with
para-carcinoma (10.7 ± 0.9 vs 8.2 ± 0.7, P < 0.05) and normal hepatic (10.7 ± 0.9
vs 2.7 ± 0.4, P < 0.05) tissues. Overexpression of FoxM1 was correlated with HCC 
tumor size, tumor number, macrovascular invasion and higher TNM stage, but was
negatively correlated with E-cadherin expression in microarray specimens and in
cell lines. FoxM1 overexpression was correlated significantly with HCC metastasis
and EMT. In vitro, we found that FoxM1 plays a key role in HGF-induced EMT, and
overexpression of FoxM1 could suppress E-cadherin expression and induce EMT
changes, which were associated with increased HCC cell invasiveness. Next, we
confirmed that FOXM1 directly binds to and activates the SNAI1 promoter, and we
identified SNAI1 as a direct transcriptional target of FOXM1. Moreover,
inhibiting the expression of SNAI1 significantly inhibited FoxM1-mediated EMT.
CONCLUSION: FoxM1 overexpression promotes EMT and metastasis of HCC, and SNAI1
plays a critical role in FoxM1-mediated EMT.

PMCID: PMC4284335
PMID: 25574092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Mol Cancer Ther. 2015 Mar;14(3):642-8. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-14-0650. Epub
2015 Jan 6.

Validation of the Hsp70-Bag3 protein-protein interaction as a potential
therapeutic target in cancer.

Li X(1), Colvin T(2), Rauch JN(1), Acosta-Alvear D(3), Kampmann M(4), Dunyak
B(1), Hann B(5), Aftab BT(5), Murnane M(5), Cho M(4), Walter P(3), Weissman
JS(4), Sherman MY(2), Gestwicki JE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and the Institute for Neurodegenerative
Disease, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(2)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco,
California. (4)Department of Molecular and Cellular Pharmacology, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco,
California. (5)Department of Medicine, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(6)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and the Institute for Neurodegenerative
Disease, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
Jason.Gestwicki@ucsf.edu.

Hsp70 is a stress-inducible molecular chaperone that is required for cancer
development at several steps. Targeting the active site of Hsp70 has proven
relatively challenging, driving interest in alternative approaches. Hsp70
collaborates with the Bcl2-associated athanogene 3 (Bag3) to promote cell
survival through multiple pathways, including FoxM1. Therefore, inhibitors of the
Hsp70-Bag3 protein-protein interaction (PPI) may provide a noncanonical way to
target this chaperone. We report that JG-98, an allosteric inhibitor of this PPI,
indeed has antiproliferative activity (EC50 values between 0.3 and 4 µmol/L)
across cancer cell lines from multiple origins. JG-98 destabilized FoxM1 and
relieved suppression of downstream effectors, including p21 and p27. On the basis
of these findings, JG-98 was evaluated in mice for pharmacokinetics,
tolerability, and activity in two xenograft models. The results suggested that
the Hsp70-Bag3 interaction may be a promising, new target for anticancer therapy.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4456214
PMID: 25564440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Neoplasma. 2015;62(1):61-71.

FOXM1 overexpression is associated with cisplatin resistance in non-small cell
lung cancer and mediates sensitivity to cisplatin in A549 cells via the
JNK/mitochondrial pathway.

Liu Y, Chen X, Gu Y, Zhu L, Qian Y, Pei D, Zhang W, Shu Y.

The Forkhead box M1 transcription factor (FoxM1) is essential for DNA replication
and mitosis, and has important role in cell proliferation and apoptosis. To
assess the role of FoxM1 in chemoresistance, we investigated FoxM1 protein
expression and the correlation between FoxM1 expression, sensitivity to
cisplatin-based therapy, and the survival of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
patients. We generated a cisplatin-resistant lung cancer cell line (A549/CDDP)
that showed elevated expression levels of FoxM1 protein and mRNA relative to
those of the parental A549 cells. We investigated the effect of the knockdown or 
overexpression of FoxM1 on the sensitivity to cisplatin and the possible
signaling transduction pathways in these cells. Our results revealed that the
positive expression rate of FoxM1 in NSCLC was associated with chemosensitivity
to cisplatin and a poor prognosis. When the expression of FoxM1 was inhibited by 
RNA interference, the sensitivity to cisplatin was enhanced. Inversely, in
FoxM1-overexpressing cell models, we observed a reduced sensitivity to cisplatin.
Moreover, we showed that the downregulation of FoxM1 enhanced cisplatin-induced
A549/CDDP cell apoptosis through the activation of the c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase 
(JNK)/mitochondrial pathway. These results suggest that FoxM1 plays a critical
role in chemoresistance to cisplatin and that FoxM1 depletion may be a promising 
approach to lung cancer therapy.KEYWORDS: FoxM1, cisplatin, drug resistance,
non-small cell lung cancer, A549, JNK/mitochondrial pathway.

PMID: 25563368  [PubMed - in process]


174. Int J Biol Sci. 2015 Jan 5;11(2):186-98. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.10634. eCollection
2015.

FOXM1 promotes lung adenocarcinoma invasion and metastasis by upregulating SNAIL.

Wei P(1), Zhang N(2), Wang Y(3), Li D(4), Wang L(3), Sun X(3), Shen C(3), Yang
Y(3), Zhou X(3), Du X(3).

Author information: 
(1)1. Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai 
200032, China ; 2. Institute of Pathology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China ; 3. Cancer Institute, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai,
200032, China ; 6. Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University, Shanghai 200032, China. (2)7. Department of neurosurgery, 1st
affiliated hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, 510080, China. (3)1.
Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai
200032, China ; 2. Institute of Pathology, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China ; 4. Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China. ; 6. Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, China. (4)5. Department of Colorectal Surgery, Fudan University 
Shanghai Cancer Center, Shanghai 200032, China ; 6. Department of Oncology,
Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

The forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor is one of the key genes inducing
tumor invasion and metastasis by an unknown mechanism. In this study, we set out 
to investigate the effects of FOXM1 overexpression on metastatic human lung
adenocarcinoma and the underlying mechanism. FOXM1 expression was analyzed in 78 
frozen lung adenocarcinoma tissue samples using an Affymetrix microarray and a
155-paraffin-embedded lung adenocarcinoma tissue microarray with
immunohistochemical detection. FOXM1 was found to be overexpressed in lung
adenocarcinoma, particularly in metastatic patients, compared to non-metastatic
patients. Knockdown of FOXM1 by a specific siRNA significantly suppressed EMT
progression, migration and invasion of lung adenocarcinoma cells in vitro, and
tumor growth and metastasis in vivo, whereas restored expression of FOXM1 had the
opposite effect. FOXM1 binds directly to the SNAIL promoter through two specific 
binding sites and constitutively transactivates it. Collectively, our findings
indicate that FOXM1 may play an important role in advancing lung adenocarcinoma
progression. Aberrant FOXM1 expression directly and constitutively activates
SNAIL, thereby promoting lung adenocarcinoma metastasis. Inhibition of
FOXM1-SNAIL signaling may present an ideal target for future treatment.

PMCID: PMC4279094
PMID: 25561901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Leuk Res. 2015 Mar;39(3):342-7. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2014.12.005. Epub 2014 Dec
17.

Targeting FoxM1 transcription factor in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell 
line.

Tüfekçi Ö(1), Yandim MK(2), Ören H(3), Irken G(1), Baran Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dokuz Eylül University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric
Hematology, Balçova, Izmir, Turkey. (2)Izmir Institute of Technology, Faculty of 
Science, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Urla, Izmir, Turkey.
(3)Dokuz Eylül University, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pediatric
Hematology, Balçova, Izmir, Turkey. Electronic address: hale.oren@deu.edu.tr.

The Forkhead box protein M1 (FoxM1) is an important transcription factor having
significant roles in various cellular events. FoxM1 overexpression has been
reported to be related with many types of cancer. However, it is not known
whether it contributes to oncogenesis of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Siomycin
A, a thiazol antibiotic, is known to inhibit FoxM1 transcriptional activity. In
this study, we aimed to determine gene expression levels of FoxM1 in Jurkat cells
(T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell line) and therapeutic potential of
targeting FoxM1 by siomycin A alone and in combination with dexamethasone which
improves the survival of children with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
We also examined the molecular mechanisms of siomycin A and dexamethasone-induced
cell death in Jurkat cells. We demonstrated that FoxM1 mRNA is highly expressed
in Jurkat cells. Dexamethasone and siomycin A caused a significant reduction in
gene expression levels of FoxM1 in Jurkat cells. Targeting FoxM1 by siomycin A
and dexamethasone caused a significant decrease in T-ALL cell line proliferation 
through induction of G1 cell cycle arrest. All these findings suggest a possible 
role of FoxM1 in T-cell ALL pathogenesis and represent FoxM1 as an attractive
target for T-cell ALL therapy.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25557384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2015 Feb;36(2):241-51. doi: 10.1038/aps.2014.122. Epub 2015
Jan 5.

Sorafenib inhibits proliferation and invasion of human hepatocellular carcinoma
cells via up-regulation of p53 and suppressing FoxM1.

Wei JC(1), Meng FD(1), Qu K(1), Wang ZX(1), Wu QF(2), Zhang LQ(1), Pang Q(1), Liu
C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China. (2)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China.

AIM: Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is a transcription factor that plays important roles
in the pathogenesis and progression of human cancers, including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). The aim of this study was to examine the involvement of FoxM1 in
the anti-cancer action of sorafenib, a multikinase inhibitor, in human HCC cells.
METHODS: HCC cell lines HepG2 and HuH-7 were tested. Cell viability was examined 
using MTT assay and cell invasion was determined with Transwell migration assay. 
The relevant mRNA expression was determined with RT-PCR, and the proteins were
detected using Western blotting and immunofluorescence assays. RNA interference
was used to modify the expression of p53 and FoxM1. HuH-7 cell line xenograft
mice were used for in vivo study, which were treated with sorafenib (40 mg/kg,
po) daily for 3 weeks.
RESULTS: Sorafenib (2-20 µmol/L) inhibited the proliferation of the cells in
dose- and time-dependent manners with an IC50 value of nearly 6 µmol/L at 48 h.
Sorafenib (6 µmol/L) markedly suppressed the cell invasion. Furthermore,
sorafenib (2-6 µmol/L) dose-dependently decreased the expression of FoxM1, MMP-2,
and Ki-67, and up-regulated that of p53 in the cells. Silencing p53 abolished the
decrease of FoxM1 and increase of p53 in sorafenib-treated cells. Silencing FoxM1
significantly reduced the expression of MMP-2 and Ki-67, and enhanced the
anti-proliferation action of sorafenib in the cells, whereas overexpression of
FoxM1 increased the expression of MMP-2 and Ki-67, and abrogated the
anti-proliferation action of sorafenib. In the xenograft mice, sorafenib
administration decreased the tumor growth by 40%, and markedly increased the
expression of p53, and decreased the expression of FoxM1, MMP-2, and Ki-67 in
tumor tissues.
CONCLUSION: Sorafenib inhibits HCC proliferation and invasion by inhibiting MMP-2
and Ki-67 expression due to up-regulation of P53 and suppressing FoxM1.

PMCID: PMC4326788
PMID: 25557114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Oncotarget. 2015 Feb 10;6(4):2349-65.

FOXM1 confers to epithelial-mesenchymal transition, stemness and chemoresistance 
in epithelial ovarian carcinoma cells.

Chiu WT(1,)(2), Huang YF(3), Tsai HY(4), Chen CC(5,)(6), Chang CH(2), Huang
SC(7), Hsu KF(3,)(4), Chou CY(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, 
Taiwan. (2)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Cheng Kung
University Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan,
Taiwan. (4)Cancer Research Center, National Cheng Kung University Hospital,
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Pathology, Chia-Yi Christian Hospital, Chiayi, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Cosmetic Science, Chia Nan University of Pharmacy and Science,
Tainan, Taiwan. (7)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Chi Mei Medical
Center, Liouying Campus, Tainan, Taiwan.

Chemoresistance to anti-cancer drugs substantially reduces survival in epithelial
ovarian cancer. In this study, we showed that chemoresistance to cisplatin and
paclitaxel induced the epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and a stem cell
phenotype in ovarian cancer cells. Chemoresistance was associated with the
downregulation of epithelial markers and the upregulation of mesenchymal markers,
EMT-related transcription factors, and cancer stem cell markers, which enhanced
invasion and sphere formation ability. Overexpression of FOXM1 increased
cisplatin-resistance and sphere formation in cisplatin-sensitive and low
FOXM1-expressing ovarian cancer cells. Conversely, depletion of FOXM1 via RNA
interference reduced cisplatin resistance and sphere formation in
cisplatin-resistant and high FOXM1-expressing cells. Overexpression of FOXM1 also
increased the expression, nuclear accumulation, and activity of ß-CATENIN in
chemoresistant cells, whereas downregulation of FOXM1 suppressed these events.
The combination of cisplatin and the FOXM1 inhibitor thiostrepton inhibited the
expression of stem cell markers in chemoresistant cells and subcutaneous ovarian 
tumor growth in mouse xenografts. In an analysis of 106 ovarian cancer patients, 
high FOXM1 levels in tumors were associated with cancer progression and short
progression-free intervals. Collectively, our findings highlight the importance
of FOXM1 in chemoresistance and suggest that FOXM1 inhibitors may be useful for
treatment of ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4385856
PMID: 25537512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 6;290(6):3708-19. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.634386. Epub 2014
Dec 22.

Polo-like kinase 1-mediated phosphorylation of Forkhead box protein M1b
antagonizes its SUMOylation and facilitates its mitotic function.

Zhang J(1), Yuan C(1), Wu J(1), Elsayed Z(1), Fu Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth
University Institute of Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University
Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine,
Richmond, Virginia 23298. (2)From the Department of Human and Molecular Genetics,
Virginia Commonwealth University Institute of Molecular Genetics, Virginia
Commonwealth University Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University
School of Medicine, Richmond, Virginia 23298 zfu@vcu.edu.

Transcription factor Forkhead box protein M1b (FoxM1b) plays an important role
during mitotic entry and progression. Our previous studies identified polo-like
kinase 1 (PLK1) as a major regulator of FoxM1b. During G2/M transition, PLK1
directly interacts with and phosphorylates FoxM1b, resulting in full activation
of the transactivation capacity of FoxM1b. Such a vital regulatory mechanism is
essential for timely mitotic entry and progression. However, the molecular
mechanism by which PLK1-mediated phosphorylation enhances the transcriptional
activity of FoxM1b remains to be determined. We demonstrate that FoxM1b can be
SUMOylated in vitro and in vivo, preferentially by SUMO-1. SUMOylation of FoxM1b 
was found to occur at multiple sites, leading to suppression of FoxM1b
transcriptional activity. Such a posttranslational modification of FoxM1b was
antagonized by PLK1-mediated phosphorylation. By immunofluorescence staining and 
subcellular fractionation, we demonstrate that SUMO conjugation promotes
cytosolic translocation of FoxM1b. Moreover, SUMO modification of FoxM1b
facilitates the ubiquitin-mediated proteasomal degradation of FoxM1b.
PLK1-mediated phosphorylation of FoxM1b abrogates the inhibitory effect on FoxM1b
by SUMO modification, thereby promoting its nuclear translocation and preventing 
its proteolytic degradation in the cytoplasm. Such an antagonistic regulatory
mechanism is essential for the mitotic function of FoxM1b, ensuring timely
mitotic entry and progression. Taken together, our studies have revealed a
working mechanism by which PLK1 positively regulates the activity and level of
FoxM1b, which would greatly facilitate therapeutic interventions that focus on
targeting the PLK1-mediated and/or FoxM1-mediated signaling network.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4319035
PMID: 25533473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Neurooncol. 2015 Feb;121(3):469-77. doi: 10.1007/s11060-014-1664-2. Epub 2014
Dec 21.

Plumbagin induces growth inhibition of human glioma cells by downregulating the
expression and activity of FOXM1.

Liu X(1), Cai W, Niu M, Chong Y, Liu H, Hu W, Wang D, Gao S, Shi Q, Hu J, Zhou X,
Yu R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Nervous System Diseases, Xuzhou Medical College, Xuzhou, Jiangsu,
China.

Plumbagin, a natural quinonoid constituent isolated from the root of medicinal
plant Plumbago zeylanica L, has exhibited anti-tumor and anti-proliferative
activities in various tumor cell lines as well as in animal tumor models.
However, its anticancer effects and the mechanisms underlying its suppression of 
glioma cell growth have not been elucidated. Oncogenic transcription factor
Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) has garnered particular interest in recent years as a
potential target for the prevention and/or therapeutic intervention in glioma,
nevertheless, less information is currently available regarding FOXM1 inhibitor. 
Here, we reported that plumbagin could effectively inhibit cell proliferation,
migration and invasion and induce apoptosis of glioma cells. Cell cycle assay
showed that plumbagin induced G2/M arrest. Interestingly, we found that plumbagin
decreased the expression of FOXM1 both at mRNA level and protein level. Plumbagin
also inhibited the transactivation ability of FOXM1, resulting in down-regulating
the expression of FOXM1 downstream target genes, such as cyclin D1, Cdc25B,
survivin, and increasing the expression of p21(CIP1) and p27(KIP1). Most
importantly, down-regulation of FOXM1 by siFOXM1 transfection enhanced
plumbagin-induced change in viability. On the contrary, over-expression of FOXM1 
by cDNA transfection reduced plumbagin-induced glioma cell growth inhibition.
These results suggest that plumbagin exhibits its anticancer activity partially
by inactivation of FOXM1 signaling pathway in glioma cells. Our findings indicate
that plumbagin may be considered as a potential natural FOXM1 inhibitor, which
could contribute to the development of new anticancer agent for therapy of
gliomas.

PMID: 25528634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Dec 16;15(12):23345-58. doi: 10.3390/ijms151223345.

OPN induces FoxM1 expression and localization through ERK 1/2, AKT, and p38
signaling pathway in HEC-1A cells.

Xie Y(1), Li Y(2), Kong Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular, Dalian Medical University, Dalian
116044, China. yunpeng_xie1986@163.com. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, China.
yinghua_li1989@163.com. (3)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular, Dalian
Medical University, Dalian 116044, China. yingkong@dlmedu.edu.cn.

Mammalian embryo implantation is an extremely complex process and requires
endometrial receptivity. In order to establish this receptivity, sequential
proliferation and differentiation during the menstrual cycle is necessary.
Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is described as a major oncogenic transcription factor in
tumor initiation, promotion and progression. According to these functions, we
believe that FoxM1 should also play an essential role in embryo implantation.
Osteopontin (OPN), an adhesion molecule, has been studied extensively in
reproduction. In this study, we observed the expression and distribution of FoxM1
during the proliferative-phase and secretory-phase human endometrium and the
pre-implantation mouse uterus firstly. Then we observed the relationship between 
OPN and FoxM1. Our results showed that FoxM1 was mainly distributed in glandular 
epithelium. OPN increased the expression of FoxM1 in the human uterine epithelial
cell line HEC-1A cells in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. OPN
regulates FoxM1 to influence HEC-1A cell proliferation through extracellular
regulated protein kinases (ERK 1/2), protein kinase B (PKB, AKT), and the p38
mitogen activated protein kinases (p38MAPK, p38) signaling pathway. Inhibition of
ERK 1/2, AKT and p38 suppressed OPN-induced FoxM1 expression and location. Our
data indicate that FoxM1 might be regulated by OPN to influence endometrial
proliferation to establish endometrial receptivity.

PMCID: PMC4284770
PMID: 25522167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Curr Pharm Des. 2015;21(10):1268-71.

Glioblastoma multiforme formation and EMT: role of FoxM1 transcription factor.

Wang Z, Zhang S, Siu TL, Huang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. suhuang@mdanderson.org.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is one of the most malignant cancers in human
brain. The prognosis of GBM is extremely poor because it is resistant to
radiotherapy and chemotherapy. Improving understanding of the tumor biology
brings some new hope to the treatment of GBM. In this review, we discuss the
evidence that FoxM1 promotes the development and progression of GBM by regulating
key factors involved in cell proliferation, epithelial to mesenchymal transition 
(EMT), invasion, angiogenesis and upregulating Wnt/ß-catenin signalling. Our
recent experimental findings are also summarized to prove that FoxM1 is a novel
therapeutic target against GBM.

PMCID: PMC4380124
PMID: 25506897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Clin Cancer Res. 2015 Feb 15;21(4):844-53. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-2437.
Epub 2014 Dec 11.

Activation of vitamin D receptor signaling downregulates the expression of
nuclear FOXM1 protein and suppresses pancreatic cancer cell stemness.

Li Z(1), Jia Z(2), Gao Y(3), Xie D(4), Wei D(2), Cui J(5), Mishra L(2), Huang
S(6), Zhang Y(7), Xie K(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology, The Harbin Medical University Cancer 
Hospital, Harbin, People's Republic of China. Department of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology & Nutrition, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology &
Nutrition, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
(3)Department of Oncology and Tumor Institute, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Oncology and Tumor Institute, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. Department
of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First People's Hospital,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (5)Department of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology & Nutrition, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. Department of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated
First People's Hospital, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (6)Department of
Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. 
(7)Department of Gastrointestinal Oncology, The Harbin Medical University Cancer 
Hospital, Harbin, People's Republic of China. kepxie@mdanderson.org
yanqiaozhang@126.com. (8)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, 
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas.
kepxie@mdanderson.org yanqiaozhang@126.com.

PURPOSE: Dysregulated signaling of nuclear transcription factors vitamin D
receptor (VDR) and Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) plays important roles in
transformation and tumorigenesis. In this study, we sought to determine whether
VDR signaling causally affected FOXM1 signaling in and pathogenesis of pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC).
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Genetic and pharmacologic approaches were used to manipulate
VDR signaling. The impacts of altered VDR signaling on FOXM1 expression and
function in PDAC cells were determined using molecular and biochemical methods,
whereas those on PDAC cell biology and tumorigenicity were determined using in
vitro and in vivo experimental systems. The clinical relevance of our findings
was validated by analyzing human PDAC specimens.
RESULTS: There was a striking inverse correlation between reduced expression of
VDR and increased expression of FOXM1 in human PDAC cells and tissues. Treatment 
of PDAC cells with 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D), its synthetic analogue
EB1089 (EB), and VDR transgenics drastically inhibited FOXM1 signaling and
markedly suppressed tumor stemness, growth, and metastasis. Mechanistically,
1,25D and EB repressed FOXM1 transcription and reduced the expression level of
nuclear FOXM1 protein.
CONCLUSION: Inactivation of Vitamin D/VDR signaling is a critical contributor to 
PDAC development and progression via elevated expression and function of FOXM1
and enhanced PDAC cell stemness, invasion, and metastasis.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4334671
PMID: 25501129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Med Oncol. 2015 Jan;32(1):312. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0312-1. Epub 2014 Dec 10.

Different expression of FoxM1 in human benign and malignant pleural effusion.

Tang Z(1), Li H, Zhu H, Bai C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Huadong Hospital, Fudan University, 200040, 
Shanghai, China.

The aims of this study were as follows: to analyze the forkhead box M1 (FoxM1)
expression in benign and malignant pleural effusion by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay (RT-PCR); to explore the role of
FoxM1 in formation and progress in malignant pleural effusion, and whether there 
is significant difference in expression level of FoxM1 between benign and
malignant pleural effusion; to seek a gene marker diagnostically useful to
identify benign and malignant pleural effusion in diagnosis and treatment of
pleural effusion; and to collect expression level data of FoxM1 in 23 malignant
pleural effusion samples (17 adenocarcinoma samples, four squamous carcinoma
samples and two small cell lung carcinoma samples) and 15 benign pleural effusion
samples (11 inflammatory pleural effusions, two transudates, two tuberculous
pleural effusions) by RT-PCR. Among all 38 samples, average FoxM1 expression
level of benign pleural effusions is (235.09 ± 59.99), while malignant pleural
effusions (828.77 ± 109.76). Among 23 malignant samples, average FoxM1 expression
level is (529.27 ± 75.85) in samples without cytological diagnostic evidence,
while (1,218.12 ± 167.21) in samples with cytological diagnostic evidence.
Differences of FoxM1 expression level between benign pleural effusions and
malignant ones have statistical significance. There is an area of 0.881 under the
receiver-operating characteristic curve, which verifies the accuracy of using
FoxM1 expression level as diagnostic index to identify benign and malignant
pleural effusions. According to our study, diagnostic sensitivity and specificity
for FoxM1 expression level at 418.1 were 82.6 and 86.7 %, respectively, while
47.8 and 100 %, respectively, at 768.7. FoxM1 expression level in malignant
pleural effusions is significantly higher than in benign ones. This study
provides a new approach in clinical diagnosis, with FoxM1 as a specific molecule 
marker to identify benign and malignant pleural effusions. FoxM1 expression level
could provide evidence for diagnosis and treatment of malignant pleural effusions
and lung cancer.

PMID: 25491139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(16):2572-86. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2015.942209.

p53 shapes genome-wide and cell type-specific changes in microRNA expression
during the human DNA damage response.

Hattori H(1), Janky R, Nietfeld W, Aerts S, Madan Babu M, Venkitaraman AR.

Author information: 
(1)a University of Cambridge; Medical Research Council Cancer Unit; Hutchison/MRC
Research Center ; Cambridge , UK.

The human DNA damage response (DDR) triggers profound changes in gene expression,
whose nature and regulation remain uncertain. Although certain micro-(mi)RNA
species including miR34, miR-18, miR-16 and miR-143 have been implicated in the
DDR, there is as yet no comprehensive description of genome-wide changes in the
expression of miRNAs triggered by DNA breakage in human cells. We have used
next-generation sequencing (NGS), combined with rigorous integrative
computational analyses, to describe genome-wide changes in the expression of
miRNAs during the human DDR. The changes affect 150 of 1523 miRNAs known in
miRBase v18 from 4-24 h after the induction of DNA breakage, in cell-type
dependent patterns. The regulatory regions of the most-highly regulated miRNA
species are enriched in conserved binding sites for p53. Indeed, genome-wide
changes in miRNA expression during the DDR are markedly altered in TP53-/- cells 
compared to otherwise isogenic controls. The expression levels of certain
damage-induced, p53-regulated miRNAs in cancer samples correlate with patient
survival. Our work reveals genome-wide and cell type-specific alterations in
miRNA expression during the human DDR, which are regulated by the tumor
suppressor protein p53. These findings provide a genomic resource to identify new
molecules and mechanisms involved in the DDR, and to examine their role in tumor 
suppression and the clinical outcome of cancer patients.

PMCID: PMC4601526
PMID: 25486198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(20):3202-6. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.950132.

Proteasome inhibitors suppress the protein expression of mutant p53.

Halasi M(1), Pandit B, Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine ; University of Illinois at Chicago ; Chicago , IL
USA.

Tumor suppressor p53 is one of the most frequently mutated genes in cancer, with 
almost 50% of all types of cancer expressing a mutant form of p53. p53
transactivates the expression of its primary negative regulator, HDM2. HDM2 is a 
ubiquitin ligase, which initiates the proteasomal degradation of p53 following
ubiquitination. Proteasome inhibitors, by targeting the ubiquitin proteasome
pathway inhibit the degradation of the majority of cellular proteins including
wild-type p53. In contrast, in this study we found that the protein expression of
mutant p53 was suppressed following treatment with established or novel
proteasome inhibitors. Furthermore, for the first time we demonstrated that
Arsenic trioxide, which was previously shown to suppress mutant p53 protein
level, exhibits proteasome inhibitory activity. Proteasome inhibitor-mediated
suppression of mutant p53 was partially rescued by the knockdown of HDM2,
suggesting that the stabilization of HDM2 by proteasome inhibitors might be
responsible for mutant p53 suppression to some extent. This study suggests that
suppression of mutant p53 is a general property of proteasome inhibitors and it
provides additional rationale to use proteasome inhibitors for the treatment of
tumors with mutant p53.

PMCID: PMC4613555
PMID: 25485499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Leukemia. 2015 Jun;29(6):1350-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.341. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

PTPROt-mediated regulation of p53/Foxm1 suppresses leukemic phenotype in a CLL
mouse model.

Motiwala T(1), Kutay H(1), Zanesi N(2), Frissora FW(3), Mo X(4), Muthusamy N(5), 
Jacob ST(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH, USA. (2)Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical
Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (3)Comprehensive Cancer
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (4)Center for
Biostatistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. (5)Department of
Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Wexner Medical Center, Columbus,
OH, USA. (6)1] Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, The Ohio State 
University, Columbus, OH, USA [2] Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA.

The gene encoding PTPROt (truncated isoform of protein tyrosine phosphatase
receptor-type O) is methylated and suppressed in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL). PTPROt exhibits in vitro tumor-suppressor characteristics through the
regulation of B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling. Here we generated transgenic (Tg) 
mice with B-cell-specific expression of PTPROt. Although lymphocyte development
is normal in these mice, crossing them with TCL1 Tg mouse model of CLL results in
a survival advantage compared with the TCL1 Tg mice. Gene expression profiling of
splenic B-lymphocytes before detectable signs of CLL followed by Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis revealed that the most prominently regulated functions in TCL1
Tg vs non-transgenic (NTg) and TCL1 Tg vs PTPROt/TCL1 double Tg are the same and 
also biologically relevant to this study. Further, enhanced expression of the
chemokine Ccl3, the oncogenic transcription factor Foxm1 and its targets in TCL1 
Tg mice were significantly suppressed in the double Tg mice, suggesting a
protective function of PTPROt against leukemogenesis. This study also showed that
PTPROt-mediated regulation of Foxm1 involves activation of p53, a transcriptional
repressor of Foxm1, which is facilitated through suppression of BCR signaling.
These results establish the in vivo tumor-suppressive function of PTPROt and
identify p53/Foxm1 axis as a key downstream effect of PTPROt-mediated suppression
of BCR signaling.

PMCID: PMC4456291
PMID: 25482129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Mar;1849(3):290-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.11.008. 
Epub 2014 Dec 4.

The FOXM1-induced resistance to oxaliplatin is partially mediated by its novel
target gene Mcl-1 in gastric cancer cells.

Hu CJ(1), Wang B(2), Tang B(1), Chen BJ(1), Xiao YF(1), Qin Y(1), Yong X(1), Luo 
G(1), Zhang JW(1), Zhang D(1), Li S(3), He F(4), Yang SM(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400038, China. (3)Center for Pharmacogenetics, Department of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, University of Pittsburgh,
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, United States. (4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular 
Biology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 400038, China. Electronic address: hefengtian06@aliyun.com.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Xinqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, China. Electronic address: shimingyang@yahoo.com.

Myeloid cell leukemia-1 (Mcl-1) is an anti-apoptotic protein that belongs to the 
Bcl-2 family. The aberrant expression of Mcl-1 is important for sensitivity to
chemotherapy drugs in gastric cancer. However, the regulatory mechanism of Mcl-1 
in gastric cancer cells remains unclear. In this study, we first found that
Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) and Mcl-1 expression levels were positively correlated in
human gastric cancer specimens and that both are associated with poor prognosis
of patients treated with oxaliplatin. Second, we demonstrated that the expression
level of Mcl-1 was correlated with FOXM1 expression in gastric cancer cells.
Third, reporter assays showed that FOXM1 upregulated the promoter activity of the
Mcl-1 gene. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays further demonstrated that FOXM1 could bind to a
particular site (-635acaaacaa-628) in the promoter region of the Mcl-1 gene.
Moreover, CCK-8 assays and analyses of apoptosis revealed that the suppression of
the FOXM1/Mcl-1 pathway induced apoptosis and thus increased sensitivity to
oxaliplatin in gastric cancer cells, whereas the enhancement of the FOXM1/Mcl-1
pathway inhibited apoptosis and decreased sensitivity to oxaliplatin in gastric
cancer cells. Taken together, this study is the first to not only show that Mcl-1
is a novel target gene of FOXM1 but also suggest that targeting FOXM1/Mcl-1 may
be a novel strategy to enhance sensitivity to oxaliplatin in gastric cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25482013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Cell Prolif. 2015 Feb;48(1):105-15. doi: 10.1111/cpr.12153. Epub 2014 Dec 5.

Increased FOXM1 expression can stimulate DNA repair in normal hepatocytes in vivo
but also increases nuclear foci associated with senescence.

Baranski OA(1), Kalinichenko VV, Adami GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Oral Diagnostics, Center for Molecular Biology
of Oral Diseases, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60612-7213,
USA.

OBJECTIVES: FOXM1 is a transcription factor that has been shown to promote cell
proliferation in many tissues during early development and high cell turnover
tissues in adults. In a number of tumour cell lines, enrichment of FOXM1 has been
shown to reduce the DNA damage response (DDR) and induction of senescence by a
range of DNA-damaging agents, suggesting a role for the protein in DNA repair.
Endogenous FOXM1 is expressed at detectable levels in hepatocytes of mice up to 2
weeks of age, but not in older mice. The aim of this investigation has been to
better understand the role of the protein in DDR in normal cells in vivo.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mice with artificially prolonged elevated FOXM1 expression
in hepatocytes, were exposed to alkylating diethylnitrosamine.
RESULTS: FOXM1-enriched mice had dampened DDR after treatment with this
alkylating agent, which was consistent with observed increase in expression of
genes involved in DNA repair. Paradoxically, mice with FOXM1 expression, within
weeks after exposure to the DNA-damaging agent, had increased levels of
potentially senescent hepatocytes with large nuclear foci, containing 53BP1.
Similarly, spontaneous accumulation of these cells seen with normal ageing in
mice was increased with FOXM1 enrichment.
CONCLUSION: Despite its known abilities to promote proliferation and DNA repair, 
and to reduce ROS, enrichment of FOXM1, as with other oncoproteins, may cause
increased persistent DNA lesions and/or senescence in normal murine hepatocytes.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25477198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;58:28-36. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2014.11.002.
Epub 2014 Nov 11.

Oncogenic Human Papillomavirus 16E7 modulates SUMOylation of FoxM1b.

Jaiswal N(1), John R(1), Chand V(1), Nag A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Delhi South Campus, Benito Juarez
Road, New Delhi 110021, India. (2)Department of Biochemistry, University of Delhi
South Campus, Benito Juarez Road, New Delhi 110021, India. Electronic address:
alonag22@gmail.com.

The oncogenic transcription factor Forkhead box M1b (FoxM1b), a key regulator of 
cell cycle, is often overexpressed in many human cancers. Interestingly,
posttranslational modifications are known to play important role in regulating
the levels and activity of FoxM1b. The purpose of the present study was to
characterize the SUMOylation of FoxM1b and identify the functional consequences
including viral pathogenesis. Here, we report that FoxM1b interacts with
SUMOylating enzymes Ubc9 and PIAS1 and acts as a substrate for SUMOylation. We
also show that SUMOylation facilitates FoxM1b protein destabilization and
nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. More importantly, we provide the first evidence for 
a role of E7 oncoprotein in high risk human papillomavirus (HPV) mediated
upregulation of FoxM1b. The elevated expression of FoxM1 was determined to be
posttranscriptional and was attributed to decreased SUMOylation of FoxM1b in the 
E7-expressing cells. Moreover, we demonstrate the involvement of SUMOylation in
regulation of FoxM1 and present biochemical evidence that HPV16 E7 oncoprotein
can modulate SUMOylation of FoxM1b by impairing its interaction with Ubc9.
Together, these results provide a novel connection between SUMOylation of FoxM1b 
and HPV carcinogenesis. The findings may have important implications in the
discovery of future anti-cancer therapeutics.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25462159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Redox Biol. 2014;3:79-87. doi: 10.1016/j.redox.2014.11.003. Epub 2014 Nov 18.

Peroxiredoxin 3 levels regulate a mitochondrial redox setpoint in malignant
mesothelioma cells.

Cunniff B(1), Wozniak AN(2), Sweeney P(2), DeCosta K(2), Heintz NH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont, College of Medicine, 149
Beaumont Avenue, Burlington, VT 05405, USA. (3)Department of Pathology,
University of Vermont, College of Medicine, 149 Beaumont Avenue, Burlington, VT
05405, USA. Electronic address: Nicholas.Heintz@uvm.edu.

Peroxiredoxin 3 (PRX3), a typical 2-Cys peroxiredoxin located exclusively in the 
mitochondrial matrix, is the principal peroxidase responsible for metabolizing
mitochondrial hydrogen peroxide, a byproduct of cellular respiration originating 
from the mitochondrial electron transport chain. Mitochondrial oxidants are
produced in excess in cancer cells due to oncogenic transformation and metabolic 
reorganization, and signals through FOXM1 and other redox-responsive factors to
support a hyper-proliferative state. Over-expression of PRX3 in cancer cells has 
been shown to counteract oncogene-induced senescence and support tumor cell
growth and survival making PRX3 a credible therapeutic target. Using malignant
mesothelioma (MM) cells stably expressing shRNAs to PRX3 we show that decreased
expression of PRX3 alters mitochondrial structure, function and cell cycle
kinetics. As compared to control cells, knockdown of PRX3 expression increased
mitochondrial membrane potential, basal ATP production, oxygen consumption and
extracellular acidification rates. shPRX3 MM cells failed to progress through the
cell cycle compared to wild type controls, with increased numbers of cells in
G2/M phase. Diminished PRX3 expression also induced mitochondrial hyperfusion
similar to the DRP1 inhibitor mdivi-1. Cell cycle progression and changes in
mitochondrial networking were rescued by transient expression of either catalase 
or mitochondrial-targeted catalase, indicating high levels of hydrogen peroxide
contribute to perturbations in mitochondrial structure and function in shPRX3 MM 
cells. Our results indicate that PRX3 levels establish a redox set point that
permits MM cells to thrive in response to increased levels of mROS, and that
perturbing the redox status governed by PRX3 impairs proliferation by altering
cell cycle-dependent dynamics between mitochondrial networking and energy
metabolism.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4297934
PMID: 25462069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Exp Cell Res. 2015 Jan 15;330(2):442-50. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2014.10.022. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

The miR-134 attenuates the expression of transcription factor FOXM1 during
pluripotent NT2/D1 embryonal carcinoma cell differentiation.

Chen Y(1), Meng L(1), Yu Q(1), Dong D(1), Tan G(1), Huang X(2), Tan Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Biology,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Chemistry and Molecular Medicine, Hunan
University, 1 Denggao Road, Changsha, China. (2)State Key Laboratory of
Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Biology, Collaborative Innovation
Center for Chemistry and Molecular Medicine, Hunan University, 1 Denggao Road,
Changsha, China. Electronic address: huangminming@hnu.edu.cn. (3)State Key
Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Biology,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Chemistry and Molecular Medicine, Hunan
University, 1 Denggao Road, Changsha, China. Electronic address:
yjtan@hnu.edu.cn.

Transcription factor FOXM1 plays a critical role in maintenance of stem cell
pluripotency through stimulating the transcription of pluripotency-related genes 
in mouse pluripotent stem cells. In this study, we have found that the repression
of FOXM1 expression is mediated by FOXM1 3'UTR during retinoic acid-induced
differentiation of human pluripotent NT2/D1 embryonal carcinoma cells. FOXM1
3'UTR contains a microRNA response element (MRE) for miR-134, which has been
shown to attenuate the expression of pluripotency-related genes
post-transcriptionally during mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation. We have 
determined that miR-134 is induced during RA-induced differentiation of NT2/D1
cells and the overexpression of miR-134 represses the expression of FOXM1 protein
but not FOXM1 mRNA. Furthermore, the expression of OCT4 is diminished by FOXM1
knockdown and the OCT4 promoter is regulated directly by FOXM1, suggesting that
FOXM1 is required for maintaining the expression of OCT4 in NT2/D1 cells.
Together, our results suggest that FOXM1 is essential for human pluripotent stem 
cells and miR-134 attenuates its expression during differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25447206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Feb 6;457(2):125-32. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.11.039. Epub 2014 Nov 21.

miR-320 enhances the sensitivity of human colon cancer cells to chemoradiotherapy
in vitro by targeting FOXM1.

Wan LY(1), Deng J(1), Xiang XJ(1), Zhang L(1), Yu F(1), Chen J(1), Sun Z(1), Feng
M(1), Xiong JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanchang University, 
Nanchang 330006, PR China. (2)Department of Oncology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanchang University, Nanchang 330006, PR China. Electronic address:
jpxiong@medmail.com.cn.

miR-320 expression level is found to be down-regulated in human colon cancer. To 
date, however, its underlying mechanisms in the chemo-resistance remain largely
unknown. In this study, we demonstrated that ectopic expression of miR-320 led to
inhibit HCT-116 cell proliferation, invasion and hypersensitivity to 5-Fu and
Oxaliplatin. Also, knockdown of miR-320 reversed these effects in HT-29 cells.
Furthermore, we identified an oncogene, FOXM1, as a direct target of miR-320. In 
addition, miR-320 could inactive the activity of Wnt/ß-catenin pathway. Finally, 
we found that miR-320 and FOXM1 protein had a negative correlation in colon
cancer tissues and adjacent normal tissues. These findings implied that
miR-320-FOXM1 axis may overcome chemo-resistance of colon cancer cells and
provide a new therapeutic target for the treatment of colon cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Transl Res. 2015 Mar;165(3):417-27. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2014.10.001. Epub 2014
Oct 31.

Breast tissue-based microRNA panel highlights microRNA-23a and selected target
genes as putative biomarkers for breast cancer.

Eissa S(1), Matboli M(2), Shehata HH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Diagnostic Unit, Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
Department, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams University, Cairo, Egypt. Electronic
address: Dr_sanaa_eissa@yahoo.com. (2)Oncology Diagnostic Unit, Medical
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Faculty of Medicine, Ain Shams
University, Cairo, Egypt.

We explored the differential expression of breast tissue-based panel of microRNAs
(miRNAs) and their potential application as prognostic markers of breast cancer
(BC). This study was divided into the following phases: (1) A panel of 6 BC
characteristic miRNAs, which were retrieved based on the microarray signature
profiling (released by miRWalk), was explored using SYBR Green-based polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) array in 16 cancerous and 16 noncancerous breast tissue; (2)
pathway enrichment analysis of the key miRNA target genes; (3) marker choice and 
validation by real-time PCR in a larger set of 76 patients with BC, 36 benign
breast conditions, and 36 healthy volunteers; (4) validation of miRNA (miR)-23a
target genes (forkhead box m [FOXM1] and histidine-rich glycoprotein [HRG]) by
conventional reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR; and (5) the prognostic significance 
of the investigated parameters in the BC validation group was explored. In PCR
array-based miRNA expression analysis, 4 miRNAs were found to be altered more
than twice (miR-96, miR-29c, miR-221, and miR-23a). Bioinformatic analysis of the
target genes revealed enrichment for special biological process categories, that 
is, cell cycle, angiogenesis, apoptosis, cell proliferation, and cell adhesion.
miR-23a, HRG messenger RNA, and FOX messenger RNA were positive in BC by 82.9%,
72.4%, and 71.1%, respectively. The overall concordance rates between miR-23a
with HRG and FOXM1 tissue RNAs were 91% and 79%, respectively. The median
follow-up period was 49 months. mi-23a and HRG RNA were significant independent
prognostic markers in relapse-free survival. miR-23a may have an oncogenic
function and enhance BC progression by directly activating FOXM1 and HRG at RNA
level.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Curr Drug Targets. 2015;16(3):258-71.

Hedgehog signaling and urological cancers.

Shigemura K, Fujisawa M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Department of Organ Therapeutics, Faculty of Medicine,
Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe
650-0017, Japan. yutoshunta@hotmail.co.jp.

Hedgehog (Hh) signaling is aberrantly activated in several hematological and
solid cancers. Therapeutic options are sometimes lacking for urological cancers
because their mechanisms of progression are imperfectly understood. Studies
establishing the anti-tumor effects and safety of inhibitors of Hh pathways are
needed for tumors in which the Hh pathways are activated. At present vismodegib
is clinically available for basal cell carcinoma, and is expected to be extended 
to treat other cancers. Cholecalciferol, the precursor of active vitamin D3, is a
strong inhibitor of Shh-Gli signaling and may have growth inhibitory effects in
renal cancer. As a supplementary therapy it may promote tumor regression.
Preclinical data in prostate cancer suggest that while suppressing Hh signaling
could reduce invasion and metastasis, it may also result in acquired drug
resistance after long-term use. Combining Hh inhibitors with ionizing radiation
and/or chemotherapy could improve treatment while lessening the risk of acquired 
drug resistance. Expression of Shh-related ligand gene and Shh-Gli-inducible
target genes like FOXM1 or IGF2 is characteristic of urothelial tumor samples.
Overexpression of Shh is observed in 96% of non-muscle invasive bladder cancer
and 52% of muscle invasive bladder cancer samples. This review summarizes
recently reported trends in Hh signaling activation studies in urological cancer,
especially focusing on possible clinical applications.

PMID: 25429711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 30;5(22):11365-80.

Targeting of mutant p53-induced FoxM1 with thiostrepton induces cytotoxicity and 
enhances carboplatin sensitivity in cancer cells.

Zhang X(1), Cheng L(1), Minn K(1), Madan R(2), Godwin AK(2), Shridhar V(3), Chien
J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas
City, Kansas, U.S.A. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine,
University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas, U.S.A. (3)Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, U.S.A.

FoxM1 is an oncogenic Forkhead transcription factor that is overexpressed in
ovarian cancer. However, the mechanisms by which FoxM1 is deregulated in ovarian 
cancer and the extent to which FoxM1 can be targeted in ovarian cancer have not
been reported previously. In this study, we showed that MDM2 inhibitor Nutlin-3
upregulated p53 protein and downregulated FoxM1 expression in several cancer cell
lines with wild type TP53 but not in cell lines with mutant TP53. FoxM1
downregulation was partially blocked by cycloheximide or actinomycin D, and
pulse-chase studies indicate Nutlin-3 enhances FoxM1 mRNA decay. Knockdown of p53
using shRNAs abrogated the FoxM1 downregulation by Nutlin-3, indicating a
p53-dependent mechanism. FoxM1 inhibitor, thiostrepton, induces apoptosis in
cancer cell lines and enhances sensitivity to cisplatin in these cells.
Thiostrepton downregulates FoxM1 expression in several cancer cell lines and
enhances sensitivity to carboplatin in vivo. Finally, FoxM1 expression is
elevated in nearly all (48/49) ovarian tumors, indicating that thiostrepton
target gene is highly expressed in ovarian cancer. In summary, the present study 
provides novel evidence that both amorphic and neomorphic mutations in TP53
contribute to FoxM1 overexpression and that FoxM1 may be targeted for therapeutic
benefits in cancers.

PMCID: PMC4294351
PMID: 25426548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Neoplasia. 2014 Nov 20;16(11):961-71. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.09.010. eCollection
2014.

Up-regulation of FOXM1 by E6 oncoprotein through the MZF1/NKX2-1 axis is required
for human papillomavirus-associated tumorigenesis.

Chen PM(1), Cheng YW(1), Wang YC(2), Wu TC(2), Chen CY(3), Lee H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Cancer Biology and Drug Discovery, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)School of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University,
Taichung, Taiwan ; Department of Internal Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (3)Department of Surgery, China Medical University
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: Foxhead box M1 (FOXM1) expression has been shown to be linked with human
papillomavirus (HPV) 16/18-infected cervical cancer. However, the mechanism
underlying the induction of FOXM1 in HPV 16/18-infected cancers remains elusive.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The mechanistic actions of FOXM1 induced by the E6/NKX2-1
axis in tumor aggressiveness were elucidated in cellular and animal models. The
prognostic value of FOXM1 for overall survival (OS) and relapse-free survival
(RFS) in HPV-positive oral and lung cancers was assessed using Kaplan-Meier and
Cox regression models.
RESULTS: Herein, FOXM1 expression is upregulated by E6-mediated NKX2-1 in
HPV-positive cervical, oral, and lung cancer cells. Induction of FOXM1 by E6
through the MZF1/NKX2-1 axis is responsible for HPV-mediated soft agar growth,
invasiveness, and stemness through activating Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. In
a nude mice model, metastatic lung tumor nodules in HPV 18 E6-positive GNM or HPV
16 E6-positive TL-1-injected nude mice were markedly decreased in both cell types
with E6 knockdown, FOXM1 knockdown, or treatment with FOXM1 inhibitor
(thiostrepton). Among the four subgroup patients, the worst FOXM1 prognostic
value for OS and RFS was observed in HPV 16/18-positive patients with tumors with
high-expressing FOXM1.
CONCLUSIONS: Induction of FOXM1 by E6 oncoprotein through the MZF1/NKX2-1 axis
may be responsible for HPV 16/18-mediated tumor progression and poor outcomes in 
HPV-positive patients.

PMCID: PMC4240922
PMID: 25425970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Curr Drug Targets. 2016;17(2):164-77.

Insights into a Critical Role of the FOXO3a-FOXM1 Axis in DNA Damage Response and
Genotoxic Drug Resistance.

Nestal de Moraes G, Bella L, Zona S, Burton MJ, Lam EW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK. eric.lam@imperial.ac.uk.

FOXO3a and FOXM1 are two forkhead transcription factors with antagonistic roles
in cancer and DNA damage response. FOXO3a functions like a typical tumour
suppressor, whereas FOXM1 is a potent oncogene aberrantly overexpressed in
genotoxic resistant cancers. FOXO3a not only represses FOXM1 expression but also 
its transcriptional output. Recent research has provided novel insights into a
central role for FOXO3a and FOXM1 in DNA damage response. The FOXO3a-FOXM1 axis
plays a pivotal role in DNA damage repair and the accompanied cellular response
through regulating the expression of genes essential for DNA damage sensing,
mediating, signalling and repair as well as for senescence, cell cycle and cell
death control. In this manner, the FOXO3a-FOXM1 axis also holds the key to cell
fate decision in response to genotoxic therapeutic agents and controls the
equilibrium between DNA repair and cell termination by cell death or senescence. 
As a consequence, inhibition of FOXM1 or reactivation of FOXO3a in cancer cells
could enhance the efficacy of DNA damaging cancer therapies by decreasing the
rate of DNA repair and cell survival while increasing senescence and cell death. 
Conceptually, targeting FOXO3a and FOXM1 may represent a promising molecular
therapeutic option for improving the efficacy and selectivity of DNA damage
agents, particularly in genotoxic agent resistant cancer. In addition, FOXO3a,
FOXM1 and their downstream transcriptional targets may also be reliable
diagnostic biomarkers for predicting outcome, for selecting therapeutic options, 
and for monitoring treatments in DNA-damaging agent therapy.

PMID: 25418858  [PubMed - in process]


198. Gut. 2015 Sep;64(9):1444-53.

Control of hepatocyte proliferation and survival by Fgf receptors is essential
for liver regeneration in mice.

Padrissa-Altés S, Bachofner M, Bogorad RL, Pohlmeier L, Rossolini T, Böhm F,
Liebisch G, Hellerbrand C, Koteliansky V, Speicher T, Werner S.

OBJECTIVE: Fibroblast growth factors (Fgfs) are key orchestrators of development,
and a role of Fgfs in tissue repair is emerging. Here we studied the consequences
of inducible loss of Fgf receptor (Fgfr) 4, the major Fgf receptor (Fgfr) on
hepatocytes, alone or in combination with Fgfr1 and Fgfr2, for liver regeneration
after PH.
DESIGN: We used siRNA delivered via nanoparticles combined with liver-specific
gene knockout to study Fgfr function in liver regeneration. Liver or blood
samples were analysed using histology, immunohistochemistry,real-time RT-PCR,
western blotting and ELISA.
RESULTS: siRNA-mediated knockdown of Fgfr4 severely affected liver regeneration
due to impairment of hepatocyte proliferation combined with liver
necrosis.Mechanistically, the proliferation defect resulted from inhibition of an
Fgf15-Fgfr4-Stat3 signalling pathway,which is required for injury-induced
expression of the Foxm1 transcription factor and subsequent cell cycle
progression, while elevated levels of intrahepatic toxicbile acids were
identified as the likely cause of the necrotic damage. Failure of liver mass
restoration in Fgfr4 knockdown mice was prevented at least in part by
compensatory hypertrophy of hepatocytes. Most importantly, our data revealed
partially redundant functions of Fgf receptors in the liver, since knock down of 
Fgfr4 in mice lacking Fgfr1 and Fgfr2 in hepatocytes caused liver failure after
PH due to severe liver necrosis and a defect in regeneration.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate that Fgfr signalling in hepatocytes is
essential for liver regeneration and suggest activation of Fgfr signalling asa
promising approach for the improvement of the liver's regenerative capacity.

PMID: 25416068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 20;9(11):e113478. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0113478.
eCollection 2014.

Overexpression of forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) in ovarian cancer correlates
with poor patient survival and contributes to paclitaxel resistance.

Zhao F(1), Siu MK(2), Jiang L(3), Tam KF(4), Ngan HY(2), Le XF(5), Wong OG(4),
Wong ES(4), Gomes AR(6), Bella L(6), Khongkow P(6), Lam EW(6), Cheung AN(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, China; Department
of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Obstetrics and Gynaecology, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, West China Hospital, Sichuang University, Chengdu,
China. (4)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, China.
(5)Department of Experimental Therapeutics, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Texas, United States of America. (6)Department of Surgery and
Cancer, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom. (7)Department of
Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, HKSAR, China; Department of Pathology,
The University of Hong Kong -Shenzhen Hospital, Shenzhen, China.

AIM: Deregulation of FOXM1 has been documented in various cancers. The aim of
this study was to evaluate the role of FOXM1 in ovarian cancer tumorigenesis and 
paclitaxel resistance.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Expression of FOXM1 was examined in 119 clinical samples by 
immunohistochemistry and correlated with clinicopathological parameters. Effects 
of FOXM1 knockdown on ovarian cancer cell migration, invasion and mitotic
catastrophe were also studied. qPCR and ChIP-qPCR were used to establish KIF2C as
a novel FOXM1 target gene implicated in chemoresistance.
RESULTS: High nuclear FOXM1 expression in ovarian cancer patient samples was
significantly associated with advanced stages (P = 0.035), shorter overall (P =
0.019) and disease-free (P = 0.014) survival. Multivariate analysis confirmed
FOXM1 expression as an independent prognostic factor for ovarian cancer. FOXM1
knockdown significantly inhibited migration and invasion of ovarian cancer cells 
and enhanced paclitaxel-mediated cell death and mitotic catastrophe in a
p53-independent manner. Bioinformatics analysis suggested a number of potential
transcription targets of FOXM1. One of the potential targets, KIF2C, exhibited
similar expression pattern to FOXM1 in chemosensitive and chemoresistant cells in
response to paclitaxel treatment. FOXM1 could be detected at the promoter of
KIF2C and FOXM1 silencing significantly down-regulated KIF2C.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that FOXM1 is associated with poor patient
outcome and contributes to paclitaxel resistance by blocking mitotic catastrophe.
KIF2C is identified as a novel FOXM1 transcriptional target that may be
implicated in the acquisition of chemoresistance. FOXM1 should be further
investigated as a potential prognostic marker and therapeutic target for ovarian 
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4239070
PMID: 25411964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Sep 15;7(10):6585-95. eCollection 2014.

FoxM1 influences embryo implantation and is regulated by 17 beta-estradiol and
progesterone in mouse uteri and endometrium cells.

Xie Y(1), Cui D(1), Kong Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular, Dalian Medical University Dalian,
Liaoning Provincial, China.

To be a successful implantation, endometrial receptivity should be established.
Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is described as a major oncogenic transcription factor in
tumor initiation, promotion, and progression. FoxM1 regulates the expression of
lots of targeted genes important to cell differentiation, proliferation and
apoptosis; cell-cycle progression; and tumor angiogenesis, migration, invasion,
and metastasis. According to these functions, we believe that FoxM1 should also
play an essential role in embryo implantation. To test our hypothesis, we
observed the expression and distribution of FoxM1 during the early pregnancy of
mouse. Then, we used Immunohistochemistry to examine the expression of FoxM1
induced by E2 and/or P4 in the ovariectomized mouse uterus and human endometrium 
cells. This study further investigated whether FoxM1 was an important factor in
the implantation. Our results showed that FoxM1 expressed in the mouse uterus
during early pregnancy (Day 1 to 5). The expression of FoxM1 gradually increased 
along pregnancy process; FoxM1 expression could be increased by E2. On the
contrary, FoxM1 expression could be decreased by P4 and E2 plus P4. We also
detected the proliferation of human endometrium cells. We found that E2 might
promote cells proliferation, while P4 and E2 plus P4 inhibited cells
proliferation; Inhibiting FoxM1 could interfere the embryo implantation of mouse.
Amplification or inhibiting of FoxM1 in JAR cells can increase or decrease the
adhesion rate to Rl95-2 and HEC-1A cells separately. Our data indicate that FoxM1
might play an important role during the process of mouse embryo implantation.

PMCID: PMC4230058
PMID: 25400737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Pharmacol. 2015 Feb;87(2):150-61. doi: 10.1124/mol.114.095380. Epub 2014 Nov 
12.

Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor signaling increases the invasive potential 
of human epidermal growth factor receptor 2-overexpressing breast cancer cells
via Src-focal adhesion kinase and forkhead box protein M1.

Sanabria-Figueroa E(1), Donnelly SM(1), Foy KC(1), Buss MC(1), Castellino RC(1), 
Paplomata E(1), Taliaferro-Smith L(1), Kaumaya PT(1), Nahta R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology (E.S.-F., S.M.D., R.N.) and Hematology and Medical
Oncology (E.P., L.T.-S., R.N.), School of Medicine, and Molecular and Systems
Pharmacology Program, Graduate Division of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
(E.S.-F., R.N.), and Winship Cancer Institute (R.C.C., E.P., L.T.-S., R.N.),
Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia; Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center,
Children's Healthcare of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia (M.C.B., R.C.C.); and
Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Microbiology, James Cancer Hospital,
Solove Research Institute and Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio (K.C.F., P.T.P.K.). (2)Departments of Pharmacology
(E.S.-F., S.M.D., R.N.) and Hematology and Medical Oncology (E.P., L.T.-S.,
R.N.), School of Medicine, and Molecular and Systems Pharmacology Program,
Graduate Division of Biological and Biomedical Sciences (E.S.-F., R.N.), and
Winship Cancer Institute (R.C.C., E.P., L.T.-S., R.N.), Emory University,
Atlanta, Georgia; Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center, Children's Healthcare 
of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia (M.C.B., R.C.C.); and Departments of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology and Microbiology, James Cancer Hospital, Solove Research Institute and
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio (K.C.F.,
P.T.P.K.) rnahta@emory.edu.

Resistance to the human epidermal growth factor receptor (HER2)-targeted antibody
trastuzumab is a major clinical concern in the treatment of HER2-positive
metastatic breast cancer. Increased expression or signaling from the insulin-like
growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) has been reported to be associated with
trastuzumab resistance. However, the specific molecular and biologic mechanisms
through which IGF-1R promotes resistance or disease progression remain poorly
defined. In this study, we found that the major biologic effect promoted by
IGF-1R was invasion, which was mediated by both Src-focal adhesion kinase (FAK)
signaling and Forkhead box protein M1 (FoxM1). Cotargeting IGF-1R and HER2 using 
either IGF-1R antibodies or IGF-1R short hairpin RNA in combination with
trastuzumab resulted in significant but modest growth inhibition. Reduced
invasion was the most significant biologic effect achieved by cotargeting IGF-1R 
and HER2 in trastuzumab-resistant cells. Constitutively active Src blocked the
anti-invasive effect of IGF-1R/HER2 cotargeted therapy. Furthermore, knockdown of
FoxM1 blocked IGF-1-mediated invasion, and dual targeting of IGF-1R and HER2
reduced expression of FoxM1. Re-expression of FoxM1 restored the invasive
potential of IGF-1R knockdown cells treated with trastuzumab. Overall, our
results strongly indicate that therapeutic combinations that cotarget IGF-1R and 
HER2 may reduce the invasive potential of cancer cells that are resistant to
trastuzumab through mechanisms that depend in part on Src and FoxM1.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental
Therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4293451
PMID: 25391374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2015 Jun;141(6):971-81. doi: 10.1007/s00432-014-1872-3. 
Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Targeting FoxM1 by thiostrepton inhibits growth and induces apoptosis of
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Jiang L(1), Wu X, Wang P, Wen T, Yu C, Wei L, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University, 1 Youyi Rd, Chongqing, 400016, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: We have previously reported that forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription
factor was overexpressed in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) and was
associated with development of LSCC. However, there are limited studies regarding
the functional significance of FoxM1 and FoxM1 inhibitor thiostrepton in LSCC.
Therefore, the aim of this study was to examine both in vitro and in vivo
activity of FoxM1 inhibitor thiostrepton against LSCC cell line and nude mice.
METHODS: Cell viability was studied by CCK-8 assay. Cell growth was evaluated by 
CFSE staining and cell cycle analysis. Apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry. 
The mRNA and protein expression were detected by quantitative real-time RT-PCR,
Western blot and immunohistochemical staining. Xenograft model of tumor formation
was used to investigate how thiostrepton influences tumorigenesis in vivo.
RESULTS: Overexpression of FoxM1 in LSCC cells was down-regulated by thiostrepton
in a dose-dependent manner. Thiostrepton caused dose- and time-dependent
suppression of cell viability of LSCC. Moreover, thiostrepton induced cell cycle 
arrest at S phase at early time and inhibited DNA synthesis in LSCC cells in a
dose- and time-dependent manner by down-regulation of cyclin D1 and cyclin E1.
Thiostrepton also induced dose- and time-dependent apoptosis of LSCC cells by
down-regulation of Bcl-2, up-regulation of Bax and p53, and inducing release of
cytochrome c accompanied by activation of cleaved caspase-9, cleaved caspase-3
and cleaved PARP. In addition, z-VAD-fmk, a universal inhibitor of caspases,
prevented activation of cleavage caspase-3 and abrogates cell death induced by
thiostrepton treatment. Furthermore, FADD and cleaved caspase-8 were activated,
and expression of cIAP1, XIAP and survivin were inhibited by thiostrepton.
Finally, treatment of LSCC cell line xenografts with thiostrepton resulted in
tumorigenesis inhibition of tumors in nude mice by reducing proliferation and
inducing apoptosis of LSCC cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our finding suggest that targeting FoxM1 by
thiostrepton inhibit growth and induce apoptosis of LSCC through mitochondrial-
and caspase-dependent intrinsic pathway and Fas-dependent extrinsic pathway as
well as IAP family. Thiostrepton may represent a novel lead compound for targeted
therapy of LSCC.

PMID: 25391371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Nat Commun. 2014 Nov 12;5:5165. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6165.

Suppression of the FOXM1 transcriptional programme via novel small molecule
inhibition.

Gormally MV(1), Dexheimer TS(2), Marsico G(3), Sanders DA(3), Lowe C(4),
Matak-Vinkovic D(4), Michael S(2), Jadhav A(2), Rai G(2), Maloney DJ(2), Simeonov
A(2), Balasubramanian S(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] University Chemical Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of
Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK [2] Cancer Research UK, Li Ka
Shing Centre, Cambridge Institute, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK [3] National Center for 
Advancing Translational Sciences, NIH, Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.
(2)National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, NIH, Rockville, Maryland
20850, USA. (3)Cancer Research UK, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge Institute,
Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. (4)University Chemical Laboratory, Department of
Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK. (5)1] 
University Chemical Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge,
Lensfield Road, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK [2] Cancer Research UK, Li Ka Shing Centre,
Cambridge Institute, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK.

The transcription factor FOXM1 binds to sequence-specific motifs on DNA
(C/TAAACA) through its DNA-binding domain (DBD) and activates proliferation- and 
differentiation-associated genes. Aberrant overexpression of FOXM1 is a key
feature in oncogenesis and progression of many human cancers. Here--from a
high-throughput screen applied to a library of 54,211 small molecules--we
identify novel small molecule inhibitors of FOXM1 that block DNA binding. One of 
the identified compounds, FDI-6 (NCGC00099374), is characterized in depth and is 
shown to bind directly to FOXM1 protein, to displace FOXM1 from genomic targets
in MCF-7 breast cancer cells, and induce concomitant transcriptional
downregulation. Global transcript profiling of MCF-7 cells by RNA-seq shows that 
FDI-6 specifically downregulates FOXM1-activated genes with FOXM1 occupancy
confirmed by ChIP-PCR. This small molecule-mediated effect is selective for
FOXM1-controlled genes with no effect on genes regulated by homologous forkhead
family factors.

PMCID: PMC4258842
PMID: 25387393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Oncotarget. 2014 Dec 15;5(23):12371-82.

Preclinical efficacy of maternal embryonic leucine-zipper kinase (MELK)
inhibition in acute myeloid leukemia.

Alachkar H(1), Mutonga MB(1), Metzeler KH(2), Fulton N(1), Malnassy G(1), Herold 
T(2), Spiekermann K(2), Bohlander SK(3), Hiddemann W(2), Matsuo Y(4), Stock W(1),
Nakamura Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL. (2)Department of
Internal Medicine 3, University Hospital Grosshadern,
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU), München, Germany. Clinical Cooperative
Group Leukemia, Helmholtz Center Munich for Environmental Health, München,
Germany. (3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Pathology, The University of
Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand. (4)OncoTherapy Science, Inc., Kanagawa, Japan.

Maternal embryonic leucine-zipper kinase (MELK), which was reported to be
frequently up-regulated in various types of solid cancer, plays critical roles in
formation and maintenance of cancer stem cells. However, little is known about
the relevance of this kinase in hematologic malignancies. Here we report
characterization of possible roles of MELK in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). MELK 
is expressed in AML cell lines and AML blasts with higher levels in less
differentiated cells. MELK is frequently upregulated in AML with complex
karyotypes and is associated with worse clinical outcome. MELK knockdown resulted
in growth inhibition and apoptosis of leukemic cells. Hence, we investigated the 
potent anti-leukemia activity of OTS167, a small molecule MELK kinase inhibitor, 
in AML, and found that the compound induced cell differentiation and apoptosis as
well as decreased migration of AML cells. MELK expression was positively
correlated with the expression of FOXM1 as well as its downstream target genes.
Furthermore, MELK inhibition resulted in downregulation of FOXM1 activity and the
expression of its downstream targets. Taken together, and given that OTS167 is
undergoing a phase I clinical trial in solid cancer, our study warrants clinical 
evaluation of this compound as a novel targeted therapy for AML patients.

PMCID: PMC4323011
PMID: 25365263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Int J Mol Med. 2015 Jan;35(1):59-71. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1985. Epub 2014 Oct
29.

miRNA-130b is required for the ERK/FOXM1 pathway activation-mediated protective
effects of isosorbide dinitrate against mesenchymal stem cell senescence induced 
by high glucose.

Xu J(1), Huang Z(2), Lin L(3), Fu M(2), Song Y(2), Shen Y(3), Ren D(2), Gao Y(2),
Su Y(2), Zou Y(2), Chen Y(1), Zhang D(1), Hu W(1), Qian J(2), Ge J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Minhang Hospital, Ruijin Hospital Group, Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 201199, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Cardiology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, P.R. China. (3)Department of Cardiology, Eastern Hospital, Tongji
University, Shanghai 200120, P.R. China.

The present study was carried out to investigate the hypothesis that organic
nitrates can attenuate the senescence of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs), a
superior cell source involved in the regeneration and repair of damaged tissue.
MSCs were treated with high glucose (HG) in order to induce senescence, which was
markedly attenuated by pre-treatment with isosorbide dinitrate (ISDN), a commonly
used nitrate, as indicated by senescence-associated galactosidase (SA-ß-gal)
activity, p21 expression, as well as by the mRNA levels of DNA methyltransferase 
1 (DNMT1) and differentiated embryo chondrocyte expressed gene 1 (DEC1), which
are senescence-related biomarkers. It was also found that the senescent MSCs
(induced by HG glucose) exhibited a marked downregulation in ERK activity and
forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) expression, which was reversed by ISDN preconditioning.
Of note, the inhibition of ERK phosphorylation or the downregulation of FOXM1
statistically abolished the favourable effects of ISDN. In addition, the
investigation of the senescence-associated miR-130 family suggested that miR-130b
mediates the beneficial effects of ISDN; it was found that the protective effects
of ISDN against the senescence of MSCs were prominently reversed by the knockdown
of miR-130b. Furthermore, the downregulation of ERK phosphorylation or FOXM1
expression decreased the miR-130b expression level; however, the suppression of
miR-130b demonstrated no significant impact on ERK phosphorylation or FOXM1
expression. Taken together, to the best of our knowledge, the present study is
the first to demonstrate the favourable effects of ISDN against HG-induced MSC
senescence, which are mediated through the activation of the ERK/FOXM1 pathway
and the upregulation of miR-130b.

PMCID: PMC4249746
PMID: 25355277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Aug 15;7(9):5450-60. eCollection 2014.

Down-regulation of FoxM1 by thiostrepton or small interfering RNA inhibits
proliferation, transformation ability and angiogenesis, and induces apoptosis of 
nasopharyngeal carcinoma cells.

Jiang L(1), Wang P(2), Chen L(3), Chen H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University Chongqing 400016, China ; Department of Otolaryngology, Dazu
District People's Hospital Chongqing 402360, China. (2)Department of Osteology,
Dazu District People's Hospital Chongqing 402360, China. (3)Department of
Otolaryngology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University
Chongqing 400016, China.

Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a head and neck malignant tumor rare throughout
most of the world but common in Southern China. Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1)
transcription factor has been shown to play important role in the development and
progression of human cancers. We have previously found that FoxM1 was
overexpressed in NPC patients and was associated with development of NPC.
However, the exact functional significance of FoxM1 and its inhibitor
thiostrepton in NPC is little known. The purpose of this study was to investigate
in vitro activity of down-regulation of FoxM1 by thiostrepton or siRNA against
NPC cell line. FoxM1 inhibition by thiostrepton or siRNA inhibited proliferation 
of NPC cells by down-regulation of cyclin D1 and cyclin E1. Transformation
ability of NPC cells was suppressed by thiostrepton. FoxM1 inhibition by
thiostrepton induced apoptosis of NPC cells by down-regulation of bcl-2,
up-regulation of bax and p53, and inducing release of cytochrome c accompanied by
activation of caspase-9, cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved PARP. In addition, FoxM1
inhibition by siRNA transfection also down-regulated expression of bcl-2 and
up-regulated expression of bax, p53, cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved PARP.
Furthermore, FADD and cleaved caspase-8 expression were up-regulated by
thiostrepton or FoxM1 siRNA, and expression of cIAP1 and XIAP was inhibited by
thiostrepton. At last, FoxM1 inhibition by thiostrepton reduced the expression of
HIF-1a and VEGF, and transfection of FoxM1 siRNA decreased VEGF expression but
not HIF-1a. Collectively, our finding suggest that FoxM1 inhibition by
thiostrepton or siRNA suppresses proliferation, transformation ability,
angiogenesis, and induces apoptosis of NPC.

PMCID: PMC4203158
PMID: 25337187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2014 Oct;41(10):1276-9.

[Clinical trial of a seven-peptide vaccine and tegafur-uracil/leucovorin as
combination therapy for advanced colorectal cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Inoue K(1), Sugiura F, Kogita A, Yoshioka Y, Sukegawa Y, Hida J, Okuno K.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Kinki University, Faculty of Medicine.

We conducted a clinical trial of a seven-peptide vaccine in combination with
tegafur-uracil/Leucovorin for advanced colorectal cancer. These antigenic
peptides were derived from 5 proteins identified as cancer-testis antigens(ring
finger protein 43 [RNF43], translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane
34[TOMM34], maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase[MELK], forkhead box
M1[FOXM1], and holliday junction recognition protein[HJURP])and 2 vascular
endothelial growth factor receptors(VEGFR1 and VEGFR2). Thirty patients with
advanced colorectal cancer were enrolled. We found that 25 patients had Grade 1
injection-site redness/induration and 1 patient had Grade 3 anaphylaxis. Tumor
imaging revealed that 3 patients had a partial response (PR), 15 had stable
disease(SD)and 12 had progressive disease(PD). This trial showed that treatment
with the seven-peptide vaccine and UFT/LV was well tolerated and feasible for
advanced colorectal cancer.

PMID: 25335716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2014 Dec;7(12):1228-39. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-14-0182. Epub 2014 Oct 14.

Dietary tomato and lycopene impact androgen signaling- and carcinogenesis-related
gene expression during early TRAMP prostate carcinogenesis.

Wan L(1), Tan HL(1), Thomas-Ahner JM(2), Pearl DK(3), Erdman JW Jr(4), Moran
NE(2), Clinton SK(5).

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
Interdisciplinary Nutrition Program, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(2)Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(3)Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
Department of Statistics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio.
(4)Department of Food Science and Human Nutrition, University of Illinois,
Urbana, Illinois. (5)Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio. Division of Medical Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio. steven.clinton@osumc.edu.

Consumption of tomato products containing the carotenoid lycopene is associated
with a reduced risk of prostate cancer. To identify gene expression patterns
associated with early testosterone-driven prostate carcinogenesis, which are
impacted by dietary tomato and lycopene, wild-type (WT) and transgenic
adenocarcinoma of the mouse prostate (TRAMP) mice were fed control or tomato- or 
lycopene-containing diets from 4 to 10 weeks of age. Eight-week-old mice
underwent sham surgery, castration, or castration followed by testosterone
repletion (2.5 mg/kg/d initiated 1 week after castration). Ten-week-old intact
TRAMP mice exhibit early multifocal prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia. Of the
200 prostate cancer-related genes measured by quantitative NanoString, 189 are
detectable, 164 significantly differ by genotype, 179 by testosterone status, and
30 by diet type (P < 0.05). In TRAMP, expression of Birc5, Mki67, Aurkb, Ccnb2,
Foxm1, and Ccne2 is greater compared with WT and is decreased by castration. In
parallel, castration reduces Ki67-positive staining (P < 0.0001) compared with
intact and testosterone-repleted TRAMP mice. Expression of genes involved in
androgen metabolism/signaling pathways is reduced by lycopene feeding (Srd5a1)
and by tomato feeding (Srd5a2, Pxn, and Srebf1). In addition, tomato feeding
significantly reduced expression of genes associated with stem cell features,
Aldh1a and Ly6a, whereas lycopene feeding significantly reduced expression of
neuroendocrine differentiation-related genes, Ngfr and Syp. Collectively, these
studies demonstrate a profile of testosterone-regulated genes associated with
early prostate carcinogenesis that are potential mechanistic targets of dietary
tomato components. Future studies on androgen signaling/metabolism, stem cell
features, and neuroendocrine differentiation pathways may elucidate the
mechanisms by which dietary tomato and lycopene impact prostate cancer risk.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4259248
PMID: 25315431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Hepatology. 2015 Mar;61(3):942-52. doi: 10.1002/hep.27566. Epub 2015 Jan 28.

Differential effects of targeting Notch receptors in a mouse model of liver
cancer.

Huntzicker EG(1), Hötzel K, Choy L, Che L, Ross J, Pau G, Sharma N, Siebel CW,
Chen X, French DM.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department Biomarker Group, Gilead Sciences, Foster City, CA.

Primary liver cancer encompasses both hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA). The Notch signaling pathway, known to be important for 
the proper development of liver architecture, is also a potential driver of
primary liver cancer. However, with four known Notch receptors and several Notch 
ligands, it is not clear which Notch pathway members play the predominant role in
liver cancer. To address this question, we utilized antibodies to specifically
target Notch1, Notch2, Notch3, or jagged1 (Jag1) in a mouse model of primary
liver cancer driven by v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog and
neuroblastoma RAS viral oncogene homolog (NRas). We show that inhibition of
Notch2 reduces tumor burden by eliminating highly malignant HCC- and CCA-like
tumors. Inhibition of the Notch ligand, Jag1, had a similar effect, consistent
with Jag1 acting in cooperation with Notch2. This effect was specific to Notch2, 
because Notch3 inhibition did not decrease tumor burden. Unexpectedly, Notch1
inhibition altered the relative proportion of tumor types, reducing HCC-like
tumors but dramatically increasing CC-like tumors. Finally, we show that Notch2
and Jag1 are expressed in, and Notch2 signaling is activated in, a subset of
human HCC samples.CONCLUSIONS: These findings underscore the distinct roles of
different Notch receptors in the liver and suggest that inhibition of Notch2
signaling represents a novel therapeutic option in the treatment of liver cancer.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC4447303
PMID: 25311838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Dec;10(6):3193-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2629. Epub 2014 Oct 13.

Effects of metformin on FOXM1 expression and on the biological behavior of acute 
leukemia cell lines.

Zhang B(1), Liu LL(2), Mao X(1), Zhang DH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Hematology, Wuhan General Hospital of Guangzhou Military
Command, Wuhan, Hubei 430070, P.R. China.

Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is a typical proliferation-associated transcription
factor, which is overexpressed in many types of human cancer. We investigated the
expression level of FOXM1 in patients with untreated acute leukemia (AL) and
explored the correlation between expression levels and AL type. The relationship 
between the expression of the genes FOXM1 and mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) was determined after treatment of ML-2 cells with thiostrepton. The
apoptosis, proliferation and cell-cycle progression of ML-2 lines were examined
after treatment with metformin. We found that FOXM1 is expressed in the majority 
of AL patients and that its expression level was associated with the AL type.
Thiostrepton is a specific inhibitor of FOXM1, and by inhibiting the FOXM1
expression via thiostrepton, we observed downregulatiion of mTOR; a significant
correlation between FOXM1 and mTOR levels was observed. Thus, metformin may be
involved in the downregulation of FOXM1. In addition, our study demonstrated that
metformin promotes the apoptosis of ML-2 cells, induces cell-cycle arrest at the 
G0/G1 and G2/M phases, and inhibits proliferation. The potential role of FOXM1 in
tumorigenesis renders it an attractive target for anticancer therapy, and
metformin may represent a new agent for the treatment of leukemia.

PMID: 25310131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Cell Biochem. 2015 Mar;116(3):386-97. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24987.

DNA microarray and signal transduction analysis in pulmonary artery smooth muscle
cells from heritable and idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension subjects.

Yu J(1), Wilson J, Taylor L, Polgar P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, 02118.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is characterized by increased pulmonary
vascular smooth muscle contraction and proliferation. Here, we analyze
genome-wide mRNA expression in human pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells
(HPASMC) isolated from three control, three hereditary (HPAH), and three
idiopathic PAH (IPAH) subjects using the Affymetrix Human Gene ST 1.0 chip. The
microarray analysis reveals the expression of 537 genes in HPAH and 1024 genes in
IPAH changed compared with control HPASMC. Among those genes, 227 genes show
similar directionality of expression in both HPAH and IPAH HPASMC. Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA) suggests that many of those genes are involved in cellular
growth/proliferation and cell cycle regulation and that signaling pathways such
as the mitotic activators, polo-like kinases, ATM signaling are activated under
PAH conditions. Furthermore, the analysis demonstrates downregulated mRNA
expression of certain vasoactive receptors such as bradykinin receptor B2
(BKB2R). Using real time PCR, we verified the downregulated BKB2R expression in
the PAH cells. Bradykinin-stimulated calcium influx is also decreased in PAH
PASMC. IPA also identified transcriptional factors such p53 and Rb as
downregulated, and FoxM1 and Myc as upregulated in both HPAH and IPAH HPASMC. The
decreased level of phospho-p53 in PAH cells was confirmed with a phospho-protein 
array; and we experimentally show a dysregulated proliferation of both HPAH and
IPAH PASMC. Together, the microarray experiments and bioinformatics analysis
highlight an aberrant proliferation and cell cycle regulation in HPASMC from PAH 
subjects. These newly identified pathways may provide new targets for the
treatment of both hereditary and idiopathic PAH.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4391824
PMID: 25290246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Nov;1839(11):1316-22. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.09.016. Epub 2014 Oct 5.

FOXM1: an emerging master regulator of DNA damage response and genotoxic agent
resistance.

Zona S(1), Bella L(1), Burton MJ(1), Nestal de Moraes G(1), Lam EW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, London W12 0NN, UK. (2)Department of Surgery and Cancer,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London W12 0NN, UK.
Electronic address: eric.lam@imperial.ac.uk.

FOXM1 is a transcription factor required for a wide spectrum of essential
biological functions, including DNA damage repair, cell proliferation, cell cycle
progression, cell renewal, cell differentiation and tissue homeostasis. Recent
evidence suggests that FOXM1 also has a role in many aspects of the DNA damage
response. Accordingly, FOXM1 drives the transcription of genes for DNA damage
sensors, mediators, signal transducers and effectors. As a result of these
functions, it plays an integral part in maintaining the integrity of the genome
and so is key to the propagation of accurate genetic information to the next
generation. Preserving the genetic code is a vital means of suppressing cancer
and other genetic diseases. Conversely, FOXM1 is also a potent oncogenic factor
that is essential for cancer initiation, progression and drug resistance. An
enhanced FOXM1 DNA damage repair gene expression network can confer resistance to
genotoxic agents. Developing a thorough understanding of the regulation and
function of FOXM1 in DNA damage response will improve the diagnosis and treatment
of diseases including cancer, neurodegenerative conditions and immunodeficiency
disorders. It will also benefit cancer patients with acquired genotoxic agent
resistance.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC4316173
PMID: 25287128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2015 May;52(5):611-21. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2014-0091OC.

Foxm1 regulates resolution of hyperoxic lung injury in newborns.

Xia H(1), Ren X, Bolte CS, Ustiyan V, Zhang Y, Shah TA, Kalin TV, Whitsett JA,
Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)3 Division of Neonatology and Pulmonary Biology.

Current treatments for inflammation associated with bronchopulmonary dysplasia
(BPD) fail to show clinical efficacy. Foxm1, a transcription factor of the
Forkhead box family, is a critical mediator of lung development and
carcinogenesis, but its role in BPD-associated pulmonary inflammation is unknown.
Immunohistochemistry and RNA analysis were used to assess Foxm1 in lung tissue
from hyperoxia-treated mice and patients with BPD. LysM-Cre/Foxm1(-/-) mice, in
which Foxm1 was deleted from myeloid-derived inflammatory cells, including
macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils, were exposed to neonatal hyperoxia,
causing lung injury and remodeling. Measurements of lung function and flow
cytometry were used to evaluate the effects of Foxm1 deletion on pulmonary
inflammation and repair. Increased Foxm1 expression was observed in pulmonary
macrophages of hyperoxia-exposed mice and in lung tissue from patients with BPD. 
After hyperoxia, deletion of Foxm1 from the myeloid cell lineage decreased
numbers of interstitial macrophages
(CD45(+)CD11b(+)Ly6C(-)Ly6G(-)F4/80(+)CD68(-)) and impaired alveologenesis and
lung function. The exaggerated BPD-like phenotype observed in hyperoxia-exposed
LysM-Cre/Foxm1(-/-) mice was associated with increased expression of
neutrophil-derived myeloperoxidase, proteinase 3, and cathepsin g, all of which
are critical for lung remodeling and inflammation. Our data demonstrate that
Foxm1 influences pulmonary inflammatory responses to hyperoxia, inhibiting
neutrophil-derived enzymes and enhancing monocytic responses that limit alveolar 
injury and remodeling in neonatal lungs.

PMCID: PMC4491137 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25275225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. PLoS Genet. 2014 Sep 25;10(9):e1004656. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004656.
eCollection 2014.

SPDEF inhibits prostate carcinogenesis by disrupting a positive feedback loop in 
regulation of the Foxm1 oncogene.

Cheng XH(1), Black M(1), Ustiyan V(1), Le T(1), Fulford L(1), Sridharan A(1),
Medvedovic M(2), Kalinichenko VV(1), Whitsett JA(1), Kalin TV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, the Perinatal Institute of Cincinnati
Children's Research Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.
(2)Department of Environmental Health, College of Medicine, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America.

SAM-pointed domain-containing ETS transcription factor (SPDEF) is expressed in
normal prostate epithelium. While its expression changes during prostate
carcinogenesis (PCa), the role of SPDEF in prostate cancer remains controversial 
due to the lack of genetic mouse models. In present study, we generated
transgenic mice with the loss- or gain-of-function of SPDEF in prostate
epithelium to demonstrate that SPDEF functions as tumor suppressor in prostate
cancer. Loss of SPDEF increased cancer progression and tumor cell proliferation, 
whereas over-expression of SPDEF in prostate epithelium inhibited carcinogenesis 
and reduced tumor cell proliferation in vivo and in vitro. Transgenic
over-expression of SPDEF inhibited mRNA and protein levels of Foxm1, a
transcription factor critical for tumor cell proliferation, and reduced
expression of Foxm1 target genes, including Cdc25b, Cyclin B1, Cyclin A2, Plk-1, 
AuroraB, CKS1 and Topo2alpha. Deletion of SPDEF in transgenic mice and cultures
prostate tumor cells increased expression of Foxm1 and its target genes.
Furthermore, an inverse correlation between SPDEF and Foxm1 levels was found in
human prostate cancers. The two-gene signature of low SPDEF and high FoxM1
predicted poor survival in prostate cancer patients. Mechanistically, SPDEF bound
to, and inhibited transcriptional activity of Foxm1 promoter by interfering with 
the ability of Foxm1 to activate its own promoter through auto-regulatory site
located in the -745/-660 bp Foxm1 promoter region. Re-expression of Foxm1
restored cellular proliferation in the SPDEF-positive cancer cells and rescued
progression of SPDEF-positive tumors in mouse prostates. Altogether, SPDEF
inhibits prostate carcinogenesis by preventing Foxm1-regulated proliferation of
prostate tumor cells. The present study identified novel crosstalk between SPDEF 
tumor suppressor and Foxm1 oncogene and demonstrated that this crosstalk is
required for tumor cell proliferation during progression of prostate cancer in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC4177813
PMID: 25254494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Ups J Med Sci. 2014 Nov;119(4):324-32. doi: 10.3109/03009734.2014.960053. Epub
2014 Sep 18.

Overexpression of FOXM1 is associated with metastases of nasopharyngeal
carcinoma.

Jiang L(1), Wang P, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing
Medical University , 1 Youyi Road, 400016 Chongqing , P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: The forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor plays an important
role in the metastases of many cancers. Down-regulation of FOXM1 by its
inhibitor, thiostrepton, can inhibit the metastatic potential of some cancers;
however, there are few studies regarding the functional signi<U+FB01>cance of FOXM1 and 
thiostrepton in the metastases of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) and the
underlying mechanism.
METHODS: Expression of FOXM1 in NPC, normal nasopharyngeal tissues, a NPC cell
line (C666-1), and a nasopharyngeal epithelial cell line (NP69) was investigated 
by immunohistochemical staining, qRT-PCR, and Western blot. The correlation
between FOXM1 expression and the clinical characteristics of patients was
analyzed. Moreover, the effects of thiostrepton on expression of FOXM1 in C666-1 
and NP69 cells, and the invasion and migration ability of C666-1 cells were
examined. The expressions of MMP-2, MMP-9, fascin-1, ezrin, and paxillin were
determined after treatment with thiostrepton.
RESULTS: FOXM1 was overexpressed in NPC and C666-1 cells compared with normal
nasopharyngeal tissues and NP69 cells. Overexpression of FOXM1 was associated
with lymph node metastasis and advanced tumor stage. Moreover, thiostrepton
inhibited expression of FOXM1 in C666-1 cells in a dose-dependent manner, but had
a minimal effect on NP69 cells. Thiostrepton inhibited the migration and invasion
ability of C666-1 cells by down-regulating the expression of MMP-2, MMP-9,
fascin-1, and paxillin.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of FOXM1 is associated with metastases of NPC
patients. Thiostrepton inhibits the metastatic ability of NPC cells by
down-regulating the expression of FOXM1, MMP-2, MMP-9, fascin-1, and paxillin.

PMCID: PMC4248072
PMID: 25231007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Radiat Res. 2014 Oct;182(4):420-9. doi: 10.1667/RR13726.1. Epub 2014 Sep 17.

Forkhead box M1 regulates quiescence-associated radioresistance of human head and
neck squamous carcinoma cells.

Eckers JC(1), Kalen AL, Sarsour EH, Tompkins VS, Janz S, Son JM, Doskey CM,
Buettner GR, Goswami PC.

Author information: 
(1)a<U+2009> Free Radical and Radiation Biology Division, Department of Radiation
Oncology.

Cellular quiescence is a reversible growth arrest in which cells retain their
ability to enter into and exit from the proliferative cycle. This study
investigates the hypothesis that cell growth-state specific oxidative stress
response regulates radiosensitivity of cancer cells. Results showed that
quiescent (low proliferative index; >75% G1 phase and lower RNA content) Cal27
and FaDu human head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) are radioresistant
compared to proliferating cells. Quiescent cells exhibited a three to tenfold
increase in mRNA levels of Mn-superoxide dismutase (MnSOD), dual oxidase 2
(DUOX2) and dual-specificity phosphatase 1 (DUSP1), while mRNA levels of catalase
(CAT), peroxiredoxin 3 (PRDX3) and C-C motif ligand 5 (CCL5) were approximately
two to threefold lower compared to proliferating cells. mRNA levels of forkhead
box M1 (FOXM1) showed the largest decrease in quiescent cells at approximately
18-fold. Surprisingly, radiation treatment resulted in a distinct gene expression
pattern that is specific to proliferating and quiescent cells. Specifically,
FOXM1 expression increased two to threefold in irradiated quiescent cells, while 
the same treatment had no net effect on FOXM1 mRNA expression in proliferating
cells. RNA interference and pharmacological-based downregulation of FOXM1
abrogated radioresistance of quiescent cells. Furthermore, radioresistance of
quiescent cells was associated with an increase in glucose consumption and
expression of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD). Knockdown of FOXM1
resulted in a significant decrease in G6PD expression, and
pharmacological-inhibition of G6PD sensitized quiescent cells to radiation. Taken
together, these results suggest that targeting FOXM1 may overcome radioresistance
of quiescent HNSCC.

PMCID: PMC4221113
PMID: 25229973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 12;16(5):436. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0436-4.

The forkhead transcription factor FOXM1 promotes endocrine resistance and
invasiveness in estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer by expansion of
stem-like cancer cells.

Bergamaschi A, Madak-Erdogan Z, Kim YJ, Choi YL, Lu H, Katzenellenbogen BS.

INTRODUCTION: The forkhead transcription factor FOXM1 coordinates expression of
cell cycle-related genes and plays a pivotal role in tumorigenesis and cancer
progression. We previously showed that FOXM1 acts downstream of 14-3-3<U+03B6>
signaling, the elevation of which correlates with a more aggressive tumor
phenotype. However, the role that FOXM1 might play in engendering resistance to
endocrine treatments in estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) patients when tumor
FOXM1 is high has not been clearly defined yet.
METHODS: We analyzed FOXM1 protein expression by immunohistochemistry in 501
ER-positive breast cancers. We also mapped genome-wide FOXM1, extracellular
signal-regulated kinase 2 and ERa binding events by chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) in hormone-sensitive and
resistant breast cancer cells after tamoxifen treatment. These binding profiles
were integrated with gene expression data derived from cells before and after
FOXM1 knockdown to highlight specific FOXM1 transcriptional networks. We also
modulated the levels of FOXM1 and newly discovered FOXM1-regulated genes and
examined their impact on the cancer stem-like cell population and on cell
invasiveness and resistance to endocrine treatments.
RESULTS: FOXM1 protein expression was high in 20% of the tumors, which correlated
with significantly reduced survival in these patients (P = 0.003 by logrank
Mantel-Cox test). ChIP-seq analyses revealed that FOXM1 binding sites were
enriched at the transcription start site of genes involved in cell-cycle
progression, maintenance of stem cell properties, and invasion and metastasis,
all of which are associated with a poor prognosis in ERa-positive patients
treated with tamoxifen. Integration of binding profiles with gene expression
highlighted FOXM1 transcriptional networks controlling cell proliferation, stem
cell properties, invasion and metastasis. Increased expression of FOXM1 was
associated with an expansion of the cancer stem-like cell population and with
increased cell invasiveness and resistance to endocrine treatments. Use of a
selective FOXM1 inhibitor proved very effective in restoring endocrine therapy
sensitivity and decreasing breast cancer aggressiveness.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, our findings uncover novel roles for FOXM1 and
FOXM1-regulated genes in promoting cancer stem-like cell properties and therapy
resistance. They highlight the relevance of FOXM1 as a therapeutic target to be
considered for reducing invasiveness and enhancing breast cancer response to
endocrine treatments.

PMCID: PMC4303117
PMID: 25213081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Cell Death Dis. 2014 Sep 11;5:e1417. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.370.

MEIS2 is essential for neuroblastoma cell survival and proliferation by
transcriptional control of M-phase progression.

Zha Y(1), Xia Y(2), Ding J(3), Choi JH(4), Yang L(5), Dong Z(6), Yan C(7), Huang 
S(8), Ding HF(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Yichang, Institute of
Translational Neuroscience, Three Gorges University College of Medicine, Yichang,
China. (2)1] Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Yichang, Institute of
Translational Neuroscience, Three Gorges University College of Medicine, Yichang,
China [2] Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA. (3)Cancer 
Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA. (4)1] Cancer Center,
Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA [2] Department of Biostatistics and 
Epidemiology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA. (5)State Key
Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Institute of Sericulture and System
Biology, Southwest University, Chongqing, China. (6)Department of Cellular
Biology and Anatomy, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA. (7)1] Cancer
Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA [2] Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA, USA.
(8)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Georgia Regents University, 
Augusta, GA, USA. (9)1] Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA,
USA [2] Department of Pathology, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents
University, Augusta, GA, USA.

MEIS2 has an important role in development and organogenesis, and is implicated
in the pathogenesis of human cancer. The molecular basis of MEIS2 action in
tumorigenesis is not clear. Here, we show that MEIS2 is highly expressed in human
neuroblastoma cell lines and is required for neuroblastoma cell survival and
proliferation. Depletion of MEIS2 in neuroblastoma cells leads to M-phase arrest 
and mitotic catastrophe, whereas ectopic expression of MEIS2 markedly enhances
neuroblastoma cell proliferation, anchorage-independent growth, and
tumorigenicity. Gene expression profiling reveals an essential role of MEIS2 in
maintaining the expression of a large number of late cell-cycle genes, including 
those required for DNA replication, G2-M checkpoint control and M-phase
progression. Importantly, we identify MEIS2 as a transcription activator of the
MuvB-BMYB-FOXM1 complex that functions as a master regulator of cell-cycle gene
expression. Further, we show that FOXM1 is a direct target gene of MEIS2 and is
required for MEIS2 to upregulate mitotic genes. These findings link a
developmentally important gene to the control of cell proliferation and suggest
that high MEIS2 expression is a molecular mechanism for high expression of
mitotic genes that is frequently observed in cancers of poor prognosis.

PMCID: PMC4540202
PMID: 25210800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Int J Oncol. 2014 Dec;45(6):2355-64. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2645. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Downregulation of FoxM1 inhibits proliferation, invasion and angiogenesis of HeLa
cells in vitro and in vivo.

Chen H(1), Zou Y(1), Yang H(1), Wang J(1), Pan H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan
University, Wuhan, Hubei 430071, P.R. China.

FoxM1 is a specific transcription factor that has an important function in
aggressive human carcinomas, including cervical cancer. However, the specific
function and internal molecular mechanism in cervical cancer remain unclear. In
this study, RNAi-mediated FoxM1 knockdown inhibited cell growth. This process
also decreased the migration and invasion activities of HeLa cells in vitro.
Downregulation of FoxM1 inhibited tumor growth and angiogenesis in vivo. In
addition, the expressions of uPA, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, MMP-9 and
VEGF were significantly decreased in vitro and in vivo. These results suggested
that the inactivation of FoxM1 could be a novel therapeutic target for cervical
cancer treatment.

PMID: 25201015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Sci Rep. 2014 Sep 5;4:6293. doi: 10.1038/srep06293.

Identification of gene expression biomarkers for predicting radiation exposure.

Lu TP(1), Hsu YY(2), Lai LC(3), Tsai MH(4), Chuang EY(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Public Health, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan [2]
Graduate Institute of Epidemiology and Preventive Medicine, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (2)Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics and
Bioinformatics and Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (3)1] Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Core, Center
of Genomic Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Graduate
Institute of Physiology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)1]
Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Core, Center of Genomic Medicine, National
Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Institute of Biotechnology, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)1] Graduate Institute of Biomedical Electronics
and Bioinformatics and Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan
University, Taipei, Taiwan [2] Bioinformatics and Biostatistics Core, Center of
Genomic Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

A need for more accurate and reliable radiation dosimetry has become increasingly
important due to the possibility of a large-scale radiation emergency resulting
from terrorism or nuclear accidents. Although traditional approaches provide
accurate measurements, such methods usually require tedious effort and at least
two days to complete. Therefore, we provide a new method for rapid prediction of 
radiation exposure. Eleven microarray datasets were classified into two groups
based on their radiation doses and utilized as the training samples. For the two 
groups, Student's t-tests and resampling tests were used to identify biomarkers, 
and their gene expression ratios were used to develop a prediction model. The
performance of the model was evaluated in four independent datasets, and
Ingenuity pathway analysis was performed to characterize the associated
biological functions. Our meta-analysis identified 29 biomarkers, showing
approximately 90% and 80% accuracy in the training and validation samples.
Furthermore, the 29 genes significantly participated in the regulation of cell
cycle, and 19 of them are regulated by three well-known radiation-modulated
transcription factors: TP53, FOXM1 and ERBB2. In conclusion, this study
demonstrates a reliable method for identifying biomarkers across independent
studies and high and reproducible prediction accuracy was demonstrated in both
internal and external datasets.

PMCID: PMC4155333
PMID: 25189756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 Dec;92(12):1319-30. doi: 10.1007/s00109-014-1198-2. Epub
2014 Sep 3.

Inactivation of FoxM1 transcription factor contributes to curcumin-induced
inhibition of survival, angiogenesis, and chemosensitivity in acute myeloid
leukemia cells.

Zhang JR(1), Lu F, Lu T, Dong WH, Li P, Liu N, Ma DX, Ji CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, West Wenhua Rd. 
107, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, People's Republic of China.

Aberrant expression of forkhead box protein M1 (FoxM1) contributes to
carcinogenesis in human cancers, including acute myeloid leukemia (AML),
suggesting that the discovery of specific agents targeting FoxM1 would be
extremely valuable for the treatment of AML. Curcumin, a naturally occurring
phenolic compound, is suggested to possess anti-leukemic activity; however, the
underlying mechanism has not been well elucidated. In this study, we found that
curcumin inhibited cell survival accompanied by induction of G2/M cell cycle
arrest and apoptosis in HL60, Kasumi, NB4, and KG1 cells. This was associated
with concomitant attenuation of FoxM1 and its downstream genes, such as cyclin
B1, cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) 2, S-phase kinase-associated protein 2, Cdc25B,
survivin, Bcl-2, matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, MMP-9, and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF), as well as the reduction of the angiogenic
effect of AML cells. We also found that specific downregulation of FoxM1 by siRNA
prior to curcumin treatment resulted in enhanced cell survival inhibition and
induction of apoptosis. Accordingly, FoxM1 siRNA increased the susceptibility of 
AML cells to doxorubicin-induced apoptosis. More importantly, curcumin suppressed
FoxM1 expression, selectively inhibited cell survival as well as the combination 
of curcumin and doxorubicin exhibited a more inhibitory effect in primary CD34(+)
AML cells, while showing limited lethality in normal CD34(+) hematopoietic
progenitors. These results identify a novel role for FoxM1 in mediating the
biological effects of curcumin in human AML cells. Our data provide the first
evidence that curcumin together with chemotherapy or FoxM1 targeting agents may
be effective strategies for the treatment of AML.KEY MESSAGE: Curcumin inhibited 
AML cell survival and angiogenesis and induced chemosensitivity. Aberrant
expression of FoxM1 induces AML cell survival and chemoresistance. Inactivation
of FoxM1 contributes to curcumin-induced anti-leukemic effects. Curcumin together
with FoxM1 targeting agents may be effective for AML therapy.

PMID: 25179295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Oncol Rep. 2014 Oct;32(4):1327-34. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3357. Epub 2014 Jul 23.

Targeting forkhead box transcription factors FOXM1 and FOXO in leukemia (Review).

Zhu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, College of Biology, Hunan University,
Changsha, Hunan 410082, P.R. China.

Deregulation of forkhead box (FOX) proteins has been found in many genetic
diseases and malignancies including leukemia. Leukemia is a common neoplastic
disease of the blood or bone marrow characterized by the presence of immature
leukocytes and is one of the leading causes of death due to cancer. Forkhead
transcription factors, FOXM1 and FOXO family members (FOXOs), are important
mediators in leukemia development. Aberrant expression of FOXM1 and FOXOs results
in leukemogenesis. Usually the expression of FOXM1 is upregulated, whereas the
expression of FOXOs is downregulated due to phosphorylation, nuclear exclusion
and degradation in leukemia. On the one hand, FOXOs are bona fide tumor
suppressors, on the other hand, active FOXOs maintain leukemia stem cells and
stimulate drug resistance genes, contributing to leukemogenesis. FOXM1 and FOXOs 
have been proven to be potential targets for the development of leukemia
therapeutics. They are also valuable diagnostic and prognostic markers in
leukemia for clinical applications. This review summarizes the present knowledge 
concerning the molecular mechanisms by which FOXM1 and FOXOs modulate
leukemogenesis and leukemia development, the clinical relevance of these FOX
proteins in leukemia and related areas that warrant further investigation.

PMID: 25175498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Int J Oncol. 2014 Nov;45(5):1949-58. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2615. Epub 2014 Aug
21.

The pterocarpanquinone LQB-118 induces apoptosis in acute myeloid leukemia cells 
of distinct molecular subtypes and targets FoxO3a and FoxM1 transcription
factors.

Nestal de Moraes G(1), Castro CP(1), Salustiano EJ(2), Dumas ML(3), Costas F(1), 
Lam EW(4), Costa PR(2), Maia RC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Hemato-Oncology, Program of Molecular
Hemato-Oncology, Brazilian National Cancer Institute (INCA), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, 
Brazil. (2)Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, Research Nucleous of Natural
Products, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, RJ,
Brazil. (3)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology, Leopoldo de Meis Medical Biochemistry 
Institute (IBqM-UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil. (4)Division of Cancer,
Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital
Campus, London, UK.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients' outcome is usually poor, mainly because of
drug resistance phenotype. The identification of new drugs able to overcome
mechanisms of chemoresistance is essential. The pterocarpanquinone LQB-118
compound has been shown to have a potent cytotoxic activity in myeloid leukemia
cell lines and patient cells. Our aim was to investigate if LQB-118 is able to
target FoxO3a and FoxM1 signaling pathways while sensitizing AML cell lines.
LQB-118 induced apoptosis in both AML cell lines HL60 (M3 FAB subtype) and U937
(M4/M5 FAB subtype). Cell death occurred independently of alterations in cell
cycle distribution. In vivo administration revealed that LQB-118 was not
cytotoxic to normal bone marrow-derived cells isolated from mice. LQB-118 induced
FoxO3a nuclear translocation and upregulation of its direct transcriptional
target Bim, in HL60 cells. However, LQB-118 induced FoxO3a nuclear exclusion,
followed by Bim downregulation, in U937 cells. Concomitantly, LQB-118 exposure
reduced FoxM1 and Survivin expression in U937 cells, but this effect was more
subtle in HL60 cells. Taken together, our data suggest that LQB-118 has a
selective and potent antitumor activity against AML cells with distinct molecular
subtypes, and it involves differential modulation of the signaling pathways
associated with FoxO3a and FoxM1 transcription factors.

PMID: 25174716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 29;9(8):e105842. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105842.
eCollection 2014.

Control of asymmetric Hopfield networks and application to cancer attractors.

Szedlak A(1), Paternostro G(2), Piermarocchi C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, Michigan State University, East Lansing, 
Michigan, United States of America. (2)Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, La Jolla, California, United States of America; Salgomed Inc., Del
Mar, California, United States of America. (3)Department of Physics and
Astronomy, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan, United States of
America; Salgomed Inc., Del Mar, California, United States of America.

The asymmetric Hopfield model is used to simulate signaling dynamics in gene
regulatory networks. The model allows for a direct mapping of a gene expression
pattern into attractor states. We analyze different control strategies aimed at
disrupting attractor patterns using selective local fields representing
therapeutic interventions. The control strategies are based on the identification
of signaling bottlenecks, which are single nodes or strongly connected clusters
of nodes that have a large impact on the signaling. We provide a theorem with
bounds on the minimum number of nodes that guarantee control of bottlenecks
consisting of strongly connected components. The control strategies are applied
to the identification of sets of proteins that, when inhibited, selectively
disrupt the signaling of cancer cells while preserving the signaling of normal
cells. We use an experimentally validated non-specific and an
algorithmically-assembled specific B cell gene regulatory network reconstructed
from gene expression data to model cancer signaling in lung and B cells,
respectively. Among the potential targets identified here are TP53, FOXM1, BCL6
and SRC. This model could help in the rational design of novel robust therapeutic
interventions based on our increasing knowledge of complex gene signaling
networks.

PMCID: PMC4149479
PMID: 25170874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Cell Rep. 2014 Sep 11;8(5):1595-606. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.07.037. Epub 2014
Aug 21.

The NF-<U+03BA>B genomic landscape in lymphoblastoid B cells.

Zhao B(1), Barrera LA(2), Ersing I(1), Willox B(3), Schmidt SC(1), Greenfeld
H(3), Zhou H(1), Mollo SB(1), Shi TT(3), Takasaki K(3), Jiang S(1),
Cahir-McFarland E(3), Kellis M(4), Bulyk ML(5), Kieff E(1), Gewurz BE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Infectious Disease, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Division of Genetics,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Committee on Higher Degrees in
Biophysics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Harvard-MIT Division of
Health Sciences and Technology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (3)Division of Infectious Disease,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(4)Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (5)Division of Genetics,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA; Committee on Higher Degrees in
Biophysics, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Harvard-MIT Division of
Health Sciences and Technology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA;
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
Electronic address: mlbulyk@receptor.med.harvard.edu. (6)Division of Infectious
Disease, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, 
USA; Department of Microbiology and Immunobiology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address: bgewurz@partners.org.

The nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA><U+0392>) subunits RelA, RelB, cRel, p50, and p52 are each
critical for B cell development and function. To systematically characterize
their responses to canonical and noncanonical NF-<U+03BA>B pathway activity, we
performed chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput DNA
sequencing (ChIP-seq) analysis in lymphoblastoid B cell lines (LCLs). We found a 
complex NF-<U+03BA>B-binding landscape, which did not readily reflect the two NF-<U+03BA>B
pathway paradigms. Instead, 10 subunit-binding patterns were observed at
promoters and 11 at enhancers. Nearly one-third of NF-<U+03BA>B-binding sites lacked <U+03BA>B 
motifs and were instead enriched for alternative motifs. The oncogenic forkhead
box protein FOXM1 co-occupied nearly half of NF-<U+03BA>B-binding sites and was
identified in protein complexes with NF-<U+03BA>B on DNA. FOXM1 knockdown decreased
NF-<U+03BA>B target gene expression and ultimately induced apoptosis, highlighting FOXM1
as a synthetic lethal target in B cell malignancy. These studies provide a
resource for understanding mechanisms that underlie NF-<U+03BA>B nuclear activity and
highlight opportunities for selective NF-<U+03BA>B blockade.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4163118
PMID: 25159142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Oncotarget. 2014 Aug 15;5(15):6512-25.

CDK4/6 inhibitors have potent activity in combination with pathway selective
therapeutic agents in models of pancreatic cancer.

Franco J(1), Witkiewicz AK(2), Knudsen ES(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology , UT Southwestern, Dallas TX. (2)Department of
Pathology , UT Southwestern, Dallas TX; Simmons Cancer Center, UT Southwestern,
Dallas TX.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) has a poor prognosis, in part, due to the 
therapy-recalcitrant nature of the disease. Loss of the CDK4/6 inhibitor CDKN2A
is a signature genetic event in PDA. Therefore, PDA may be amenable to treatment 
with pharmaceutical CDK4/6 inhibitors. Surprisingly, response to CDK4/6
inhibition was highly variable in PDA models, and associated with differential
suppression of gene expression. Mitotic genes were repressed and FOXM1 was
uniformly attenuated; however, genes involved in DNA replication were uniquely
suppressed in sensitive models. Aberrant induction of Cyclin E1 was associated
with resistance, and knockdown demonstrated synergistic suppression of the cell
cycle with CDK4/6 inhibition. Combination therapies are likely required for the
effective treatment of disease, and drug screening demonstrated
additive/antagonistic interactions with CDK4/6 inhibitors. Agents dependent on
mitotic progression (taxanes/PLK1 inhibitors) were antagonized by CDK4/6
inhibition, while the response to 5-FU and gemcitabine exhibited drug specific
interactions. PI3K/MTOR and MEK inhibitors potently cooperated with CDK4/6
inhibition. These agents were synergistic with CDK4/6 inhibition, blocked the
aberrant upregulation of Cyclin E1, and yielded potent inhibition of tumor cell
growth. Together, these data identify novel mechanisms of resistance to CDK4/6
inhibitions and provide a roadmap for combination therapies in the treatment of
PDA.

PMCID: PMC4171647
PMID: 25156567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Haematologica. 2014 Oct;99(10):1565-73. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2014.104943. Epub
2014 Aug 22.

Krüppel-like transcription factors KLF1 and KLF2 have unique and coordinate roles
in regulating embryonic erythroid precursor maturation.

Vinjamur DS(1), Wade KJ(1), Mohamad SF(1), Haar JL(2), Sawyer ST(3), Lloyd JA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, VA, USA. (2)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Virginia
Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA. (3)Department of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA. (4)Department of
Human and Molecular Genetics, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA
Massey Cancer Center, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA, USA
jlloyd@vcu.edu.

The Krüppel-like transcription factors KLF1 and KLF2 are essential for embryonic 
erythropoiesis. They can partially compensate for each other during mouse
development, and coordinately regulate numerous erythroid genes, including the
ß-like globins. Simultaneous ablation of KLF1 and KLF2 results in earlier
embryonic lethality and severe anemia. In this study, we determine that this
anemia is caused by a paucity of blood cells, and exacerbated by diminished
ß-like globin gene expression. The anemia phenotype is dose-dependent, and,
interestingly, can be ameliorated by a single copy of the KLF2, but not the KLF1 
gene. The roles of KLF1 and KLF2 in maintaining normal peripheral blood cell
numbers and globin mRNA amounts are erythroid cell-specific. Mechanistic studies 
led to the discovery that KLF2 has an essential function in erythroid precursor
maintenance. KLF1 can partially compensate for KLF2 in this role, but is uniquely
crucial for erythroid precursor proliferation through its regulation of G1- to
S-phase cell cycle transition. A more drastic impairment of primitive erythroid
colony formation from embryonic progenitor cells occurs with simultaneous loss of
KLF1 and KLF2 than with loss of a single factor. KLF1 and KLF2 coordinately
regulate several proliferation-associated genes, including Foxm1. Differential
expression of FoxM1, in particular, correlates with the observed KLF1 and KLF2
gene dosage effects on anemia. Furthermore, KLF1 binds to the FoxM1 gene promoter
in blood cells. Thus KLF1 and KLF2 coordinately regulate embryonic erythroid
precursor maturation through the regulation of multiple homeostasis-associated
genes, and KLF2 has a novel and essential role in this process.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4181252
PMID: 25150253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42(16):10331-50. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku696. Epub 2014 Aug
8.

The CHR site: definition and genome-wide identification of a cell cycle
transcriptional element.

Müller GA(1), Wintsche A(2), Stangner K(3), Prohaska SJ(2), Stadler PF(4),
Engeland K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology, Medical School, University of Leipzig, Semmelweisstr. 14, 
04103 Leipzig, Germany gerd.mueller@medizin.uni-leipzig.de. (2)Computational
EvoDevo Group, Department of Computer Science and Interdisciplinary Center for
Bioinformatics, University of Leipzig, Härtelstraße 16-18, 04107 Leipzig,
Germany. (3)Molecular Oncology, Medical School, University of Leipzig,
Semmelweisstr. 14, 04103 Leipzig, Germany. (4)Bioinformatics Group, Department of
Computer Science and Interdisciplinary Center for Bioinformatics, University of
Leipzig, Härtelstrasse 16-18, 04107 Leipzig, Germany Max Planck Institute for
Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstraße 22, 04103 Leipzig, Germany Center for
Non-coding RNA in Technology and Health, Department of Basic Veterinary and
Animal Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences University of Copenhagen,
Grønnegårdsvej 3, 1870 Frederiksberg C Denmark Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park
Rd, Santa Fe, NM 87501, USA.

The cell cycle genes homology region (CHR) has been identified as a DNA element
with an important role in transcriptional regulation of late cell cycle genes. It
has been shown that such genes are controlled by DREAM, MMB and FOXM1-MuvB and
that these protein complexes can contact DNA via CHR sites. However, it has not
been elucidated which sequence variations of the canonical CHR are functional and
how frequent CHR-based regulation is utilized in mammalian genomes. Here, we
define the spectrum of functional CHR elements. As the basis for a computational 
meta-analysis, we identify new CHR sequences and compile phylogenetic motif
conservation as well as genome-wide protein-DNA binding and gene expression data.
We identify CHR elements in most late cell cycle genes binding DREAM, MMB, or
FOXM1-MuvB. In contrast, Myb- and forkhead-binding sites are underrepresented in 
both early and late cell cycle genes. Our findings support a general mechanism:
sequential binding of DREAM, MMB and FOXM1-MuvB complexes to late cell cycle
genes requires CHR elements. Taken together, we define the group of CHR-regulated
genes in mammalian genomes and provide evidence that the CHR is the central
promoter element in transcriptional regulation of late cell cycle genes by DREAM,
MMB and FOXM1-MuvB.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4176359
PMID: 25106871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Scientifica (Cairo). 2014;2014:596528. doi: 10.1155/2014/596528. Epub 2014 Jun
24.

Suppression of the Oncogenic Transcription Factor FOXM1 by Proteasome Inhibitors.

Gartel AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 606012,
USA.

The oncogenic transcription factor FOXM1 is one of the key regulators of
tumorigenesis. We found that FOXM1 upregulates its own transcription and its
protein stability depends on its interaction with the chaperone nucleophosmin. We
also determined that FOXM1 is negatively regulated by the tumor suppressor p53.
We identified the thiazole antibiotics Siomycin A and thiostrepton as inhibitors 
of transcriptional activity and FOXM1 expression via proteasome inhibition. In
addition, we found that all tested proteasome inhibitors target FOXM1. We showed 
synergy between thiostrepton and bortezomib in different human cancer cell lines 
and in vivo. We generated isogenic human cancer cell lines of different origin
with wild-type p53 or p53 knockdown and we demonstrated that proteasome
inhibitors induce p53-independent apoptosis in these cells. Using
RNA-interference or proteasome inhibitors to inhibit FOXM1 we found that
suppression of FOXM1 sensitized human cancer cells to apoptosis induced by
DNA-damaging agents or oxidative stress. We encapsulated thiostrepton into
micelle-nanoparticles and after injection we detected accumulation of
nanoparticles in tumors and in the livers of treated mice. This treatment led to 
inhibition of human xenograft tumor growth in nude mice. Our data indicate that
targeting FOXM1 increases apoptosis and inhibits tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC4095980
PMID: 25093142  [PubMed]


230. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Sep;28(9):1435-47. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1024. Epub 2014 Jul 
29.

Activated FoxM1 attenuates streptozotocin-mediated ß-cell death.

Golson ML(1), Maulis MF, Dunn JC, Poffenberger G, Schug J, Kaestner KH, Gannon
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Tennessee Valley Healthcare System Department of Veteran Affairs (M.L.G.,
M.F.M., J.C.D., G.P., M.A.G.), Nashville, Tennessee 37212; Department of
Medicine, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism (M.L.G., M.F.M.,
J.C.D., G.P., M.A.G.), and Departments of Cell and Developmental Biology (M.A.G.)
and Molecular Physiology and Biophysics (M.A.G.), Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232; and Department of Genetics and Institute for 
Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism (J.S., K.H.K.), University of Pennsylvania
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.

The forkhead box transcription factor FoxM1, a positive regulator of the cell
cycle, is required for ß-cell mass expansion postnatally, during pregnancy, and
after partial pancreatectomy. Up-regulation of full-length FoxM1, however, is
unable to stimulate increases in ß-cell mass in unstressed mice or after partial 
pancreatectomy, probably due to the lack of posttranslational activation. We
hypothesized that expression of an activated form of FoxM1 could aid in recovery 
after ß-cell injury. We therefore derived transgenic mice that inducibly express 
an activated version of FoxM1 in ß-cells (RIP-rtTA;TetO-hemagglutinin
(HA)-Foxm1(<U+0394>)(NRD) mice). This N-terminally truncated form of FoxM1 bypasses 2
posttranslational controls: exposure of the forkhead DNA binding domain and
targeted proteasomal degradation. Transgenic mice were subjected to
streptozotocin (STZ)-induced ß-cell ablation to test whether activated FoxM1 can 
promote ß-cell regeneration. Mice expressing HA-FoxM1(<U+0394>NRD) displayed decreased
ad libitum-fed blood glucose and increased ß-cell mass. ß-Cell proliferation was 
actually decreased in RIP-rtTA:TetO-HA-Foxm1(NRD) mice compared with that in
RIP-rtTA mice 7 days after STZ treatment. Unexpectedly, ß-cell death was
decreased 2 days after STZ treatment. RNA sequencing analysis indicated that
activated FoxM1 alters the expression of extracellular matrix and immune cell
gene profiles, which may protect against STZ-mediated death. These studies
highlight a previously underappreciated role for FoxM1 in promoting ß-cell
survival.

PMCID: PMC4154244
PMID: 25073103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jul 28;20(28):9497-505. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i28.9497.

Down-regulation of FoxM1 inhibits viability and invasion of gallbladder carcinoma
cells, partially dependent on inducement of cellular senescence.

Tao J(1), Xu XS(1), Song YZ(1), Qu K(1), Wu QF(1), Wang RT(1), Meng FD(1), Wei
JC(1), Dong SB(1), Zhang YL(1), Tai MH(1), Dong YF(1), Wang L(1), Liu C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jie Tao, Xin-Sen Xu, Kai Qu, Rui-Tao Wang, Fan-Di Meng, Ji-Chao Wei, Shun-Bin 
Dong, Lin Wang, Chang Liu, Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First
Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, 
Shaanxi Province, China.

AIM: To investigate the effect of knockdown of Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) on the
proliferation and invasion capacities of human gallbladder carcinoma (GBC)-SD
cells.
METHODS: Four FoxM1 shRNAs were transfected into GBC-SD cells with Lipofectamine 
2000 to select the appropriate shRNA for down-regulation of FoxM1. A recombinant 
lentivirus for shFoxM1 (Lv-shFoxM1), which expresses FoxM1-speci<U+FB01>c shRNA, and a
negative control carrying green fluorescent protein, which expresses a scrambled 
RNA, were constructed. After transfection with the recombinant adenovirus and
screened with puromycin, RT-PCR and Western blot were utilized to evaluate the
inhibition efficiency. Cell viability was evaluated by MTT assay, and cell
migration and invasion were assessed using the Transwell system. Cells were
suspended in serum-free medium and seeded into Transwell inserts either uncoated 
(for migration assay) or coated (for invasion assay) with growth factor-reduced
Matrigel. To verify the involvement of FoxM1 in the senescence of tumor cells,
staining of senescence ß-galactosidase (SA ß-gal), the widely used biomarker of
cellular senescence, was also performed.
RESULTS: After successful transfection of four FoxM1 small interfering RNAs
(shRNAs) with Lipofectamine 2000, the shF1822 was selected as the most
appropriate shRNA according to its obvious inhibitory effect. The recombinant
adenovirus was then constructed with the shF1822 and successfully transfected
into the GBC-SD cells, resulting in the significant inhibition of FoxM1
expression at both the mRNA and protein levels, compared with the negative
control (P < 0.05). After transfection, down-regulation of FoxM1 significantly
inhibited cell viability according to the MTT assay (P < 0.05). In addition,
Transwell migration and invasion assays also suggested the suppression of
invasion ability of the transfected cells. SA ß-gal staining showed that
down-regulation of FoxM1 could induce more senescent GBC cells (P < 0.05),
suggesting the possible involvement of the senescence process of the
FoxM1-deficient cells in GBC.
CONCLUSION: FoxM1 is functionally involved in viability of GBC cells, partially
dependent on the inducement of cellular senescence, and is a potential target for
GBC therapy.

PMCID: PMC4110581
PMID: 25071344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Semin Cancer Biol. 2014 Dec;29:32-9. doi: 10.1016/j.semcancer.2014.07.008. Epub
2014 Jul 25.

FOXM1: A key oncofoetal transcription factor in health and disease.

Bella L(1), Zona S(1), Nestal de Moraes G(1), Lam EW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial Centre for Translational and
Experimental Medicine (ICTEM), Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital
Campus, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom. (2)Department of Surgery and Cancer,
Imperial Centre for Translational and Experimental Medicine (ICTEM), Imperial
College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom.
Electronic address: eric.lam@imperial.ac.uk.

Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) is a bona fide oncofoetal transcription factor, which
orchestrates complex temporal and spatial gene expression throughout embryonic
and foetal development as well as during adult tissue homeostasis and repair.
Controlled FOXM1 expression and activity provides a balanced transcriptional
programme to ensure proper growth and maturation during embryogenesis and foetal 
development as well as to manage appropriate homeostasis and repair of adult
tissues. Conversely, deregulated FOXM1 upregulation likely affects cell
migration, invasion, angiogenesis, stem cell renewal, DNA damage repair and
cellular senescence, which impact tumour initiation, progression, metastasis,
angiogenesis and drug resistance. A thorough understanding of the regulation and 
role of FOXM1 in health and in cancer should contribute to the development of
better diagnostics and treatments for cancer as well as congenital disorders and 
other developmental diseases.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25068996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. FEBS Lett. 2014 Aug 25;588(17):3298-307. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.07.020. Epub
2014 Jul 24.

miR-342-3p suppresses proliferation, migration and invasion by targeting FOXM1 in
human cervical cancer.

Li XR(1), Chu HJ(2), Lv T(2), Wang L(2), Kong SF(1), Dai SZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao
University, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China; Department of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, The Affiliated Hiser Medical Group of Qingdao University Medical
College, Qingdao, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The
Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.
(3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao
University, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China; Gynecological Tumors and
Reproductive Function Protection Laboratory of Qingdao, China; Key Laboratory of 
Cervical Disease of Qingdao, China. Electronic address: daishuzhen2001@163.com.

FOXM1 is a well-established oncogenic factor that has been reported to be
involved in multiple biological processes including cell proliferation, growth,
angiogenesis, migration and invasion. It can also be regulated by miRNAs. In this
study, we reported that FOXM1 is directly targeted by miR-342-3p, which is
down-regulated along with its host gene, EVL, in human cervical cancer tissues
compared to the adjacent normal tissues. Functional studies suggested that the
overexpression of miR-342-3p inhibits cell proliferation, migration and invasion 
in cervical cell lines. FOXM1 is upregulated and negatively correlates with
miR-342-3p in cervical cancer tissues, and the overexpression of FOXM1 rescues
the phenotype changes induced by the overexpression of miR-342-3p.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25066298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Gene Expr Patterns. 2014 Sep;16(1):8-22. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2014.07.002. Epub
2014 Jul 21.

Transcriptome analysis in cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation of murine
embryonic stem cells reveals transcriptional regulation network.

Gan L(1), Schwengberg S(2), Denecke B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research Aachen (IZKF Aachen), RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. (2)Axiogenesis AG, Köln, Germany.
(3)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research Aachen (IZKF Aachen), RWTH
Aachen University, Aachen, Germany. Electronic address:
bernd.denecke@rwth-aachen.de.

The differentiation to cardiomyocytes is a prerequisite and an important part of 
heart development. A good understanding of the complicated cardiomyocyte
differentiation process benefits cardiogenesis study. Embryonic stem cells
(ESCs), cell lines with infinite ability to proliferate and to be differentiated 
into all cell types of the adult body, are important research tools for
investigation of differentiation and meanwhile good models for developmental
research. In the current study, genome-wide gene expression of ESCs is profiled
through high throughput platform during cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation
and maturation. Gene expression patterns of undifferentiated ESCs and ESC-derived
cardiomyocytes provide a global overview of genes involved in
cardiomyocyte-specific differentiation, whereas marker gene expression profiles
of both ESC-related genes and cardiac-specific genes presented the expression
pattern shift during differentiation in a pure ESC-derived cardiomyocyte cell
culture system. The differentiation and maturation process was completed at day
19 after initiation of differentiation, according to our gene expression profile 
results. Functional analysis of regulated genes reveals over-represented
biological processes, molecular functions and pathways during the differentiation
and maturation process. Finally, transcription factor regulation networks were
engineered based on gene expression data. Within these networks, the number of
identified important regulators (Trim28, E2f4, Foxm1, Myc, Hdac1, Rara, Mef2c,
Nkx2-5, Gata4) and possible key co-regulation modules (Nkx2-5 - Gata4 - Tbx5, Myc
- E2F4) could be expanded. We demonstrate that a more comprehensive picture of
cardiomyocyte differentiation and its regulation can be achieved solely by
studying gene expression patterns. The results from our study contribute to a
better and more accurate understanding of the regulation mechanisms during
cardiomyocyte differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25058891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Hum Pathol. 2014 Sep;45(9):1847-58. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2014.05.002. Epub 2014
May 23.

The potential contributions of a Y-located protooncogene and its X homologue in
sexual dimorphisms in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Kido T(1), Lo RC(2), Li Y(1), Lee J(2), Tabatabai ZL(3), Ng IO(2), Lau YF(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA,
94121, USA; Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94121, USA. (2)Department of Pathology and State
Key Laboratory for Liver Research, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Rd, Hong
Kong, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San
Francisco, CA, 94121, USA. (4)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, San Francisco, CA, 94121, USA; Institute for Human Genetics, University
of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, 94121, USA. Electronic address: 
chris.lau@ucsf.edu.

There is a significant sex disparity favoring males among hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) patients. Although various risk factors have been identified, the
exact etiology of such sexual dimorphism(s) in HCC is uncertain. Previous studies
showed that overexpression of the Y-located protooncogene, testis-specific
protein Y encoded (TSPY), promotes cell proliferation and oncogenesis whereas its
X-located homologue, TSPYhomologue X (TSPX), retards cell cycle and oncogenic
progression. Furthermore, TSPX promotes proteasomal degradation of hepatitis B
virus-encoded X oncoprotein and hence could serve as a tumor suppressor in
virus-associated HCC. Using immunohistochemistry and reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction analysis, we had examined the expression of TSPY and
TSPX with reference to other established biomarkers in HCC and related liver
cancers. Our results demonstrated that 55 (19.2%) of 287 male cases were TSPY
positive in immunohistochemistry of tissue arrays, and 15 (46.9%) of 32 male
cases were TSPY positive in reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
analysis of clinical samples. TSPY expression was closely associated with the
expression of HCC biomarkers, such as glypican 3. In contrast, TSPX expression
was down-regulated in 54.5% of total tumor/nontumorous paired samples (18/33) and
negatively associated with those of TSPY, glypican 3, and forkhead box M1 (FOXM1)
and was positively associated with that of a tumor suppressor, insulin-like
growth factor binding protein 3. The present findings support the hypothesis that
the oncogenic events leading to an ectopic activation of the Y-located
protooncogene TSPY and/or inactivating mutation/epigenetic silencing of the
X-located tumor suppressor gene TSPX could collectively contribute to the sexual 
dimorphism(s) in HCC and related liver cancers in male-biased manners.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25017435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Expert Rev Anticancer Ther. 2014 Aug;14(8):873-5. doi:
10.1586/14737140.2014.940324. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

Transcription factors as master regulator for cancer stemness: remove milk from
fox?

Nakano I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Ohio State University, 385 Wiseman Hall, OSUCCC, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Some cancers display a cellular hierarchy of varying differentiation states, as
if they phenocopy the normal organ development processes. Accumulating evidence
suggests that the molecular signals that control carcinogenesis, at least
partially, overlap with those involved in organogenesis. Cancer stem cells (CSCs)
at the apex of cellular hierarchy are likely one, if not the only, critical
therapeutic target in cancers. The proto-oncogene FOXM1 is a transcription factor
(TF) defined as a master regulator for a broad array of genes required for CSCs
and therefore FOXM1 is overexpressed in various cancers. In general, therapeutic 
development for TFs is a challenging task. Recently, on the other hand, novel
insight has been brought by the discovery of a protein complex of FOXM1 with the 
mitotic kinase MELK in CSCs in brain cancers, as this protein complex appears to 
be cancer-specific. This editorial describes FOXM1 signaling in cancers and its
potential therapeutic development.

PMID: 25017123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. FEBS Lett. 2014 Aug 25;588(17):3170-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.06.058. Epub
2014 Jul 3.

Tumour-suppressive microRNA-24-1 inhibits cancer cell proliferation through
targeting FOXM1 in bladder cancer.

Inoguchi S(1), Seki N(2), Chiyomaru T(1), Ishihara T(1), Matsushita R(1), Mataki 
H(3), Itesako T(1), Tatarano S(1), Yoshino H(1), Goto Y(2), Nishikawa R(2),
Nakagawa M(1), Enokida H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences,
Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan. (2)Department of Functional Genomics,
Chiba University Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba, Japan. (3)Department of
Pulmonary Medicine, Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima
University, Kagoshima, Japan. (4)Department of Urology, Graduate School of
Medical and Dental Sciences, Kagoshima University, Kagoshima, Japan. Electronic
address: enokida@m.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp.

Here, we found that microRNA-24-1 (miR-24-1) is significantly reduced in bladder 
cancer (BC) tissues, suggesting that it functions as a tumour suppressor.
Restoration of mature miR-24-1 inhibits cancer cell proliferation and induces
apoptosis. Forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) is a direct target gene of miR-24-1,
as shown by genome-wide gene expression analysis and luciferase reporter assay.
Overexpressed FOXM1 is confirmed in BC clinical specimens, and silencing of FOXM1
induces apoptosis in cancer cell lines. Our data demonstrate that the
miR-24-1-FOXM1 axis contributes to cancer cell proliferation in BC, and
elucidation of downstream signalling will provide new insights into the molecular
mechanisms of BC oncogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24999187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Cancer Res. 2014 Sep 1;74(17):4731-40. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-0747. Epub
2014 Jul 3.

Hsp70-Bag3 interactions regulate cancer-related signaling networks.

Colvin TA(1), Gabai VL(2), Gong J(3), Calderwood SK(4), Li H(5), Gummuluru S(6), 
Matchuk ON(7), Smirnova SG(7), Orlova NV(7), Zamulaeva IA(7), Garcia-Marcos M(2),
Li X(8), Young ZT(8), Rauch JN(8), Gestwicki JE(9), Takayama S(10), Sherman
MY(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts. Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, 
Boston, Massachusetts. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of
Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts. (3)Department of Medicine, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts. (4)Molecular and Cellular Radiation
Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts. (5)Center for Individualized Medicine, Department of Molecular
Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(6)Department of Microbiology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts. (7)Medical Radiology Research Center, Obninsk, Russia.
(8)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Institute for Neurodegenerative
Disease, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
(9)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Institute for Neurodegenerative
Disease, University of California at San Francisco, San Francisco, California.
sherma1@bu.edu jason.gestwicki@ucsf.edu takayama@bu.edu. (10)Department of
Pathology, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
sherma1@bu.edu jason.gestwicki@ucsf.edu takayama@bu.edu. (11)Department of
Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts.
sherma1@bu.edu jason.gestwicki@ucsf.edu takayama@bu.edu.

Bag3, a nucleotide exchange factor of the heat shock protein Hsp70, has been
implicated in cell signaling. Here, we report that Bag3 interacts with the SH3
domain of Src, thereby mediating the effects of Hsp70 on Src signaling. Using
several complementary approaches, we established that the Hsp70-Bag3 module is a 
broad-acting regulator of cancer cell signaling by modulating the activity of the
transcription factors NF-<U+03BA>B, FoxM1, Hif1a, the translation regulator HuR, and the
cell-cycle regulators p21 and survivin. We also identified a small-molecule
inhibitor, YM-1, that disrupts the Hsp70-Bag3 interaction. YM-1 mirrored the
effects of Hsp70 depletion on these signaling pathways, and in vivo
administration of this drug was sufficient to suppress tumor growth in mice.
Overall, our results defined Bag3 as a critical factor in Hsp70-modulated
signaling and offered a preclinical proof-of-concept that the Hsp70-Bag3 complex 
may offer an appealing anticancer target.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4174322
PMID: 24994713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Int J Oncol. 2014 Oct;45(4):1594-608. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2014.2531. Epub 2014 Jul
3.

USP22 promotes the G1/S phase transition by upregulating FoxM1 expression via
ß-catenin nuclear localization and is associated with poor prognosis in stage II 
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Ning Z(1), Wang A(2), Liang J(1), Xie Y(3), Liu J(2), Feng L(4), Yan Q(3), Wang
Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116011, P.R. China. (2)Department of Oncology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116011, P.R. China.
(3)Department of Pathology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian 116011, P.R. China. (4)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116044, P.R. China.

Ubiquitin-specific protease 22 (USP22), a newly discovered member of ubiquitin
hydrolase family, exhibits a critical function in cell cycle progression and
tumorigenesis. The forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor plays a crucial
role in cell proliferation, differentiation and transformation. However, the
expression and functions of USP22 in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) and
whether FoxM1 is involved in USP22-mediated cell cycle regulation have not been
studied. We examined the expression of USP22 and FoxM1 in 136 stage II PDA
tissues by immunohistochemistry. Clinical significance was analyzed by
multivariate Cox regression analysis, Kaplan-Meier curves and log-rank test.
RT-PCR, western blot analysis, luciferase and immunofluorescence assays were used
to investigate the molecular function of USP22 and FoxM1 in PDA fresh tissues and
cell lines. USP22 and FoxM1 were significantly upregulated in PDA tissues
compared with the paired normal carcinoma-adjacent tissues. A statistical
correlation was observed between USP22 and FoxM1 expression. The expression of
USP/FoxM1 and co-expression of both factors correlated with tumor size, lymph
node metastasis and overall survival. Multivariate Cox regression analysis
revealed that the expression of USP22/FoxM1, especially the co-expression of both
factors, is an independent, unfavorable prognostic factor. USP22 overexpression
is accompanied by an increase in FoxM1 expression and USP22 increases FoxM1
expression to promote G1/S transition and cell proliferation through promoting
ß-catenin nuclear translocation in PDA cell lines. USP22 promotes the G1/S phase 
transition by upregulating FoxM1 expression via promoting ß-catenin nuclear
localization. USP22 and FoxM1 may act as prognostic markers and potential targets
for PDA.

PMID: 24993031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Mol Biol Rep. 2014 Sep;41(9):6291-6. doi: 10.1007/s11033-014-3511-0. Epub 2014
Jul 2.

ChIP-seq analysis of androgen receptor in LNCaP cell line.

Tao S(1), He H, Chen Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Second Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, 88 Jiefang Road, Hangzhou, 310009, China,
ttsieng@hotmail.com.

Retraction in
    Tao S, He H, Chen Q. Mol Biol Rep. 2015 Oct;42(10):1479.

The aim of this study was to screen target genes and gene functions of androgen
receptor (AR) in LNCaP cell line by ChIP-seq data analysis. We downloaded the
gene expression profile GSE14092 from Gene Expression Omnibus database and
selected ChIP-seq data (GSM353644) of AR stimulated by androgen R1881 (R1881
stimulation group) and the ChIP-seq data (GSM353643) of AR without R1881
stimulation (control group). MACS peak calling software was used to identify the 
AR binding cites. After target genes selection and function analysis, motif
finding analysis was utilized to predict the AR co-located transcription
regulation factors, and we analyzed their functions through GO enrichment
analysis. Total 27202 and 2730 AR binding sites were detected in the R1881
stimulation group and the control group, respectively and 398 and 58 target genes
were identified in R1881 stimulation group and control group, respectively. Based
on GO enrichment analysis, 20 biological processes which AR regulated in the
LNCaP cells were enriched, including xenobiotic metabolic process, positive
regulation of interleukin-2 production and cellular response to sterol etc. We
finally identified 99 transcription factors with high motif enrichment
significant levels, and the enrichment of AR co-located transcription factors was
significantly enriched in the biological process of regulation of cell
proliferation in which 13 transcription factors were involved (FOXJ1, FOXM1, NF1,
SOX2, HOXD13, FOXO1, FOXP3, FOXO4, SOX9, PGR, DBP, JUN and TLX1). The analysis of
AR target genes and gene functions help us to elucidate the mechanism of the
prostate cancer on a molecular level. In addition, it will pave the way to
effective therapies for prostatic cancer. However, further experiments are still 
needed to confirm our results.

PMID: 24985976  [PubMed]


241. Aging Cell. 2014 Oct;13(5):773-9. doi: 10.1111/acel.12242. Epub 2014 Jul 1.

Cellular senescence and aging: the role of B-MYB.

Mowla SN(1), Lam EW, Jat PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease and MRC Prion Unit, UCL Institute of
Neurology, Queen Square, London, WC1N 3BG, UK.

Cellular senescence is a stable cell cycle arrest, caused by insults, such as:
telomere erosion, oncogene activation, irradiation, DNA damage, oxidative stress,
and viral infection. Extrinsic stimuli such as cell culture stress can also
trigger this growth arrest. Senescence is thought to have evolved as an example
of antagonistic pleiotropy, as it acts as a tumor suppressor mechanism during the
reproductive age, but can promote organismal aging by disrupting tissue renewal, 
repair, and regeneration later in life. The mechanisms underlying the senescence 
growth arrest are broadly considered to involve p16(INK4A) -pRB and
p53-p21(CIP1/WAF1/SDI1) tumor suppressor pathways; but it is not known what makes
the senescence arrest stable and what the critical downstream targets are, as
they are likely to be key to the establishment and maintenance of the senescent
state. MYB-related protein B (B-MYB/MYBL2), a member of the myeloblastosis family
of transcription factors, has recently emerged as a potential candidate for
regulating entry into senescence. Here, we review the evidence which indicates
that loss of B-MYB expression has an important role in causing senescence growth 
arrest. We discuss how B-MYB acts, as the gatekeeper, to coordinate transit
through the cell cycle, in conjunction with the multivulval class B (MuvB)
complex and FOXM1 transcription factors. We also evaluate the evidence connecting
B-MYB to the mTOR nutrient signaling pathway and suggest that inhibition of this 
pathway leading to an extension of healthspan may involve activation of B-MYB.

© 2014 The Authors. Aging Cell published by the Anatomical Society and John Wiley
& Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4331756
PMID: 24981831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Oncol Lett. 2014 Jul;8(1):295-300. Epub 2014 Apr 22.

7-difluoromethoxyl-5,4'-di-n-octyl genistein inhibits ovarian cancer stem cell
characteristics through the downregulation of FOXM1.

Ning YX(1), Li QX(1), Ren KQ(2), Quan MF(2), Cao JG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510120, P.R. China.
(2)Laboratory of Medicine Engineering, Medical College, Hunan Normal University, 
Changsha, Hunan 410013, P.R. China.

7-Difluoromethoxyl-5,4'-di-n-octylgenistein (DFOG) is a novel synthetic genistein
analogue that possesses anti-cancer activity in a variety of cancers, including
ovarian cancer. The objective of the present study was to investigate whether
DFOG inhibits the self-renewal capacity of ovarian cancer stem-like cells
(OCSLCs) and to identify its potential mechanism of action. It was found that the
sphere-forming cells (SFCs) of the SKOV3 cell line exhibited a self-renewal
capacity and high tumorigenicity, indicating that they possessed the properties
of ovarian cancer stem cells (OCSCs). It was also shown for the first time that
DFOG preferentially inhibited proliferation, self-renewal capacity and expression
of stem cell markers [cluster of differentiation (CD)133, CD44 and aldehyde
dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1)] in the SFCs derived from the SKOV3 cells. These effects 
were accompanied by the downregulation of forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) expression.
Overexpression of FOXM1 rescued the DFOG-induced downregulation of FOXM1, CD133, 
CD44 and ALDH1 protein expression. It also inhibited the self-renewal capacity of
the SFCs derived from the SKOV3 cells. Thus, DFOG appears to inhibit the
characteristics of OCSLCs by downregulating FOXM1 expression.

PMCID: PMC4063643
PMID: 24959264  [PubMed]


243. J Pathol. 2014 Aug;233(4):344-56. doi: 10.1002/path.4393.

Pregnancy-associated plasma protein A regulates mitosis and is epigenetically
silenced in breast cancer.

Loddo M(1), Andryszkiewicz J, Rodriguez-Acebes S, Stoeber K, Jones A, Dafou D,
Apostolidou S, Wollenschlaeger A, Widschwendter M, Sainsbury R, Tudzarova S,
Williams GH.

Author information: 
(1)UCL Cancer Institute, University College London, UK.

Aberrant mitosis is a common feature of cancer, yet little is known about the
altered genes causing mitotic defects. We screened human tumours for cells with
morphological signatures of highly specific mitotic defects previously assigned
to candidate genes in a genome-wide RNA interference screen carried out in HeLa
cells (www.mitocheck.org). We discovered a striking enrichment of early mitotic
configurations indicative of prophase/prometaphase delay in breast cancer.
Promoter methylation analysis of MitoCheck candidate genes assigned to the
corresponding 'mitotic delay' class linked this defect to epigenetic silencing of
the gene encoding pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A (PAPPA), a secreted
protease. PAPPA silencing was highly prevalent in precursor lesions and invasive 
breast cancer. Experimental manipulation of PAPPA protein levels in human mammary
epithelial cells and in breast cancer cell lines demonstrates that progression
through early mitosis is dependent on PAPPA function, and that breast cancer
cells become more invasive after down-regulation of this protease. PAPPA
regulates mitotic progression through modulating the IGF-1 signalling pathway
resulting in activation of the forkhead transcription factor FoxM1, which drives 
a transcriptional cluster of essential mitotic genes. Our results show that PAPPA
has a critical function in normal cell division and is targeted early in breast
cancer development.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 24931331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Jun 10;15(6):10233-51. doi: 10.3390/ijms150610233.

SUMOylation of FOXM1B alters its transcriptional activity on regulation of
MiR-200 family and JNK1 in MCF7 human breast cancer cells.

Wang CM(1), Liu R(2), Wang L(3), Nascimento L(4), Brennan VC(5), Yang WH(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Mercer University School of Medicine,
Savannah, GA 31404, USA. meowy200@yahoo.com. (2)Department of Genetics and
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 
35294, USA. runhua@uab.edu. (3)Department of Genetics and Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294, USA.
lwang12@uab.edu. (4)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Mercer University School
of Medicine, Savannah, GA 31404, USA. ln6739@stu.armstrong.edu. (5)Department of 
Biomedical Sciences, Mercer University School of Medicine, Savannah, GA 31404,
USA. v.brennan@umiami.edu. (6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Mercer
University School of Medicine, Savannah, GA 31404, USA. yang_w@mercer.edu.

Transcription factor Forkhead Box Protein M1 (FOXM1) is a well-known master
regulator in controlling cell-cycle pathways essential for DNA replication and
mitosis, as well as cell proliferation. Among the three major isoforms of FOXM1, 
FOXM1B is highly associated with tumor growth and metastasis. The activities of
FOXM1B are modulated by post-translational modifications (PTMs), such as
phosphorylation, but whether it is modified by small ubiquitin-related modifier
(SUMO) remains unknown. The aim of the current study was to determine whether
FOXM1B is post-translationally modified by SUMO proteins and also to identify
SUMOylation of FOXM1B on its target gene transcription activity. Here we report
that FOXM1B is clearly defined as a SUMO target protein at the cellular levels.
Moreover, a SUMOylation protease, SENP2, significantly decreased SUMOylation of
FOXM1B. Notably, FOXM1B is selectively SUMOylated at lysine residue 463. While
SUMOylation of FOXM1B is required for full repression of its target genes
MiR-200b/c and p21, SUMOylation of FOXM1B is essential for full activation of
JNK1 gene. Overall, we provide evidence that FOXM1B is post-translationally
modified by SUMO and SUMOylation of FOXM1B plays a functional role in regulation 
of its target gene activities.

PMCID: PMC4100150
PMID: 24918286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Ethnopharmacol. 2014 Aug 8;155(1):847-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.05.053. Epub 
2014 Jun 6.

Korean Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi methanol extracts inhibits metastasis via
the Forkhead Box M1 activity in hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Park HS(1), Park KI(2), Hong GE(1), Nagappan A(1), Lee HJ(1), Kim EH(3), Lee
WS(4), Shin SC(5), Seo ON(5), Won CK(1), Cho JH(1), Kim G(6).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Life Science, College of Veterinary Medicine (BK21 plus 
project), Gyeongsang National University, Gazwa, Jinju 660-701, Republic of
Korea. (2)Department of Biological Science, Center for Colon Cancer Research,
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29208, USA. (3)Department of Nursing
Science, International University of Korea, Jinju 660-759, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Health Sciences, Gyeongsang
National University School of Medicine, Gyeongnam Regional Cancer Center,
Gyeongsang National University Hospital, Jinju 660-702, Republic of Korea.
(5)Department of Chemistry, Research Institute of Life Science, Gyeongsang
National University, Jinju 660-701, Republic of Korea. (6)Research Institute of
Life Science, College of Veterinary Medicine (BK21 plus project), Gyeongsang
National University, Gazwa, Jinju 660-701, Republic of Korea. Electronic address:
gonskim@gnu.ac.kr.

ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi, commonly known as
skullcaps, and it has been widely used as traditional therapeutic herb in several
eastern Asia including Korea, China and Japan because of its remarkable
anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer effects. Our study focuses on the
anti-metastatic effects of Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Methanol extract of Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi was
examined for identification of its composition by HPLC-MS/MS. The extract was
evaluated for the anti-metastasis activity using HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma
cells via immunoblotting and RT-PCR. For mechanical study, specific Forkhead Box 
M1 (FOXM1) vector was transfected to HepG2 cells.
RESULTS: Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi potentially inhibited proliferation of
HepG2 cells dose dependently. Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi decreased metastasis
through the regulation of matrix metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2) and FOXM1 activities
at the transcription and translation levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of the present study suggest that Scutellaria
baicalensis Georgi could be a potent chemotherapeutic agent against HCC. Its
clinical use guarantee for further study and individual flavonoids from
Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi should also be investigated.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24910406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Nat Rev Cancer. 2014 Jul;14(7):450-1. doi: 10.1038/nrc3772. Epub 2014 Jun 5.

Signalling: FOXM1 and CENPF: co-pilots driving prostate cancer.

Lokody I.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2014 May 12;25(5):638-51.

PMID: 24898057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 4;9(6):e98370. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098370. eCollection 
2014.

Panepoxydone targets NF-kB and FOXM1 to inhibit proliferation, induce apoptosis
and reverse epithelial to mesenchymal transition in breast cancer.

Arora R(1), Yates C(2), Gary BD(1), McClellan S(1), Tan M(1), Xi Y(1), Reed E(1),
Piazza GA(1), Owen LB(1), Dean-Colomb W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncologic Sciences, Mitchell Cancer Institute, University of
South Alabama, Mobile, Alabama, United States of America. (2)Department of
Biology and Center for Cancer Research, Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, Alabama,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is a highly diverse group that
is associated with an aggressive phenotype. Its treatment has been challenging
due to its heterogeneity and absence of well-defined molecular targets. Thus,
there is an urgent need to identify novel agents with therapeutic application.
NF-<U+03BA>B is over-expressed in many breast cancers; thus, inactivation of the NF-<U+03BA>B
pathway could serve as a therapeutic target. Here we report for the first time
the anti-tumor activity of panepoxydone (PP), a NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitor isolated from an 
edible mushroom, in several breast cancer cell lines.
METHODS: We investigated the effects of PP on cell growth, migration-invasion,
apoptosis and EMT-related proteins expression in MCF-7 and TNBC cell lines
MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-453.
RESULTS: Significant antitumor activity was seen in all cell lines, with
differential responses noted in cell-line specific manner. Treatment with PP
resulted in significant cytotoxicity, decreased invasion, migration and increased
apoptosis in all cell lines tested. Up-regulation of Bax and cleaved PARP and
down-regulation of Bcl-2, survivin, cyclin D1 and caspase 3 were noted in
PP-treated breast cancer cells. The antitumor effect of PP appeared related to
its ability to inhibit the phosphorylation of inhibitor of NF-<U+03BA>B (I<U+03BA>Ba) with
cytoplasmic accumulation. PP treatment also down-regulated FOXM1 which resulted
in a reversal of EMT. Similar results were obtained after silencing of NF-kB and 
FOXM1.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, these studies show, for the first time the antitumor
activity of PP against breast cancer cells, in particular TNBC cells.
Furthermore, it highlights the concept that optimal treatment of TNBC warrants
attention to the differential sensitivity of various TNBC subtypes to therapeutic
agents. These results suggest that the PP may be a potentially effective
chemopreventive or therapeutic agent against breast cancer. However, additional
studies are required to more fully elucidate the mechanism of antitumor effect of
PP.

PMCID: PMC4045585
PMID: 24896091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Transl Med. 2014 May 20;12:134. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-12-134.

Overexpression of FOXM1 predicts poor prognosis and promotes cancer cell
proliferation, migration and invasion in epithelial ovarian cancer.

Wen N(1), Wang Y, Wen L, Zhao SH, Ai ZH, Wang Y, Wu B, Lu HX, Yang H, Liu WC, Li 
Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, The General Hospital of Chinese PLA, Beijing
100853, China. wenning301@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1), an important regulator of cell
differentiation and proliferation, is overexpressed in a number of aggressive
human carcinomas. The purpose of this study was to examine the expression levels 
of FOXM1 in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC), to identify the relationship between
FOXM1 expression and patient survival, and to investigate the role of FOXM1 in
human ovarian cancer development.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical analysis for FOXM1 was performed in a total of 158
ovarian tissue specimens, all with linked clinical outcome data. Kaplan-Meier
method and Cox proportional hazards analysis were used to relate FOXM1 expression
to clinicopathological variables and to progression-free survival (PFS) and
overall survival (OS). In vitro studies were performed to determine the function 
of FOXM1 in cell proliferation, migration and invasion in EOC cells using
pcDNA3.1-FOXM1 and FOXM1 shRNA.
RESULTS: Elevated FOXM1 levels were associated with lymph node metastasis
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009), but not with age, FIGO stage, histological grade and histological
type. Patients with high expression of FOXM1 had poorer PFS (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0001) and OS
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001) than patients with low expression of FOXM1. Furthermore,
multivariate analyses indicated that FOXM1 positivity was an independent
prognostic factor for PFS (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.046) and OS (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.022), respectively.
Overexpression of FOXM1 increased expression and activity of matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), MMP-9 and vascular endothelial growth factor-A
(VEGF-A), and cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion of HO-8910 cells,
whereas knockdown of FOXM1 reduced expression and activity of MMP-2, MMP-9 and
VEGF-A, and cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion of HO-8910 PM
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that FOXM1 expression is likely to play
important roles in EOC development and progression. FOXM1 expression is a
potential prognostic factor for PFS and OS, and it could be a novel treatment
target in EOC patients.

PMCID: PMC4063689
PMID: 24885308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. PLoS One. 2014 May 27;9(5):e97681. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0097681. eCollection
2014.

Integration of mRNA expression profile, copy number alterations, and microRNA
expression levels in breast cancer to improve grade definition.

Cava C(1), Bertoli G(1), Ripamonti M(1), Mauri G(2), Zoppis I(2), Della Rosa
PA(1), Gilardi MC(1), Castiglioni I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Bioimaging and Physiology (IBFM), National Research
Council (CNR), Milan, Italy. (2)Department of Informatics, Systems and
Communications, University of Milan-Bicocca, Milan, Italy.

Defining the aggressiveness and growth rate of a malignant cell population is a
key step in the clinical approach to treating tumor disease. The correct grading 
of breast cancer (BC) is a fundamental part in determining the appropriate
treatment. Biological variables can make it difficult to elucidate the mechanisms
underlying BC development. To identify potential markers that can be used for BC 
classification, we analyzed mRNAs expression profiles, gene copy numbers,
microRNAs expression and their association with tumor grade in BC
microarray-derived datasets. From mRNA expression results, we found that grade 2 
BC is most likely a mixture of grade 1 and grade 3 that have been misclassified, 
being described by the gene signature of either grade 1 or grade 3. We assessed
the potential of the new approach of integrating mRNA expression profile, copy
number alterations, and microRNA expression levels to select a limited number of 
genomic BC biomarkers. The combination of mRNA profile analysis and copy number
data with microRNA expression levels led to the identification of two gene
signatures of 42 and 4 altered genes (FOXM1, KPNA4, H2AFV and DDX19A)
respectively, the latter obtained through a meta-analytical procedure. The
42-based gene signature identifies 4 classes of up- or down-regulated microRNAs
(17 microRNAs) and of their 17 target mRNA, and the 4-based genes signature
identified 4 microRNAs (Hsa-miR-320d, Hsa-miR-139-5p, Hsa-miR-567 and
Hsa-let-7c). These results are discussed from a biological point of view with
respect to pathological features of BC. Our identified mRNAs and microRNAs were
validated as prognostic factors of BC disease progression, and could potentially 
facilitate the implementation of assays for laboratory validation, due to their
reduced number.

PMCID: PMC4035288
PMID: 24866763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Neoplasia. 2014 Apr;16(4):329-42.e1-14. doi: 10.1016/j.neo.2014.04.001.

Prolactin-induced protein is required for cell cycle progression in breast
cancer.

Naderi A(1), Vanneste M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical Education and Research Facility,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. Electronic address: ali-naderi@uiowa.edu.
(2)Holden Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical Education and Research Facility,
University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.

Prolactin-induced protein (PIP) is expressed in the majority of breast cancers
and is used for the diagnostic evaluation of this disease as a characteristic
biomarker; however, the molecular mechanisms of PIP function in breast cancer
have remained largely unknown. In this study, we carried out a comprehensive
investigation of PIP function using PIP silencing in a broad group of breast
cancer cell lines, analysis of expression microarray data, proteomic analysis
using mass spectrometry, and biomarker studies on breast tumors. We demonstrated 
that PIP is required for the progression through G1 phase, mitosis, and
cytokinesis in luminal A, luminal B, and molecular apocrine breast cancer cells. 
In addition, PIP expression is associated with a transcriptional signature
enriched with cell cycle genes and regulates key genes in this process including 
cyclin D1, cyclin B1, BUB1, and forkhead box M1 (FOXM1). It is notable that
defects in mitotic transition and cytokinesis following PIP silencing are
accompanied by an increase in aneuploidy of breast cancer cells. Importantly, we 
have identified novel PIP-binding partners in breast cancer and shown that PIP
binds to ß-tubulin and is necessary for microtubule polymerization. Furthermore, 
PIP interacts with actin-binding proteins including Arp2/3 and is needed for
inside-out activation of integrin-ß1 mediated through talin. This study suggests 
that PIP is required for cell cycle progression in breast cancer and provides a
rationale for exploring PIP inhibition as a therapeutic approach in breast cancer
that can potentially target microtubule polymerization.

Copyright © 2014 Neoplasia Press, Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC4094838
PMID: 24862759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Gastroenterology. 2014 Aug;147(2):485-97.e18. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.04.048. 
Epub 2014 May 20.

Down-regulation of microRNA-494 via loss of SMAD4 increases FOXM1 and ß-catenin
signaling in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells.

Li L(1), Li Z(2), Kong X(3), Xie D(4), Jia Z(5), Jiang W(6), Cui J(6), Du Y(1),
Wei D(5), Huang S(7), Xie K(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of
Gastroenterology, Shanghai Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
zhaoshenli.smmu.edu@hotmail.com. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai
Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, People's
Republic of China; Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The 
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. Electronic
address: xiangyukong185@hotmail.com. (4)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pancreatic
Diseases Research and Department of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong University
Affiliated First People's Hospital, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (6)Department of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pancreatic Diseases
Research and Department of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated
First People's Hospital, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (7)Department of
Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. 
(8)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. Electronic address:
kepxie@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Dysregulation of ß-catenin and the transcriptional activator
FOXM1 mediate oncogenesis, but it is not clear how these proteins become
dysregulated in tumors that do not typically carry mutations in adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) or ß-catenin, such as pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas
(PDACs). We searched for microRNAs that regulate levels of FOXM1 in PDAC cells
and samples from patients.
METHODS: We identified microRNAs that affect levels of FOXM1 in PDACs using
bioinformatic, genetic, and pharmacologic approaches. We altered expression of
the microRNA-494 (miR-494) in PDAC cell lines (AsPC-1 and PANC-1) and examined
the effects on FOXM1 and ß-catenin signaling and cell proliferation and colony
formation. The cells were injected into immunocompromised mice and growth of
xenograft tumors and liver metastases were measured. We performed
immunohistochemical analyses of 10 paired PDAC and nontumor pancreatic tissue
samples collected from untreated patients during surgery.
RESULTS: We identified miR-494 as a negative regulator of FOXM1 levels in PDAC
cells, and found that levels of this microRNA were reduced in PDAC specimens,
compared with nontumor tissues. Loss of response of PDAC cells to transforming
growth factor ß, owing to SMAD4 deficiency, reduced expression of miR-494.
Transgenic expression of miR-494 in PDAC cells produced the same effects as
reducing expression of FOXM1 or blocking nuclear translocation of ß-catenin,
reducing cell proliferation, migration, and invasion, and increasing their
sensitivity to gemcitabine. Reduced expression of miR-494 correlated with PDAC
metastasis and reduced survival times of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of SMAD4 in PDAC cells leads to reduced levels of miR-494,
increased levels of FOXM1, and nuclear localization of ß-catenin. miR-494 might
be developed as a prognostic marker for patients with PDAC or a therapeutic
target.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Cell Death Dis. 2014 May 22;5:e1252. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2014.230.

Non-viral FoxM1 gene delivery to hepatocytes enhances liver repopulation.

Xiang D(1), Liu CC(1), Wang MJ(1), Li JX(1), Chen F(1), Yao H(1), Yu B(1), Lu
L(1), Borjigin U(2), Chen YX(3), Zhong L(4), Wangensteen KJ(5), He ZY(1), Wang
X(6), Hu YP(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Cell Biology, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai,
China [2] Center for Stem Cell and Medicine, The Graduate School, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, China. (2)The Key Laboratory of National Education 
Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia
University, Huhhot, China. (3)1] Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA [2] Department of Medicine,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. (4)1] School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China [2] Shenzhen Center for ADR
Monitoring, Shenzhen, China. (5)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (6)1] The Key
Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive Biology and 
Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University, Huhhot, China [2] Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA 
[3] Hepatoscience Incorporation, Palo Alto, CA, USA.

Hepatocyte transplantation as a substitute strategy of orthotopic liver
transplantation is being studied for treating end-stage liver diseases. Several
technical hurdles must be overcome in order to achieve the therapeutic liver
repopulation, such as the problem of insufficient expansion of the transplanted
hepatocytes in recipient livers. In this study, we analyzed the application of
FoxM1, a cell-cycle regulator, to enhance the proliferation capacity of
hepatocytes. The non-viral sleeping beauty (SB) transposon vector carrying FoxM1 
gene was constructed for delivering FoxM1 into the hepatocytes. The proliferation
capacities of hepatocytes with FoxM1 expression were examined both in vivo and in
vitro. Results indicated that the hepatocytes with FoxM1 expression had a higher 
proliferation rate than wild-type (WT) hepatocytes in vitro. In comparison with
WT hepatocytes, the hepatocytes with FoxM1 expression had an enhanced level of
liver repopulation in the recipient livers at both sub-acute injury (fumaryl
acetoacetate hydrolase (Fah)(-/-) mice model) and acute injury (2/3 partial
hepatectomy mice model). Importantly, there was no increased risk of
tumorigenicity with FoxM1 expression in recipients even after serial
transplantation. In conclusion, expression of FoxM1 in hepatocytes enhanced the
capacity of liver repopulation without inducing tumorigenesis. FoxM1 gene
delivered by non-viral SB vector into hepatocytes may be a viable approach to
promote therapeutic repopulation after hepatocyte transplantation.

PMCID: PMC4047909
PMID: 24853430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Elife. 2014 May 20;3:e01763. doi: 10.7554/eLife.01763.

MELK is an oncogenic kinase essential for mitotic progression in basal-like
breast cancer cells.

Wang Y(1), Lee YM(2), Baitsch L(1), Huang A(3), Xiang Y(1), Tong H(1), Lako A(1),
Von T(1), Choi C(4), Lim E(5), Min J(3), Li L(3), Stegmeier F(3), Schlegel R(3), 
Eck MJ(1), Gray NS(1), Mitchison TJ(6), Zhao JJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, United
States Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, United States. (2)Department of Cancer Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, United States. (3)Novartis Institutes for
Biomedical Research, Cambridge, United States. (4)Department of Cancer Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, United States Harvard University,
Cambridge, United States. (5)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, United States. (6)Department of Systems Biology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, United States. (7)Department of Cancer Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, United States Department of Biological
Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, United
States jean_zhao@dfci.harvard.edu.

Despite marked advances in breast cancer therapy, basal-like breast cancer (BBC),
an aggressive subtype of breast cancer usually lacking estrogen and progesterone 
receptors, remains difficult to treat. In this study, we report the
identification of MELK as a novel oncogenic kinase from an in vivo tumorigenesis 
screen using a kinome-wide open reading frames (ORFs) library. Analysis of
clinical data reveals a high level of MELK overexpression in BBC, a feature that 
is largely dependent on FoxM1, a master mitotic transcription factor that is also
found to be highly overexpressed in BBC. Ablation of MELK selectively impairs
proliferation of basal-like, but not luminal breast cancer cells both in vitro
and in vivo. Mechanistically, depletion of MELK in BBC cells induces
caspase-dependent cell death, preceded by defective mitosis. Finally, we find
that Melk is not required for mouse development and physiology. Together, these
data indicate that MELK is a normally non-essential kinase, but is critical for
BBC and thus represents a promising selective therapeutic target for the most
aggressive subtype of breast cancer.DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01763.001.

Copyright © 2014, Wang et al.

PMCID: PMC4059381
PMID: 24844244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Biol Cell. 2014 Jul 1;25(13):1983-94. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E14-03-0837. Epub 2014
May 14.

Kinetochore genes are coordinately up-regulated in human tumors as part of a
FoxM1-related cell division program.

Thiru P(1), Kern DM(2), McKinley KL(2), Monda JK(2), Rago F(2), Su KC(1), Tsinman
T(1), Yarar D(3), Bell GW(1), Cheeseman IM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142. (2)Whitehead
Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139. (3)Merrimack
Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA 02139. (4)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical
Research, Cambridge, MA 02142Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 icheese@wi.mit.edu.

The key player in directing proper chromosome segregation is the macromolecular
kinetochore complex, which mediates DNA-microtubule interactions. Previous
studies testing individual kinetochore genes documented examples of their
overexpression in tumors relative to normal tissue, leading to proposals that
up-regulation of specific kinetochore genes may promote tumor progression.
However, kinetochore components do not function in isolation, and previous
studies did not comprehensively compare the expression behavior of kinetochore
components. Here we analyze the expression behavior of the full range of human
kinetochore components in diverse published expression compendia, including
normal tissues and tumor samples. Our results demonstrate that kinetochore genes 
are rarely overexpressed individually. Instead, we find that core kinetochore
genes are coordinately regulated with other cell division genes under virtually
all conditions. This expression pattern is strongly correlated with the
expression of the forkhead transcription factor FoxM1, which binds to the
majority of cell division promoters. These observations suggest that kinetochore 
gene up-regulation in cancer reflects a general activation of the cell division
program and that altered expression of individual kinetochore genes is unlikely
to play a causal role in tumorigenesis.

© 2014 Thiru et al. This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell 
Biology under license from the author(s). Two months after publication it is
available to the public under an AttributionNoncommercialShare Alike 3.0
Unported Creative Commons License
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0).

PMCID: PMC4072572
PMID: 24829384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. PLoS One. 2014 May 13;9(5):e96989. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096989. eCollection
2014.

FOXM1 modulates cisplatin sensitivity by regulating EXO1 in ovarian cancer.

Zhou J(1), Wang Y(2), Wang Y(3), Yin X(3), He Y(3), Chen L(3), Wang W(3), Liu
T(3), Di W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Gynecologic Oncology, Shanghai, China; Focus Construction Subject of Shanghai
Education Department, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Health Bureau Key Disciplines and
Specialties Foundation, Shanghai, China; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
The First Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou, Jiangsu, China.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Gynecologic Oncology, Shanghai, China; Focus Construction Subject of Shanghai
Education Department, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Health Bureau Key Disciplines and
Specialties Foundation, Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gynecologic Oncology, Shanghai,
China.

Cisplatin is commonly used in ovarian cancer chemotherapy, however,
chemoresistance to cisplatin remains a great clinical challenge. Oncogenic
transcriptional factor FOXM1 has been reported to be overexpressed in ovarian
cancer. In this study, we aimed to investigate the potential role of FOXM1 in
ovarian cancers with chemoresistance to cisplatin. Our results indicate that
FOXM1 is upregulated in chemoresistant ovarian cancer samples, and defends
ovarian cancer cells against cytotoxicity of cisplatin. FOXM1 facilitates DNA
repair through regulating direct transcriptional target EXO1 to protect ovarian
cancer cells from cisplatin-mediated apoptosis. Attenuating FOXM1 and EXO1
expression by small interfering RNA, augments the chemotherapy efficacy against
ovarian cancer. Our findings indicate that targeting FOXM1 and its target gene
EXO1 could improve cisplatin effect in ovarian cancer, confirming their role in
modulating cisplatin sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC4019642
PMID: 24824601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Cancer Cell. 2014 May 12;25(5):638-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2014.03.017.

Cross-species regulatory network analysis identifies a synergistic interaction
between FOXM1 and CENPF that drives prostate cancer malignancy.

Aytes A(1), Mitrofanova A(2), Lefebvre C(2), Alvarez MJ(2), Castillo-Martin M(3),
Zheng T(4), Eastham JA(5), Gopalan A(6), Pienta KJ(7), Shen MM(8), Califano A(9),
Abate-Shen C(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032,
USA; Translational Research Laboratory, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Bellvitge 
Institute for Biomedical Research, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona 08907,
Spain. (2)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, New 
York, NY 10032, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. (4)Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department
of Statistics, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027, USA. (5)Department of
Urology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA.
(6)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
10065, USA. (7)The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA; Brady
Urological Institute at the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD
21231, USA. (8)Department of Urology, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University Medical
Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Medicine, Columbia University
Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Genetics & Development,
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; Herbert Irving
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA. (9)Department of Systems Biology, Columbia University Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, USA; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics,
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; Herbert Irving
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY
10032, USA. Electronic address: califano@c2b2.columbia.edu. (10)Department of
Urology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; Department 
of Systems Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA; 
Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, NY 10032, USA; Herbert Irving Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. Electronic address:
cabateshen@columbia.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2014 Jul;14(7):450-1.

To identify regulatory drivers of prostate cancer malignancy, we have assembled
genome-wide regulatory networks (interactomes) for human and mouse prostate
cancer from expression profiles of human tumors and of genetically engineered
mouse models, respectively. Cross-species computational analysis of these
interactomes has identified FOXM1 and CENPF as synergistic master regulators of
prostate cancer malignancy. Experimental validation shows that FOXM1 and CENPF
function synergistically to promote tumor growth by coordinated regulation of
target gene expression and activation of key signaling pathways associated with
prostate cancer malignancy. Furthermore, co-expression of FOXM1 and CENPF is a
robust prognostic indicator of poor survival and metastasis. Thus, genome-wide
cross-species interrogation of regulatory networks represents a valuable strategy
to identify causal mechanisms of human cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4051317
PMID: 24823640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Mol Cancer Ther. 2014 Jun;13(6):1393-8. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-13-0764. Epub 
2014 May 2.

Maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase: key kinase for stem cell phenotype in
glioma and other cancers.

Ganguly R(1), Hong CS(1), Smith LG(1), Kornblum HI(2), Nakano I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Neurological Surgery; The James
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio;
Departments of Psychiatry, Pharmacology, and Pediatrics; and The Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, California. (2)Authors' Affiliations: Department of
Neurological Surgery; The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio; Departments of Psychiatry, Pharmacology, and
Pediatrics; and The Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CaliforniaAuthors' Affiliations:
Department of Neurological Surgery; The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio; Departments of Psychiatry, Pharmacology,
and Pediatrics; and The Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School 
of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CaliforniaAuthors'
Affiliations: Department of Neurological Surgery; The James Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio; Departments of Psychiatry,
Pharmacology, and Pediatrics; and The Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David 
Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles,
CaliforniaAuthors' Affiliations: Department of Neurological Surgery; The James
Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio;
Departments of Psychiatry, Pharmacology, and Pediatrics; and The Jonsson
Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, California. (3)Authors' Affiliations: Department of
Neurological Surgery; The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio; Departments of Psychiatry, Pharmacology, and
Pediatrics; and The Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, CaliforniaAuthors' Affiliations:
Department of Neurological Surgery; The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio; Departments of Psychiatry, Pharmacology,
and Pediatrics; and The Jonsson Comprehensive Cancer Center, David Geffen School 
of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California
Ichiro.nakano@osumc.edu.

Maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase (MELK) is a member of the snf1/AMPK
family of protein serine/threonine kinases that has recently gained significant
attention in the stem cell and cancer biology field. Recent studies suggest that 
activation of this kinase is tightly associated with extended survival and
accelerated proliferation of cancer stem cells (CSC) in various organs.
Overexpression of MELK has been noted in various cancers, including colon,
breast, ovaries, pancreas, prostate, and brain, making the inhibition of MELK an 
attractive therapeutic strategy for a variety of cancers. In the experimental
cancer models, depletion of MELK by RNA interference or small molecule inhibitors
induces apoptotic cell death of CSCs derived from glioblastoma multiforme and
breast cancer, both in vitro and in vivo. Mechanism of action of MELK includes,
yet may not be restricted to, direct binding and activation of the oncogenic
transcription factors c-JUN and FOXM1 in cancer cells but not in the normal
counterparts. Following these preclinical studies, the phase I clinical trial for
advanced cancers with OTSSP167 started in 2013, as the first-in-class MELK
inhibitor. This review summarizes the current molecular understanding of MELK and
the recent preclinical studies about MELK as a cancer therapeutic target.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4048631
PMID: 24795222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Anticancer Res. 2014 May;34(5):2427-32.

Clinicopathological and prognostic significance of FOXM1 expression in esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma.

Takata A(1), Takiguchi S, Okada K, Takahashi T, Kurokawa Y, Yamasaki M, Miyata H,
Nakajima K, Mori M, Doki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University 2-2, E2, Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
stakiguchi@gesurg.med.osaka-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) has a poor prognosis
because invasion and metastasis are prevalent. To improve diagnosis, it is
important to identify and characterize tumor-specific molecular markers in ESCC. 
FOXM1 is overexpressed and correlates with pathogenesis in a variety of human
malignancies. We aimed to investigate the clinical significance of FOXM1
overexpression in ESCC.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: FOXM1 expression was assessed in ESCC specimens from 174
curatively-resected cases. The relationships between FOXM1 expression,
clinicopathological parameters, and prognoses were examined.
RESULTS: Immunohistochemical analysis showed that 94 (54.0%) tumors were positive
for FOXM1 expression. FOXM1 positivity did not correlate with any
clinicopathological parameter. However, FOXM1-positive cases had poorer prognoses
than FOXM1-negative ones (p=0.0037, log-rank test). In multivariate analysis, the
following were independent prognostic factors: pT, pN, neoadjuvant chemotherapy, 
and FOXM1 expression (hazard ratio=1.69, 95% confidence interval=1.06-2.75,
p=0.027).
CONCLUSION: FOXM1 may be a novel prognostic factor in patients with ESCC who
undergo curative resection.

PMID: 24778055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Oncol Lett. 2014 May;7(5):1711-1717. Epub 2014 Feb 25.

Casticin induces breast cancer cell apoptosis by inhibiting the expression of
forkhead box protein M1.

Liu LP(1), Cao XC(2), Liu F(2), Quan MF(2), Sheng XF(2), Ren KQ(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Breast Department, Hunan Province Tumor Hospital, Changsha, Hunan 410013, 
P.R. China. (2)Medical College, Hunan Normal University, Changsha, Hunan 410013, 
P.R. China.

Casticin is an active ingredient derived from Fructus Viticis, a traditional
Chinese medicine. This study aimed to investigate the role of forkhead box O3
(FOXO3a) in breast cancer cells and examine the regulatory mechanisms of FOXO3a
in response to casticin treatment of the cells by ELISA, flow cytometry, small
interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection and western blot analysis. Casticin
treatment induced apoptosis and reduced the expression of the transcription
factor forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1). In addition, FOXM1 repression induced by 
casticin treatment was associated with the activation of FOXO3a via increased
dephosphorylation. Notably, silencing FOXO3a expression by siRNA-mediated gene
knockdown attenuated casticin-mediated apoptosis. Collectively, these findings
suggest that FOXO3a is a critical mediator of the inhibitory effects of casticin 
on apoptosis in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3997681
PMID: 24765206  [PubMed]


260. Physiol Rep. 2014 Mar 20;2(3):e00261. doi: 10.1002/phy2.261. Print 2014.

Dextran induces differentiation of circulating endothelial progenitor cells.

Obi S(1), Masuda H, Akimaru H, Shizuno T, Yamamoto K, Ando J, Asahara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine Science, Tokai University School of
Medicine, Isehara, Japan.

Abstract Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) have been demonstrated to be
effective for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases. However, the
differentiation process from circulation to adhesion has not been clarified
because circulating EPCs rarely attached to dishes in EPC cultures previously.
Here we investigated whether immature circulating EPCs differentiate into mature 
adhesive EPCs in response to dextran. When floating-circulating EPCs derived from
ex vivo expanded human cord blood were cultured with 5% and 10% dextran, they
attached to fibronectin-coated dishes and grew exponentially. The bioactivities
of adhesion, proliferation, migration, tube formation, and differentiated type of
EPC colony formation increased in EPCs exposed to dextran. The surface protein
expression rate of the endothelial markers vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF)-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2, ICAM1, VCAM1, and integrin av/ß3 increased in
EPCs exposed to dextran. The mRNA levels of VEGF-R1/2, VE-cadherin, Tie2,
endothelial nitric oxide synthase, MMP9, and VEGF increased in EPCs treated with 
dextran. Those of endothelium-related transcription factors ID1/2, FOXM1, HEY1,
SMAD1, FOSL1, NFkB1, NRF2, HIF1A, EPAS1 increased in dextran-treated EPCs;
however, those of hematopoietic- and antiangiogenic-related transcription factors
TAL1, RUNX1, c-MYB, GATA1/2, ERG, FOXH1, HHEX, SMAD2/3 decreased in
dextran-exposed EPCs. Inhibitor analysis showed that PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and
p38 signal transduction pathways are involved in the differentiation in response 
to dextran. In conclusion, dextran induces differentiation of circulating EPCs in
terms of adhesion, migration, proliferation, and vasculogenesis. The
differentiation mechanism in response to dextran is regulated by multiple signal 
transductions including PI3K/Akt, ERK1/2, JNK, and p38. These findings indicate
that dextran is an effective treatment for EPCs in regenerative medicines.

PMCID: PMC4002241
PMID: 24760515  [PubMed]


261. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Sep;59(9):2145-52. doi: 10.1007/s10620-014-3159-6. Epub 2014
Apr 19.

MicroRNA-194 inhibits the epithelial-mesenchymal transition in gastric cancer
cells by targeting FoxM1.

Li Z(1), Ying X, Chen H, Ye P, Shen Y, Pan W, Zhang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Colorectal Surgery, Shaoxing People's Hospital, Shaoxing
Hospital of Zhejiang University, Shaoxing, 312000, Zhejiang, China.

AIM: We hypothesized that miR-194 may control Forkhead box protein M1 (FoxM1)
expression in gastric cancer cells and therefore may have therapeutic potential
in gastric cancer.
METHODS: The expression level of miR-194 was examined using real-time PCR in
human gastric cancer and noncancerous gastric tissues, gastric cancer cell and
normal gastric mucosal epithelial cell. We examined whether the miR-194 regulates
cell migration and invasion, and the epithelial-mesenchymal transition Phenotype 
by inhibiting FoxM1 in gastric cancer cells.
RESULTS: The expression of miR-194 was significantly lower in gastric cancer
compared with non-cancerous gastric tissues and cells. Exogenous expression of
miR-194 inhibited cell migration, invasion, and the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition phenotype in gastric cancer cells. Moreover, we discovered a novel
post-transcriptional regulatory mechanism of FoxM1 expression that is mediated by
miR-194.
CONCLUSION: Our study clearly demonstrates that miR-194 inhibits the acquisition 
of the EMT phenotype in gastric cancer cells by downregulating FoxM1, thereby
inhibiting cell migration and invasion during cancer progression.

PMID: 24748184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 18;9(4):e95481. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095481. eCollection
2014.

Global gene expression analysis of canine cutaneous mast cell tumor: could
molecular profiling be useful for subtype classification and prognostication?

Giantin M(1), Granato A(2), Baratto C(2), Marconato L(3), Vascellari M(2),
Morello EM(4), Vercelli A(5), Mutinelli F(2), Dacasto M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biomedicina Comparata e Alimentazione, Università di Padova,
Legnaro (Padova), Italy. (2)Istituto Zooprofilattico Sperimentale delle Venezie, 
Legnaro (Padova), Italy. (3)Centro Oncologico Veterinario, Sasso Marconi,
Bologna, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Scienze Veterinarie, Università di Torino,
Grugliasco (Torino), Italy. (5)Ambulatorio Veterinario Associato, Torino, Italy.

Prognosis and therapeutic management of dogs with cutaneous mast cell tumors
(MCTs) depend on clinical stage and histological grade. However, the prognostic
value of this latter is still questionable. In the present study, MCT
transcriptome was analyzed to identify a set of candidate genes potentially
useful for predicting the biological behavior of MCTs. Fifty-one canine MCT
biopsies were analyzed. Isolated and purified total RNAs were individually
hybridized to the Agilent Canine V2 4x44k DNA microarray. The comparison of
reference differentiated and undifferentiated MCT transcriptome revealed a total 
of 597 differentially expressed genes (147 down-regulated and 450 up-regulated). 
The functional analysis of this set of genes provided evidence that they were
mainly involved in cell cycle, DNA replication, p53 signaling pathway, nucleotide
excision repair and pyrimidine metabolism. Class prediction analysis identified
13 transcripts providing the greatest accuracy of class prediction and divided
samples into two categories (differentiated and undifferentiated), harboring a
different prognosis. The Principal Component Analysis of all samples, made by
using the selected 13 markers, confirmed MCT classification. The first three
components accounted for 99.924% of the total variance. This molecular
classification significantly correlated with survival time (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0026).
Furthermore, among all marker genes, a significant association was found between 
mRNA expression and MCT-related mortality for FOXM1, GSN, FEN1 and KPNA2
(p<0.05). Finally, marker genes mRNA expression was evaluated in a cohort of 22
independent samples. Data obtained enabled to identify MCT cases with different
prognosis. Overall, the molecular characterization of canine MCT transcriptome
allowed the identification of a set of 13 transcripts that clearly separated
differentiated from undifferentiated MCTs, thus predicting outcome regardless of 
the histological grade. These results may have clinical relevance and warrant
future validation in a prospective study.

PMCID: PMC3991658
PMID: 24748173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 17;9(4):e92304. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092304. eCollection
2014.

Foxm1 mediates LIF/Stat3-dependent self-renewal in mouse embryonic stem cells and
is essential for the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells.

Tan G(1), Cheng L(1), Chen T(1), Yu L(1), Tan Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, Department of
Biomedical Engineering, College of Biology, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Chemistry and Molecular Medicine, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan, China.

Activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (Stat3) by
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) is required for maintaining self-renewal and
pluripotency of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs). Here, we have confirmed
transcription factor Forkhead Box m1 (Foxm1) as a LIF/Stat3 downstream target
that mediates LIF/Stat3-dependent mESC self-renewal. The expression of Foxm1
relies on LIF signaling and is stimulated by Stat3 directly in mESCs. The
knockdown of Foxm1 results in the loss of mESC pluripotency in the presence of
LIF, and the overexpression of Foxm1 alone maintains mESC pluripotency in the
absence of LIF and feeder layers, indicating that Foxm1 is a mediator of
LIF/Stat3-dependent maintenance of pluripotency in mESCs. Furthermore, the
inhibition of Foxm1 expression prevents the reprogramming of mouse embryonic
fibroblasts to induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), suggesting that Foxm1 is
essential for the reprogramming of somatic cells into iPSCs. Our results reveal
an essential function of Foxm1 in the LIF/Stat3-mediated mESC self-renewal and
the generation of iPSCs.

PMCID: PMC3990529
PMID: 24743237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Cancer Genet. 2014 Mar;207(3):75-82. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2014.02.008. Epub
2014 Feb 27.

Down-regulation of FoxM1 leads to the inhibition of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in gastric cancer cells.

Miao L(1), Xiong X(1), Lin Y(1), Cheng Y(1), Lu J(1), Zhang J(1), Cheng N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bile Duct Surgery, West China Hospital, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China. (2)Department of Bile Duct Surgery, West China 
Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, China. Electronic
address: chengnansheng2013@163.com.

Emerging evidence suggests that FoxM1 may have a crucial role in the development 
and progression of human gastric cancer. Therefore, we sought to determine the
role of FoxM1 in gastric cancer epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The
down-regulation of FoxM1 expression by the transfection of cells with FoxM1 siRNA
decreased cell migration, invasion, and proliferation. Moreover, the
over-expression of FoxM1 promoted cell migration, invasion, and proliferation,
which led to the acquisition of an EMT phenotype by up-regulating the protein
expression of the mesenchymal cell markers ZEB1, ZEB2, and vimentin and by
down-regulating the epithelial cell marker E-cadherin in gastric epithelial
cells. More important, the depletion of FoxM1 levels in gastric cancer cells led 
to significant decreases in the NF-<U+03BA>B p65 subunit, cyclin D1, Hes-1, VEGF, and
EpCAM protein levels. Real-time PCR examination showed that the down-regulation
of FoxM1 expression significantly inhibited vimentin and N-cadherin expression
compared to that in control cells. Most important, cells transfected with FoxM1
siRNA displayed an elongated/irregular fibroblastoid morphology and reduction of 
the vimentin expression. Our current study strongly suggests that FoxM1 signaling
has important roles in tumor cell aggressiveness through the acquisition of the
EMT phenotype in gastric cancer cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Oncol Rep. 2014 Jun;31(6):2660-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3129. Epub 2014 Apr 4.

Overexpression of FOXM1 is associated with EMT and is a predictor of poor
prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer.

Kong FF(1), Qu ZQ(2), Yuan HH(1), Wang JY(1), Zhao M(1), Guo YH(1), Shi J(1),
Gong XD(1), Zhu YL(3), Liu F(1), Zhang WY(1), Jiang B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, No. 3 People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine (SJTU-SM), Shanghai 201900, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Interventional Radiology, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery
Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200438, P.R. China.
(3)Department of General Surgery, No. 3 People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai 
Jiaotong University School of Medicine (SJTU-SM), Shanghai 201900, P.R. China.

Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1), a member of the Fox family of transcriptional factors,
is considered to be an independent predictor of poor survival in many solid
cancers. However, the underlying mechanism is not yet clear. The aim of the
present study was to investigate the clinical significance of the correlation
between FOXM1 and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in non-small cell lung 
carcinoma and the possible mechanism responsible for FOXM1-induced EMT and
metastasis. In the present study, expression levels of FOXM1 and EMT indicator
proteins were determined by tissue microarray (TMA) and immunohistochemical
staining, western blotting and reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR). Other cellular
and molecular approaches including gene transfection, small interfering RNA
(siRNA), and migration and invasion assays were utilized. Our results
demonstrated that FOXM1 overexpression was statistically significantly associated
with a higher TNM stage (p=0.036), lymph node metastasis (p=0.009) and a positive
smoking history of the patients (p=0.044). Additionally, high expression of FOXM1
correlated with loss of E-cadherin expression (p<0.001) and anomalous
immunopositivity of Vimentin (p=0.002). Moreover, patient survival analysis
demonstrated that high expression of FOXM1 (p=0.043) and the presence of lymph
node metastasis (p=0.042) were independent prognostic factors for non-small cell 
lung cancer (NSCLC). Furthermore, various in vitro experiments indicated that
overexpression or knockdown of FOXM1 expression altered EMT through activation or
inhibition of the AKT/p70S6K signaling pathway. Collectively, the results suggest
that FOXM1 may be used as a prognostic indicator for patients with NSCLC and
promotes metastasis by inducing EMT of lung cancer cells through activation of
the AKT/p70S6K pathway. Therefore, we suggest that FOXM1 may be a potential
target for lung cancer therapy.

PMID: 24715097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Jun;33(6):1531-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1732. Epub 2014 Apr 
7.

Overexpression of Her-2 upregulates FoxM1 in gastric cancer.

Qi W(1), Li X(1), Zhang Y(1), Yao R(2), Qiu W(1), Tang D(3), Liang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, The Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University Medical 
College, Qingdao, Shandong 266003, P.R. China. (2)Central Laboratory, The
Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University Medical College, Qingdao, Shandong
266003, P.R. China. (3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, The Affiliated Hospital of
Qingdao University Medical College, Qingdao, Shandong 266003, P.R. China.

The transcription factor, forkhead box protein M1 (FoxM1), and the tyrosine
kinase receptor, human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 (Her-2), are aberrantly
expressed in a number of human malignancies, and are closely associated with the 
development of cancer. However, their regulatory mechanisms and their involvement
in tumor development have not been extensively investigated, particularly in
gastric cancer. In the present study, we examined the expression levels of FoxM1 
and Her-2 in samples from patients with gastric cancer, as well as gastric cancer
cell lines. Their regulatory mechanisms and the connection between them were also
explored. We found that FoxM1 and Her-2 expression was markedly higher in the
gastric cancer samples, while a strong association was found between them at the 
mRNA and protein level. When we regulated the levels of Her-2 in the gastric
cancer cell lines, the expression of FoxM1 changed accordingly. Following the
transfection of Her-2 expression vectors into the gastric cell lines, the
luciferase activity of the FoxM1 promoter positively increased along with the
concentration of pcDNA3.1-Her-2. However, Her-2-siRNA inverted this variation,
which was further confirmed by treatment with the Her-2 inhibitor, trastuzumab,
revealing that Her-2 regulates FoxM1 expression at the promoter level in gastric 
cancer cells. Our results suggest that FoxM1 and Her-2 are important diagnostic
markers for gastric cancer. FoxM1 may be a potential cellular target for
therapeutic intervention, particularly in gastric cancers resistant to
Her-2-targeted therapy.

PMID: 24715000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jun 15;20(12):3233-43. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2761. 
Epub 2014 Apr 8.

Expression signature defined by FOXM1-CCNB1 activation predicts disease
recurrence in non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer.

Kim SK(1), Roh YG(1), Park K(1), Kang TH(1), Kim WJ(1), Lee JS(1), Leem SH(2),
Chu IS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Korean Bioinformation Center, Korea Research Institute 
of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon; Department of Biology, College of
Natural Science, Dong-A University, Busan; Department of Urology, Chungbuk
National University College of Medicine, Cheongju, Chungbuk, Korea; and
Department of Systems Biology, Division of Cancer Medicine, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (2)Authors' Affiliations: Korean
Bioinformation Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, 
Daejeon; Department of Biology, College of Natural Science, Dong-A University,
Busan; Department of Urology, Chungbuk National University College of Medicine,
Cheongju, Chungbuk, Korea; and Department of Systems Biology, Division of Cancer 
Medicine, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas
chu@kribb.re.kr shleem@dau.ac.kr.

PURPOSE: Although standard treatment with transurethral resection and
intravesical therapy (IVT) is known to be effective to address the clinical
behavior of non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC), many patients fail to
respond to the treatment and frequently experience disease recurrence. Here, we
aim to identify a prognostic molecular signature that predicts the NMIBC
heterogeneity and response to IVT.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We analyzed the genomic profiles of 102 patients with NMIBC 
to identify a signature associated with disease recurrence. The validity of the
signature was verified in three independent patient cohorts (n = 658). Various
statistical methods, including a leave-one-out cross-validation and multivariate 
Cox regression analyses, were applied to identify a signature. We confirmed an
association between the signature and tumor aggressiveness with experimental
assays using bladder cancer cell lines.
RESULTS: Gene expression profiling in 102 patients with NMIBC identified a CCNB1 
signature associated with disease recurrence, which was validated in another
three independent cohorts of 658 patients. The CCNB1 signature was shown to be an
independent risk factor by a multivariate analysis and subset stratification
according to stage and grade [HR, 2.93; 95% confidence intervals (CI),
1.302-6.594; P = 0.009]. The subset analysis also revealed that the signature
could identify patients who would benefit from IVT. Finally, gene network
analyses and experimental assays indicated that NMIBC recurrence could be
mediated by FOXM1-CCNB1-Fanconi anemia pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: The CCNB1 signature represents a promising diagnostic tool to
identify patients with NMIBC who have a high risk of recurrence and to predict
response to IVT.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24714775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cell Rep. 2014 Apr 10;7(1):194-207. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.03.006. Epub 2014 
Apr 3.

Crosstalk between the Rb pathway and AKT signaling forms a quiescence-senescence 
switch.

Imai Y(1), Takahashi A(2), Hanyu A(2), Hori S(2), Sato S(2), Naka K(3), Hirao
A(3), Ohtani N(4), Hara E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Biology, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan; Graduate School of Biomedical
Science, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8510, Japan.
(2)Division of Cancer Biology, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan. (3)Cancer Research Institute,
Kanazawa University, Kanazawa 920-1192, Japan. (4)Division of Cancer Biology, The
Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Koto-ku, Tokyo
135-8550, Japan; PRESTO, Japan Science Technology Agency, Saitama 332-0012,
Japan. (5)Division of Cancer Biology, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation
for Cancer Research, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan; CREST, Japan Science
Technology Agency, Saitama 332-0012, Japan. Electronic address:
eiji.hara@jfcr.or.jp.

Cell-cycle arrest in quiescence and senescence is largely orchestrated by the
retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor-suppressor pathway, but the mechanisms underlying the
quiescence-senescence switch remain unclear. Here, we show that the crosstalk
between the Rb-AKT-signaling pathways forms this switch by controlling the
overlapping functions of FoxO3a and FoxM1 transcription factors in cultured
fibroblasts. In the absence of mitogenic signals, although FoxM1 expression is
repressed by the Rb pathway, FoxO3a prevents reactive oxygen species (ROS)
production by maintaining SOD2 expression, leading to quiescence. However, if the
Rb pathway is activated in the presence of mitogenic signals, FoxO3a is also
inactivated by AKT, thus reducing SOD2 expression and consequently allowing ROS
production. This situation elicits senescence through irreparable DNA damage. We 
demonstrate that this pathway operates in mouse liver, indicating that this
machinery may contribute more broadly to tissue homeostasis in vivo.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24703840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Hepatology. 2014 Nov;60(5):1674-85. doi: 10.1002/hep.27093. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Gd-EOB-DTPA-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging and alpha-fetoprotein predict
prognosis of early-stage hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yamashita T(1), Kitao A, Matsui O, Hayashi T, Nio K, Kondo M, Ohno N, Miyati T,
Okada H, Yamashita T, Mizukoshi E, Honda M, Nakanuma Y, Takamura H, Ohta T,
Nakamoto Y, Yamamoto M, Takayama T, Arii S, Wang X, Kaneko S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Medicine, Kanazawa University Graduate School of Medical
Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan; Department of Gastroenterology, Kanazawa
University Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Ishikawa, Japan.

The survival of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is often
individually different even after surgery for early-stage tumors. Gadolinium
ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA)-enhanced magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) has been introduced recently to evaluate hepatic lesions 
with regard to vascularity and the activity of the organic anion transporter
OATP1B3. Here we report that Gd-EOB-DTPA-enhanced MRI (EOB-MRI) in combination
with serum alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) status reflects the stem/maturational status
of HCC with distinct biology and prognostic information. Gd-EOB-DTPA uptake in
the hepatobiliary phase was observed in ~15% of HCCs. This uptake correlated with
low serum AFP levels, maintenance of hepatocyte function with the up-regulation
of OATP1B3 and HNF4A expression, and good prognosis. By contrast, HCC showing
reduced Gd-EOB-DTPA uptake with high serum AFP levels was associated with poor
prognosis and the activation of the oncogene FOXM1. Knockdown of HNF4A in HCC
cells showing Gd-EOB-DTPA uptake resulted in the increased expression of AFP and 
FOXM1 and the loss of OATP1B3 expression accompanied by morphological changes,
enhanced tumorigenesis, and loss of Gd-EOB-DTPA uptake in vivo. HCC
classification based on EOB-MRI and serum AFP levels predicted overall survival
in a single-institution cohort (n=70), and its prognostic utility was validated
independently in a multi-institution cohort of early-stage HCCs
(n=109).CONCLUSION: This noninvasive classification system is molecularly based
on the stem/maturation status of HCCs and can be incorporated into current
staging practices to improve management algorithms, especially in the early stage
of disease.

© 2014 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC4142120
PMID: 24700365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Jun;33(6):1514-22. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1707. Epub 2014 Mar
20.

Increased FoxM1 expression is a target for metformin in the suppression of EMT in
prostate cancer.

Wang Y(1), Yao B(2), Wang Y(3), Zhang M(1), Fu S(1), Gao H(1), Peng R(2), Zhang
L(4), Tang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ultrasound, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R.
China. (2)Department of Experimental Pathology, Beijing Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Beijing 100850, P.R. China. (3)Department of Stomatology, Chinese PLA
General Hospital, Beijing 100853, P.R. China. (4)State Key Laboratory of
Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Beijing 100850, P.R. China.

Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor is related to the pathogenesis of
various malignancies and recent evidence indicates that FoxM1 promotes
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in breast cancer. Metformin can inhibit
the progression of cancer. However, whether FoxM1 plays a role in EMT in prostate
cancer (PCa) and whether metformin can suppress EMT through FoxM1 in PCa remain
unresolved issues. In this study, we investigated the expression levels of the
FoxM1 protein in 62 PCa and 39 benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH) samples and
found that the expression levels of FoxM1 were higher in the PCa tissues (66.1%) 
compared with the BPH tissues (28.2%) (p<0.05). We observed that FoxM1 was
expressed in the PCa cell lines and that metformin suppressed cell proliferation 
and the expression of FoxM1. We induced EMT in the PCa cells by the addition of
transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß1 and verified the process by examining
EMT-related gene (E-cadherin, vimentin and Slug) expression. In addition, the
knockdown of FoxM1 by shRNA in the PCa cells reversed EMT and markedly reduced
cell migration. These results indicate that metformin suppresses EMT by
inhibiting FoxM1. We demonstrate that the suppression of FoxM1 may be an
effective therapeutic strategy for PCa and provide further evidence of the
anticancer effects of metformin.

PMID: 24676803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2014 Jun;18(6):633-49. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2014.896904. Epub 2014 Mar 24.

The role of transcription factors in prostate cancer and potential for future RNA
interference therapy.

Fitzgerald KA(1), Evans JC, McCarthy J, Guo J, Prencipe M, Kearney M, Watson WR, 
O'Driscoll CM.

Author information: 
(1)PhD student in gene delivery, University College Cork, School of Pharmacy,
Cavanagh Pharmacy Building , Cork , Ireland.

INTRODUCTION: Prostate cancer is a leading cause of cancer-related death in men
and current treatments offer only a modest survival benefit in advanced stages of
the disease. RNA interference (RNAi) is a therapeutic option that has received
great attention in recent years with the potential to treat a variety of
disorders, including prostate cancer. Transcription factors are cellular proteins
that can up-regulate or down-regulate the transcription of genes and offer
promising therapeutic targets.
AREAS COVERED: This review will focus on transcription factors that have been
identified as key molecules in drug resistance, disease progression and
metastases in prostate cancer, which may offer potential as therapeutic targets
for RNAi in the future.
EXPERT OPINION: By identifying therapeutically viable transcription factor
targets in prostate cancer, it is hoped that treatment strategies using RNAi will
augment the effect of current chemotherapy regimens, slow disease progression and
reduce metastases in prostate cancer, resulting in disease regression.

PMID: 24660778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Biomed Rep. 2013 Nov;1(6):850-854. Epub 2013 Sep 25.

Forkhead box m1 mRNA expression of lung of preterm and term rabbits.

Chang JY(1), Hahn WH(2), Kim CR(3), Bae CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong, Seoul
134727, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine, Soon 
Chun Hyang University, Cheonan 330721, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Hanyang University Medical Center, Guri 471701, Republic of Korea.

Previous studies on forkhead box m1 (Foxm1) of mice demonstrated the correlation 
between this gene and lung maturation. However, no study has been conducted on
human Foxm1 with regard to lung maturation. The aim of this study was to compare 
the mRNA expression of surfactant protein (SP)-A, -B, -C and Foxm1 gene of
preterm rabbits to that of full-term ones and to determine the association
between Foxm1 and lung maturation. New Zealand white rabbits were grouped
according to gestational age. Cesarean sections were carried out after rabbits
were divided into two groups of 30-31 days of gestation (term group, n=18) and
26-27 days of gestation (preterm group, n=18). mRNA expression levels of SP-A,
-B, -C and Foxm1 were compared by using quantitative real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). The relative ratios of SP-A,
-B and -C mRNA expression levels of the preterm to term groups were 0.380, 0.563 
and 0.448:1, respectively, on qRT-PCR. By contrast, Foxm1 expression was
increased in the preterm group and its relative expression ratio to the term
group was 2.166:1 for RT-PCR and qRT-PCR, which was double that of the Foxm1 gene
in the term group. Moreover, a significant correlation between the expressions of
these genes was found. Foxm1 is considered to be an important gene required for
the lung maturation of preterm rabbits in correlation with SP genes.

PMCID: PMC3917027
PMID: 24649041  [PubMed]


273. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 May 15;20(10):2595-606. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2407.
Epub 2014 Mar 14.

FOXM1 promotes the warburg effect and pancreatic cancer progression via
transactivation of LDHA expression.

Cui J(1), Shi M(2), Xie D(2), Wei D(3), Jia Z(3), Zheng S(3), Gao Y(3), Huang
S(3), Xie K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pancreatic Diseases
Research; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First
People's Hospital; Department of General Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University
Affiliated Ruijin Hospital; Department of Oncology and Tumor Institute, Shanghai 
East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai; Hainan Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Intervention, Pathology Department of
Affiliated Hospital, Hainan Medical College, Haikou, People's Republic of China; 
Departments of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition; and Neurosurgery, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TexasAuthors'
Affiliations: Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pancreatic Diseases Research; Department
of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First People's Hospital;
Department of General Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Ruijin
Hospital; Department of Oncology and Tumor Institute, Shanghai East Hospital,
Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai; Hainan Provincial Key Laboratory 
of Carcinogenesis and Intervention, Pathology Department of Affiliated Hospital, 
Hainan Medical College, Haikou, People's Republic of China; Departments of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Nutrition; and Neurosurgery, The University of 
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TexasAuthors' Affiliations: Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Pancreatic Diseases Research; Department of Oncology, Shanghai 
Jiaotong University Affiliated First People's Hospital; Department of General
Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Ruijin Hospital; Department of
Oncology and Tumor Institute, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai; Hainan Provincial Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Intervention, Pathology Department of Affiliated Hospital, Hainan Medical
College, Haikou, People's Republic of China; Departments of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition; and Neurosurg (2)Authors' Affiliations: Shanghai Key
Laboratory of Pancreatic Diseases Research; Department of Oncology, Shanghai
Jiaotong University Affiliated First People's Hospital; Department of General
Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Ruijin Hospital; Department of
Oncology and Tumor Institute, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai; Hainan Provincial Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Intervention, Pathology Department of Affiliated Hospital, Hainan Medical
College, Haikou, People's Republic of China; Departments of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition; and Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, TexasAuthors' Affiliations: Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Pancreatic Diseases Research; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong
University Affiliated First People's Hospital; Department of General Surgery,
Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Ruijin Hospital; Department of Oncology
and Tumor Institute, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai; Hainan Provincial Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Intervention, Pathology Department of Affiliated Hospital, Hainan Medical
College, Haikou, People's Republic of China; Departments of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition; and Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (3)Authors' Affiliations: Shanghai Key Laboratory 
of Pancreatic Diseases Research; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong
University Affiliated First People's Hospital; Department of General Surgery,
Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Ruijin Hospital; Department of Oncology
and Tumor Institute, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai; Hainan Provincial Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Intervention, Pathology Department of Affiliated Hospital, Hainan Medical
College, Haikou, People's Republic of China; Departments of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition; and Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (4)Authors' Affiliations: Shanghai Key Laboratory 
of Pancreatic Diseases Research; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong
University Affiliated First People's Hospital; Department of General Surgery,
Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Ruijin Hospital; Department of Oncology
and Tumor Institute, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai; Hainan Provincial Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and
Intervention, Pathology Department of Affiliated Hospital, Hainan Medical
College, Haikou, People's Republic of China; Departments of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Nutrition; and Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson 
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas kepxie@mdanderson.org.

PURPOSE: The transcription factor Forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) plays critical 
roles in cancer development and progression. However, the regulatory role and
underlying mechanisms of FOXM1 in cancer metabolism are unknown. In this study,
we characterized the regulation of aerobic glycolysis by FOXM1 and its impact on 
pancreatic cancer metabolism.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effect of altered expression of FOXM1 on expression of
glycolytic enzymes and tumor development and progression was examined using
animal models of pancreatic cancer. Also, the underlying mechanisms of altered
pancreatic cancer glycolysis were analyzed using in vitro molecular biology. The 
clinical relevance of aberrant metabolism caused by dysregulated FOXM1 signaling 
was determined using pancreatic tumor and normal pancreatic tissue specimens.
RESULTS: We found that FOXM1 did not markedly change the expression of most
glycolytic enzymes except for phosphoglycerate kinase 1 (PGK-1) and lactate
dehydrogenase A (LDHA). FOXM1 and LDHA were overexpressed concomitantly in
pancreatic tumors and cancer cell lines. Increased expression of FOXM1
upregulated the expression of LDHA at both the mRNA and protein level and
elevated LDH activity, lactate production, and glucose utilization, whereas
reduced expression of FOXM1 did the opposite. Further studies demonstrated that
FOXM1 bound directly to the LDHA promoter region and regulated the expression of 
the LDHA gene at the transcriptional level. Also, elevated FOXM1-LDHA signaling
increased the pancreatic cancer cell growth and metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Dysregulated expression and activation of FOXM1 play important roles
in aerobic glycolysis and tumorigenesis in patients with pancreatic cancer via
transcriptional regulation of LDHA expression.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4024335
PMID: 24634381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cancer Genomics Proteomics. 2014 Jan-Feb;11(1):1-12.

Genome-wide transcriptional sequencing identifies novel mutations in metabolic
genes in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Meerzaman DM(1), Yan C, Chen QR, Edmonson MN, Schaefer CF, Clifford RJ, Dunn BK, 
Dong L, Finney RP, Cultraro CM, Hu Y, Yang Z, Nguyen CV, Kelley JM, Cai S, Zhang 
H, Zhang J, Wilson R, Messmer L, Chung YH, Kim JA, Park NH, Lyu MS, Song IH,
Komatsoulis G, Buetow KH.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biomedical Informatics & Information Technology, 9609 Medical
Center Drive, 1W466, Rockville, MD 20850, U.S.A. meerzamd@mail.nih.gov.

We report on next-generation transcriptome sequencing results of three human
hepatocellular carcinoma tumor/tumor-adjacent pairs. This analysis robustly
examined ~12,000 genes for both expression differences and molecular alterations.
We observed 4,513 and 1,182 genes demonstrating 2-fold or greater increase or
decrease in expression relative to their normal, respectively. Network analysis
of expression data identified the Aurora B signaling, FOXM1 transcription factor 
network and Wnt signaling pathways pairs being altered in HCC. We validated as
differential gene expression findings in a large data set containing of 434 liver
normal/tumor sample pairs. In addition to known driver mutations in TP53 and
CTNNB1, our mutation analysis identified non-synonymous mutations in genes
implicated in metabolic diseases, i.e. diabetes and obesity: IRS1, HMGCS1,
ATP8B1, PRMT6 and CLU, suggesting a common molecular etiology for HCC of
alternative pathogenic origin.

PMID: 24633315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Cell Mol Med. 2014 May;18(5):811-23. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12216. Epub 2014 Mar 14.

FOXM1 mediates resistance to docetaxel in gastric cancer via up-regulating
Stathmin.

Li X(1), Yao R, Yue L, Qiu W, Qi W, Liu S, Yao Y, Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology of the Affiliated Hospital of Medical College Qingdao
University, Qingdao, China.

Docetaxel is commonly used as an effective chemotherapeutic drug for gastric
cancer patients recently. With the increasing emergence of docetaxel resistance
nowadays, identification of suitable biomarkers for predicting chemosensitivity
to docetaxel may be a key role for improving therapeutic effects for gastric
cancer patients. In this study, we investigated the correlation between the
expression of transcription factor forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) and
chemotherapy response to docetaxel in gastric cancer, the possible mechanism for 
which was further explored. As a result, FOXM1 overexpression was shown to
mediate resistance to docetaxel in gastric cancers. It altered microtubule
dynamics to protect tumour cells from docetaxel-induced apoptosis. Mechanistic
investigations revealed that tubulin-destabilizing protein Stathmin, which
mediated docetaxel resistance in FOXM1-silenced gastric cancer cells, is a direct
down-stream target of FOXM1, whereas another microtubule dynamics protein mitotic
centromere-associated kinesin (MCAK), shown to be related to docetaxel resistance
in gastric cancer cells, is not associated with FOXM1 expression significantly.
These results were further provided by immunohistochemical analysis, indicating
that FOXM1 and Stathmin expression levels were correlated in 103 post-operational
gastric cancer specimens. Moreover, when we attenuated FOXM1 expression with
FOXM1 inhibitor thiostrepton, docetaxel resistance in gastric cancers was found
to be reversed, simultaneously with the down-regulation of FOXM1 and Stathmin.
Therefore, FOXM1 can be a useful marker for predicting and monitoring docetaxel
response. Through the inhibition of FOXM1, docetaxel resistance can be reversed, 
and thus FOXM1 could be a new therapeutic target in docetaxel-resistant gastric
cancer.

© 2014 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4119387
PMID: 24628949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Pathol. 2014 Jul;233(3):308-18. doi: 10.1002/path.4348. Epub 2014 May 21.

MiR-506 suppresses proliferation and induces senescence by directly targeting the
CDK4/6-FOXM1 axis in ovarian cancer.

Liu G(1), Sun Y, Ji P, Li X, Cogdell D, Yang D, Parker Kerrigan BC, Shmulevich I,
Chen K, Sood AK, Xue F, Zhang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX, USA; Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Tianjin Medical
University General Hospital, People's Republic of China.

Ovarian carcinoma is the most lethal gynaecological malignancy. Better
understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of this disease and effective
targeted therapies are needed to improve patient outcomes. MicroRNAs play
important roles in cancer progression and have the potential for use as either
therapeutic agents or targets. Studies in other cancers have suggested that
miR-506 has anti-tumour activity, but its function has yet to be elucidated. We
found that deregulation of miR-506 in ovarian carcinoma promotes an aggressive
phenotype. Ectopic over-expression of miR-506 in ovarian cancer cells was
sufficient to inhibit proliferation and to promote senescence. We also
demonstrated that CDK4 and CDK6 are direct targets of miR-506, and that miR-506
can inhibit CDK4/6-FOXM1 signalling, which is activated in the majority of serous
ovarian carcinomas. This newly recognized miR-506-CDK4/6-FOXM1 axis provides
further insight into the pathogenesis of ovarian carcinoma and identifies a
potential novel therapeutic agent.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4144705
PMID: 24604117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014;1839(4):297-305. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.02.016.
Epub 2014 Feb 27.

FOXM1 and androgen receptor co-regulate CDC6 gene transcription and DNA
replication in prostate cancer cells.

Liu Y(1), Gong Z(2), Sun L(1), Li X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87 
Xiangya Road, Changsha, Hunan Province 410008, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87 Xiangya
Road, Changsha, Hunan Province 410008, People's Republic of China. (3)Center for 
Molecular Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87 Xiangya Road, 
Changsha, Hunan Province 410008, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: 
xiolijob@gmail.com.

CDC6 is a key component of the DNA replication initiation machinery, and its
transcription is regulated by E2F or androgen receptor (AR) alone or in
combination in prostate cancer (PCa) cells. Through both overexpression and
knockdown approaches, we found that in addition to its effects on the E2F
pathway, the cell proliferation specific transcription factor FOXM1 stimulated
CDC6 transcription in cooperation with AR. We have identified a forkhead box
motif in the CDC6 proximal promoter that is occupied by FOXM1 and is sufficient
to drive FOXM1-regulated transcription. Indirectly, FOXM1 elevated AR protein
levels and AR dependent transcription. Furthermore, FOXM1 and AR proteins
physically interact. Using synchronized cultures, we observed that CDC6
expression is elevated near S phase of the cell cycle, at a time coinciding with 
elevated FOXM1 and AR expression and CDC6 promoter occupancy by both AR and FOXM1
proteins. Androgen increased the binding of AR protein to CDC6 promoter, and AR
and FOXM1 knockdown decreased AR binding. These results provided new evidence for
the regulatory mechanism of aberrant CDC6 oncogene transcription by FOXM1 and AR,
two highly expressed transcription factors in PCa cells. Functionally, the
cooperation of FOXM1 and AR accelerated DNA synthesis and cell proliferation by
affecting CDC6 gene expression. Furthermore, siomycin A, a proteasome inhibitor
known to inhibit FOXM1 expression and activity, inhibited PCa cell proliferation 
and its effect was additive to that of bicalutamide, an antiandrogen commonly
used to treat PCa patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24583551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 28;446(1):280-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.094. Epub 2014 Feb 28.

Over-expression of FoxM1 is associated with adverse prognosis and FLT3-ITD in
acute myeloid leukemia.

Liu LL(1), Zhang DH(2), Mao X(3), Zhang XH(4), Zhang B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China; Department of Hematology,
Wuhan General Hospital of Guangzhou Military, Wuhan, Hubei, China. (2)Department 
of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. Electronic address: zdh62@aliyun.com.
(3)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China. (4)Department of Hematology, 
Wuhan General Hospital of Guangzhou Military, Wuhan, Hubei, China. (5)Department 
of Hematology, Jiangsu Province Hospital of TCM, Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing
University of TCM, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.

Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) drives cell cycle progression and the prevention of
growth arrest and is over-expressed in many human malignancies. However, the
characteristics of FoxM1 in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) are not clearly
understood. We investigated the expression level of FoxM1 and analyzed the
correlation of FoxM1 expression with AML patient characteristics and prognoses.
Changes in FoxM1 expression were detected after MV4-11 cells, which have an
internal tandem duplication (ITD) of the fms-like tyrosine kinase 3 gene
(FLT3-ITD), and control THP1 cells (encoding wild-type FLT3) were treated with
the FLT3 receptor tyrosine kinase inhibitor AC220 (quizartinib) or FLT3 ligand
(FL). Finally, we determined the apoptosis rates after the addition of the FoxM1 
inhibitor thiostrepton (TST) to AML cells with or without FLT3-ITD. The
expression of FoxM1 in AML patients was correlated with the presence of FLT3-ITD,
genetic groups, and possibly overall survival. Inhibition of FLT3-ITD by AC220
down-regulated FoxM1 expression in MV4-11 cells, and stimulation of FLT3 by FL
up-regulated FoxM1 expression in MV4-11 and THP1 cells. TST induced the apoptosis
of MV4-11 and THP1 cells in a dose-dependent manner. Thus, FoxM1 is a potential
prognostic marker and a promising therapeutic target in AML.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Cell. 2014 Mar 20;53(6):1053-66. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2014.02.001. Epub 2014
Feb 27.

Uncovering SUMOylation dynamics during cell-cycle progression reveals FoxM1 as a 
key mitotic SUMO target protein.

Schimmel J(1), Eifler K(1), Sigurðsson JO(2), Cuijpers SA(1), Hendriks IA(1),
Verlaan-de Vries M(1), Kelstrup CD(2), Francavilla C(2), Medema RH(3), Olsen
JV(4), Vertegaal AC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA Leiden, the Netherlands. (2)Novo Nordisk Foundation
Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University
of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Department of Cell
Biology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX Amsterdam, the
Netherlands. (4)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200
Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address: jesper.olsen@cpr.ku.dk. (5)Department of
Molecular Cell Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Albinusdreef 2, 2333 ZA
Leiden, the Netherlands. Electronic address: vertegaal@lumc.nl.

Loss of small ubiquitin-like modification (SUMOylation) in mice causes genomic
instability due to the missegregation of chromosomes. Currently, little is known 
about the identity of relevant SUMO target proteins that are involved in this
process and about global SUMOylation dynamics during cell-cycle progression. We
performed a large-scale quantitative proteomics screen to address this and
identified 593 proteins to be SUMO-2 modified, including the Forkhead box
transcription factor M1 (FoxM1), a key regulator of cell-cycle
progression and chromosome segregation. SUMOylation of FoxM1 peaks during G2 and 
M phase, when FoxM1 transcriptional activity is required. We found that
a SUMOylation-deficient FoxM1 mutant was less active compared to wild-type FoxM1,
implying that SUMOylation of the protein enhances its transcriptional activity.
Mechanistically, SUMOylation blocks the dimerization of FoxM1, thereby relieving 
FoxM1 autorepression. Cells deficient for FoxM1 SUMOylation showed increased
levels of polyploidy. Our findings contribute to understanding the role of
SUMOylation during cell-cycle progression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Stem Cells. 2014 Jul;32(7):1855-64. doi: 10.1002/stem.1690.

Endothelial FoxM1 mediates bone marrow progenitor cell-induced vascular repair
and resolution of inflammation following inflammatory lung injury.

Zhao YD(1), Huang X, Yi F, Dai Z, Qian Z, Tiruppathi C, Tran K, Zhao YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, The University of Illinois College of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois, USA; Center for Lung and Vascular Biology, The University of
Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Adult stem cell treatment is a potential novel therapeutic approach for acute
respiratory distress syndrome. Given the extremely low rate of cell engraftment, 
it is believed that these cells exert their beneficial effects via paracrine
mechanisms. However, the endogenous mediator(s) in the pulmonary vasculature
remains unclear. Using the mouse model with endothelial cell (EC)-restricted
disruption of FoxM1 (FoxM1 CKO), here we show that endothelial expression of the 
reparative transcriptional factor FoxM1 is required for the protective effects of
bone marrow progenitor cells (BMPC) against LPS-induced inflammatory lung injury 
and mortality. BMPC treatment resulted in rapid induction of FoxM1 expression in 
wild type (WT) but not FoxM1 CKO lungs. BMPC-induced inhibition of lung vascular 
injury, resolution of lung inflammation, and survival, as seen in WT mice, were
abrogated in FoxM1 CKO mice following LPS challenge. Mechanistically, BMPC
treatment failed to induce lung EC proliferation in FoxM1 CKO mice, which was
associated with impaired expression of FoxM1 target genes essential for cell
cycle progression. We also observed that BMPC treatment enhanced endothelial
barrier function in WT but not in FoxM1-deficient EC monolayers. Restoration of
ß-catenin expression in FoxM1-deficient ECs normalized endothelial barrier
enhancement in response to BMPC treatment. These data demonstrate the requisite
role of endothelial FoxM1 in the mechanism of BMPC-induced vascular repair to
restore vascular integrity and accelerate resolution of inflammation, thereby
promoting survival following inflammatory lung injury.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC4383792
PMID: 24578354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Cancer Gene Ther. 2014 Mar;21(3):133-8. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2014.8. Epub 2014 Feb
28.

Silencing of FOXM1 transcription factor expression by adenovirus-mediated RNA
interference inhibits human hepatocellular carcinoma growth.

Chen T(1), Xiong J(1), Yang C(1), Shan L(1), Tan G(1), Yu L(1), Tan Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, Department of
Biomedical Engineering, College of Biology, Collaborative Innovation Center for
Chemistry and Molecular Medicine, Hunan University, Changsha, China.

The Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor has been considered as a
potential target for the prevention and/or therapeutic intervention in human
carcinomas because of its roles in tumorigenesis and tumor progression through
regulating the expression of genes relevant to cell proliferation and
transformation. In this study, FOXM1 was found to express strongly in both
clinical tissue specimens and human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines
such as Huh-6, Huh-7 and HepG2. The knockdown of FOXM1 expression through an
adenovirus vector (named AdFOXM1shRNA), which expresses a short hairpin RNA to
downregulate FOXM1 expression specifically, diminished the proliferation of Huh-7
and HepG2 cells and anchorage-independent growth of Huh-7 cells. Furthermore, we 
assessed the efficacy of AdFOXM1shRNA for tumor gene therapy with the Huh-7 cell 
xenograft mouse model and found that the tumor growth was significantly
suppressed when inoculated mice were injected with AdFOXM1shRNA in the tumors.
Together, our results suggest that FOXM1 is a potential therapeutic target for
HCC and AdFOXM1shRNA may be an additional gene therapeutic intervention for HCC
treatment.

PMID: 24577129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Apr 25;447(1):1-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.079. Epub 2014 Feb 19.

CXCL12-induced upregulation of FOXM1 expression promotes human glioblastoma cell 
invasion.

Wang S(1), Zhang S(1), Li J(1), Xu X(1), Weng Y(1), Zheng M(1), Ouyang L(1), Li
F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510120, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, The Sun
Yat-sen Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510120, China.
Electronic address: fangchengli001@163.com.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most common primary malignant brain tumor;
it is highly aggressive and is associated with a poor prognosis. Binding of the
chemokine CXCL12 to its receptors (CXCR4 and CXCR7) contributes to the activation
of many downstream signaling pathways and promotes the invasion of various
malignant tumor cells, including GBM cells. FOXM1, a transcription factor
involved in cell cycle regulation, is overexpressed in GBM and is involved in GBM
progression. However, the molecular mechanisms by which CXCL12 promotes the
invasion of human GBM cells remain unclear. In this study, we demonstrate that
CXCL12 increases the production of FOXM1 by binding to CXCR4 in GBM cell lines.
Furthermore, pretreatment with an inhibitor of the PI3K/AKT pathway abrogated the
CXCL12-induced expression of FOXM1. In addition, there was a positive correlation
between CXCL12/CXCR4 expression and FOXM1 expression in human malignant glioma
tissues. Finally, a functional assay revealed that CXCL12 does not stimulate GBM 
cell invasion when FOXM1 expression is silenced using a small interfering RNA
(siRNA). Collectively, these findings suggest that CXCL12 promotes GBM cell
invasion in part by increasing the expression of FOXM1, which is mediated in part
by a PI3K/AKT-dependent mechanism in vitro.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24561124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. FEBS Lett. 2014 Mar 18;588(6):981-9. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.01.058. Epub
2014 Feb 14.

PTPLAD2 is a tumor suppressor in esophageal squamous cell carcinogenesis.

Zhu S(1), Wang Z(2), Zhang Z(3), Wang J(4), Li Y(5), Yao L(6), Mei Q(7), Zhang
W(8).

Author information: 
(1)The Helmholtz Sino-German Research Laboratory for Cancer, Department of
Pathology, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China.
Electronic address: zhusjly@fmmu.edu.cn. (2)Key Laboratory of Gastrointestinal
Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica of the State Administration of Traditional
Chinese Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an, China. Electronic address: zhipengw@fmmu.edu.cn.
(3)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China. Electronic address: zhangzhipei2013@hotmail.com.
(4)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China. Electronic address: wjtm1976@163.com. (5)The Helmholtz 
Sino-German Research Laboratory for Cancer, Department of Pathology, Tangdu
Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China; Department of
Gynecology and Obstetrics, Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China. Electronic address: lyhzhw@fmmu.edu.cn. (6)The
Helmholtz Sino-German Research Laboratory for Cancer, Department of Pathology,
Tangdu Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. Electronic
address: yaoli@fmmu.edu.cn. (7)Key Laboratory of Gastrointestinal Pharmacology of
Chinese Materia Medica of the State Administration of Traditional Chinese
Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Fourth Military Medical
University, Xi'an, China. Electronic address: qbmei@fmmu.edu.cn. (8)The Helmholtz
Sino-German Research Laboratory for Cancer, Department of Pathology, Tangdu
Hospital, The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, China. Electronic
address: zhwlyh@fmmu.edu.cn.

Esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCCs) are highly invasive and have poor
prognoses. We investigated the role of PTPLAD2, a protein tyrosine
phosphatase-like A domain (PTPLAD) family member, in ESCC carcinogenesis.
Survival analysis was performed using patient data. ESCC tissue samples lost
PTPLAD2 heterozygosity and had decreased PTPLAD2 expression. Low PTPLAD2
expression and high p-STAT3 correlated with poor prognosis. Overexpression of
PTPLAD2 in ESCC cells reduced STAT3 phosphorylation, decreased FoxM1, inhibited
proliferation and decreased in mouse xenograft tumor formation. Therefore,
PTPLAD2 is a potential tumor suppressor and prognostic indicator that reduces
STAT3 phosphorylation. PTPLAD2 is a possible clinical target for ESCC treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24530685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Fish Physiol Biochem. 2014 Aug;40(4):1239-52. doi: 10.1007/s10695-014-9919-6.
Epub 2014 Feb 14.

Genome-wide identification, phylogeny, and gonadal expression of fox genes in
Nile tilapia, Oreochromis niloticus.

Yuan J(1), Tao W, Cheng Y, Huang B, Wang D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Freshwater Fish Reproduction and Development (Ministry of
Education), Key Laboratory of Aquatic Science of Chongqing, School of Life
Science, Southwest University, Chongqing, 400715, People's Republic of China.

The fox genes play important roles in various biological processes, including
sexual development. In the present study, we isolated 65 fox genes, belonging to 
18 subfamilies named A-R, from Nile tilapia through genome-wide screening.
Twenty-four of them have two or three (foxm1) copies. Furthermore, 16, 25, 68,
and 45 fox members were isolated from nematodes, protochordates, teleosts, and
tetrapods, respectively. Phylogenetic analyses indicated fox gene family had
undergone three expansions parallel to the three rounds of genome duplication
during evolution. We also analyzed the clustered fox genes and found that
apparent linkage duplication existed in teleosts, which further supported
fish-specific genome duplication hypothesis. In addition, species- and
lineage-specific duplication is another reason for fox gene family expansion.
Based on the four pairs of XX and XY gonadal transcriptome data from four
critical developmental stages, we analyzed the expression profile of all fox
genes and identified sexually dimorphic fox genes at each stage. All fox genes
were detected in gonads, with 15 of them at the background expression level
(total read per kb per million reads, RPKM < 10), 29 at moderate expression level
(10 < total RPKM < 100), and 21 at high expression level (total RPKM > 100).
There are 27, 24, 28, and 9 sexually dimorphic fox genes at 5, 30, 90, and
180 days after hatching (dah), respectively. foxq1a, foxf1, foxr1, and foxr1 were
identified as the most differentially expressed genes at each stage. foxl2 was
characterized as XX-dominant gene, while foxd5, foxi3, foxn3, foxj1a, foxj3b, and
foxo6b were characterized as XY-dominant genes. qPCR and in situ hybridization of
foxh1 and foxj1a were performed to confirm the expression profiles and to
validate the transcriptome data. Our results suggest that fox genes might play
important roles in sex determination and gonadal development in teleosts.

PMID: 24526262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 4;9(2):e87536. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087536. eCollection 
2014.

Treatment with N- and C-terminal peptides of parathyroid hormone-related protein 
partly compensate the skeletal abnormalities in IGF-I deficient mice.

Rodríguez-de la Rosa L(1), López-Herradón A(2), Portal-Núñez S(2), Murillo-Cuesta
S(1), Lozano D(3), Cediel R(4), Varela-Nieto I(1), Esbrit P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols", Centro Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain ;
Unidad 761, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain ; Instituto de Investigación
Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain. (2)Laboratorio de Metabolismo
Mineral y Óseo, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria-Fundación Jiménez Díaz,
Madrid, Spain ; Red Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en Envejecimiento y
Fragilidad, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain. (3)Instituto de
Investigación Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, Spain ; Laboratorio de
Metabolismo Mineral y Óseo, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria-Fundación
Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain ; Red Temática de Investigación Cooperativa en
Envejecimiento y Fragilidad, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(4)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas "Alberto Sols", Centro Superior de
Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain ;
Unidad 761, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras,
Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain ; Facultad de Veterinaria,
Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) deficiency causes growth delay, and IGF-I
has been shown to partially mediate bone anabolism by parathyroid hormone (PTH). 
PTH-related protein (PTHrP) is abundant in bone, and has osteogenic features by
poorly defined mechanisms. We here examined the capacity of PTHrP (1-36) and
PTHrP (107-111) (osteostatin) to reverse the skeletal alterations associated with
IGF-I deficiency. Igf1-null mice and their wild type littermates were treated
with each PTHrP peptide (80 µg/Kg/every other day/2 weeks; 2 males and 4 females 
for each genotype) or saline vehicle (3 males and 3 females for each genotype).
We found that treatment with either PTHrP peptide ameliorated trabecular
structure in the femur in both genotypes. However, these peptides were
ineffective in normalizing the altered cortical structure at this bone site in
Igf1-null mice. An aberrant gene expression of factors associated with osteoblast
differentiation and function, namely runx2, osteoprotegerin/receptor activator of
NF-<U+03BA>B ligand ratio, Wnt3a , cyclin D1, connexin 43, catalase and Gadd45, as well 
as in osteocyte sclerostin, was found in the long bones of Igf1-null mice. These 
mice also displayed a lower amount of trabecular osteoblasts and osteoclasts in
the tibial metaphysis than those in wild type mice. These alterations in
Igf1-null mice were only partially corrected by each PTHrP peptide treatment. The
skeletal expression of Igf2, Igf1 receptor and Irs2 was increased in Igf1-null
mice, and this compensatory profile was further improved by treatment with each
PTHrP peptide related to ERK1/2 and FoxM1 activation. In vitro, PTHrP (1-36) and 
osteostatin were effective in promoting bone marrow stromal cell mineralization
in normal mice but not in IGF-I-deficient mice. Collectively, these findings
indicate that PTHrP (1-36) and osteostatin can exert several osteogenic actions
even in the absence of IGF-I in the mouse bone.

PMCID: PMC3913635
PMID: 24503961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 29;9(1):e85448. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085448. eCollection
2014.

Integrated genomic and epigenomic analysis of breast cancer brain metastasis.

Salhia B(1), Kiefer J(2), Ross JT(3), Metapally R(2), Martinez RA(1), Johnson
KN(1), DiPerna DM(1), Paquette KM(3), Jung S(1), Nasser S(4), Wallstrom G(5),
Tembe W(2), Baker A(1), Carpten J(1), Resau J(6), Ryken T(7), Sibenaller Z(8),
Petricoin EF(9), Liotta LA(9), Ramanathan RK(10), Berens ME(3), Tran NL(3).

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Cancer Genomics Division, Translational Genomics Research
Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America. (2)Collaborative Center
for Bioinformatics, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, 
United States of America. (3)Cancer and Cell Biology Division, Translational
Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America.
(4)Neurogenomics Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix,
Arizona, United States of America. (5)Center for Personalized Diagnostics,
Biodesign Institute, Arizona State University, Tempe, Arizona, United States of
America. (6)The Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, Michigan, United
States of America. (7)Iowa Spine and Brain Institute, Iowa City, Iowa, United
States of America. (8)Department of Radiation Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa
City, Iowa, United States of America. (9)Center for Applied Proteomics and
Molecular Medicine, George Mason University, Manassas, Virginia, United States of
America. (10)Virginia G. Piper Cancer Center, Scottsdale Healthcare, Scottsdale, 
Arizona, United States of America.

The brain is a common site of metastatic disease in patients with breast cancer, 
which has few therapeutic options and dismal outcomes. The purpose of our study
was to identify common and rare events that underlie breast cancer brain
metastasis. We performed deep genomic profiling, which integrated gene copy
number, gene expression and DNA methylation datasets on a collection of breast
brain metastases. We identified frequent large chromosomal gains in 1q, 5p, 8q,
11q, and 20q and frequent broad-level deletions involving 8p, 17p, 21p and Xq.
Frequently amplified and overexpressed genes included ATAD2, BRAF, DERL1, DNMTRB 
and NEK2A. The ATM, CRYAB and HSPB2 genes were commonly deleted and
underexpressed. Knowledge mining revealed enrichment in cell cycle and G2/M
transition pathways, which contained AURKA, AURKB and FOXM1. Using the PAM50
breast cancer intrinsic classifier, Luminal B, Her2+/ER negative, and basal-like 
tumors were identified as the most commonly represented breast cancer subtypes in
our brain metastasis cohort. While overall methylation levels were increased in
breast cancer brain metastasis, basal-like brain metastases were associated with 
significantly lower levels of methylation. Integrating DNA methylation data with 
gene expression revealed defects in cell migration and adhesion due to
hypermethylation and downregulation of PENK, EDN3, and ITGAM. Hypomethylation and
upregulation of KRT8 likely affects adhesion and permeability. Genomic and
epigenomic profiling of breast brain metastasis has provided insight into the
somatic events underlying this disease, which have potential in forming the basis
of future therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC3906004
PMID: 24489661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci. 2014;18(2):205-11.

FoxM1 regulates Sirt1 expression in glioma cells.

Zhu GY(1), Shi BZ, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Henan University of
Science and Technology, Luoyang, Henan, China. sbzmd20569@163.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Glioma accounts for most of primary malignant brain
tumors and usually results in poor survival. However, the key signaling networks 
regulating glioma cell proliferation remain poorly defined. The forkhead box M1
(FoxM1) is a key transcription factor regulating multiple aspects of cell
biology. Prior studies have shown that FoxM1 is overexpressed in glioma and plays
a critical role in cancer development and progression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Western blot and Real-time PCR assays were used to
determine the regulation roles of FoxM1 on Sirt1 (Sirtuin1) expression. Small
interfering RNAs (siRNAs) were used to silence the expression of FoxM1.
Luciferase assays were used to measure binding of FoxM1 to the promoter region of
Sirt1. Direct binding of FoxM1 to promoter of Sirt1 was assessed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (CHIP) assays.
RESULTS: We found that FoxM1 positively regulated mRNA expression of Sirt1. FoxM1
overexpression promoted while its knockdown inhibited Sirt1 expression. Besides, 
we identified a minimal FoxM1 binding site on the promoter region of Sirt1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results for the first time add a new FoxM1-Sirt1 connection that
mediates cell proliferation in glioma.

PMID: 24488909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(33):5279-86.

Targeting miRNAs for pancreatic cancer therapy.

Shi M, Xie D, Gaod Y, Xie K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, Unit 1466, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, 
TX 77030, USA. kepxie@mdanderson.org.

Pancreatic cancer (PC) is the fourth leading cause of cancer-related deaths in
the United States and has a median 5-year survival rate less than 5%. Although
surgery offers the best chance for a cure for pancreatic cancer, less than 20% of
patients are eligible for potentially curative resection, because in most cases, 
the cancer has already spread locally or to distant organs at diagnosis,
precluding resection. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small noncoding, endogenous,
single-stranded RNAs that are pivotal regulators of posttranscriptional gene
expression. Extensive studies of miRNAs over the past several years have revealed
that the expression of miRNAs is frequently deregulated in pancreatic cancer
patients and that this deregulation contributes to the pathogenesis and
aggressiveness of the disease. Currently, investigators are studying the use of
miRNAs as diagnostic and/or prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic tools for
pancreatic cancer. Rapid discovery of many miRNA targets and their relevant
pathways has contributed to the development of miRNA-based therapeutics. In
particular, the transcription factor Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is overexpressed in 
the majority of cancer patients, including those with pancreatic cancer. This
overexpression is implicated to have a role in tumorigenesis, progression, and
metastasis. This important role of FOXM1 affirms its usefulness in therapeutic
interventions for pancreatic cancer. In this review, we summarize the current
knowledge and concepts concerning the involvement of miRNAs and FOXM1 in
pancreatic cancer development and describe the roles of the miRNA-FOXM1 signaling
pathway in pancreatic cancer initiation and progression. Additionally, we
describe some of the technical challenges in the use of the miRNA-FOXM1 signaling
pathway in pancreatic cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4113604
PMID: 24479803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Neurosci. 2014 Jan 22;34(4):1510-22. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2549-13.2014.

A novel function for Foxm1 in interkinetic nuclear migration in the developing
telencephalon and anxiety-related behavior.

Wu X(1), Gu X, Han X, Du A, Jiang Y, Zhang X, Wang Y, Cao G, Zhao C.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, Ministry of
Education, Department of Anatomy and Neuroscience, Medical School, Southeast
University, Nanjing, 210009, China.

Interkinetic nuclear migration (INM) is a key feature of cortical neurogenesis.
INM functions to maximize the output of the neuroepithelium, and more
importantly, balance the self-renewal and differentiation of the progenitors.
Although INM has been reported to be highly correlated with the cell cycle,
little is known about the effects of cell cycle regulators on INM. In this study,
by crossing Foxm1(fl/fl) mice with Emx1-Cre line, we report that a conditional
disruption of forkhead transcription factor M1 (Foxm1) in dorsal telencephalon
results in abnormal cell cycle progression, leading to impaired INM through the
downregulation of Cyclin b1 and Cdc25b. The impairment of INM disturbs the
synchronization of apical progenitors (APs) and promotes the transition from APs 
to basal progenitors (BPs) in a cell-autonomous fashion. Moreover, ablation of
Foxm1 causes anxiety-related behaviors in adulthood. Thus, this study provides
evidence of linkages among the cell cycle regulator Foxm1, INM, and adult
behavior.

PMID: 24453338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Mar 15;20(6):1477-88. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2311.
Epub 2014 Jan 22.

FOXM1c promotes pancreatic cancer epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and
metastasis via upregulation of expression of the urokinase plasminogen activator 
system.

Huang C(1), Xie D, Cui J, Li Q, Gao Y, Xie K.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pancreatic Diseases
Research; Departments of General Surgery and Oncology, Shanghai Jiaotong
University Affiliated First People's Hospital; Department of Oncology and Tumor
Institute, Shanghai East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China; and Department of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology and Nutrition, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas.

PURPOSE: The transcription factor Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) plays important roles
in the formation of several human tumors, including pancreatic cancer. However,
the molecular mechanisms by which FOXM1 promotes pancreatic tumor
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and metastasis are unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effect of altered expression of FOXM1 and urokinase-type
plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) on EMT and metastasis was examined using
animal models of pancreatic cancer. Also, the underlying mechanisms of altered
pancreatic cancer invasion and metastasis were analyzed using in vitro molecular 
biology assays. Finally, the clinical relevance of dysregulated FOXM1/uPAR
signaling was investigated using pancreatic tumor and normal pancreatic tissue
specimens.
RESULTS: Pancreatic tumor specimens and cell lines predominantly overexpressed
the FOXM1 isoform FOXM1c. FOXM1c overexpression promoted EMT in and migration,
invasion, and metastasis of pancreatic cancer cells, whereas downregulation of
FOXM1 expression inhibited these processes. The level of FOXM1 expression
correlated directly with that of uPAR expression in pancreatic cancer cell lines 
and tumor specimens. Moreover, FOXM1c overexpression upregulated uPAR expression 
in pancreatic cancer cells, whereas inhibition of FOXM1 expression suppressed
uPAR expression. Furthermore, transfection of FOXM1c into pancreatic cancer cells
directly activated the uPAR promoter, whereas inhibition of FOXM1 expression by
FOXM1 siRNA suppressed its activation in these cells. Finally, we identified an
FOXM1-binding site in the uPAR promoter and demonstrated that FOXM1 protein bound
directly to it. Deletion mutation of this site significantly attenuated uPAR
promoter activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrated that FOXM1c contributes to pancreatic
cancer development and progression by enhancing uPAR gene transcription, and
thus, tumor EMT and metastasis.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3959252
PMID: 24452790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Apr;1845(2):104-16. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2014.01.002. 
Epub 2014 Jan 11.

FOXM1 and its oncogenic signaling in pancreatic cancer pathogenesis.

Huang C(1), Du J(2), Xie K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First
People's Hospital, Shanghai, People's Republic of China; Department of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic address:
richard-hc@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Zhenjiang Second
People's Hospital, Jiangsu University College of Medicine, Zhenjiang, People's
Republic of China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Electronic
address: kepxie@mdanderson.org.

Pancreatic cancer is a devastating disease with an overall 5-year survival rate
less than 5%. Multiple signaling pathways are implicated in the pathogenesis of
pancreatic cancer, such as Wnt/ß-catenin, Notch, Hedgehog, hypoxia-inducible
factor, signal transducer and activator of transcription, specificity
proteins/Krüppel-like factors, and Forkhead box (FOX). Recently, increasing
evidence has demonstrated that the transcription factor FOXM1 plays important
roles in the initiation, progression, and metastasis of a variety of human
tumors, including pancreatic cancer. In this review, we focus on the current
understanding of the molecular pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer with a special
focus on the function and regulation of FOXM1 and rationale for FOXM1 as a novel 
molecular target for pancreatic cancer prevention and treatment.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3995850
PMID: 24418574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2013 Nov;40(12):1584-6.

[Treatment outcome of peptide vaccination for advanced colorectal cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugiura F(1), Inoue K, Kogita A, Yoshioka Y, Hida J, Okuno K, Sukegawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Kinki University Faculty of Medicine.

Complementary DNA( cDNA) microarray technology coupled with laser microdissection
has been used to identify human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-A24-restricted epitope
peptides as potential targets for cancer vaccination in colorectal cancer
patients. These antigenic peptides were derived from 2 different cancer-testis
antigens, ring finger protein 43 (RNF43) and translocase of outer mitochondrial
membrane 34( TOMM34). We conducted a clinical trial of colorectal cancer-specific
peptide( RNF43, TOMM34) vaccines with uracil/tegafur( UFT)+Leucovorin( LV) for
the treatment of advanced or recurrent colorectal cancer. The vaccinations were
well tolerated without any serious adverse events. There were long-term survivors
in the group showing cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) responses against both RNF43
and TOMM34, as well as in the group showing CTL responses against either RNF43 or
TOMM34. A new study has been planned to obtain more immunological responses. We
started a clinical trial of vaccines against multiple peptides (RNF43, TOMM34,
forkhead box protein M1 [FOXM1], maternal embryonic leucine zipper kinase [MELK],
holliday junction recognition protein[HJURP], vascular endothelial growth factor 
receptor 1[VEGFR1], and VEGFR2) for the treatment of advanced or recurrent
colorectal cancer.

PMID: 24393856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 31;8(12):e83762. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083762.
eCollection 2013.

The effect of gestational age on angiogenic gene expression in the rat placenta.

Vaswani K(1), Hum MW(1), Chan HW(1), Ryan J(1), Wood-Bradley RJ(2), Nitert MD(1),
Mitchell MD(1), Armitage JA(2), Rice GE(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Queensland Centre for Clinical Research, Royal Brisbane and
Women's Hospital Campus, Herston, Queensland, Australia. (2)School of Medicine
(Optometry), Deakin University, Waurn Ponds, Victoria, Australia ; Department of 
Anatomy & Developmental Biology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

The placenta plays a central role in determining the outcome of pregnancy. It
undergoes changes during gestation as the fetus develops and as demands for
energy substrate transfer and gas exchange increase. The molecular mechanisms
that coordinate these changes have yet to be fully elucidated. The study
performed a large scale screen of the transcriptome of the rat placenta
throughout mid-late gestation (E14.25-E20) with emphasis on characterizing
gestational age associated changes in the expression of genes involved in
angiogenic pathways. Sprague Dawley dams were sacrificed at E14.25, E15.25,
E17.25 and E20 (n = 6 per group) and RNA was isolated from one placenta per dam. 
Changes in placental gene expression were identified using Illumina Rat Ref-12
Expression BeadChip Microarrays. Differentially expressed genes (>2-fold change, 
<1% false discovery rate, FDR) were functionally categorised by gene ontology
pathway analysis. A subset of differentially expressed genes identified by
microarrays were confirmed using Real-Time qPCR. The expression of thirty one
genes involved in the angiogenic pathway was shown to change over time, using
microarray analysis (22 genes displayed increased and 9 gene decreased
expression). Five genes (4 up regulated: Cd36, Mmp14, Rhob and Angpt4 and 1 down 
regulated: Foxm1) involved in angiogenesis and blood vessel morphogenesis were
subjected to further validation. qPCR confirmed late gestational increased
expression of Cd36, Mmp14, Rhob and Angpt4 and a decrease in expression of Foxm1 
before labour onset (P<0.0001). The observed acute, pre-labour changes in the
expression of the 31 genes during gestation warrant further investigation to
elucidate their role in pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3877080
PMID: 24391823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. J Clin Invest. 2014 Feb;124(2):564-79. doi: 10.1172/JCI71104. Epub 2014 Jan 2.

Sustained activation of SMAD3/SMAD4 by FOXM1 promotes TGF-ß-dependent cancer
metastasis.

Xue J, Lin X, Chiu WT, Chen YH, Yu G, Liu M, Feng XH, Sawaya R, Medema RH, Hung
MC, Huang S.

A key feature of TGF-ß signaling activation in cancer cells is the sustained
activation of SMAD complexes in the nucleus; however, the drivers of SMAD
activation are poorly defined. Here, using human and mouse breast cancer cell
lines, we found that oncogene forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) interacts with SMAD3 to
sustain activation of the SMAD3/SMAD4 complex in the nucleus. FOXM1 prevented the
E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase transcriptional intermediary factor 1 <U+03B3> (TIF1<U+03B3>) from 
binding SMAD3 and monoubiquitinating SMAD4, which stabilized the SMAD3/SMAD4
complex. Loss of FOXM1 abolished TGF-ß-induced SMAD3/SMAD4 formation. Moreover,
the interaction of FOXM1 and SMAD3 promoted TGF-ß/SMAD3-mediated transcriptional 
activity and target gene expression. We found that FOXM1/SMAD3 interaction was
required for TGF-ß-induced breast cancer invasion, which was the result of
SMAD3/SMAD4-dependent upregulation of the transcription factor SLUG. Importantly,
the function of FOXM1 in TGF-ß-induced invasion was not dependent on FOXM1's
transcriptional activity. Knockdown of SMAD3 diminished FOXM1-induced metastasis.
Furthermore, FOXM1 levels correlated with activated TGF-ß signaling and
metastasis in human breast cancer specimens. Together, our data indicate that
FOXM1 promotes breast cancer metastasis by increasing nuclear retention of SMAD3 
and identify crosstalk between FOXM1 and TGF-ß/SMAD3 pathways. This study
highlights the critical interaction of FOXM1 and SMAD3 for controlling TGF-ß
signaling during metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3904622
PMID: 24382352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Tumour Biol. 2014 May;35(5):4137-45. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1542-0. Epub 2013
Dec 31.

Genistein exhibits anti-cancer effects via down-regulating FoxM1 in H446
small-cell lung cancer cells.

Tian T(1), Li J, Li B, Wang Y, Li M, Ma D, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Cancer center, Qilu Hospital of Shandong
University, Jinan, 250012, China.

Genistein, a major isoflavone constituent in soybeans, has been reported to
exhibit multiple anti-tumor effects, such as inducing cell cycle arrest,
triggering apoptosis, and inactivating critical signaling pathways in a few human
cancer cells. Here, we investigated the anti-tumor effects of genistein on the
small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) cell line H446 and the underlying molecular
mechanisms. H446 cells were treated with various concentrations of genistein, and
experiments including CCK-8 assay, colony formation assay, flow cytometry
analysis, wound healing assay, real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR), western
blot analysis, and plasmid transfection were used to investigate the influence of
genistein on cell proliferation, migration ability, apoptosis, cell cycle
progression, as well as the mRNA and protein alterations of FoxM1 pathway
molecules. We found that genistein significantly inhibited the proliferation and 
migration ability of H446 cell, accompanied by apoptosis and G2/M phase cell
cycle arrest. In addition, genistein enhanced the anti-proliferative effect of
cisplatin on H446 cells. Importantly, genistein led to attenuation of the FoxM1
protein and down-regulated a series of FoxM1 target genes regulating cell cycle
and apoptosis including Cdc25B, cyclin B1, and survivin. In addition,
up-regulation of FoxM1 by cDNA transfection prior to genistein treatment could
reduce genistein-induced H446 proliferation inhibition. Thus, for the first time,
we demonstrated that genistein exerted multiple anti-tumor effects in H446 SCLC
cell line at least partly mediated by the down-regulation of FoxM1. FoxM1 has the
potential as a novel therapeutic agent in SCLC and is worthy of further study.

PMID: 24379139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2014 Mar 1;306(5):L405-19. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00143.2013. Epub 2013 Dec 27.

Grainyhead-like 2 (GRHL2) distribution reveals novel pathophysiological
differences between human idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and mouse models of
pulmonary fibrosis.

Varma S(1), Mahavadi P, Sasikumar S, Cushing L, Hyland T, Rosser AE, Riccardi D, 
Lu J, Kalin TV, Kalinichenko VV, Guenther A, Ramirez MI, Pardo A, Selman M,
Warburton D.

Author information: 
(1)Saban Research Institute, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, 4650 Sunset Blvd., 
MS35, Los Angeles, CA 90027. saaket.varma@gmail.com.

Chronic injury of alveolar lung epithelium leads to epithelial disintegrity in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF). We had reported earlier that Grhl2, a
transcriptional factor, maintains alveolar epithelial cell integrity by directly 
regulating components of adherens and tight junctions and thus hypothesized an
important role of GRHL2 in pathogenesis of IPF. Comparison of GRHL2 distribution 
at different stages of human lung development showed its abundance in developing 
lung epithelium and in adult lung epithelium. However, GRHL2 is detected in
normal human lung mesenchyme only at early fetal stage (week 9). Similar
mesenchymal reexpression of GRHL2 was also observed in IPF. Immunofluorescence
analysis in serial sections from three IPF patients revealed at least two subsets
of alveolar epithelial cells (AEC), based on differential GRHL2 expression and
the converse fluorescence intensities for epithelial vs. mesenchymal markers.
Grhl2 was not detected in mesenchyme in intraperitoneal bleomycin-induced injury 
as well as in spontaneously occurring fibrosis in double-mutant HPS1 and HPS2
mice, whereas in contrast in a radiation-induced fibrosis model, with forced
Forkhead box M1 (Foxm1) expression, an overlap of Grhl2 with a mesenchymal marker
was observed in fibrotic regions. Grhl2's role in alveolar epithelial cell
plasticity was confirmed by altered Grhl2 gene expression analysis in IPF and
further validated by in vitro manipulation of its expression in alveolar
epithelial cell lines. Our findings reveal important pathophysiological
differences between human IPF and specific mouse models of fibrosis and support a
crucial role of GRHL2 in epithelial activation in lung fibrosis and perhaps also 
in epithelial plasticity.

PMCID: PMC3949053
PMID: 24375798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Pathol. 2014 Apr;232(5):522-33. doi: 10.1002/path.4321. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Effects of TP53 mutational status on gene expression patterns across 10 human
cancer types.

Parikh N(1), Hilsenbeck S, Creighton CJ, Dayaram T, Shuck R, Shinbrot E, Xi L,
Gibbs RA, Wheeler DA, Donehower LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology and Microbiology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA.

Mutations in the TP53 tumour suppressor gene occur in half of all human cancers, 
indicating its critical importance in inhibiting cancer development. Despite
extensive studies, the mechanisms by which mutant p53 enhances tumour progression
remain only partially understood. Here, using data from the Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA), genomic and transcriptomic analyses were performed on 2256 tumours from
10 human cancer types. We show that tumours with TP53 mutations have altered gene
expression profiles compared to tumours retaining two wild-type TP53 alleles.
Among 113 known p53-up-regulated target genes identified from cell culture
assays, 10 were consistently up-regulated in at least eight of 10 cancer types
that retain both copies of wild-type TP53. RPS27L, CDKN1A (p21(CIP1)) and ZMAT3
were significantly up-regulated in all 10 cancer types retaining wild-type TP53. 
Using this p53-based expression analysis as a discovery tool, we used cell-based 
assays to identify five novel p53 target genes from genes consistently
up-regulated in wild-type p53 cancers. Global gene expression analyses revealed
that cell cycle regulatory genes and transcription factors E2F1, MYBL2 and FOXM1 
were disproportionately up-regulated in many TP53 mutant cancer types. Finally, >
93% of tumours with a TP53 mutation exhibited greatly reduced wild-type p53
messenger expression, due to loss of heterozygosity or copy neutral loss of
heterozygosity, supporting the concept of p53 as a recessive tumour suppressor.
The data indicate that tumours with wild-type TP53 retain some aspects of
p53-mediated growth inhibitory signalling through activation of p53 target genes 
and suppression of cell cycle regulatory genes.

Copyright © 2013 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4362779
PMID: 24374933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Chin J Integr Med. 2014 Jan;20(1):72-9. doi: 10.1007/s11655-013-1541-4. Epub 2013
Dec 29.

Research progress of ursolic acid's anti-tumor actions.

Zang LL(1), Wu BN, Lin Y, Wang J, Fu L, Tang ZY.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacology Department, Dalian Medical University, Dalian, Liaoning Province,
116044, China.

Ursolic acid (UA) is a sort of pentacyclic triterpenoid carboxylic acid purified 
from natural plant. UA has a series of biological effects such as sedative,
anti-inflammatory, anti-bacterial, anti-diabetic, antiulcer, etc. It is
discovered that UA has a broad-spectrum anti-tumor effect in recent years, which 
has attracted more and more scholars' attention. This review explained anti-tumor
actions of UA, including (1) the protection of cells' DNA from different damages;
(2) the anti-tumor cell proliferation by the inhibition of epidermal growth
factor receptor/mitogen-activated protein kinase signal or of FoxM1 transcription
factors, respectively; (3) antiangiogenesis, (4) the immunological surveillance
to tumors; (5) the inhibition of tumor cell migration and invasion; (6) the
effect of UA on caspase, cytochromes C, nuclear factor kappa B, cyclooxygenase,
tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) or mammalian
target of rapamycin signal to induce tumor cell apoptosis respectively, and etc. 
Moreover, UA has selective toxicity to tumor cells, basically no effect on normal
cells. With further studies, UA would be one of the potential anti-tumor agents.

PMID: 24374755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Exp Med. 2014 Jan 13;211(1):105-20. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130901. Epub 2013 Dec
23.

IL-12 and type I interferon prolong the division of activated CD8 T cells by
maintaining high-affinity IL-2 signaling in vivo.

Starbeck-Miller GR(1), Xue HH, Harty JT.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Immunology, 2 Department of
Microbiology, and 3 Department of Pathology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA
52242.

TCR ligation and co-stimulation induce cellular division; however, optimal
accumulation of effector CD8 T cells requires direct inflammatory signaling by
signal 3 cytokines, such as IL-12 or type I IFNs. Although in vitro studies
suggest that IL-12/type I IFN may enhance T cell survival or early proliferation,
the mechanisms underlying optimal accumulation of CD8 T cells in vivo are
unknown. In particular, it is unclear if disparate signal 3 cytokines optimize
effector CD8 T cell accumulation by the same mechanism and how these inflammatory
cytokines, which are transiently produced early after infection, affect T cell
accumulation many days later at the peak of the immune response. Here, we show
that transient exposure of CD8 T cells to IL-12 or type I IFN does not promote
survival or confer an early proliferative advantage in vivo, but rather sustains 
surface expression of CD25, the high-affinity IL-2 receptor. This prolongs
division of CD8 T cells in response to basal IL-2, through activation of the PI3K
pathway and expression of FoxM1, a positive regulator of cell cycle progression
genes. Thus, signal 3 cytokines use a common pathway to optimize effector CD8 T
cell accumulation through a temporally orchestrated sequence of cytokine signals 
that sustain division rather than survival.

PMCID: PMC3892973
PMID: 24367005  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Oncogene. 2014 Aug 21;33(34):4316-29. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.546. Epub 2013 Dec
23.

SUMOylation inhibits FOXM1 activity and delays mitotic transition.

Myatt SS(1), Kongsema M(1), Man CW(2), Kelly DJ(3), Gomes AR(1), Khongkow P(1),
Karunarathna U(1), Zona S(1), Langer JK(1), Dunsby CW(4), Coombes RC(1), French
PM(4), Brosens JJ(5), Lam EW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Imperial Centre for
Translational and Experimental Medicine (ICTEM), London, UK. (2)Department of
Applied Biology and Chemical Technology, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
Hong Kong, SAR China. (3)1] Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College
London, Imperial Centre for Translational and Experimental Medicine (ICTEM),
London, UK [2] Photonics Group, Department of Physics, Imperial College London,
London, UK. (4)Photonics Group, Department of Physics, Imperial College London,
London, UK. (5)Division of Reproductive Health, Warwick Medical School, Clinical 
Sciences Research Laboratories, University Hospital, Coventry, UK.

The forkhead box transcription factor FOXM1 is an essential effector of
G2/M-phase transition, mitosis and the DNA damage response. As such, it is
frequently deregulated during tumorigenesis. Here we report that FOXM1 is
dynamically modified by SUMO1 but not by SUMO2/3 at multiple sites. We show that 
FOXM1 SUMOylation is enhanced in MCF-7 breast cancer cells in response to
treatment with epirubicin and mitotic inhibitors. Mutation of five consensus
conjugation motifs yielded a SUMOylation-deficient mutant FOXM1. Conversely,
fusion of the E2 ligase Ubc9 to FOXM1 generated an auto-SUMOylating mutant
(FOXM1-Ubc9). Analysis of wild-type FOXM1 and mutants revealed that SUMOylation
inhibits FOXM1 activity, promotes translocation to the cytoplasm and enhances
APC/Cdh1-mediated ubiquitination and degradation. Further, expression of the
SUMOylation-deficient mutant enhanced cell proliferation compared with wild-type 
FOXM1, whereas the FOXM1-Ubc9 fusion protein resulted in persistent cyclin B1
expression and slowed the time from mitotic entry to exit. In summary, our
findings suggest that SUMOylation attenuates FOXM1 activity and causes mitotic
delay in cytotoxic drug response.

PMCID: PMC4096495
PMID: 24362530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Am J Transl Res. 2013 Dec 1;6(1):28-42. eCollection 2013.

Transcriptomic changes induced by mycophenolic acid in gastric cancer cells.

Dun B(1), Sharma A(2), Xu H(3), Liu H(2), Bai S(2), Zeng L(4), She JX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Translational Medicine, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Nanjing University of Technology Nanjing, China ; Center for Biotechnology and
Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University Augusta,
GA, USA ; Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of
Sciences Guangzhou, China. (2)Center for Biotechnology and Genomic Medicine,
Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University Augusta, GA, USA.
(3)Institute of Translational Medicine, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Nanjing University of Technology Nanjing, China ; Center for Biotechnology and
Genomic Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University Augusta,
GA, USA. (4)Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of
Sciences Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND: Inhibition of inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) by
mycophenolic acid (MPA) can inhibit proliferation and induce apoptosis in cancer 
cells. This study investigated the underlying molecular mechanisms of MPA's
anticancer activity.
METHODS: A gastric cancer cell line (AGS) was treated with MPA and gene
expression at different time points was analyzed using Illumina whole genome
microarrays and selected genes were confirmed by real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: Transcriptomic profiling identified 1070 genes with =2 fold changes and 
85 genes with >4 fold alterations. The most significantly altered biological
processes by MPA treatment include cell cycle, apoptosis, cell proliferation and 
migration. MPA treatment altered at least ten KEGG pathways, of which eight (p53 
signaling, cell cycle, pathways in cancer, PPAR signaling, bladder cancer,
protein processing in ER, small cell lung cancer and MAPK signaling) are
cancer-related. Among the earliest cellular events induced by MPA is cell cycle
arrest which may be caused by six molecular pathways: 1) up-regulation of cyclins
(CCND1 and CCNE2) and down-regulation of CCNA2 and CCNB1, 2) down-regulation of
cyclin-dependent kinases (CDK4 and CDK5); 3) inhibition of cell division related 
genes (CDC20, CDC25B and CDC25C) and other cell cycle related genes (MCM2, CENPE 
and PSRC1), 4) activation of p53, which activates the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors (CDKN1A), 5) impaired spindle checkpoint function and chromosome
segregation (BUB1, BUB1B, BOP1, AURKA, AURKB, and FOXM1); and 6) reduction of
availability of deoxyribonucleotides and therefore DNA synthesis through
down-regulation of the RRM1 enzyme. Cell cycle arrest is followed by inhibition
of cell proliferation, which is mainly attributable to the inhibition of the
PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway, and caspase-dependent apoptosis due to up-regulation of
the p53 and FAS pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that MPA has beneficial anticancer activity
through diverse molecular pathways and biological processes.

PMCID: PMC3853422
PMID: 24349619  [PubMed]


302. Oncotarget. 2013 Dec;4(12):2577-90.

Anti-oxidative stress response genes: bioinformatic analysis of their expression 
and relevance in multiple cancers.

Rotblat B(1), Grunewald TG, Leprivier G, Melino G, Knight RA.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council, Toxicology Unit, Leicester University, Leicester,
UK.

Cells mount a transcriptional anti-oxidative stress (AOS) response program to
scavenge reactive oxygen species (ROS) that arise from chemical, physical, and
metabolic challenges. This protective program has been shown to reduce
carcinogenesis triggered by chemical and physical insults. However, it is also
hijacked by established cancers to thrive and proliferate within the hostile
tumor microenvironment and to gain resistance against chemo- and radiotherapies. 
Therefore, targeting the AOS response proteins that are exploited by cancer cells
is an attractive therapeutic strategy. In order to identify the AOS genes that
are suspected to support cancer progression and resistance, we analyzed the
expression patterns of 285 genes annotated for being involved in oxidative stress
in 994 tumors and 353 normal tissues. Thereby we identified a signature of 116
genes that are highly overexpressed in multiple carcinomas while being only
minimally expressed in normal tissues. To establish which of these genes are more
likely to functionally drive cancer resistance and progression, we further
identified those whose overexpression correlates with negative patient outcome in
breast and lung carcinoma. Gene-set enrichment, GO, network, and pathway analyses
revealed that members of the thioredoxin and glutathione pathways are prominent
components of this oncogenic signature and that activation of these pathways is
common feature of many cancer entities. Interestingly, a large fraction of these 
AOS genes are downstream targets of the transcription factors NRF2, NF-kappaB and
FOXM1, and relay on NADPH for their enzymatic activities highlighting promising
drug targets. We discuss these findings and propose therapeutic strategies that
may be applied to overcome cancer resistance.

PMCID: PMC3926850
PMID: 24342878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Cancer. 2013 Dec 10;12:159. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-12-159.

The roles of FOXM1 in pancreatic stem cells and carcinogenesis.

Quan M, Wang P, Cui J, Gao Y, Xie K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology & Nutrition, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
kepxie@mdanderson.org.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) has one of the poorest prognoses among
all cancers. Over the past several decades, investigators have made great
advances in the research of PDAC pathogenesis. Importantly, identification of
pancreatic cancer stem cells (PCSCs) in pancreatic cancer cases has increased our
understanding of PDAC biology and therapy. PCSCs are responsible for pancreatic
tumorigenesis and tumor progression via a number of mechanisms, including
extensive proliferation, self-renewal, high tumorigenic ability, high propensity 
for invasiveness and metastasis, and resistance to conventional treatment.
Furthermore, emerging evidence suggests that PCSCs are involved in the malignant 
transformation of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia. The molecular mechanisms 
that control PCSCs are related to alterations of various signaling pathways, for 
instance, Hedgehog, Notch, Wnt, B-cell-specific Moloney murine leukemia virus
insertion site 1, phosphoinositide 3-kinase/AKT, and Nodal/Activin. Also, authors
have reported that the proliferation-specific transcriptional factor Forkhead box
protein M1 is involved in PCSC self-renewal and proliferation. In this review, we
describe the current knowledge about the signaling pathways related to PCSCs and 
the early stages of PDAC development, highlighting the pivotal roles of Forkhead 
box protein M1 in PCSCs and their impacts on the development and progression of
pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia.

PMCID: PMC3924162
PMID: 24325450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2013 Aug;35(8):572-8.

[Effects of AG1478 on the expression of FOXM1 gene via FOXO3a in non-small cell
lung cancer cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Gong XD(1), Yuan HH, Wang JY, Guo YH, Shi J, Jiang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, the Third People's Hospital Affiliated to Shanghai
Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 201900, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of EGFR-TKI AG1478 on the expression of FoxMl
and FOXO3a genes in non-small cell cancer (NSCLC) cell lines, and explore the
effect on cell proliferation and drug sensitivity to AG1478 after down-regulation
of FOXMl and FOXO3a expression by RNAi technique.
METHODS: Human lung cancer cells were treated with AG1478 at different
concentrations. RT-PCR and Western blot were used to examine the expression of
P-EGFR, FOXM1, FOXO3a mRNA and protein. After transient transfection of FOXM1 and
FOXO3a siRNA, RT-PCR and Western blot were employed to determine the transfection
efficiency and expression of the related proteins. CCK-8 assay, colony formation 
assay and flow cytometry were performed to evaluate the cell proliferation,
colony formation ability and the changes in cell cycle distribution.
RESULTS: The expressions of FOXM1 mRNA and protein were inhibited by AG1478 in a 
dose-dependent manner (both P < 0.05). After transfection with FOXM1 siRNA, the
expressions of FOXM1 mRNA and protein, and proteins of cyclin B1, c-Myc, and
Bcl-2 were significantly down-regulated, and the expressions of p21 and
cleaved-PARP proteins were significantly up-regulated (all P < 0.05). The colony 
number of FOXM1siRNA transfection group was 37.3 ± 8.6, significantly lower than 
that of the blank control (135.3 ± 7.0) and negative control group (125.3 ± 7.5, 
P < 0.05). The colony formation inhibition rate was (7.40 ± 0.94)% in the
negative control group and (72.4 ± 6.09)% in the FOXM1 siRNA transfection group. 
FOXM1siRNA transfection induced cell cycle arrest at G2/M phase with a percentage
of (55.6 ± 4.83)%, significantly higher than that of the blank control [(24.30 ± 
1.95)%] and negative control group [(21.3 ± 2.06)%, P < 0.05]. Additionally, the 
FOXM1siRNA transfection significantly increased the chemosensitivity of A549
cells to AG1478 (P < 0.05). Besides, AG1478 induced expression and nuclear
relocation of FOXO3a. After the FOXO3a siRNA transfection, the expression of
FOXM1 protein was significantly up-regulated, and resulted in a reduction of
AG1478-induced inhibition of FOXM1.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of FOXM1 is down-regulated by AG1478 via FOXO3a in
the NSCLC cell lines, and then increases the chemosensitivity of A549 cells to
AG1478. It suggests that FOXM1 could be a potential target for the therapy and
drug exploitation for NSCLC.

PMID: 24314213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Ovarian Res. 2013 Dec 6;6(1):88. doi: 10.1186/1757-2215-6-88.

Gene-gene interaction network analysis of ovarian cancer using TCGA data.

Ying H(1), Lv J, Ying T, Jin S, Shao J, Wang L, Xu H, Yuan B, Yang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, No,36, Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang, Liaoning Province
110004, China. huanchunyiing@hotmail.com.

Retraction in
    J Ovarian Res. 2015;8(1):18.
    J Ovarian Res. 2015;8:18. doi:10.1186/s13048-015-0146-2.

BACKGROUND: The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) Data portal provides a platform for
researchers to search, download, and analysis data generated by TCGA. The
objective of this study was to explore the molecular mechanism of ovarian cancer 
pathogenesis.
METHODS: Microarray data of ovarian cancer were downloaded from TCGA database,
and Limma package in R language was used to identify the differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) between ovarian cancer and normal samples, followed by the function 
and pathway annotations of the DEGs. Next, NetBox software was used to for the
gene-gene interaction (GGI) network construction and the corresponding modules
identification, and functions of genes in the modules were screened using DAVID.
RESULTS: Our studies identified 332 DEGs, including 146 up-regulated genes which 
mainly involved in the cell cycle related functions and cell cycle pathway, and
186 down-regulated genes which were enriched in extracellular region par
function, and Ether lipid metabolism pathway. GGI network was constructed by 127 
DEGs and their significantly interacted 209 genes (LINKERs). In the top 10 nodes 
ranked by degrees in the network, 5 were LINKERs. Totally, 7 functional modules
in the network were selected, and they were enriched in different functions and
pathways, such as mitosis process, DNA replication and DNA double-strand
synthesis, lipid synthesis processes and metabolic pathways. AR, BRCA1, TFDP1,
FOXM1, CDK2, and DBF4 were identified as the transcript factors of the 7 modules.
CONCLUSION: our data provides a comprehensive bioinformatics analysis of genes,
functions, and pathways which may be involved in the pathogenesis of ovarian
cancer.

PMCID: PMC4029308
PMID: 24314048  [PubMed]


306. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Dec 4;14(12):23685-99. doi: 10.3390/ijms141223685.

Prognostic discrimination using a 70-gene signature among patients with estrogen 
receptor-positive breast cancer and an intermediate 21-gene recurrence score.

Ahn SG(1), Lee HM, Lee HW, Lee SA, Lee SR, Leem SH, Jeong J, Chu IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Gananam Severance Hospital, Yonsei University College
of Medicine, Seoul 135720, Korea. gsjjoon@yuhs.ac.

The Oncotype DX® recurrence score (RS) predictor has been clinically utilized to 
appropriately select adjuvant chemotherapy for patients with estrogen receptor
(ER)-positive early breast cancer. However, the selection of chemotherapy for
patients with intermediate RSs remains controversial. We assessed the prognostic 
value of a 70-gene signature (70GS) among patients with ER-positive breast cancer
and intermediate RSs. In addition, we sought to identify genes associated with
poor 70GS scores based on gene expression profiling (GEP). GEP was performed
using gene expression data from 186 patients with ER-positive breast cancer. The 
RS and 70GS score were calculated on the basis of GEP. Among 186 patients, 82
ER-positive patients with intermediate RSs were identified. These patients were
stratified by 70GS, overall survival (OS) significantly differed according to
70GS (p=0.013). In a supervised hierarchical analysis according to 70GS, the
expression of several representative genes for cell proliferation was
significantly higher in the poor 70GS cluster than in the good 70GS cluster.
Furthermore, among these patients, FOXM1, AURKA, AURKB, and BIRC5 displayed
prognostic significance for OS. In conclusion, 70GS can help to discriminate
survival differences among ER-positive patients with intermediate RSs. FOXM1,
AURKA, AURKB, and BIRC5, are associated with poor 70GS scores.

PMCID: PMC3876071
PMID: 24304542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2013 Nov 15;6(12):2880-6. eCollection 2013.

Delineation of biological and molecular mechanisms underlying the diverse
anticancer activities of mycophenolic acid.

Dun B(1), Xu H, Sharma A, Liu H, Yu H, Yi B, Liu X, He M, Zeng L, She JX.

Author information: 
(1)Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences
190 Kaiyuan Road, Guangzhou 510530, China ; Center for Biotechnology and Genomic 
Medicine, Medical College of Georgia, Georgia Regents University 1120 15th
Street, Augusta, GA 30912, USA ; Institute of Translational Medicine, School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Nanjing University of Technology Nanjing, China.

BACKGROUND: Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), the prodrug of mycophenolic acid (MPA)
which has been widely used for the prevention of acute graft rejection, is a
potent inhibitor of inosine monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) that is
up-regulated in many tumors and potentially a target for cancer therapy. MPA is
known to inhibit cancer cell proliferation and induces apoptosis; however, the
underlying molecular mechanisms remain elusive.
METHODS: We first demonstrated MPA's antiproliferative and proapoptotic
activities using in vitro studies of 13 cancer cell lines and a xenograft model. 
Key proteins involved in cell cycle, proliferation and apoptosis were analyzed by
Western blotting.
RESULTS: In vitro treatment of thirteen cancer cell lines indicated that five
cell lines (AGS, NCI-N87, HCT-8, A2780 and BxPC-3) are highly sensitive to MPA
(IC50 < 0.5 µg/ml), four cell lines (Hs746T, PANC-1, HepG2 and MCF-7) are very
resistant to MPA (IC50 > 20 µg/ml) and the four other cell lines (KATO III,
SNU-1, K562 and HeLa) have intermediate sensitivity. The anticancer activity of
MPA was confirmed in vivo using xenograft model with gastric AGS cell line.
Further in vitro analyses using AGS cells indicated that MPA can potently induce 
cell cycle arrest and apoptosis as well as inhibition of cell proliferation.
Targeted proteomic analyses indicate that many critical changes responsible for
MPA's activities occur at the protein expression and phosphorylation levels.
MPA-induced cell cycle arrest is achieved through reduction of many cell cycle
regulators such as CDK4, BUB1, BOP1, Aurora A and FOXM1. We also demonstrate that
MPA can inhibit the PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathway and can induce caspase-dependent
apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that MPA has beneficial activities for
anticancer therapy through diverse molecular pathways and biological processes.

PMCID: PMC3843268
PMID: 24294374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2014 Jan;143(1):57-68. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2780-y.
Epub 2013 Nov 29.

Characterizing the heterogeneity of triple-negative breast cancers using
microdissected normal ductal epithelium and RNA-sequencing.

Radovich M(1), Clare SE, Atale R, Pardo I, Hancock BA, Solzak JP, Kassem N,
Mathieson T, Storniolo AM, Rufenbarger C, Lillemoe HA, Blosser RJ, Choi MR,
Sauder CA, Doxey D, Henry JE, Hilligoss EE, Sakarya O, Hyland FC, Hickenbotham M,
Zhu J, Glasscock J, Badve S, Ivan M, Liu Y, Sledge GW, Schneider BP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of General Surgery, Department of Surgery, Indiana University School 
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA, mradovic@iupui.edu.

Triple-negative breast cancers (TNBCs) are a heterogeneous set of tumors defined 
by an absence of actionable therapeutic targets (ER, PR, and HER-2).
Microdissected normal ductal epithelium from healthy volunteers represents a
novel comparator to reveal insights into TNBC heterogeneity and to inform drug
development. Using RNA-sequencing data from our institution and The Cancer Genome
Atlas (TCGA) we compared the transcriptomes of 94 TNBCs, 20 microdissected normal
breast tissues from healthy volunteers from the Susan G. Komen for the Cure
Tissue Bank, and 10 histologically normal tissues adjacent to tumor. Pathway
analysis comparing TNBCs to optimized normal controls of microdissected normal
epithelium versus classic controls composed of adjacent normal tissue revealed
distinct molecular signatures. Differential gene expression of TNBC compared with
normal comparators demonstrated important findings for TNBC-specific clinical
trials testing targeted agents; lack of over-expression for negative studies and 
over-expression in studies with drug activity. Next, by comparing each individual
TNBC to the set of microdissected normals, we demonstrate that TNBC heterogeneity
is attributable to transcriptional chaos, is associated with non-silent DNA
mutational load, and explains transcriptional heterogeneity in addition to known 
molecular subtypes. Finally, chaos analysis identified 146 core genes
dysregulated in >90 % of TNBCs revealing an over-expressed central network. In
conclusion, use of microdissected normal ductal epithelium from healthy
volunteers enables an optimized approach for studying TNBC and uncovers
biological heterogeneity mediated by transcriptional chaos.

PMCID: PMC3901081
PMID: 24292813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Tumour Biol. 2014 Apr;35(4):3087-94. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-1406-7. Epub 2013
Nov 27.

Steroid receptor co-activator-3 promotes osteosarcoma progression through
up-regulation of FoxM1.

Geng S(1), Wang X, Xu X, Zhang H, Ma Y, Zhang Y, Li B, Bi Z, Yang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin
Medical University, No. 23, Youzheng St, Nangang, Harbin, Heilongjiang, 150001,
China, Geng_Shuo@yeah.net.

Increasing evidence suggests that the three homologous members of steroid
receptor co-activator (SRC) family (SRC-1, SRC-2, and SRC-3) play key roles in
enhancing cell proliferation in various human cancers, such as breast, prostate, 
and hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the function of SRC-3 in osteosarcoma
remains largely unexplored. In the current study, we found that SRC-3, but not
SRC-1 and SRC-2, was dramatically up-regulated in human osteosarcoma tissues,
compared with adjacent normal tissues. To explore the functions of SRC-3 in
osteosarcoma, in vitro studies were performed in MG63 and U2OS cells. SRC-3
overexpression promoted osteosarcoma cell proliferation, whereas knockdown of
SRC-3 inhibits its proliferation. In support of these findings, we further
demonstrated that SRC-3 up-regulated FoxM1 expression through co-activation of
C/EBP<U+03B3>. Together our results show that SRC-3 drives osteosarcoma progression and 
imply it as a therapeutic target to abrogate osteosarcoma.

PMID: 24282087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Oncogene. 2014 Nov 13;33(46):5391-6. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.475. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Foxm1 transcription factor is required for the initiation of lung tumorigenesis
by oncogenic Kras(G12D.).

Wang IC(1), Ustiyan V(2), Zhang Y(2), Cai Y(2), Kalin TV(2), Kalinichenko VV(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Pulmonary Biology, Perinatal Institute of Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH, USA [2] Department of Life
Sciences, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan [3] Institute of
Biotechnology, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (2)Division of
Pulmonary Biology, Perinatal Institute of Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Lung cancer is the leading cause of deaths in cancer patients in the United
States. Identification of new molecular targets is clearly needed to improve
therapeutic outcomes of this devastating human disease. Activating mutations in
K-Ras oncogene and increased expression of FOXM1 protein are associated with poor
prognosis in patients with non-small-cell lung cancer. Transgenic expression of
activated Kras(G12D) in mouse respiratory epithelium is sufficient to induce lung
adenocarcinomas; however, transcriptional mechanisms regulated by K-Ras during
the initiation of lung cancer remain poorly understood. Foxm1 transcription
factor, a downstream target of K-Ras, stimulates cellular proliferation during
embryogenesis, organ repair and tumor growth, but its role in tumor initiation is
unknown. In the present study, we used transgenic mice expressing Kras(G12D)
under control of Sftpc promoter to demonstrate that Foxm1 was induced in type II 
epithelial cells before the formation of lung tumors. Conditional deletion of
Foxm1 from Kras(G12D)-expressing respiratory epithelium prevented the initiation 
of lung tumors in vivo. The loss of Foxm1 inhibited expression of K-Ras target
genes critical for the nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and c-Jun N-terminal kinase
(JNK) pathways, including Ikbkb, Nfkb1, Nfkb2, Rela, Jnk1, N-Myc, Pttg1 and
Cdkn2a. Transgenic overexpression of activated FOXM1 mutant was sufficient to
induce expression of these genes in alveolar type II cells. FOXM1 directly bound 
to promoter regions of Ikbkb, Nfkb2, N-Myc, Pttg1 and Cdkn2a, indicating that
these genes are direct FOXM1 targets. FOXM1 is required for K-Ras-mediated lung
tumorigenesis by activating genes critical for the NF-<U+03BA>B and JNK pathways.

PMID: 24213573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 24;8(10):e77625. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077625.
eCollection 2013.

Twist1 promotes gastric cancer cell proliferation through up-regulation of FoxM1.

Qian J(1), Luo Y, Gu X, Zhan W, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Changzheng Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Twist-related protein 1 (Twist1), also known as class A basic helix-loop-helix
protein 38 (bHLHa38), has been implicated in cell lineage determination and
differentiation. Previous studies demonstrate that Twist1 expression is
up-regulated in gastric cancer with poor clinical outcomes. Besides, Twist1 is
suggested to be involved in progression of human gastric cancer. However, its
biological functions remain largely unexplored. In the present study, we show
that Twist 1 overexpression leads to a significant up-regulation of FoxM1, which 
plays a key role in cell cycle progression in gastric cancer cells. In contrast, 
knockdown of Twist 1 reduces FoxM1 expression, suggesting that FoxM1 might be a
direct transcriptional target of Twist 1. At the molecular level, we further
reveal that Twist 1 could bind to the promoter region of FoxM1, and subsequently 
recruit p300 to induce FoxM1 mRNA transcription. Therefore, our results uncover a
previous unknown Twist 1/FoxM1 regulatory pathway, which may help to understand
the mechanisms of gastric cancer proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3812021
PMID: 24204899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Pathol Oncol Res. 2014 Apr;20(2):375-80. doi: 10.1007/s12253-013-9706-1. Epub
2013 Nov 7.

Identification of differentially coexpressed genes in gonadotrope tumors and
normal pituitary using bioinformatics methods.

Cai T(1), Xiao J, Wang ZF, Liu Q, Wu H, Qiu YZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, The First Xiangya Hospital of Central South
University, Changsha, Hunan Province, China.

To investigate the underlying molecular mechanisms of pituitary tumor by using
the microarray expression profiles of pituitary tumor and normal tissue samples. 
The gene expression profile of GSE26966 was downloaded from Gene Expression
Omnibus, including nine normal samples and 14 pituitary tumor samples. The
differentially coexpressed genes (DEGs) were identified by Affy package in R
Software. The functional and pathway enrichment analysis of the screened DEGs
were performed by DAVID. Then, differential coexpression networks were contructed
and further analyzed. Functional and pathway enrichment analysis of the 1220
identified DEGs revealed that phosphatidylinositol signaling system, p53
signaling pathway and inositol phosphate metabolism were disturbed in pituitary
tumors. The degree of DLK1, CDKN2A and ITGA4 in the constructed differential
coexpression network was 46, 45 and 44, respectively. In addition, MPP2 and ASAP2
were the obvious hub genes in the constructed differential coexpression network. 
Through exploring genes in the differential coexpression networks, the results
suggested that DLK1, CDKN2A, ITGA4, MPP2 and ASAP2 may potentially be used as
biomarkers for pituitary tumor.

PMID: 24198235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Diabetes. 2014 Mar;63(3):982-93. doi: 10.2337/db13-0425. Epub 2013 Nov 5.

Epidermal growth factor receptor signaling promotes pancreatic ß-cell
proliferation in response to nutrient excess in rats through mTOR and FOXM1.

Zarrouki B(1), Benterki I, Fontés G, Peyot ML, Seda O, Prentki M, Poitout V.

Author information: 
(1)Montreal Diabetes Research Center, University of Montréal, Montréal, Québec,
Canada.

The cellular and molecular mechanisms underpinning the compensatory increase in
ß-cell mass in response to insulin resistance are essentially unknown. We
previously reported that a 72-h coinfusion of glucose and Intralipid (GLU+IL)
induces insulin resistance and a marked increase in ß-cell proliferation in
6-month-old, but not in 2-month-old, Wistar rats. The aim of the current study
was to identify the mechanisms underlying nutrient-induced ß-cell proliferation
in this model. A transcriptomic analysis identified a central role for the
forkhead transcription factor FOXM1 and its targets, and for heparin-binding
epidermal growth factor (EGF)-like growth factor (HB-EGF), a ligand of the EGF
receptor (EGFR), in nutrient-induced ß-cell proliferation. Phosphorylation of
ribosomal S6 kinase, a mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) target, was increased
in islets from GLU+IL-infused 6-month-old rats. HB-EGF induced proliferation of
insulin-secreting MIN6 cells and isolated rat islets, and this effect was blocked
in MIN6 cells by the EGFR inhibitor AG1478 or the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin.
Coinfusion of either AG1478 or rapamycin blocked the increase in FOXM1 signaling,
ß-cell proliferation, and ß-cell mass and size in response to GLU+IL infusion in 
6-month-old rats. We conclude that chronic nutrient excess promotes ß-cell mass
expansion via a pathway that involves EGFR signaling, mTOR activation, and
FOXM1-mediated cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3931394
PMID: 24194502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 31;33(31):4036-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.449. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Human papillomavirus type 16 E7 perturbs DREAM to promote cellular proliferation 
and mitotic gene expression.

DeCaprio JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA [2] Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA [3]
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Comment on
    Oncogene. 2014 Jul 31;33(31):4039-49.

The study of the small DNA tumor viruses continues to provide valuable new
insights into oncogenesis and fundamental biological processes. Although much has
already been revealed about how the human papillomaviruses (HPVs) can transform
cells and contribute to cervical and oropharyngeal cancer, there clearly is much 
more to learn. In this issue of Oncogene, Pang et al., doi:10.1038/onc.2013.426, 
demonstrate that the high-risk HPV16 E7 oncogene can promote cellular
proliferation by interacting with the DREAM (DP, RB-like, E2F and MuvB) complex
at two distinct phases of the cell cycle. Consistent with earlier work, HPV16 E7 
can bind to the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor (RB) family member p130 (RBL2)
protein and promote its proteasome-mediated destruction thereby disrupting the
DREAM complex and can prevent exit from the cell cycle into quiescence. In
addition, they demonstrate that HPV16 E7 can bind to MuvB core complex in
association with BMYB and FOXM1 and activate gene expression during the G2 and M 
phase of the cell cycle. Thus, HPV16 E7 acts to prevent exit from the cell cycle 
entry and promotes mitotic proliferation and may account for the high levels of
FOXM1 often observed in poor-risk cervical cancers.

PMCID: PMC4002639
PMID: 24166507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2013 Dec;19(12):926-36. doi: 10.1111/cns.12163. Epub 2013 Oct 
25.

Curcumin suppresses malignant glioma cells growth and induces apoptosis by
inhibition of SHH/GLI1 signaling pathway in vitro and vivo.

Du WZ(1), Feng Y, Wang XF, Piao XY, Cui YQ, Chen LC, Lei XH, Sun X, Liu X, Wang
HB, Li XF, Yang DB, Sun Y, Zhao ZF, Jiang T, Li YL, Jiang CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University, Harbin, China.

AIMS: To study the role of curcumin on glioma cells via the SHH/GLI1 pathway in
vitro and vivo.
METHODS: The effects of curcumin on proliferation, migration, apoptosis, SHH/GLI1
signaling, and GLI1 target genes expression were evaluated in multiple glioma
cell lines in vitro. A U87-implanted nude mice model was used to study the role
of curcumin on tumor volume and the suppression efficacy of GLI1.
RESULTS: Curcumin showed cytotoxic effects on glioma cell lines in vitro. Both
mRNA and protein levels of SHH/GLI1 signaling (Shh, Smo, GLI1) were downregulated
in a dose- and time-dependent manner. Several GLI1-dependent target genes
(CyclinD1, Bcl-2, Foxm1) were also downregulated. Curcumin treatment prevented
GLI1 translocating into the cell nucleus and reduced the concentration of its
reporter. Curcumin suppressed cell proliferation, colony formation, migration,
and induced apoptosis which was mediated partly through the mitochondrial pathway
after an increase in the ratio of Bax to Bcl2. Intraperitoneal injection of
curcumin in vivo reduced tumor volume, GLI1 expression, the number of positively 
stained cells, and prolonged the survival period compared with the control group.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that curcumin holds a great promise for SHH/GLI1
targeted therapy against gliomas.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24165291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Cell Death Differ. 2014 Feb;21(2):310-20. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.148. Epub 2013
Oct 25.

Epidermal Snail expression drives skin cancer initiation and progression through 
enhanced cytoprotection, epidermal stem/progenitor cell expansion and enhanced
metastatic potential.

De Craene B(1), Denecker G(1), Vermassen P(1), Taminau J(1), Mauch C(2), Derore
A(3), Jonkers J(4), Fuchs E(5), Berx G(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Unit of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, Inflammation Research Center
(IRC), VIB-Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium [2] Department of Biomedical
Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. (2)Department of
Dermatology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (3)Department of Biomedical
Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium. (4)Division of Molecular
Biology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(5)Laboratory of Mammalian Cell Biology and Development, The Rockefeller
University, New York, NY, USA.

Expression of the EMT-inducing transcription factor Snail is enhanced in
different human cancers. To investigate the in vivo role of Snail during
progression of epithelial cancer, we used a mouse model with skin-specific
overexpression of Snail. Snail transgenic mice spontaneously developed distinct
histological subtypes of skin cancer, such as basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell
carcinoma and sebaceous gland carcinoma. Development of sebaceous gland
carcinomas strongly correlated with the direct and complete repression of
Blimp-1, a central regulator of sebocyte homeostasis. Snail expression in
keratinocyte stem cells significantly promotes their proliferation associated
with an activated FoxM1 gene expression signature, resulting in a larger pool of 
Mts24-marked progenitor cells. Furthermore, primary keratinocytes expressing
Snail showed increased survival and strong resistance to genotoxic stress. Snail 
expression in a skin-specific p53-null background resulted in accelerated
formation of spontaneous tumours and enhanced metastasis. Our data demonstrate
that in vivo expression of Snail results in de novo epithelial carcinogenesis by 
allowing enhanced survival, expansion of the cancer stem cell pool with
accumulated DNA damage, a block in terminal differentiation and increased
proliferation rates of tumour-initiating cells.

PMCID: PMC3890953
PMID: 24162662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Transl Med. 2013 Oct 23;11:265. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-265.

MiR-370 sensitizes chronic myeloid leukemia K562 cells to homoharringtonine by
targeting Forkhead box M1.

Zhou M, Zeng J, Wang X, Guo Q, Huang T, Shen H, Fu Y, Wang L, Jia J, Chen C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University School of
Medicine, Jinan, P,R, China. chency@sdu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Homoharringtonine (HHT) is a kind of cephalotaxus alkaloid used in
traditional Chinese medicine. Although HHT has been successfully used as a
therapeutic agent for leukemia, the drug resistance and toxicity are major
concerns. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been identified to modulate cellular
sensitivity to anticancer drugs. We examined the synergistic action between
miR-370 and HHT in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: The synergistic action between miR-370 and HHT was examined by flow
cytometry. The effect of HHT on miR-370 expression was determined by quantitative
RT-PCR (qRT-PCR). The expression of miR-370 and Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) in 23
patients with newly diagnosed chronic-phase chronic myeloid leukemia (CML-CP) and
10 patients with blast-crisis CML (CML-BP) as well as miR-370-targeted FoxM1 was 
determined by qRT-PCR and western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Ectopic expression of miR-370 sensitized the CML K562 cell line to HHT
by targeting FoxM1, the major regulator in cell proliferation and apoptosis.
miR-370 significantly promoted HHT-mediated cell apoptosis and miR-370 and HHT
cooperated in affecting FoxM1 expression. As well, miR-370 was moderately
upregulated after HHT treatment in K562 cells. In addition, the expression of
miR-370 was significantly reduced in CML patients as compared with healthy
controls. Furthermore, the expression of miR-370 was lower in CML-BP than CML-CP 
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-370 sensitized K562 cells to HHT by inducing apoptosis in part
by downregulation of FoxM1 expression. These findings may provide further
information for CML treatment with HHT.

PMCID: PMC4015315
PMID: 24148180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Yonsei Med J. 2013 Nov;54(6):1422-9. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2013.54.6.1422.

Decreased expression of surfactant protein genes is associated with an increased 
expression of Forkhead box M1 gene in the fetal lung tissues of premature
rabbits.

Hahn WH(1), Chang JY, Lee KS, Bae CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyung Hee University Hospital at Gangdong, 892
Dongnam-ro, Gangdong-gu, Seoul 134-727, Korea. baecw@khnmc.or.kr.

PURPOSE: Recently, Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) was reported to be correlated with
lung maturation and expression of surfactant proteins (SPs) in mice models.
However, no study has been conducted in rabbit lungs despite their high homology 
with human lungs. Thus, we attempted to investigate serial changes in the
expressions of FoxM1 and SP-A/B throughout lung maturation in rabbit fetuses.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Pregnant New Zealand White rabbits were grouped according 
to gestational age from 5 days before to 2 days after the day of expected full
term delivery (F5, F4, F3, F2, F1, F0, P1, and P2). A total of 64 fetuses were
enrolled after Cesarean sections. The expressions of mRNA and proteins of FoxM1
and SP-A/B in fetal lung tissue were tested by quantitative reverse-transcriptase
real-time PCR and Western blot. Furthermore, their correlations were analyzed.
RESULTS: The mRNA expression of SP-A/B showed an increasing tendency positively
correlated with gestational age, while the expression of FoxM1 mRNA and protein
decreased from F5 to F0. A significant negative correlation was found between the
expression levels of FoxM1 and SP-A/B (SP-A: R=-0.517, p=0.001; SP-B: R=-0.615,
p<0.001).
CONCLUSION: Preterm rabbits demonstrated high expression of FoxM1 mRNA and
protein in the lungs compared to full term rabbits. Also, the expression of
SP-A/B was inversely related with serial changes in FoxM1 expression. This is the
first report to suggest an association between FoxM1 and expression of SP-A/B and
lung maturation in preterm rabbits.

PMCID: PMC3809867
PMID: 24142647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Oncogene. 2014 Aug 7;33(32):4144-55. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.457. Epub 2013 Oct 21.

FOXM1 targets NBS1 to regulate DNA damage-induced senescence and epirubicin
resistance.

Khongkow P(1), Karunarathna U(1), Khongkow M(1), Gong C(2), Gomes AR(1), Yagüe
E(1), Monteiro LJ(1), Kongsema M(1), Zona S(1), Man EP(3), Tsang JW(4), Coombes
RC(1), Wu KJ(5), Khoo US(3), Medema RH(6), Freire R(7), Lam EW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, London, UK. (2)1] Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial
College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, UK [2] Department of
Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong,
China. (3)Department of Pathology, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of
Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (4)Department of Clinical Oncology, Li Ka Shing
Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. (5)Institute of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112,
Taiwan. (6)Division of Cell Biology, the Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands. (7)Unidad de Investigación, Hospital Universitario de Canarias, 
Instituto de Tecnologías Biomédicas, Ofra s/n, La Laguna, Spain.

FOXM1 is implicated in genotoxic drug resistance but its mechanism of action
remains elusive. We show here that FOXM1-depletion can sensitize breast cancer
cells and mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) into entering epirubicin-induced
senescence, with the loss of long-term cell proliferation ability, the
accumulation of <U+03B3>H2AX foci, and the induction of senescence-associated
ß-galactosidase activity and cell morphology. Conversely, reconstitution of FOXM1
in FOXM1-deficient MEFs alleviates the accumulation of senescence-associated
<U+03B3>H2AX foci. We also demonstrate that FOXM1 regulates NBS1 at the transcriptional 
level through an forkhead response element on its promoter. Like FOXM1, NBS1 is
overexpressed in the epirubicin-resistant MCF-7Epi(R) cells and its expression
level is low but inducible by epirubicin in MCF-7 cells. Consistently,
overexpression of FOXM1 augmented and FOXM1 depletion reduced NBS1 expression and
epirubicin-induced ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM)phosphorylation in breast
cancer cells. Together these findings suggest that FOXM1 increases NBS1
expression and ATM phosphorylation, possibly through increasing the levels of the
MRN(MRE11/RAD50/NBS1) complex. Consistent with this idea, the loss of P-ATM
induction by epirubicin in the NBS1-deficient NBS1-LBI fibroblasts can be rescued
by NBS1 reconstitution. Resembling FOXM1, NBS1 depletion also rendered MCF-7 and 
MCF-7Epi(R) cells more sensitive to epirubicin-induced cellular senescence. In
agreement, the DNA repair-defective and senescence phenotypes in FOXM1-deficent
cells can be effectively rescued by overexpression of NBS1. Moreover,
overexpression of NBS1 and FOXM1 similarly enhanced and their depletion
downregulated homologous recombination (HR) DNA repair activity. Crucially,
overexpression of FOXM1 failed to augment HR activity in the background of NBS1
depletion, demonstrating that NBS1 is indispensable for the HR function of FOXM1.
The physiological relevance of the regulation of NBS1 expression by FOXM1 is
further underscored by the strong and significant correlation between nuclear
FOXM1 and total NBS1 expression in breast cancer patient samples, further
suggesting that NBS1 as a key FOXM1 target gene involved in DNA damage response, 
genotoxic drug resistance and DNA damage-induced senescence.

PMCID: PMC3969838
PMID: 24141789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Oncogene. 2014 Jul 31;33(31):4039-49. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.426. Epub 2013 Oct
21.

A functional interaction of E7 with B-Myb-MuvB complex promotes acute cooperative
transcriptional activation of both S- and M-phase genes. (129 c).

Pang CL(1), Toh SY(2), He P(2), Teissier S(2), Ben Khalifa Y(3), Xue Y(2),
Thierry F(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Institute of Medical Biology, A*STAR, Immunos #06-05, 8A Biomedical Grove, 
Singapore [2] Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore. (2)Institute of Medical Biology, A*STAR,
Immunos #06-05, 8A Biomedical Grove, Singapore. (3)Lyssavirus dynamics and host
adaptation, Pasteur Institute, 25 rue Dr Roux, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Oncogene. 2014 Jul 31;33(31):4036-8.

High-risk human papillomaviruses are causative agents of cervical cancer. Viral
protein E7 is required to establish and maintain the pro-oncogenic phenotype in
infected cells, but the molecular mechanisms by which E7 promotes carcinogenesis 
are only partially understood. Our transcriptome analyses in primary human
fibroblasts transduced with the viral protein revealed that E7 activates a group 
of mitotic genes via the activator B-Myb-MuvB complex. We show that E7 interacts 
with the B-Myb, FoxM1 and LIN9 components of this activator complex, leading to
cooperative transcriptional activation of mitotic genes in primary cells and E7
recruitment to the corresponding promoters. E7 interaction with LIN9 and FoxM1
depended on the LXCXE motif, which is also required for pocket protein
interaction and degradation. Using E7 mutants for the degradation of pocket
proteins but intact for the LXCXE motif, we demonstrate that E7 functional
interaction with the B-Myb-MuvB complex and pocket protein degradation are two
discrete functions of the viral protein that cooperate to promote acute
transcriptional activation of mitotic genes. Transcriptional level of E7 in
patient's cervical lesions at different stages of progression was shown to
correlate with those of B-Myb and FoxM1 as well as other mitotic gene
transcripts, thereby linking E7 with cellular proliferation and progression in
cervical cancer in vivo. E7 thus can directly activate the transcriptional levels
of cell cycle genes independently of pocket protein stability.

PMID: 24141769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Respir Res. 2013 Oct 17;14:108. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-14-108.

Conditional over-expression of RAGE by embryonic alveolar epithelium compromises 
the respiratory membrane and impairs endothelial cell differentiation.

Winden DR, Ferguson NT, Bukey BR, Geyer AJ, Wright AJ, Jergensen ZR, Robinson AB,
Stogsdill JA, Reynolds PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Brigham Young University, 
375A Widtsoe Building, 84602 Provo, UT, USA. paul_reynolds@byu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Receptors for advanced glycation end-products (RAGE) are cell surface
receptors prominently expressed by lung epithelium. Previous research
demonstrated that over-expression of RAGE by murine alveolar epithelial cells
during embryogenesis caused severe lung hypoplasia and neonatal lethality.
However, the effects of RAGE over-expression on adjacent matrix and endothelial
cells remained unknown.
METHODS: RAGE transgenic (TG) mice were generated that conditionally
over-expressed RAGE in alveolar type II cells when fed doxycycline (dox) from
conception to E18.5. To evaluate effects on the basement membrane, immunostaining
and immunoblotting were performed for collagen IV and MMP-9, a matrix
metalloprotease capable of degrading basement membranes. To assess changes in
vasculature, immunostaining, immunoblotting and qRT-PCR were performed for
Pecam-1, a platelet endothelial cell adhesion marker also known as CD31. Lastly, 
to characterize potential regulatory mechanisms of endothelial cell
differentiation, immunoblotting and qRT-PCR for FoxM1, a key endothelium-specific
transcription factor of the Forkhead Box (Fox) family, were completed.
RESULTS: Qualitative immunostaining for collagen IV was less in RAGE TG mice
compared to controls and immunoblotting revealed decreased collagen IV in the
RAGE TG mouse lung. Additionally, elevated MMP-9 detected via immunostaining and 
immunoblotting implicated MMP-9 as a possible down stream effector in matrix
destabilization mediated by RAGE signaling. Lastly, Pecam-1 assessment revealed a
decrease in the prevalence of microvascular endothelial cells coincident with
FoxM1 abrogation in RAGE TG mice compared to controls.
CONCLUSIONS: RAGE over-expression by alveolar epithelium weakened the basement
membrane and associated matrix via increased MMP-9 activity. Furthermore,
over-expression of RAGE inhibited FoxM1, suggesting that anomalous
transcriptional control contributes to decreased endothelial cell prevalence in
the TG mouse lung.

PMCID: PMC3853184
PMID: 24134692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 9;8(10):e76889. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076889. eCollection
2013.

Identification of candidate B-lymphoma genes by cross-species gene expression
profiling.

Tompkins VS(1), Han SS, Olivier A, Syrbu S, Bair T, Button A, Jacobus L, Wang Z, 
Lifton S, Raychaudhuri P, Morse HC 3rd, Weiner G, Link B, Smith BJ, Janz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa
City, Iowa, United States of America.

Comparative genome-wide expression profiling of malignant tumor counterparts
across the human-mouse species barrier has a successful track record as a gene
discovery tool in liver, breast, lung, prostate and other cancers, but has been
largely neglected in studies on neoplasms of mature B-lymphocytes such as diffuse
large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and Burkitt lymphoma (BL). We used global gene
expression profiles of DLBCL-like tumors that arose spontaneously in
Myc-transgenic C57BL/6 mice as a phylogenetically conserved filter for analyzing 
the human DLBCL transcriptome. The human and mouse lymphomas were found to have
60 concordantly deregulated genes in common, including 8 genes that Cox hazard
regression analysis associated with overall survival in a published landmark
dataset of DLBCL. Genetic network analysis of the 60 genes followed by biological
validation studies indicate FOXM1 as a candidate DLBCL and BL gene, supporting a 
number of studies contending that FOXM1 is a therapeutic target in mature B cell 
tumors. Our findings demonstrate the value of the "mouse filter" for genomic
studies of human B-lineage neoplasms for which a vast knowledge base already
exists.

PMCID: PMC3793908
PMID: 24130802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cancer. 2013 Dec 15;119(24):4249-58. doi: 10.1002/cncr.28354. Epub 2013 Oct 1.

Identification of FOXM1-induced epigenetic markers for head and neck squamous
cell carcinomas.

Hwang S(1), Mahadevan S, Qadir F, Hutchison IL, Costea DE, Neppelberg E, Liavaag 
PG, Waseem A, Teh MT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical and Diagnostic Oral Sciences, Institute of Dentistry,
Barts & The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, England, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic reprogramming of the methylome has been implicated in all 
stages of cancer evolution. It is now well accepted that cancer cells exploit
epigenetic reprogramming, a mechanism that regulates stem/progenitor cell renewal
and differentiation, to promote cancer initiation and progression. The oncogene
FOXM1 has been implicated in all major forms of human cancer.
METHODS: We have recently shown that aberrant upregulation of FOXM1 orchestrated 
a DNA methylation signature that mimics the cancer methylome landscape, from
which we have identified a number of FOXM1-induced epigenetic markers.
Differential promoter methylation and gene expression in clinical specimens were 
measured using commercially available bisulfite conversion kits and absolute
quantitative PCR, respectively.
RESULTS: Here, we investigated 8 FOXM1-induced differentially methylated genes,
SPCS1, FLNA, CHPF, GLT8D1, C6orf136, MGAT1, NDUFA10, and PAFAH1B3, using human
head and neck tissue specimens donated by 2 geographically independent patient
cohorts from Norway and the United Kingdom. Two genes (GLT8D1 and C6orf136) were 
found to be differentially expressed in head and neck squamous cell carcinomas
(HNSCCs). Using methylation-specific quantitative PCR, we confirmed that the
promoters of GLT8D1 and C6orf136 were hypo- and hypermethylated, respectively, in
HNSCC tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Given that epigenetic change precedes gene expression, methylation
status of candidate genes identified from this study may represent a signature of
premalignancy, rendering them potentially useful predictive biomarkers for
precancer screening and/or therapeutic targets for cancer prevention.

© 2013 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 24114764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Endocrine. 2014 Aug;46(3):568-76. doi: 10.1007/s12020-013-0073-1. Epub 2013 Oct
12.

Knockdown of prolactin receptors in a pancreatic beta cell line: effects on DNA
synthesis, apoptosis, and gene expression.

Arumugam R(1), Fleenor D, Freemark M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology & Diabetes, Duke University Medical
Center, Durham, NC, 27710, USA, arumu001@mc.duke.edu.

Prolactin (PRL) and placental lactogen stimulate beta cell replication and
insulin production in vitro and in vivo. The molecular mechanisms by which
lactogens promote beta cell expansion are unclear. We treated rat insulinoma
cells with a PRL receptor (PRLR) siRNA to determine if PRLR signaling is required
for beta cell DNA synthesis and cell survival and to identify beta cell cycle
genes whose expression depends upon lactogen action. Effects of PRLR knockdown
were compared with those of PRL treatment. PRLR knockdown (-80 %) reduced DNA
synthesis, increased apoptosis, and inhibited expression of cyclins D2 and B2,
IRS-2, Tph1, and the anti-apoptotic protein PTTG1; p21 and BCL6 mRNAs increased. 
Conversely, PRL treatment increased DNA synthesis, reduced apoptosis, and
enhanced expression of A, B and D2 cyclins, CDK1, IRS-2, FoxM1, BCLxL, and PTTG1;
BCL6 declined. PRLR signaling is required for DNA synthesis and survival of rat
insulinoma cells. The effects of lactogens are mediated by down-regulation of
cell cycle inhibitors (BCL6, p21) and induction of A, B, and D2 cyclins, IRS-2,
Tph1, FoxM1, and the anti-apoptotic proteins BCLxL and PTTG1.

PMCID: PMC3984618
PMID: 24114406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Dec;24(23):3634-50. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-05-0264. Epub 2013
Oct 9.

Identification of cell cycle-regulated genes periodically expressed in U2OS cells
and their regulation by FOXM1 and E2F transcription factors.

Grant GD(1), Brooks L 3rd, Zhang X, Mahoney JM, Martyanov V, Wood TA, Sherlock G,
Cheng C, Whitfield ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
03755 Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA 94305.

We identify the cell cycle-regulated mRNA transcripts genome-wide in the
osteosarcoma-derived U2OS cell line. This results in 2140 transcripts mapping to 
1871 unique cell cycle-regulated genes that show periodic oscillations across
multiple synchronous cell cycles. We identify genomic loci bound by the G2/M
transcription factor FOXM1 by chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) and associate these with cell
cycle-regulated genes. FOXM1 is bound to cell cycle-regulated genes with peak
expression in both S phase and G2/M phases. We show that ChIP-seq genomic loci
are responsive to FOXM1 using a real-time luciferase assay in live cells, showing
that FOXM1 strongly activates promoters of G2/M phase genes and weakly activates 
those induced in S phase. Analysis of ChIP-seq data from a panel of cell cycle
transcription factors (E2F1, E2F4, E2F6, and GABPA) from the Encyclopedia of DNA 
Elements and ChIP-seq data for the DREAM complex finds that a set of core cell
cycle genes regulated in both U2OS and HeLa cells are bound by multiple cell
cycle transcription factors. These data identify the cell cycle-regulated genes
in a second cancer-derived cell line and provide a comprehensive picture of the
transcriptional regulatory systems controlling periodic gene expression in the
human cell division cycle.

PMCID: PMC3842991
PMID: 24109597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Clin Exp Med. 2014 Nov;14(4):447-55. doi: 10.1007/s10238-013-0261-6. Epub 2013
Oct 8.

Clinical significance and positive correlation of FoxM1 and Her-2 expression in
gastric cancer.

Li X(1), Tang D, Yao Y, Qi W, Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Affiliated Hospital of Medical College Qingdao
University, 16 Jiangsu Road, Qingdao, 266003, China.

The transcription factor forkhead box protein M1 (FoxM1) and tyrosine kinase
receptor Her-2, aberrantly expressing in various kinds of human malignancies, are
closely related to the development of cancer. However, the correlation of them is
still little explored, especially in gastric cancer. In current study, we
examined FoxM1 and Her-2 levels in gastric cancers, and the clinical significance
and association of them were further explored. As a result, FoxM1 and Her-2
expression were significantly higher in gastric cancer compared with para-cancer 
tissues and gastric cell lines (P < 0.01), while a positive association was found
between the two genes at both RNA and protein levels (P = 0.007, P = 0.025). No
significant association was observed between FoxM1 expression and
clinic-pathological parameters (P > 0.1), whereas the positive frequency of Her-2
correlated with TNM stage significantly (P = 0.045). In addition, multivariate
analysis showed Her-2 was not a prognostic predictor in gastric cancer (P =
0.625), while FoxM1 was independently associated with prognosis (P = 0.001),
which especially affected the survival in patients with advanced stage (P <
0.01). These results suggest that FoxM1 and Her-2 are important diagnostic
markers for gastric cancer, and FoxM1 is a favorable prognostic indicator in
gastric cancer. FoxM1 may be a potential cellular target for therapeutic
intervention, especially in Her2-targeted therapy-resistant cancers.

PMID: 24101296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Biomed Pharmacother. 2014 Mar;68(2):149-54. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2013.08.008.
Epub 2013 Aug 23.

miR-370 targeted FoxM1 functions as a tumor suppressor in laryngeal squamous cell
carcinoma (LSCC).

Yungang W(1), Xiaoyu L(2), Pang T(2), Wenming L(3), Pan X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Qi-Lu Hospital, Shandong
University, Jinan, Shandong Province, PR China; Department of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, the Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University, Jining,
Shandong Province, PR China. (2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck
Surgery, the Affiliated Hospital of Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong
Province, PR China. (3)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Qi-Lu 
Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong Province, PR China. (4)Department 
of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Qi-Lu Hospital, Shandong University,
Jinan, Shandong Province, PR China. Electronic address: panxinliang0531@sina.com.

microRNAs, a family of small non-coding RNAs, involve in the pathogenesis of
several types of cancers, including laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC).
MiR-370 is frequently aberrant expressed in various types of human cancer
including LSCC. However, the role for miR-370 in LSCC remains elusive. Here, we
demonstrate that miR-370 was down-regulated in human LSCC tissues. Furthermore,
there was an inverse relationship between Forkhead Box ml (FoxM1), which was
up-regulated and miR-370 expression in LSCC tissues. FoxM1 was subsequently
predicted by bioinformatics and verified to be a target of miR-370 by Luciferase 
reporter assay. Restored expression of miR-370 in Hep2 cells significantly
inhibited cell proliferation. In conclusion, our results suggest that miR-370 may
function as a tumor suppressor in LSCC through downregulation of FoxM1,
suggesting that miR-370 could serve as a novel potential maker for LSCC therapy.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24055400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Nov 15;19(22):6173-82. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1675. 
Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Dual CDK4/CDK6 inhibition induces cell-cycle arrest and senescence in
neuroblastoma.

Rader J(1), Russell MR, Hart LS, Nakazawa MS, Belcastro LT, Martinez D, Li Y,
Carpenter EL, Attiyeh EF, Diskin SJ, Kim S, Parasuraman S, Caponigro G, Schnepp
RW, Wood AC, Pawel B, Cole KA, Maris JM.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Division of Oncology and Center for Childhood Cancer
Research; Division of Pathology, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia; Department 
of Pediatrics; Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; and
Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

PURPOSE: Neuroblastoma is a pediatric cancer that continues to exact significant 
morbidity and mortality. Recently, a number of cell-cycle proteins, particularly 
those within the Cyclin D/CDK4/CDK6/RB network, have been shown to exert
oncogenic roles in neuroblastoma, suggesting that their therapeutic exploitation 
might improve patient outcomes.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES: We evaluated the effect of dual CDK4/CDK6 inhibition on 
neuroblastoma viability using LEE011 (Novartis Oncology), a highly specific
CDK4/6 inhibitor.
RESULTS: Treatment with LEE011 significantly reduced proliferation in 12 of 17
human neuroblastoma-derived cell lines by inducing cytostasis at nanomolar
concentrations (mean IC50 = 307 ± 68 nmol/L in sensitive lines). LEE011 caused
cell-cycle arrest and cellular senescence that was attributed to dose-dependent
decreases in phosphorylated RB and FOXM1, respectively. In addition,
responsiveness of neuroblastoma xenografts to LEE011 translated to the in vivo
setting in that there was a direct correlation of in vitro IC50 values with
degree of subcutaneous xenograft growth delay. Although our data indicate that
neuroblastomas sensitive to LEE011 were more likely to contain genomic
amplification of MYCN (P = 0.01), the identification of additional clinically
accessible biomarkers is of high importance.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data show that LEE011 is active in a large
subset of neuroblastoma cell line and xenograft models, and supports the clinical
development of this CDK4/6 inhibitor as a therapy for patients with this disease.
Clin Cancer Res; 19(22); 6173-82. ©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3844928
PMID: 24045179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Hepat Mon. 2013 Jun 22;13(6):e9055. doi: 10.5812/hepatmon.9055. eCollection 2013.

The effects of Leptin and Adiponectin on Pdx1, Foxm1, and PPAR<U+03B3> Transcription in 
Rat Islets of Langerhans.

Mahmoodzadeh Sagheb M(1), Azarpira N, Mokhtary M, Hosseini SE, Yaghobi R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Shiraz, IR Iran.

BACKGROUND: Leptin and adiponectin are two hormones, which are released from
adipocytes in order to control energy expenditure. Both hormones are also
involved in glucose homeostasis through control of insulin secretion from
pancreatic islets. Since Pdx1, PPAR<U+03B3>, and foxm1 play important roles in islets
function, it is essential to understand how these genes are regulated in the
islets of Langerhans.
OBJECTIVES: We have designed an experiment to identify the effect of leptin and
adiponectin treatment on Pdx1, PPAR<U+03B3>, and foxm1 transcription.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Islets were isolated from adult male rats by collagenase
and incubated with different concentrations of leptin and adiponectin for 24
hours. Next, by means of real time PCR, we evaluated the gene transcription
related to a housekeeping gene. The effect of leptin and adiponectin on insulin
secretion was evaluated by ELISA.
RESULTS: Leptin decreased PPAR<U+03B3> transcription and insulin secretion, while
adiponectin significantly increased Pdx1 and PPAR<U+03B3> transcription and insulin
secretion in rat islets. The transcription of foxm1 did not change in the islet
cells treated with leptin or adiponectin.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate the possibility that Pdx1 and PPAR<U+03B3>
transcription is a mediator of leptin and adiponectin function in control of
insulin secretion and glucose homeostasis in pancreatic islets.

PMCID: PMC3759780
PMID: 24032047  [PubMed]


330. J Transl Med. 2013 Sep 3;11:204. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-204.

Forkhead box transcription factor 1 expression in gastric cancer: FOXM1 is a poor
prognostic factor and mediates resistance to docetaxel.

Li X(1), Qiu W, Liu B, Yao R, Liu S, Yao Y, Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Affiliated Hospital of Medical College Qingdao
University, 16 Jiangsu Road, Qingdao 266003, China. ljqyfy@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Forkhead box transcription factor 1 (FOXM1) has been reported to
overexpress and correlate with pathogenesis in a variety of human malignancies.
However, little research has been done to investigate its clinical significance
in gastric cancer.
METHODS: We examined the expression of FOXM1 in 103 postoperational gastric
cancer tissues and 5 gastric cell lines by immunohistochemistry and western blot 
analysis respectively. Data on clinic-pathological features and relevant
prognostic factors in these patients were then analyzed. Moreover, the
association of FOXM1 expression and chemosensitivity to docetaxel in gastric
cancer cells was further explored.
RESULTS: Our study demonstrated that the level of FOXM1 expression was
significantly higher in gastric cancer than in para-cancer tissues (P < 0.001)
and normal gastric cell lines (P = 0.026). No significant association was found
between FOXM1 expression and any clinical pathological features (P > 0.1). FOXM1 
amplification was identified as an independent prognostic factor in gastric
cancer (P = 0.001), and its affection is more significant in patients with tumor 
size larger than 5 cm (P = 0.004), pT3-4 (P = 0.003) or pIII-IV (P = 0.001).
Additionally, shown to mediate docetaxel resistance in gastric cancers by our
research, FOXM1 was revealed to alter microtubule dynamics in response to the
treatment of docetaxel, and the drug resistance could be reversed with FOXM1
inhibitor thiostrepton treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXM1 can be a useful marker for predicting patients' prognosis and 
monitoring docetaxel response, and might be a new therapeutic target in docetaxel
resistant gastric cancer.

PMCID: PMC3766246
PMID: 24004449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 26;8(8):e72376. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0072376. eCollection
2013.

FoxM1 promotes glioma cells progression by up-regulating Anxa1 expression.

Cheng SX(1), Tu Y, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Traumatic Brain Injury and Nervous Diseases of Chinese People's
Armed Police Forces, Center for Neurology and Neurosurgery of Affiliated Hospital
of Logistics College of CPAPF, Tianjin, China.

Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is a member of the forkhead transcription factor family
and is overexpression in malignant gliomas. However, the molecular mechanisms by 
which FoxM1lead to glioma carcinogenesis and progression are still not well
known. In the present study, we show that Anxa1 was overexpression in gliomas and
predicted the poor outcome. Furthermore, Anxa1 closely related to the FoxM1
expression and was a direct transcriptional target of FoxM1. Overexpression of
FoxM1 up-regulated Anxa1 expression, whereas suppression of FoxM1 expression
down-regulated Anxa1 expression in glioma cells. Finally, FoxM1 enhanced the
proliferation, migration, and angiogenesis in Anxa1-dependent manner both in
vitro and in vivo. Our findings provide both clinical and mechanistic evidences
that FoxM1 contributes to glioma development by directly up-regulating Anxa1
expression.

PMCID: PMC3753245
PMID: 23991102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Aug;26(7):1052-60. doi: 10.1071/RD13140.

FOXM1 is lower in human fetal membranes after spontaneous preterm labour and
delivery.

Lim R(1), Barker G(1), Lappas M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Vic. 3010, Australia.

Spontaneous preterm birth is usually associated with infection, inflammation or
both. Forkhead box (FOX) M1 (FOXM1), a member of the FOX family of transcription 
factors, has been associated with inflammation. The aim of this study was to
determine whether FOXM1 regulates the expression and release of pro-labour
mediators in human gestational tissues. FOXM1 mRNA and protein expression were
determined in fetal membranes from women at (1) preterm no labour: Caesarean
section with no labour and (2) preterm labour: after spontaneous labour and
delivery. Primary amnion cells were utilised to investigate the effect of small
interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated gene silencing of FOXM1 on pro-labour mediators.
Spontaneous preterm labour decreased FOXM1 gene and nuclear protein expression.
FOXM1 silencing in primary amnion cells increased interleukin (IL)-1ß-induced
pro-inflammatory cytokines (IL-6 and IL-8 mRNA expression and secretion),
cyclooxygenase (COX)-2 expression and subsequent prostaglandin (PG)E2 and PGF2a
release as well as gene expression and secretion of the matrix-degrading enzyme
matrix metalloproteinase 9 (MMP-9). In conclusion, spontaneous preterm labour is 
associated with decreased FOXM1 expression in fetal membranes.

PMID: 23953749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Oncol Rep. 2013 Oct;30(4):1739-44. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2654. Epub 2013 Aug 2.

Inhibition of FOXM1 by thiostrepton sensitizes medulloblastoma to the effects of 
chemotherapy.

Lin J(1), Zheng Y, Chen K, Huang Z, Wu X, Zhang N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510080, P.R. China.

Medulloblastoma (MB) is the most common malignant brain tumor in children and is 
highly invasive and metastatic. Despite recent advances, most MB patients suffer 
significant therapy-related morbidity, and the survival rate for patients with
metastatic MB remains unsatisfactory. Altered expression of FOXM1 has been
detected in many types of cancers, and the inhibition of FOXM1 has been studied
as a cancer therapy. In the present study, we evaluated the impact of the
inhibition of FOXM1 by thiostrepton in Daoy MB cells. Cells were treated with
different concentrations of thiostrepton alone or in combination with cisplatin. 
Cell viability was measured with CCK-8 assays, and cell cycle distribution and
apoptosis were assessed by flow cytometric analysis. Changes in protein
expression were examined by western blotting. RNAi experiments were performed
using siRNA oligonucleotides. The invasion and migration studies were performed
using 8-µm Transwell plates. Inhibition of FOXM1 by thiostrepton significantly
decreased MB cell proliferation. Cell arrest at the G2/M phase and apoptosis were
significantly increased in MB cell lines that were treated with thiostrepton or
transfected with siRNA. Thiostrepton decreased the IC50 value of cisplatin for MB
treatment by enhancing cisplatin-induced apoptosis. Thiostrepton also decreased
cell invasion and migration, which are crucial steps for tumor progression. Our
data suggest that targeting FOXM1 with small-molecule inhibitors results in
potent antitumor activity and chemosensitizing effects in human medulloblastoma
cells.

PMID: 23912794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2014 Feb;71(4):711-25. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1428-8. Epub
2013 Aug 2.

Human mitochondrial Fis1 links to cell cycle regulators at G2/M transition.

Lee S(1), Park YY, Kim SH, Nguyen OT, Yoo YS, Chan GK, Sun X, Cho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Ajou University School of Medicine, 5
Wonchon-dong, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon, 443-721, Korea.

We have previously shown that prolonged mitochondrial elongation triggers
cellular senescence. Here, we report that enforced mitochondrial elongation by
hFis1 depletion caused a severe defect in cell cycle progression through G2/M
phase (~3-fold reduction in mitotic index; p < 0.01). Reintroduction of Myc-hFis1
to these cells induced mitochondrial fragmentation and restored the cell cycle,
indicating that morphodynamic changes of mitochondria closely link to the cell
cycle. In hFis1-knockdown cells, cell cycle regulators governing the G2/M phase, 
including cyclin A, cyclin B1, cyclin-dependent kinase1 (Cdk1), polo-like kinase1
(Plk1), aurora kinase A and Mad2, were significantly suppressed (2- to 10-fold). 
Notably, however, when mitochondrial fragmentation was induced by double
knockdown of hFis1 and Opa1, the cells regained their ability to enter mitosis,
and cell cycle regulators were rebounded. Reconstitution of the cyclin B1/Cdk1
complex, a major regulator of the G2/M transition, failed to restore mitotic
entry in hFis1-depleted cells. In contrast, expression of Plk1, an upstream
regulator of the cyclin B1/Cdk1 complex, or FoxM1 (forkhead box M1), a master
transcriptional factor for the cell cycle regulators of G2/M phase, restored the 
cell cycle in these cells. Our findings suggest that mitochondrial fission
molecule hFis1 ensures the proper cell division by interplay with the cell cycle 
machinery.

PMID: 23907611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Clin Transl Oncol. 2014 Mar;16(3):307-14. doi: 10.1007/s12094-013-1076-3. Epub
2013 Jul 20.

Overexpressed transcription factor FOXM1 is a potential diagnostic and adverse
prognostic factor in postoperational gastric cancer patients.

Li X(1), Qi W, Yao R, Tang D, Liang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology of the Affiliated Hospital of Medical College Qingdao
University, 16 Jiangsu Road, Qingdao, 266003, China.

PURPOSE: In the present study, we intend to detect the expression of Forkhead box
transcription (FOXM1) in gastric cancer tissues and cell lines, and analyze the
correlation between FOXM1 expression and clinic-pathological features as well as 
their association with clinic outcomes in patients with resectable gastric
cancers.
METHODS: We examined the expression of FOXM1 in 103 cancer tissues from patients 
who underwent gastrectomy during Jan 2007 to Nov 2007 and 68 randomly selected
para-cancer tissues by immunohistochemistry. The expression of FOXM1 protein in
the benign and malignant human gastric cell lines was simultaneously detected
using Western blot analysis. Data on clinic-pathological features and relevant
prognostic factors in these patients were then analyzed.
RESULTS: FOXM1 expression was absolutely higher in gastric cancer than
para-cancer tissues (P < 0.001) and normal gastric epithelium cell lines
(P = 0.022). No significant association was found between FOXM1 expression and
any clinic-pathological parameters (P > 0.1). FOXM1 amplification was showed to
be independently associated with prognosis in gastric cancer patients
(P = 0.001), and its affection is more significant in patients with tumor size
larger than 5 cm (P = 0.004), pT3-4 (P = 0.003) or pIII-IV (P = 0.001) as a
result of stage-stratified analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpressed FOXM1 is a potential diagnostic and poor prognostic
biomarker in postoperational gastric cancer patients.

PMID: 23873251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Adv Cancer Res. 2013;119:191-419. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407190-2.00016-2.

FOXM1 (Forkhead box M1) in tumorigenesis: overexpression in human cancer,
implication in tumorigenesis, oncogenic functions, tumor-suppressive properties, 
and target of anticancer therapy.

Wierstra I(1).

Author information: 
(1)iwiwiwi@web.de

FOXM1 (Forkhead box M1) is a typical proliferation-associated transcription
factor and is also intimately involved in tumorigenesis. FOXM1 stimulates cell
proliferation and cell cycle progression by promoting the entry into S-phase and 
M-phase. Additionally, FOXM1 is required for proper execution of mitosis. In
accordance with its role in stimulation of cell proliferation, FOXM1 exhibits a
proliferation-specific expression pattern and its expression is regulated by
proliferation and anti-proliferation signals as well as by proto-oncoproteins and
tumor suppressors. Since these factors are often mutated, overexpressed, or lost 
in human cancer, the normal control of the foxm1 expression by them provides the 
basis for deregulated FOXM1 expression in tumors. Accordingly, FOXM1 is
overexpressed in many types of human cancer. FOXM1 is intimately involved in
tumorigenesis, because it contributes to oncogenic transformation and
participates in tumor initiation, growth, and progression, including positive
effects on angiogenesis, migration, invasion, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, 
metastasis, recruitment of tumor-associated macrophages, tumor-associated lung
inflammation, self-renewal capacity of cancer cells, prevention of premature
cellular senescence, and chemotherapeutic drug resistance. However, in the
context of urethane-induced lung tumorigenesis, FOXM1 has an unexpected tumor
suppressor role in endothelial cells because it limits pulmonary inflammation and
canonical Wnt signaling in epithelial lung cells, thereby restricting
carcinogenesis. Accordingly, FOXM1 plays a role in homologous recombination
repair of DNA double-strand breaks and maintenance of genomic stability, that is,
prevention of polyploidy and aneuploidy. The implication of FOXM1 in
tumorigenesis makes it an attractive target for anticancer therapy, and several
antitumor drugs have been reported to decrease FOXM1 expression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23870513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Int J Oncol. 2013 Sep;43(3):803-12. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.2016. Epub 2013 Jul 12.

The dual inhibitory effect of thiostrepton on FoxM1 and EWS/FLI1 provides a novel
therapeutic option for Ewing's sarcoma.

Sengupta A(1), Rahman M, Mateo-Lozano S, Tirado OM, Notario V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Medicine, Molecular Oncology Program, Lombardi
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC
20057, USA.

The poor prognosis of Ewing's sarcoma (EWS), together with its high lethal
recurrence rate and the side-effects of current treatments, call for novel
targeted therapies with greater curative effectiveness and substantially reduced 
side-effects. The oncogenic chimeric protein EWS/FLI1 is the key malignancy
driver in most EWSs, regulating numerous target genes, many of which influence
cell cycle progression. It has often been argued that targeting proteins
regulated directly or indirectly by EWS/FLI1 may provide improved therapeutic
options for EWS. In this context, our study examined FoxM1, a key cell cycle
regulating transcription factor, reported to be expressed in EWS and influenced
by EWS/FLI1. Thiostrepton, a naturally occurring small molecule, has been shown
to selectively inhibit FoxM1 expression in cancer cells. We demonstrate that in
EWS, in addition to inhibiting FoxM1 expression, thiostrepton downregulates the
expression of EWS/FLI1, both at the mRNA and protein levels, leading to cell
cycle arrest and, ultimately, to apoptotic cell death. We also show that
thiostrepton treatment reduces the tumorigenicity of EWS cells, significantly
delaying the growth of nude mouse xenograft tumors. Results from this study
demonstrate a novel action of thiostrepton as inhibitor of the expression of the 
EWS/FLI1 oncoprotein in vitro and in vivo, and that it shows greater efficacy
against EWS than against other tumor types, as it is active on EWS cells and
tumors at concentrations lower than those reported to have effective inhibitory
activity on tumor cells derived from other cancers. Owing to the dual action of
this small molecule, our findings suggest that thiostrepton may be particularly
effective as a novel agent for the treatment of EWS patients.

PMCID: PMC3787886
PMID: 23857410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Cancer Lett. 2013 Oct 28;340(1):104-12. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2013.07.004. Epub
2013 Jul 12.

FOXM1 promotes the epithelial to mesenchymal transition by stimulating the
transcription of Slug in human breast cancer.

Yang C(1), Chen H, Tan G, Gao W, Cheng L, Jiang X, Yu L, Tan Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Biology,
Collaborative Innovation Center for Chemistry and Molecular Medicine, Hunan
University, Changsha, Hunan 410082, China.

The Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor is involved in tumorigenesis and
tumor progression in multiple human carcinomas. In this study, we found that
FOXM1 promoted the epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) in human breast
cancer. We observed a strong correlation between the expression levels of FOXM1
and the mesenchymal phenotype. Knockdown of FOXM1 inhibited the mesenchymal
phenotype, whereas stable overexpression of FOXM1 induced EMT in breast cancer
cells. FOXM1 was found to endogenously bind to and stimulate the promoter of Slug
that is crucial for EMT progression. The knockdown of Slug abolished the
EMT-inducing function of FOXM1. The stable overexpression of FOXM1 promoted
metastasis of breast cancer cells in vivo. This study confirmed that FOXM1
promoted EMT in breast cancer cells by stimulating the transcription of
EMT-related genes such as Slug.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23856032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Curr Drug Targets. 2013 Sep;14(10):1192-202.

Signaling of miRNAs-FOXM1 in cancer and potential targeted therapy.

Shi M(1), Cui J, Xie K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Ruijin
Hospital, Shanghai, Peoples Republic of China.

The transcription factor Forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) is overexpressed in the 
majority of cancer patients. This overexpression is implicated to play a role in 
the pathogenesis, progression, and metastasis of cancer. This important role of
FOXM1 demonstrates its significance to cancer therapy. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are
small noncoding, endogenous, single-stranded RNAs that are pivotal
posttranscriptional gene expression regulators. MiRNAs aberrantly expressed in
cancer cells have important roles in tumorigenesis and progression. Currently,
miRNAs are being studied as diagnostic and prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic 
tools for cancer. The rapid discovery of many target miRNAs and their relevant
pathways has contributed to the development of miRNA-based therapeutics for
cancer. In this review, we summarize the latest and most significant findings on 
FOXM1 and miRNA involvement in cancer development and describe the role/roles of 
miRNA/FOXM1 signaling pathways in cancer initiation and progression. Targeting
FOXM1 via regulation of miRNA expression may have a role in cancer treatment,
although the miRNA delivery method remains the key challenge to the establishment
of this novel therapy.

PMCID: PMC4081534
PMID: 23834153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Chin J Cancer. 2013 Jul;32(7):363-4. doi: 10.5732/cjc.013.10114.

Targeted therapy: tailoring cancer treatment.

Yan M(1), Liu QQ.

Author information: 
(1)Research Department, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

Targeted therapies include small-molecule inhibitors and monoclonal antibodies,
have made treatment more tumor-specific and less toxic, and have opened new
possibilities for tailoring cancer treatment. Nevertheless, there remain several 
challenges to targeted therapies, including molecular identification, drug
resistance, and exploring reliable biomarkers. Here, we present several selected 
signaling pathways and molecular targets involved in human cancers including
Aurora kinases, PI3K/mTOR signaling, FOXO-FOXM1 axis, and MDM2/MDM4-p53
interaction. Understanding the molecular mechanisms for tumorigenesis and
development of drug resistance will provide new insights into drug discovery and 
design of therapeutic strategies for targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC3845608
PMID: 23823626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Scand J Surg. 2013;102(2):101-5. doi: 10.1177/1457496913482250.

Human early liver regeneration after hepatectomy in patients with hepatocellular 
carcinoma: special reference to age.

Shirabe K(1), Motomura T, Takeishi K, Morita K, Kayashima H, Taketomi A, Ikegami 
T, Soejima Y, Yoshizumi T, Maehara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Sciences, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: This study was conducted to clarify the effects of age on
human liver regeneration.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Thirty major hepatectomies, equal to or more than two
segmentectomies for hepatocellular carcinoma, were performed. Ages ranged from 37
to 85 years and five octogenarians were included. The early regenerative index
was defined: (liver volume after 7 days after hepatectomy - estimated remnant
liver volume before hepatectomy)/estimated remnant liver volume, using
three-dimensional computed tomographic volumetry. Farnesoid X receptor and
forkhead box m1 expression in the liver, which has been reported to age-related
decrease of liver regeneration in animal model, were examined using real-time
polymerase chain reaction. The patients were divided into two groups: low early
regenerative index (n = 15), early regenerative index less than 55% and high
early regenerative index (n = 15), early regenerative index equal to or more than
55%.
RESULTS: The mean early regenerative index was 57%. Age (R (2) = 0.274, P =
0.003) and estimated blood loss (R (2) = 0.134, P = 0.0466) were inversely
correlated with the early regenerative index, and the expression of farnesoid X
receptor and forkhead box m1 was not. The incidence of post-hepatectomy liver
failure in the low early regenerative index group was higher than that in the
high early regenerative index group (P = 0.0421).
CONCLUSIONS: Age and intraoperative blood loss are inversely correlated with
early liver regeneration in humans. In elderly patients, massive blood loss
should be avoided in view of liver regeneration.

PMID: 23820685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. BMC Cancer. 2013 Jul 3;13:327. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-327.

Activation of AMPK inhibits cervical cancer cell growth through AKT/FOXO3a/FOXM1 
signaling cascade.

Yung MM(1), Chan DW, Liu VW, Yao KM, Ngan HY.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Although advanced-stage cervical cancer can benefit from current
treatments, approximately 30% patients may fail after definitive treatment
eventually. Therefore, exploring alternative molecular therapeutic approaches is 
imperatively needed for this disease. We have recently shown that activation of
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), a metabolic sensor, hampers cervical cancer 
cell growth through blocking the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling activity. Here, we
report that activated AMPK (p-AMPK) also inhibits cervical cancer cell growth by 
counteracting FOXM1 function.
METHODS: Effect of the activation of AMPK on FOXM1 expression was examined by
hypoxia and glucose deprivation, as well as pharmacological AMPK activators such 
as A23187, AICAR and metformin. RT Q-PCR and Western blot analysis were employed 
to investigate the activities of AMPK, FOXM1 and AKT/FOXO3a signaling.
RESULTS: Consistent with our previous findings, the activation of AMPK by either 
AMPK activators such as AICAR, A23187, metformin, glucose deprivation or hypoxia 
significantly inhibited the cervical cancer cell growth. Importantly, we found
that activated AMPK activity was concomitantly associated with the reduction of
both the mRNA and protein levels of FOXM1. Mechanistically, we showed that
activated AMPK was able to reduce AKT mediated phosphorylation of p-FOXO3a
(Ser253). Interestingly, activated AMPK could not cause any significant changes
in FOXM1 in cervical cancer cells in which endogenous FOXO3a levels were knocked 
down using siRNAs, suggesting that FOXO3a is involved in the suppression of
FOXM1.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our results suggest the activated AMPK impedes
cervical cancer cell growth through reducing the expression of FOXM1.

PMCID: PMC3702529
PMID: 23819460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Oncogene. 2014 May 29;33(22):2888-97. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.250. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

LXRa-mediated downregulation of FOXM1 suppresses the proliferation of
hepatocellular carcinoma cells.

Hu C(1), Liu D(2), Zhang Y(1), Lou G(1), Huang G(1), Chen B(1), Shen X(1), Gao
M(1), Gong W(1), Zhou P(1), Dai S(1), Zeng Y(1), He F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medical
Sciences, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China. (2)1] Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medical Sciences, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, China [2] Depeartment of State Key
Laboratory of Trauma, Burns and Combined Injury, Daping Hospital and Institute of
Surgery Research, Chongqing, China.

Liver X receptors (LXRs), including LXRa and LXRß isoforms, have important roles 
in the metabolic regulation of glucose, cholesterol and lipid. Moreover,
activation of LXRs also represses the expression of cyclin D1 and cyclin B1, and 
thus suppresses the proliferation of multiple cancer cells, but the relevant
mechanism is not well known. Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is a proliferation-specific 
member of forkhead box family, which is highly expressed in proliferating normal 
cells and numerous cancer cells. FOXM1 directly activates transcription of cyclin
D1 and cyclin B1, resulting in the enhancement of cell cycle progression and cell
proliferation. However, it is unclear whether LXRs are involved in the regulation
of FOXM1. In this study, we demonstrated that specific LXRs agonists
downregulated expression of FOXM1, cyclin D1 and cyclin B1 in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) cells, which led to cell cycle and cell proliferation arrest.
Knockdown of FOXM1 significantly alleviated LXRs activation-mediated cell cycle
arrest and cell growth suppression. Reporter assays showed that the activation of
LXRs significantly reduced the transcriptional activity of FOXM1 promoter.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that LXRa but not LXRß could bind to an inverted repeat IR2
(-52CCGTCAcgTGACCT-39) in the promoter region of FOXM1 gene. Moreover, the
xenograft tumor growth and the corresponding FOXM1 expression in nude mice were
dramatically repressed by LXRs agonists. Taken together, we conclude that LXRa
but not LXRß functions as a transcriptional repressor for FOXM1 expression. The
pathway 'LXRa-FOXM1-cyclin D1/cyclin B1' is a novel mechanism by which LXRs
suppress the proliferation of HCC cells, suggesting that the pathway may be a
novel target for HCC treatment.

PMID: 23812424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Cell Physiol. 2014 Jan;229(1):108-16. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24425.

Activated ERK/FOXM1 pathway by low-power laser irradiation inhibits UVB-induced
senescence through down-regulating p21 expression.

Ling Q(1), Meng C, Chen Q, Xing D.

Author information: 
(1)MOE Key Laboratory of Laser Life Science & Institute of Laser Life Science,
College of Biophotonics, South China Normal University, Guangzhou, China.

Cellular senescence is a growth-arrest program that limits cell proliferation.
Low-power laser irradiation (LPLI) has been demonstrated to promote cell
proliferation. However, whether LPLI can inhibit cellular senescence remains
unknown. In the present study, to investigate the functional role of LPLI against
skin aging, we used ultraviolet radiation b (UVB) to induce cell senescence. We
first report that LPLI can delay UVB-induced cell senescence. The
senescence-associated ß-galactosidase (SA-ß-Gal) activity and p21 expression,
hallmarks of senescent cells, were decreased in the Forkhead box transcription
factor FOXM1-dependent manner under treatment with LPLI. The effect of LPLI was
further enhanced with an overexpression of FOXM1, and abolished when FOXM1 was
knockdown with short hairpin RNA (shRNA). Furthermore, LPLI activated the
extracellular regulated protein kinases (ERK) that was upstream of FOXM1. This
led to FOXM1 phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. Nuclear translocation
enhanced FOXM1 transcriptional activity and promoted its downstream target gene
c-Myc expression that could inhibit p21 expression. These findings highlight the 
protective effects of ERK/FOXM1 pathway against UVB-induced cell senescence,
suggesting a potential protecting strategy for treating skin aging by LPLI.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23804320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 11;8(6):e65745. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065745. Print 2013.

2-deprenyl-rheediaxanthone B isolated from Metaxya rostrata induces active cell
death in colorectal tumor cells.

Kainz KP(1), Krenn L, Erdem Z, Kaehlig H, Zehl M, Bursch W, Berger W, Marian B.

Author information: 
(1)Medical University Vienna, Department of Medicine 1, Institute of Cancer
Research, Vienna, Austria.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(9). doi:10.1371/annotation/f4e4a7b2-f60d-4102-a56f-37666aafd7e1.

Metaxya rostrata C. Presl (Metaxyaceae) is a common tree fern in Central and
South America that is used for the treatment of intestinal ulcers and tumours in 
ethnic medicine. Using a bioactivity-guided strategy 2-deprenyl-rheediaxanthone B
(XB) has been isolated as one of the active principles in this plant. XB induced 
loss of cell viability in colorectal cancer cell lines at IC50 concentrations of 
11-23 µM. This was caused by both accumulation of cells in the G2- and S-phase as
well as by induction of active cell death in a time and concentration-dependent
manner. Cells exposed to XB were incapable of undergoing regular mitosis due to
down-regulation of FoxM1 and absence of chromosome condensation. The
apoptosis-related proteins Bcl2 and Bclxl were up-regulated so that Caspase 3 was
not activated and classical apoptosis was not observed. However, XB triggered
damage pathways down-stream of ATR and activated Caspase 2 causing cell death by 
a mechanism similar to mitotic catastrophe. Our observations are the first to
show the cytotoxic activity of 2-deprenyl-rheediaxanthone B and indicate that XB 
is an interesting new lead compound for cancer therapy that merits further
development.

PMCID: PMC3679105
PMID: 23776538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Biol Chem. 2013 Aug 2;288(31):22527-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.455089. Epub 2013
Jun 17.

Foxm1 expression in prostate epithelial cells is essential for prostate
carcinogenesis.

Cai Y(1), Balli D, Ustiyan V, Fulford L, Hiller A, Misetic V, Zhang Y, Paluch AM,
Waltz SE, Kasper S, Kalin TV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, the Perinatal Institute of Cincinnati
Children's Research Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

The treatment of advanced prostate cancer (PCa) remains a challenge.
Identification of new molecular mechanisms that regulate PCa initiation and
progression would provide targets for the development of new cancer treatments.
The Foxm1 transcription factor is highly up-regulated in tumor cells,
inflammatory cells, and cells of tumor microenvironment. However, its functions
in different cell populations of PCa lesions are unknown. To determine the role
of Foxm1 in tumor cells during PCa development, we generated two novel transgenic
mouse models, one exhibiting Foxm1 gain-of-function and one exhibiting Foxm1
loss-of-function under control of the prostate epithelial-specific Probasin
promoter. In the transgenic adenocarcinoma mouse prostate (TRAMP) model of PCa
that uses SV40 large T antigen to induce PCa, loss of Foxm1 decreased tumor
growth and metastasis. Decreased prostate tumorigenesis was associated with a
decrease in tumor cell proliferation and the down-regulation of genes critical
for cell proliferation and tumor metastasis, including Cdc25b, Cyclin B1, Plk-1, 
Lox, and Versican. In addition, tumor-associated angiogenesis was decreased,
coinciding with reduced Vegf-A expression. The mRNA and protein levels of
11ß-Hsd2, an enzyme playing an important role in tumor cell proliferation, were
down-regulated in Foxm1-deficient PCa tumors in vivo and in Foxm1-depleted TRAMP 
C2 cells in vitro. Foxm1 bound to, and increased transcriptional activity of, the
mouse 11ß-Hsd2 promoter through the -892/-879 region, indicating that 11ß-Hsd2
was a direct transcriptional target of Foxm1. Without TRAMP, overexpression of
Foxm1 either alone or in combination with inhibition of a p19(ARF) tumor
suppressor caused a robust epithelial hyperplasia, but was insufficient to induce
progression from hyperplasia to PCa. Foxm1 expression in prostate epithelial
cells is critical for prostate carcinogenesis, suggesting that inhibition of
Foxm1 is a promising therapeutic approach for prostate cancer chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC3829340
PMID: 23775078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Biochem J. 2013 Sep 1;454(2):201-8. doi: 10.1042/BJ20130282.

ROS inhibitor N-acetyl-L-cysteine antagonizes the activity of proteasome
inhibitors.

Halasi M(1), Wang M, Chavan TS, Gaponenko V, Hay N, Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612, USA.

NAC (N-acetyl-L-cysteine) is commonly used to identify and test ROS (reactive
oxygen species) inducers, and to inhibit ROS. In the present study, we identified
inhibition of proteasome inhibitors as a novel activity of NAC. Both NAC and
catalase, another known scavenger of ROS, similarly inhibited ROS levels and
apoptosis associated with H2O2. However, only NAC, and not catalase or another
ROS scavenger Trolox, was able to prevent effects linked to proteasome
inhibition, such as protein stabilization, apoptosis and accumulation of
ubiquitin conjugates. These observations suggest that NAC has a dual activity as 
an inhibitor of ROS and proteasome inhibitors. Recently, NAC was used as a ROS
inhibitor to functionally characterize a novel anticancer compound,
piperlongumine, leading to its description as a ROS inducer. In contrast, our own
experiments showed that this compound depicts features of proteasome inhibitors
including suppression of FOXM1 (Forkhead box protein M1), stabilization of
cellular proteins, induction of ROS-independent apoptosis and enhanced
accumulation of ubiquitin conjugates. In addition, NAC, but not catalase or
Trolox, interfered with the activity of piperlongumine, further supporting that
piperlongumine is a proteasome inhibitor. Most importantly, we showed that NAC,
but not other ROS scavengers, directly binds to proteasome inhibitors. To our
knowledge, NAC is the first known compound that directly interacts with and
antagonizes the activity of proteasome inhibitors. Taken together, the findings
of the present study suggest that, as a result of the dual nature of NAC, data
interpretation might not be straightforward when NAC is utilized as an
antioxidant to demonstrate ROS involvement in drug-induced apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC4322432
PMID: 23772801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Adv Cancer Res. 2013;118:97-398. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-407173-5.00004-2.

The transcription factor FOXM1 (Forkhead box M1): proliferation-specific
expression, transcription factor function, target genes, mouse models, and normal
biological roles.

Wierstra I(1).

Author information: 
(1)iwiwiwi@web.de

FOXM1 (Forkhead box M1) is a typical proliferation-associated transcription
factor, which stimulates cell proliferation and exhibits a proliferation-specific
expression pattern. Accordingly, both the expression and the transcriptional
activity of FOXM1 are increased by proliferation signals, but decreased by
antiproliferation signals, including the positive and negative regulation by
protooncoproteins or tumor suppressors, respectively. FOXM1 stimulates cell cycle
progression by promoting the entry into S-phase and M-phase. Moreover, FOXM1 is
required for proper execution of mitosis. Accordingly, FOXM1 regulates the
expression of genes, whose products control G1/S-transition, S-phase progression,
G2/M-transition, and M-phase progression. Additionally, FOXM1 target genes encode
proteins with functions in the execution of DNA replication and mitosis. FOXM1 is
a transcriptional activator with a forkhead domain as DNA binding domain and with
a very strong acidic transactivation domain. However, wild-type FOXM1 is (almost)
inactive because the transactivation domain is repressed by three inhibitory
domains. Inactive FOXM1 can be converted into a very potent transactivator by
activating signals, which release the transactivation domain from its inhibition 
by the inhibitory domains. FOXM1 is essential for embryonic development and the
foxm1 knockout is embryonically lethal. In adults, FOXM1 is important for tissue 
repair after injury. FOXM1 prevents premature senescence and interferes with
contact inhibition. FOXM1 plays a role for maintenance of stem cell pluripotency 
and for self-renewal capacity of stem cells. The functions of FOXM1 in prevention
of polyploidy and aneuploidy and in homologous recombination repair of
DNA-double-strand breaks suggest an importance of FOXM1 for the maintenance of
genomic stability and chromosomal integrity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23768511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Biochem Res Int. 2013;2013:506731. doi: 10.1155/2013/506731. Epub 2013 May 16.

miR-149 Inhibits Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer Cells EMT by Targeting FOXM1.

Ke Y(1), Zhao W, Xiong J, Cao R.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430022, China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been implied to play crucial roles for
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) of non-small-cell lung cancer cells
(NSCLC cells). Here we found that the expression of miR-149, downregulated in
lung cancer, was inversely correlated with invasive capability and the EMT
phenotype of NSCLC cells. miR-149 inhibited EMT in NSCLC cells. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that miR-149 directly targeted Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1), and FOXM1
was involved in the EMT induced by TGF- ß 1 in A549 cells. Overexpression of
FOXM1 restored EMT process inhibited by miR-149. Our work suggested that miR-149 
might be an EMT suppressor in NSCLC cells.

PMCID: PMC3671264
PMID: 23762558  [PubMed]


350. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 6;8(6):e65686. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0065686. Print 2013.

An antimitotic and antivascular agent BPR0L075 overcomes multidrug resistance and
induces mitotic catastrophe in paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells.

Wang X(1), Wu E, Wu J, Wang TL, Hsieh HP, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech
University Health Sciences Center, Amarillo, Texas, United States of America.

Paclitaxel plays a major role in the treatment of ovarian cancer; however,
resistance to paclitaxel is frequently observed. Thus, new therapy that can
overcome paclitaxel resistance will be of significant clinical importance. We
evaluated antiproliferative effects of an antimitotic and antivascular agent
BPR0L075 in paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells. BPR0L075 displays potent
and broad-spectrum cytotoxicity at low nanomolar concentrations (IC50<U+200A>=<U+200A>2-7 nM)
against both parental ovarian cancer cells (OVCAR-3, SKOV-3, and A2780-1A9) and
paclitaxel-resistant sublines (OVCAR-3-TR, SKOV-3-TR, 1A9-PTX10), regardless of
the expression levels of the multidrug resistance transporter P-gp and class III 
ß-tubulin or mutation of ß-tubulin. BPR0L075 blocks cell cycle at the G2/M phase 
in paclitaxel-resistant cells while equal concentration of paclitaxel treatment
was ineffective. BPR0L075 induces cell death by a dual mechanism in parental and 
paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells. In the parental cells (OVCAR-3 and
SKOV-3), BPR0L075 induced apoptosis, evidenced by poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) cleavage and DNA ladder formation. BPR0L075 induced cell death in
paclitaxel-resistant ovarian cancer cells (OVCAR-3-TR and SKOV-3-TR) is primarily
due to mitotic catastrophe, evidenced by formation of giant, multinucleated cells
and absence of PARP cleavage. Immunoblotting analysis shows that BPR0L075
treatment induced up-regulation of cyclin B1, BubR1, MPM-2, and survivin protein 
levels and Bcl-XL phosphorylation in parental cells; however, in resistant cells,
the endogenous expressions of BubR1 and survivin were depleted, BPR0L075
treatment failed to induce MPM-2 expression and phosphorylation of Bcl-XL.
BPR0L075 induced cell death in both parental and paclitaxel-resistant ovarian
cancer cells proceed through caspase-3 independent mechanisms. In conclusion,
BPR0L075 displays potent cytotoxic effects in ovarian cancer cells with a
potential to overcome paclitaxel resistance by bypassing efflux transporters and 
inducing mitotic catastrophe. BPR0L075 represents a novel microtubule therapeutic
to overcome multidrug resistance and trigger alternative cell death by mitotic
catastrophe in ovarian cancer cells that are apoptosis-resistant.

PMCID: PMC3675084
PMID: 23762410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Front Oncol. 2013 Jun 6;3:150. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00150. eCollection 2013.

Thiazole Antibiotics Siomycin a and Thiostrepton Inhibit the Transcriptional
Activity of FOXM1.

Gartel AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago Chicago, IL, USA.

PMCID: PMC3674410
PMID: 23761863  [PubMed]


352. Oncol Lett. 2013 May;5(5):1605-1610. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Casticin induces ovarian cancer cell apoptosis by repressing FoxM1 through the
activation of FOXO3a.

Jiang L(1), Cao XC, Cao JG, Liu F, Quan MF, Sheng XF, Ren KQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics, The People's Hospital of Hunan
Province, First Affiliated Hospital of Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410005;

Casticin, a polymethoxyflavone, is reported to have anticancer activities. The
aim of the present study was to examine the molecular mechanisms by which
casticin induces apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells. The human ovarian cancer cell
lines SKOV3 and A2780 were cultured in vitro. Various molecular techniques,
including histone/DNA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), western blot analysis and gene 
transfection, were used to assess the expression of FOXO3a and forkhead box
protein M1 (FoxM1) in casticin-treated ovarian cancer cell lines.
Casticin-induced apoptotic cell death was accompanied by the activation of
transcription factor FOXO3a, with a concomitant decrease in the expression levels
of FoxM1 and its downstream target factors, namely survivin and polo-like kinase 
1 (PLK1), and an increase in p27(KIP1). A small inhibitory RNA (siRNA) knockout
of FoxM1 potentiated casticin-induced apoptosis in ovarian cancer cells.
Silencing FOXO3a expression using siRNA increased FoxM1 expression levels and
clearly attenuated the induction of apoptosis by casticin treatment. These
results show that casticin-induced apoptosis in ovarian cancer may be caused by
the activation of FOXO3a, leading to FoxM1 inhibition.

PMCID: PMC3678892
PMID: 23761826  [PubMed]


353. Int J Oncol. 2013 Aug;43(2):457-68. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2013.1982. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

The Wnt signaling pathway and mitotic regulators in the initiation and evolution 
of mantle cell lymphoma: Gene expression analysis.

Kimura Y(1), Arakawa F, Kiyasu J, Miyoshi H, Yoshida M, Ichikawa A, Niino D,
Sugita Y, Okamura T, Doi A, Yasuda K, Tashiro K, Kuhara S, Ohshima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, Kurume University, Kurume,
Fukuoka, Japan. kimura_yoshizou@kurume-u.ac.jp

For an accurate understanding of mantle cell lymphoma (MCL), molecular behavior
could be staged into two major events: lymphomagenesis with the t(11;14)
translocation (initiation), and evolution into a more aggressive form
(transformation). Unfortunately, it is still unknown which genes contribute to
each event. In this study, we performed cDNA microarray experiments designed
based on the concept that morphologically heterogeneous MCL samples would provide
insights into the role of aberrant gene expression for both events. A total of 15
MCLs were collected from the files, which include a total of 237 MCL patients
confirmed by histology as CCND1-positive. We posited four stepwise morphological 
grades for MCL: MCL in situ, MCL with classical form (cMCL), MCL with aggressive 
form (aMCL), and MCL with intermediate morphology between classical and
aggressive forms at the same site (iMCL). To identify genes involved in
initiation, we compared the tumor cells of MCL in situ (n=4) with normal mantle
zone B lymphocytes (n=4), which were selected by laser microdissection (LMD). To 
identify genes contributing to transformation, we selected the overlapping genes 
differentially expressed between both cMCL (n=4) vs. aMCL (n=5) and classical vs.
aggressive areas in iMCL (n=2) obtained by LMD. A significant number of genes
(n=23, p=0.016) belonging to the Wnt signaling pathway were differentially
expressed in initiation. This specific activation was confirmed by
immuno-histochemistry, as MCL in situ had nuclear localization of
phosphorylated-ß-catenin with high levels of cytoplasmic Wnt3 staining. For
transformation, identified 60 overlapping genes included a number of members of
the p53 interaction network (CDC2, BIRC5 and FOXM1), which is known to mediate
cell cycle progression during the G2/M transition. Thus, we observe that the Wnt 
signaling pathway may play an important role in initial lymphomagenesis in
addition to t(11;14) translocations, and that specific mitotic regulators
facilitate transformation into more aggressive forms.

PMID: 23760751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Chin J Cancer. 2013 Jul;32(7):365-70. doi: 10.5732/cjc.012.10277. Epub 2013 May
27.

Role and regulation of the forkhead transcription factors FOXO3a and FOXM1 in
carcinogenesis and drug resistance.

Gomes AR(1), Zhao F, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London, UK.

The FOXO3a and FOXM1 forkhead transcription factors are key players in cancer
initiation, progression, and drug resistance. Recent research shows that FOXM1 is
a direct transcriptional target of FOXO3a, a vital downstream effector of the
PI3K-AKT-FOXO signaling cascade. In addition, FOXM1 and FOXO3a also antagonize
each other's activity by competitively binding to the same target genes, which
are involved in chemotherapeutic drug sensitivity and resistance. Understanding
the role and regulation of the FOXO-FOXM1 axis will provide insight into
chemotherapeutic drug action and resistance in patients, and help to identify
novel therapeutic approaches as well as diagnostic and predictive biomarkers.

PMCID: PMC3845605
PMID: 23706767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Am J Pathol. 2013 Jul;183(1):257-65. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.03.012. Epub 2013
May 10.

Combination of oxidative stress and FOXM1 inhibitors induces apoptosis in cancer 
cells and inhibits xenograft tumor growth.

Halasi M(1), Pandit B, Wang M, Nogueira V, Hay N, Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA.

Tumor cells accumulate high level of reactive oxygen species (ROS) because they
are metabolically more active than normal cells. Elevated ROS levels increase
tumorigenecity but also render cancer cells more vulnerable to oxidative stress
than normal cells. The oncogenic transcription factor Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1),
which is overexpressed in a wide range of human cancers, was reported to protect 
cancer cells from the adverse effects of oxidative stress by up regulating the
expression of scavenger enzymes. We therefore hypothesized that the combination
of FOXM1 ablation and ROS inducers could selectively eradicate cancer cells. We
show that RNA interference-mediated knockdown of FOXM1 further elevates
intracellular ROS levels and increases sensitivity of cancer cells to
ROS-mediated cell death after treatment with ROS inducers. We also demonstrate
that the combination of ROS inducers with FOXM1/proteasome inhibitors induces
robust apoptosis in different human cancer cells. In addition, we show evidence
that FOXM1/proteasome inhibitor bortezomib in combination with the ROS inducer
ß-phenylethyl isothiocyanate efficiently inhibits the growth of breast tumor
xenografts in nude mice. We conclude that the combination of ROS inducers and
FOXM1 inhibitors could be used as a therapeutic strategy to selectively eliminate
cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3702734
PMID: 23665201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Hepatol. 2013 Oct;59(4):830-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.04.031. Epub 2013 May 
7.

Pleiotropic effects of methionine adenosyltransferases deregulation as
determinants of liver cancer progression and prognosis.

Frau M(1), Feo F, Pascale RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Laboratory of Experimental
Pathology and Oncology, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

Downregulation of liver-specific MAT1A gene, encoding S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) 
synthesizing isozymes MATI/III, and upregulation of widely expressed MAT2A,
encoding MATII isozyme, known as MAT1A:MAT2A switch, occurs in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Being inhibited by its reaction product, MATII isoform
upregulation cannot compensate for MATI/III decrease. Therefore, MAT1A:MAT2A
switch contributes to decrease in SAM level in rodent and human
hepatocarcinogenesis. SAM administration to carcinogen-treated rats prevents
hepatocarcinogenesis, whereas MAT1A-KO mice, characterized by chronic SAM
deficiency, exhibit macrovesicular steatosis, mononuclear cell infiltration in
periportal areas, and HCC development. This review focuses upon the pleiotropic
changes, induced by MAT1A/MAT2A switch, associated with HCC development.
Epigenetic control of MATs expression occurs at transcriptional and
post-transcriptional levels. In HCC cells, MAT1A/MAT2A switch is associated with 
global DNA hypomethylation, decrease in DNA repair, genomic instability, and
signaling deregulation including c-MYC overexpression, rise in polyamine
synthesis, upregulation of RAS/ERK, IKK/NF-kB, PI3K/AKT, and LKB1/AMPK axis.
Furthermore, decrease in MAT1A expression and SAM levels results in increased HCC
cell proliferation, cell survival, and microvascularization. All of these changes
are reversed by SAM treatment in vivo or forced MAT1A overexpression or MAT2A
inhibition in cultured HCC cells. In human HCC, MAT1A:MAT2A and MATI/III:MATII
ratios correlate negatively with cell proliferation and genomic instability, and 
positively with apoptosis and global DNA methylation. This suggests that SAM
decrease and MATs deregulation represent potential therapeutic targets for HCC.
Finally, MATI/III:MATII ratio strongly predicts patients' survival length
suggesting that MAT1A:MAT2A expression ratio is a putative prognostic marker for 
human HCC.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Aug;11(8):875-86. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0706. Epub
2013 May 1.

Transcription factor interactions mediate EGF-dependent COX-2 expression.

Xu K(1), Shu HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Emory University, 1365 Clifton Road, NE,
Suite CT-104, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) is linked to poor prognosis in patients with malignant
gliomas. Amplification/overexpression of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) 
is commonly seen in these tumors. EGFR signaling, through activation of the
p38-MAPK/PKC-d/Sp1 cascade, plays an essential role in the regulation of COX-2
expression in glioma cells. Here, we report that Src kinase contributes upstream 
to this signaling cascade. In addition, more detailed analysis revealed the
involvement of FOXM1, a member of the forkhead box family of transcriptional
activators, in EGF-dependent COX-2 induction. FOXM1 protein increased after
stimulation with EGF, although its role in modulating COX-2 expression does not
depend on this increase. While a conventional FOXM1 responsive element resides in
a distal region (-2872/-2539 relative to the transcriptional start site) of the
COX-2 promoter, this is not required for EGF-dependent induction of COX-2.
Instead, FOXM1 forms a cooperative interaction with Sp1 at the Sp1-binding site
(-245/-240 relative to the start site) of the COX-2 promoter to mediate
EGF-induced COX-2 expression. Definition of this novel interaction provides a
clearer understanding of the mechanistic basis for EGF induction of
COX-2.IMPLICATIONS: These data provide a guide for the evaluation of potential
newer therapeutic targets that have relevance in this disease.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3748214
PMID: 23635401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 19;8(4):e61262. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061262. Print 2013.

The expression of glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase associated cell cycle 
(GACC) genes correlates with cancer stage and poor survival in patients with
solid tumors.

Wang D(1), Moothart DR, Lowy DR, Qian X.

Author information: 
(1)W2MOTIF, LLC., San Diego, California, USA. dunrui@yahoo.com

Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) is often used as a stable
housekeeping marker for constant gene expression. However, the transcriptional
levels of GAPDH may be highly up-regulated in some cancers, including non-small
cell lung cancers (NSCLC). Using a publically available microarray database, we
identified a group of genes whose expression levels in some cancers are highly
correlated with GAPDH up-regulation. The majority of the identified genes are
cell cycle-dependent (GAPDH Associated Cell Cycle, or GACC). The up-regulation
pattern of GAPDH positively associated genes in NSCLC is similar to that observed
in cultured fibroblasts grown under conditions that induce anti-senescence. Data 
analysis demonstrated that up-regulated GAPDH levels are correlated with aberrant
gene expression related to both glycolysis and gluconeogenesis pathways.
Down-regulation of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (FBP1) in gluconeogenesis in
conjunction with up-regulation of most glycolytic genes is closely related to
high expression of GAPDH in the tumors. The data presented demonstrate that
up-regulation of GAPDH positively associated genes is proportional to the
malignant stage of various tumors and is associated with an unfavourable
prognosis. Thus, this work suggests that GACC genes represent a potential new
signature for cancer stage identification and disease prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3631177
PMID: 23620736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Aug;34(8):1907-17. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgt134. Epub 2013 Apr
24.

C-terminus-deleted FoxM1 is expressed in cancer cell lines and induces chromosome
instability.

Kim YH(1), Choi MH, Kim JH, Lim IK, Park TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Brain Korea 21 Division of
Cell Transformation and Restoration, Ajou University, School of Medicine, Suwon, 
Korea.

Forkhead Box M1 (FoxM1) protein is a transcription factor and regulates cell
cycle. It is commonly upregulated in human cancer tissue and correlated with poor
prognosis, suggesting that the overexpression of FoxM1 plays a critical role in
carcinogenesis. In this study, we report the identification and characterization 
of a new variant of FoxM1, which was first isolated from our laboratory in
hepatoma cell lines. Compared with wild-type FoxM1, the new variant lacks of
C-terminus of FoxM1 (FoxM1<U+0394>C), which is a transactivation domain. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and western blot analysis demonstrated
that FoxM1<U+0394>C was highly expressed in a variety of cancer cell lines such as
HepG2, HeLa, A549, MB231, EJ, U2OS, Hep3B and MCF7, but not expressed in normal
human dermal fibroblast (HDF). Immunoprecipitation assay revealed that FoxM1<U+0394>C
interacted with wild-type FoxM1. Furthermore, FoxM1<U+0394>C bound to FoxM1 targeted
gene promoter region and correlated with dysregulation of wild-type FoxM1.
FoxM1<U+0394>C delayed G2/M to G1 progression of cell cycle, decreased Aurora B(T232)
phosphorylation and increased chromosome centromere interspace. Finally, FoxM1<U+0394>C 
induced instability of chromosome and formation of aneuploid cells within 1 month
when expressed in HDF. In conclusion, FoxM1<U+0394>C is expressed in cancer cells and
dysregulates normal cell cycle and induces chromosome instability.

PMID: 23615399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Oncogene. 2014 Mar 13;33(11):1395-406. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.90. Epub 2013 Apr
22.

ACP5, a direct transcriptional target of FoxM1, promotes tumor metastasis and
indicates poor prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xia L(1), Huang W(1), Tian D(2), Chen Z(1), Zhang L(1), Li Y(3), Hu H(1), Liu
J(1), Chen Z(1), Tang G(1), Dou J(1), Sha S(1), Xu B(1), Liu C(1), Ma J(1), Zhang
S(1), Li M(1), Fan D(1), Nie Y(1), Wu K(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive
Diseases, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaanxi Province, People's
Republic of China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei
Province, People's Republic of China. (3)University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5 (ACP5), which is essential for bone
resorption and osteoclast differentiation, promotes cell motility through the
modulation of focal adhesion kinase phosphorylation. However, whether ACP5
contributes to the metastasis and progression of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
remains unknown. In this paper, a complementary DNA microarray, serial deletion, 
site-directed mutagenesis and a chromatin immunoprecipitation assays confirmed
that ACP5 is a direct transcriptional target of Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1). ACP5
expression was markedly higher in HCC tissues compared with adjacent noncancerous
tissues. ACP5 overexpression was correlated with microvascular invasion, poor
differentiation and higher tumor-node-metastasis stage. HCC patients with
positive ACP5 expression had poorer prognoses than those with negative ACP5
expression. A multivariate analysis revealed that ACP5 expression was an
independent and significant risk factor for disease recurrence and
reduced-patient survival following curative resection. Transwell assays and an
orthotopic metastatic model showed that the upregulation of ACP5 promoted HCC
invasion and lung metastasis, whereas ACP5 knockdown inhibited these processes.
The knockdown of ACP5 significantly attenuated FoxM1-enhanced invasion and lung
metastasis. Immunohistochemistry revealed that ACP5 expression was positively
correlated with FoxM1 expression in human HCC tissues, and their coexpression was
associated with poor prognoses. In summary, ACP5 is a direct transcriptional and 
functional target of FoxM1. This novel FoxM1/ACP5 signaling pathway promotes HCC 
metastasis and may be a candidate biomarker for prognosis and a target for new
therapies.

PMID: 23604121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Cancer Res. 2013 Jul 1;73(13):3987-96. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-3859. Epub
2013 Apr 18.

Dysregulated expression of FOXM1 isoforms drives progression of pancreatic
cancer.

Kong X(1), Li L, Li Z, Le X, Huang C, Jia Z, Cui J, Huang S, Wang L, Xie K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Changhai Hospital, Second Military
Medical University, Shanghai, PR China.

The transcription factor Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) plays important roles in
oncogenesis. However, the expression statuses of FOXM1 isoforms and their impact 
on and molecular basis in oncogenesis are unknown. We sought to determine the
identities of FOXM1 isoforms in and the impact of their expression on pancreatic 
cancer development and progression using human tissues, cell lines, and animal
models. Overexpression of FOXM1 mRNA and protein was pronounced in human
pancreatic tumors and cancer cell lines. We identified five FOXM1 isoforms
present in pancreatic cancer: FOXM1a, FOXM1b, and FOXM1c along with two isoforms 
tentatively designated as FOXM1b1 and FOXM1b2 because they were closely related
to FOXM1b. Interestingly, FOXM1c was predominantly expressed in pancreatic tumors
and cancer cell lines, whereas FOXM1a expression was generally undetectable in
them. Functional analysis revealed that FOXM1b, FOXM1b1, FOXM1b2, and FOXM1c, but
not FOXM1a, promoted pancreatic tumor growth and metastasis. Consistently,
FOXM1b, FOXM1b1, FOXM1b2, and FOXM1c activated transcription of their typical
downstream genes. Also, Sp1 mechanistically activated the FOXM1 promoter, whereas
Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4) repressed its activity. Finally, we identified an
Sp1- and KLF4-binding site in the FOXM1 promoter and showed that both Sp1 and
KLF4 protein bound directly to it. Deletion mutation of this binding site
significantly attenuated the transcriptional regulation of the FOXM1 promoter
positively by Sp1 and negatively by KLF4. We showed that overexpression of
specific FOXM1 isoforms critically regulates pancreatic cancer development and
progression by enhancing tumor cell invasion and metastasis. Our findings
strongly suggest that targeting specific FOXM1 isoforms effectively attenuates
pancreatic cancer development and progression.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3702645
PMID: 23598278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Orv Hetil. 2013 Apr 21;154(16):627-32. doi: 10.1556/OH.2013.29590.

[Simplified, low-cost gene expression profiling for the prediction of outcome in 
breast cancer based on routine histologic specimens].

[Article in Hungarian]

Szász AM(1), Ács B, Ágoston E, Sztupinszki Z, Tokés AM, Szittya L, Székely B,
Szendroi M, Li Q, Harsányi L, Tímár J, Szállási Z, Swanton C, Gyorffy B, Kulka J.

Author information: 
(1)Semmelweis Egyetem, Általános Orvotudományi Kar II. Patológiai Intézet
Budapest Ülloi út 93. 1091. cac@korb2@sote.hu

BACKGROUND: Grade 2 breast carcinomas do not form a uniform prognostic group.
AIM: To extend the number of patients and the investigated genes of a previously 
identified prognostic signature described by the authors that reflect chromosomal
instability in order to refine characterization of grade 2 breast cancers and
identify driver genes.
METHODS: Using publicly available databases, the authors selected 9 target and 3 
housekeeping genes that are capable to divide grade 2 breast carcinomas into
prognostic groups. Gene expression was investigated by polymerase chain reaction 
in 249 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded breast tumors. The results were
correlated with relapse-free survival.
RESULTS: Histologically grade 2 carcinomas were split into good and a poor
prognosis groups. Centroid-based ranking showed that 3 genes, FOXM1, TOP2A and
CLDN4 were able to separate the good and poor prognostic groups of grade 2 breast
carcinomas.
CONCLUSION: Using appropriately selected control genes, a limited set of genes is
able to split prognostic groups of breast carcinomas independently from their
grade.

PMID: 23587542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Aug;11(8):834-44. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0007. Epub
2013 Apr 10.

FoxM1 is overexpressed in Helicobacter pylori-induced gastric carcinogenesis and 
is negatively regulated by miR-370.

Feng Y(1), Wang L, Zeng J, Shen L, Liang X, Yu H, Liu S, Liu Z, Sun Y, Li W, Chen
C, Jia J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Key Laboratory for Experimental Teratology of
Chinese Ministry of Education, School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan
250012, PR China.

Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori) infections are strongly implicated in human
gastric mucosa-associated diseases. Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1), a key positive
regulator of cell proliferation, is overexpressed in gastric cancer. MicroRNAs
are important post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression. In this study, 
the effects of H. pylori infection on FoxM1 expression and possible mechanisms of
carcinogenesis were explored. The expression of FoxM1 was gradually increased in 
human gastric specimens from inflammation to cancer. FoxM1 upregulation was time-
and concentration-dependent in gastric epithelial-derived cell lines infected
with H. pylori. CagA, a key virulence factor of H. pylori, was associated with
increased FoxM1 expression. H. pylori and CagA inhibited the expression of
p27(Kip1) (CDKN1B) and promoted cell proliferation by upregulating FoxM1. The
expression of miR-370 was decreased in human gastritis and gastric cancer. FoxM1 
was directly downregulated by miR-370 in gastric cell lines. H. pylori and CagA
inhibited miR-370 expression, which led to overexpression of FoxM1 and cell
proliferation. Furthermore, the overexpression of FoxM1 and reduced expression of
miR-370 was confirmed in H. pylori-infected C57BL/6J mice. H. pylori infection
and CagA upregulated FoxM1 expression, dependent on miR-370, altered the
expression of p27(Kip1), and promoted proliferation in gastric
cells.IMPLICATIONS: These findings delineate the mechanisms governing FoxM1
regulation and the role of H. pylori in the process of gastric carcinogenesis.

©2013 AACR.

PMID: 23576572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59412. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059412. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

FoxM1 is associated with poor prognosis of non-small cell lung cancer patients
through promoting tumor metastasis.

Xu N(1), Jia D, Chen W, Wang H, Liu F, Ge H, Zhu X, Song Y, Zhang X, Zhang D, Ge 
D, Bai C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: FoxM1 has been reported to be important in initiation and progression
of various tumors. However, whether FoxM1 has any indication for prognosis in
non-small cell lung cancer patients remains unclear.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, FoxM1 expression in tumor cells
was examined first by immunohistochemistry in 175 NSCLC specimens, the result of 
which showed that FoxM1 overexpression was significantly associated with positive
smoking status (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.001), poorer tissue differentiation (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0052), higher
TNM stage (P<0.0001), lymph node metastasis (P<0.0001), advanced tumor stage
(P<0.0001), and poorer prognosis (P<0.0001). Multivariable analysis showed that
FoxM1 expression increased the hazard of death (hazard ratio, 1.899; 95% CI,
1.016-3.551). Furthermore, by various in vitro and in vivo experiments, we showed
that targeted knockdown of FoxM1 expression could inhibit the migratory and
invasive abilities of NSCLC cells, whereas enforced expression of FoxM1 could
increased the invasion and migration of NSCLC cells. Finally, we found that one
of the cellular mechanisms by which FoxM1 promotes tumor metastasis is through
inducing epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) program.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggested that FoxM1 overexpression in tumor tissues
is significantly associated with the poor prognosis of NSCLC patients through
promoting tumor metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3607616
PMID: 23536876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Curr Med Chem. 2013;20(19):2486-99.

MEK inhibition increases lapatinib sensitivity via modulation of FOXM1.

Gayle SS(1), Castellino RC, Buss MC, Nahta R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular & Systems Pharmacology Program, Graduate Division of Biological and 
Biomedical Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

The standard targeted therapy for HER2-overexpressing breast cancer is the HER2
monoclonal antibody, trastuzumab. Although effective, many patients eventually
develop trastuzumab resistance. The dual EGFR/HER2 small molecule tyrosine kinase
inhibitor lapatinib is approved for use in trastuzumab-refractory metastatic
HER2-positive breast cancer. However, lapatinib resistance is a problem as most
patients with trastuzumab-refractory disease do not benefit from lapatinib.
Understanding the mechanisms underlying lapatinib resistance may ultimately
facilitate development of new therapeutic strategies for HER2-overexpressing
breast cancer. Our current results indicate that MEK inhibition increases
lapatinib-mediated cytotoxicity in resistant HER2-overexpressing breast cancer
cells. We genetically and pharmacologically blocked MEK/ERK signaling and
evaluated lapatinib response by trypan blue exclusion, anchorage-independent
growth assays, flow cytometric cell cycle and apoptosis analysis, and in tumor
xenografts. Combined MEK inhibition and lapatinib treatment reduced
phosphorylated ERK more than single agent treatment. In addition, Western blots, 
immunofluorescence, and immunohistochemistry demonstrated that the combination of
MEK inhibitor plus lapatinib reduced nuclear expression of the MEK/ERK downstream
proto-oncogene FOXM1. Genetic knockdown of MEK was tested for the ability to
increase lapatinib-mediated cell cycle arrest or apoptosis in JIMT-1 and MDA361
cells. Finally, xenograft studies demonstrated that combined pharmacological
inhibition of MEK plus lapatinib suppressed tumor growth and reduced expression
of FOXM1 in HER2-overexpressing breast cancers that are resistant to trastuzumab 
and lapatinib. Our results suggest that FoxM1 contributes to lapatinib resistance
downstream of MEK signaling, and supports further study of pharmacological MEK
inhibition to improve response to lapatinib in HER2-overexpressing
trastuzumab-resistant breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3650616
PMID: 23531216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Gastroenterol. 2014 Feb;49(2):305-16. doi: 10.1007/s00535-013-0780-7. Epub 2013
Mar 20.

Lipid overloading during liver regeneration causes delayed hepatocyte DNA
replication by increasing ER stress in mice with simple hepatic steatosis.

Hamano M(1), Ezaki H, Kiso S, Furuta K, Egawa M, Kizu T, Chatani N, Kamada Y,
Yoshida Y, Takehara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Osaka University, Graduate
School of Medicine, 2-2 K1, Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Impaired fatty liver regeneration has already been reported
in many genetic modification models. However, in diet-induced simple hepatic
steatosis, which showed similar phenotype with clinical pathology, whether liver 
regeneration is impaired or not remains unclear. In this study, we evaluated
liver regeneration in mice with diet-induced simple hepatic steatosis, and
focused on excess lipid accumulation occurring during liver regeneration.
METHODS: Mice were fed high fat diet (HFD) or control diet for 9-10 weeks. We
analyzed intrahepatic lipid accumulation, DNA replication, and various signaling 
pathways including cell proliferation and ER stress during liver regeneration
after partial hepatectomy. In addition, some of mice were pretreated with
tauroursodeoxycholic acid (TUDCA), a chemical chaperone which alleviates ER
stress, and then we estimated TUDCA effects on liver regeneration.
RESULTS: The peak of hepatocyte BrdU incorporation, the expression of
proliferation cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) protein, and the expressions of cell
cycle-related genes were observed in delayed time in HFD mice. The expression of 
phosphorylated Erk1/2 was also delayed in HFD mice. The amounts of liver
triglyceride were at least twofold higher in HFD mice at each time point.
Intrahepatic palmitic acid was increased especially in HFD mice. ER stress
induced during liver regeneration was significantly higher in HFD mice. In HFD
mice, pretreatment with TUDCA reduced ER stress and resulted in improvement of
delayed liver regeneration.
CONCLUSION: In simple hepatic steatosis, lipid overloading occurring during liver
regeneration might be caused ER stress and results in delayed hepatocyte DNA
replication.

PMCID: PMC3925298
PMID: 23512345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2013 Apr;138(3):691-8. doi: 10.1007/s10549-013-2475-4.
Epub 2013 Mar 17.

A 3-gene proliferation score (TOP-FOX-67) can re-classify histological grade-2,
ER-positive breast cancers into low- and high-risk prognostic categories.

Szekely B(1), Iwamoto T, Szasz AM, Qi Y, Matsuoka J, Symmans WF, Tokes AM, Kulka 
J, Swanton C, Pusztai L.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Pathology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.
szekelybora@gmail.com

The goal of this study was to assess the prognostic value of a 3-gene (TOP2A,
FOXM1, and MKI67) proliferation score and use it to risk stratify grade-2,
estrogen receptor (ER)-positive breast cancers into low- and high-risk groups. We
used 4 different breast cancer gene expression datasets including two cohorts of 
patients who received no systemic adjuvant therapy (Mainz: n = 206, TRANSBIG: n =
134) and two other cohorts that received adjuvant tamoxifen (JBI: n = 227,
MDACC/SET: n = 192). We compared individual and combined expression values of the
3 genes between grade 1, 2, and 3 tumors and plotted distant metastasis-free
survival (DMFS) curves by the 3-gene score for grade-2 cancers. We compared the
prognostic value of the 3-gene score to the Genomic Grade Index (GGI). The
individual and combined expression of TOP2A, FOXM1, and MKI67 were significantly 
different between the 3 histological grade groups with the highest expression in 
grade-3 and the lowest in grade-1 cancers. Expression levels were variable in
grade-2 cancers. Grade-2 tumors with high expression of the 3 genes (>median)
showed significantly worse DMFS in one prognostic and one tamoxifen-treated set
and showed a similar but non-significant trend for worse survival in the
remaining two datasets. The 3-gene score performed equally well in risk
stratification as the GGI. A 3-gene proliferation score shows similar prognostic 
value as the GGI in ER-positive, grade-2 cancers and may serve as basis for a
PCR-based assay that could aid prognostic prediction for clinically
intermediate-risk cancers.

PMID: 23504136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e56707. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0056707. Epub 2013 Feb 26.

The CIN4 chromosomal instability qPCR classifier defines tumor aneuploidy and
stratifies outcome in grade 2 breast cancer.

Szász AM(1), Li Q, Eklund AC, Sztupinszki Z, Rowan A, Tokés AM, Székely B, Kiss
A, Szendroi M, Gyorffy B, Szállási Z, Swanton C, Kulka J.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Pathology, Semmelweis University, Budapest, Hungary.

PURPOSE: Quantifying chromosomal instability (CIN) has both prognostic and
predictive clinical utility in breast cancer. In order to establish a robust and 
clinically applicable gene expression-based measure of CIN, we assessed the
ability of four qPCR quantified genes selected from the 70-gene Chromosomal
Instability (CIN70) expression signature to stratify outcome in patients with
grade 2 breast cancer.
METHODS: AURKA, FOXM1, TOP2A and TPX2 (CIN4), were selected from the CIN70
signature due to their high level of correlation with histological grade and mean
CIN70 signature expression in silico. We assessed the ability of CIN4 to stratify
outcome in an independent cohort of patients diagnosed between 1999 and 2002. 185
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples were included in the qPCR
measurement of CIN4 expression. In parallel, ploidy status of tumors was assessed
by flow cytometry. We investigated whether the categorical CIN4 score derived
from the CIN4 signature was correlated with recurrence-free survival (RFS) and
ploidy status in this cohort.
RESULTS: We observed a significant association of tumor proliferation, defined by
Ki67 and mitotic index (MI), with both CIN4 expression and aneuploidy. The CIN4
score stratified grade 2 carcinomas into good and poor prognostic cohorts (mean
RFS: 83.8±4.9 and 69.4±8.2 months, respectively, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.016) and its predictive
power was confirmed by multivariate analysis outperforming MI and Ki67
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The first clinically applicable qPCR derived measure of tumor
aneuploidy from FFPE tissue, stratifies grade 2 tumors into good and poor
prognosis groups.

PMCID: PMC3582639
PMID: 23468873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Front Oncol. 2013 Mar 5;3:30. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00030. eCollection 2013.

Novel functions of FoxM1: from molecular mechanisms to cancer therapy.

Alvarez-Fernández M(1), Medema RH.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Division and Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Center (CNIO)
Madrid, Spain.

FoxM1 is a member of the forkhead family of transcription factors. Since its
identification 15 year ago, numerous studies have progressively contributed to
our current understanding on FoxM1 functions. Early work showed that FoxM1
regulates the transcriptional program of the G2 phase of the cell cycle, and is
essential for proper mitotic progression and genomic stability. Moreover, FoxM1
was found to be overexpressed in many different types of human cancer, suggesting
a role of FoxM1 in tumor proliferation. In the past years, a significant number
of studies have formally demonstrated the involvement of FoxM1 in different
aspects of tumorogenesis, including angiogenesis, invasion, and metastasis. In
addition to this, recent studies have placed FoxM1 in DNA damage response and
senescence pathways, two pathways relevant to tumor progression and the response 
to cancer therapies. Here, we review and discuss the molecular mechanisms through
which FoxM1 executes these new roles, and the implications for the potential use 
of FoxM1 as a therapeutic target in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3588610
PMID: 23467617  [PubMed]


370. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Mar;12(3):245-54. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0712. Epub 
2013 Feb 26.

FOX(M1) news--it is cancer.

Halasi M(1), Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, Department of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60612, 
USA.

FOXM1 is an oncogenic transcription factor of the Forkhead family and it has a
well-defined role in cell proliferation and cell-cycle progression. Expression of
FOXM1 is excluded in quiescent or differentiated cells, but its level is highly
elevated in proliferating and malignant cells. Overexpression of FOXM1 has been
reported in more than 20 types of human cancer. In recent years, FOXM1 has been
implicated in diverse cellular processes and also a growing body of experimental 
data has underlined the relevance of FOXM1 in tumorigenesis. Although FOXM1 is
under the control of three major tumor suppressors (RB, p53, and p19(ARF)), it is
still active in the majority of human cancers. The oncogenic potential of FOXM1
is mainly based on its ability to transcriptionally activate genes that are
involved in different facets of cancer development. In this review, the
contribution of FOXM1 to each of the hallmarks of cancer will be summarized and
discussed.

PMCID: PMC3596487
PMID: 23443798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 May;12(5):759-67. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0903. Epub 
2013 Feb 20.

Targeting FoxM1 effectively retards p53-null lymphoma and sarcoma.

Wang Z(1), Zheng Y, Park HJ, Li J, Carr JR, Chen YJ, Kiefer MM, Kopanja D, Bagchi
S, Tyner AL, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The forkhead box transcription factor FOXM1 is considered to be a promising
target for cancer therapy. However, the significance of FOXM1 in tumors harboring
mutation in p53, which is very common, is unclear. In this study, we investigated
the efficacy of FoxM1 targeting in spontaneous p53-null tumors using genetic
ablation as well as using a peptide inhibitor of FOXM1. We show that conditional 
deletion of FoxM1 inhibits growth of the p53-null thymic lymphoma and sarcoma
cells. In addition, deletion of FoxM1 induces apoptotic cell death of the
p53-null tumors, accompanied by reduced expression of the FOXM1 target genes
survivin and Bmi1. An ARF-derived peptide that inhibits the activity of FOXM1, by
targeting it to the nucleolus, also induces apoptosis in the p53-null sarcoma and
lymphoma, leading to a strong inhibition of their metastatic colonization.
Together, our observations suggest that FOXM1 is critical for survival and growth
of the p53-null lymphoma and sarcoma and provide proof-of-principle that FOXM1 is
an effective therapeutic target for sarcoma and lymphoma carrying loss of
function mutation in p53.

©2013 AACR

PMCID: PMC3651795
PMID: 23427295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Stem Cells. 2013 Jun;31(6):1051-63. doi: 10.1002/stem.1358.

MELK-dependent FOXM1 phosphorylation is essential for proliferation of glioma
stem cells.

Joshi K(1), Banasavadi-Siddegowda Y, Mo X, Kim SH, Mao P, Kig C, Nardini D, Sobol
RW, Chow LM, Kornblum HI, Waclaw R, Beullens M, Nakano I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, The James Comprehensive Cancer Center, The
Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a life-threatening brain tumor. Accumulating
evidence suggests that eradication of glioma stem-like cells (GSCs) in GBM is
essential to achieve cure. The transcription factor FOXM1 has recently gained
attention as a master regulator of mitotic progression of cancer cells in various
organs. Here, we demonstrate that FOXM1 forms a protein complex with the mitotic 
kinase MELK in GSCs, leading to phosphorylation and activation of FOXM1 in a MELK
kinase-dependent manner. This MELK-dependent activation of FOXM1 results in a
subsequent increase in mitotic regulatory genes in GSCs. MELK-driven FOXM1
activation is regulated by the binding and subsequent trans-phosphorylation of
FOXM1 by another kinase PLK1. Using mouse neural progenitor cells (NPCs), we
found that transgenic expression of FOXM1 enhances, while siRNA-mediated gene
silencing diminishes neurosphere formation, suggesting that FOXM1 is required for
NPC growth. During tumorigenesis, FOXM1 expression sequentially increases as
cells progress from NPCs, to pretumorigenic progenitors and GSCs. The antibiotic 
Siomycin A disrupts MELK-mediated FOXM1 signaling with a greater sensitivity in
GSC compared to neural stem cell. Treatment with the first-line chemotherapy
agent for GBM, Temozolomide, paradoxically enriches for both FOXM1 (+) and MELK
(+) cells in GBM cells, and addition of Siomycin A to Temozolomide treatment in
mice harboring GSC-derived intracranial tumors enhances the effects of the
latter. Collectively, our data indicate that FOXM1 signaling through its direct
interaction with MELK regulates key mitotic genes in GSCs in a PLK1-dependent
manner and thus, this protein complex is a potential therapeutic target for GBM.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3744761
PMID: 23404835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Front Oncol. 2013 Jan 31;3:11. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2013.00011. eCollection 2013.

FOXM1b, which is present at elevated levels in cancer cells, has a greater
transforming potential than FOXM1c.

Lam AK(1), Ngan AW, Leung MH, Kwok DC, Liu VW, Chan DW, Leung WY, Yao KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong Hong Kong SAR, China.

The forkhead box (FOX) M1 transcription factor is required to maintain the
proliferation of cancer cells. Two transcriptionally active isoforms of FOXM1,
FOXM1b and FOXM1c, have been identified, but their functional differences remain 
unclear. FOXM1c is distinguished from FOXM1b by an extra exon (exon Va) that
contains an ERK1/2 target sequence. Based on a literature search and quantitative
PCR analysis, we concluded that FOXM1b is the predominant isoform that is
overexpressed in cancers. The further characterization of FOXM1b and FOXM1c
revealed two interesting differences. First, FOXM1b exhibited a higher
transforming ability than FOXM1c in a soft agar assay. Second, the
transactivating activity of FOXM1c, but not that of FOXM1b, was sensitive to
activation by RAF/MEK/MAPK signaling. Importantly, the MEK1 activation of FOXM1c 
was associated with proteolytic processing to generate short forms that might
represent constitutively active forms missing the N-terminal inhibitory domain;
in contrast, the proteolytic processing of FOXM1b did not require MEK1
activation. Our findings suggest that FOXM1b is functionally more active. These
results provide novel insights into the regulation of FOXM1 activity and its role
in tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3560383
PMID: 23386997  [PubMed]


374. J Mol Neurosci. 2013 Sep;51(1):170-9. doi: 10.1007/s12031-013-9972-0. Epub 2013
Feb 6.

FoxM1 involvement in astrocyte proliferation after spinal cord injury in rats.

Zhang S(1), Teng H, Ding Q, Fan J, Shi W, Zhou Y, Zhang C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, The Central Hospital of Shijiazhuang,
Shijiazhuang, Hebei Province, 050011, People's Republic of China.

The Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) protein is a proliferation-associated transcription
factor that plays a key role in controlling both the G1/S and G2/M transitions of
the cell cycle and regulates transcription of cell cycle genes, including
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors p27(kip1) and p21(waf1/cip1). The expression
levels of FoxM1 directly correlated with the proliferation index, cancer
survival, genomic instability rate, and microvessel density, and inversely
correlated with apoptosis. Furthermore, FoxM1 is determined to play a role in
tissue repair following injury in the lungs and liver. However, the signaling of 
FoxM1, involved in its expression and its role in central nervous system lesion
and repair is poorly known. In this study, we performed a spinal cord injury
(SCI) model in adult Sprague-Dawley rats and investigated the dynamic changes and
role of FoxM1 expression in the spinal cord. Western blot analysis revealed that 
FoxM1 was lowly presented in normal spinal cord. It gradually increased, reached 
a peak at day 3, and then declined to basal levels at 14 days after spinal cord
injury. Immunohistochemistry further confirmed that FoxM1 was expressed at low
levels in gray and white matters in normal condition and increased after SCI.
Double immunofluorescence staining showed that FoxM1was co-expressed with NeuN
(neuronal marker) and GFAP (astrocytic marker), and FoxM1 expression was
increased predominantly in astrocytes after injury, which were regenerating axons
and largely proliferated after injury. Furthermore, co-immunoprecipitation
studies demonstrated increased interactions among FoxM1, Skp2, and p27(kip1) in
the spinal cord after injury. Taken together, these results provide new insights 
into the molecular mechanisms underlying astrocyte proliferation during SCI and
suggest that FoxM1 might play crucial roles in CNS pathophysiology after SCI.

PMID: 23386122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54657. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054657. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

3, 3'-Diindolylmethane enhances the effectiveness of herceptin against
HER-2/neu-expressing breast cancer cells.

Ahmad A(1), Ali S, Ahmed A, Ali AS, Raz A, Sakr WA, Rahman KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, Michigan, United States of America.

Herceptin failure is a major clinical problem in breast cancer. A subset of
breast cancer patients with high HER-2/neu levels eventually experience
metastatic disease progression when treated with Herceptin as a single agent.
Mechanistic details of development of this aggressive disease are not clear.
Therefore, there is a dire need to better understand the mechanisms by which drug
resistance develops and to design new combined treatments that benefit patients
with aggressive breast cancer and have minimal toxicity. We hypothesized that 3, 
3'-diindolylmethane (DIM), a non-toxic agent can be combined with Herceptin to
treat breast cancers with high levels of HER-2/neu. Here, we evaluated the
effects of Herceptin alone and in combination with DIM on cell viability,
apoptosis and clonogenic assays in SKBR3 (HER-2/neu-expressing) and MDA-MB-468
(HER-2/neu negative) breast cancer cells. We found that DIM could enhance the
effectiveness of Herceptin by significantly reducing cell viability, which was
associated with apoptosis-induction and significant inhibition of colony
formation, compared with single agent treatment. These results were consistent
with the down-regulation of Akt and NF-kB p65. Mechanistic investigations
revealed a significant upregulation of miR-200 and reduction of FoxM1 expression 
in DIM and Herceptin-treated breast cancer cells. We, therefore, transfected
cells with pre-miR-200 or silenced FoxM1 in these cells for understanding the
molecular mechanism involved. These results provide experimental evidence, for
the first time, that DIM plus Herceptin therapy could be translated to the clinic
as a therapeutic modality to improve treatment outcome of patients with breast
cancer, particularly for the patients whose tumors express high levels of
HER-2/neu.

PMCID: PMC3551844
PMID: 23372748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054556. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

FOXM1 is an oncogenic mediator in Ewing Sarcoma.

Christensen L(1), Joo J, Lee S, Wai D, Triche TJ, May WA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Pediatrics, Saban Research
Institute, Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

Ewing Family Tumors (Ewing Sarcoma and peripheral Primitive Neuroectodermal
Tumor) are common bone and soft tissue malignancies of childhood, adolescence and
young adulthood. Chromosomal translocation in these tumors produces fusion
oncogenes of the EWS/ETS class, with EWS/FLI1 being by far the most common.
EWS/ETS chimera are the only well established driver mutations in these tumors
and they function as aberrant transcription factors. Understanding the downstream
genes whose expression is modified has been a central approach to the study of
these tumors. FOXM1 is a proliferation associated transcription factor which has 
increasingly been found to play a role in the pathogenesis of a wide range of
human cancers. Here we demonstrate that FOXM1 is expressed in Ewing primary
tumors and cell lines. Reduction in FOXM1 expression in Ewing cell lines results 
in diminished potential for anchorage independent growth. FOXM1 expression is
enhanced by EWS/FLI1, though, unlike other tumor systems, it is not driven by
expression of the EWS/FLI1 target GLI1. Thiostrepton is a compound known to
inhibit FOXM1 by direct binding. We show that Thiostrepton diminishes FOXM1
expression in Ewing cell lines and this reduction reduces cell viability through 
an apoptotic mechanism. FOXM1 is involved in Ewing tumor pathogenesis and may
prove to be a useful therapeutic target in Ewing tumors.

PMCID: PMC3554707
PMID: 23365673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Clin Transl Oncol. 2013 Aug;15(8):626-32. doi: 10.1007/s12094-012-0978-9. Epub
2013 Jan 29.

The expression of Nek7, FoxM1, and Plk1 in gallbladder cancer and their
relationships to clinicopathologic features and survival.

Wang R(1), Song Y, Xu X, Wu Q, Liu C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of 
Medicine, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, 710061, Shaanxi Province, China.

PURPOSE: Gallbladder carcinoma (GC) is generally considered as a relatively rare 
malignancy with poor prognosis. In order to guide clinicians in selecting
suitable treatment for GC patients, reliable markers predictive of poor clinical 
outcome are desirable. This study analyzed the expression of Polo-like kinase 1
(Plk1), Nima related kinases 7 (Nek7) and Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) in GC tissues
and their relationship to clinicopathologic features and survival.
METHODS: We immunohistochemically investigated the 76 specimens of gallbladder
carcinoma, pericarcinoma and normal tissues using Nek7, FoxM1 and Plk1 antibodies
and analyzed the overall survival time of these 76 patients.
RESULTS: There were significant correlations between the high level expression of
Nek7, FoxM1 and Plk1 and the tumor differentiation, Nevin staging and metastasis.
The high level expression of Nek7, FoxM1 and Plk1 was significantly associated
with shorter overall survival time in univariate analysis (log-rank test), also
identified as an independent prognostic factor in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Nek7, FoxM1 and Plk1 were significantly associated with certain
clinicopathologic indices in GC. Evaluation of Nek7, FoxM1 and Plk1 expression
may be an important factor in identifying a group of poor GC prognosis.

PMID: 23359173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Genome Biol. 2013 Jan 24;14(1):R6. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-1-r6.

Genome-wide mapping of FOXM1 binding reveals co-binding with estrogen receptor
alpha in breast cancer cells.

Sanders DA, Ross-Innes CS, Beraldi D, Carroll JS, Balasubramanian S.

BACKGROUND: The forkhead transcription factor FOXM1 is a key regulator of the
cell cycle. It is frequently over-expressed in cancer and is emerging as an
important therapeutic target. In breast cancer FOXM1 expression is linked with
estrogen receptor (ERa) activity and resistance to endocrine therapies, with high
levels correlated with poor prognosis. However, the precise role of FOXM1 in ER
positive breast cancer is not yet fully understood.
RESULTS: The study utilizes chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
high-throughput sequencing to map FOXM1 binding in both ERa-positive and
-negative breast cancer cell lines. The comparison between binding site
distributions in the two cell lines uncovered a previously undescribed
relationship between binding of FOXM1 and ERa. Further molecular analyses
demonstrated that these two factors can bind simultaneously at genomic sites and 
furthermore that FOXM1 regulates the transcriptional activity of ERa via
interaction with the coactivator CARM1. Inhibition of FOXM1 activity using the
natural product thiostrepton revealed down-regulation of a set of FOXM1-regulated
genes that are correlated with patient outcome in clinical breast cancer samples.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings reveal a novel role for FOXM1 in ERa transcriptional 
activity in breast cancer and uncover a FOXM1-regulated gene signature associated
with ER-positive breast cancer patient prognosis.

PMCID: PMC3663086
PMID: 23347430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 22;431(4):753-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.01.037. Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Cyclin D1/Cdk4 increases the transcriptional activity of FOXM1c without
phosphorylating FOXM1c.

Wierstra I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Medical School Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 
D-30625 Hannover, Germany. iwiwiwi@web.de

Anders et al. (2011) [11] reported that cyclinD1/Cdk4 and cyclinD3/Cdk6 enhance
the transcriptional activity of FOXM1c by phosphorylating its TAD. They defined
12 Cdk consensus sites as essential for the activation of FOXM1c by cyclinD1/Cdk4
and cyclinD3/Cdk6 and stated that the 12 Cdk-sites are positioned within the TAD 
of FOXM1c. In contrast, this study demonstrates that all potential cyclin/Cdk
phosphorylation sites S/T-P of FOXM1c are located outside its TAD so that the TAD
of FOXM1c contains no potential cyclin/Cdk site, which excludes a phosphorylation
of the FOXM1c-TAD by cyclinD1/Cdk4 and cyclinD3/Cdk6. This study shows that the
activation of FOXM1c by cyclinD1/Cdk4 is lost without removal of any cyclin/Cdk
site and gained without addition of any cyclin/Cdk site because it depends on a
FOXM1c domain with no potential cyclin/Cdk site, namely on the interaction domain
for the tumor suppressor RB, which binds to and represses FOXM1c. CyclinD1/Cdk4
activates FOXM1c because cyclinD1/Cdk4 releases FOXM1c from its repression by RB 
through removal of RB from FOXM1c. For this purpose, cyclinD1/Cdk4 phosphorylates
only RB, but not FOXM1c, so that cyclinD1/Cdk4 increases the transcriptional
activity of FOXM1c without phosphorylating FOXM1c and activates FOXM1c
independently of cyclin/Cdk phosphorylation sites in FOXM1c. In summary, this
study changes the model of Anders et al. (2011) [11] completely because it
disproves their central conclusion that cyclinD1/Cdk4 and cyclinD3/Cdk6 enhance
the transcriptional activity of FOXM1c by phosphorylating its TAD at the 12
Cdk-sites.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23333330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Tumour Biol. 2013 Apr;34(2):1131-8. doi: 10.1007/s13277-013-0654-x. Epub 2013 Jan
17.

High FOXM1 expression was associated with bladder carcinogenesis.

Liu D(1), Zhang Z, Kong CZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Hospital of China Medical University, 155 North
Nanjing Street, Heping District, Shenyang, 110001, China.

The forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor plays crucial roles in
regulating the proliferation, differentiation, and transformation of cells.
Overexpression of FOXM1 is associated with a variety of aggressive solid
carcinomas, including bladder cancer. However, the precise role and molecular
mechanism responsible for the aggressive action of FOXM1 in bladder cancer remain
unclear. Real-time quantitative PCR, Western blot and immunohistochemistry were
used to explore FoxM1 expression in bladder cancer cell lines, primary bladder
cancer clinical specimens and normal bladder tissues. FoxM1 expression was
knocked down by small interfering RNA (siRNA) in T24 cells; proliferation,
migration and invasion were assayed. FoxM1 expression was up-regulated in the
majority of the bladder cancer tissue specimens at both mRNA and protein levels. 
Immunohistochemistry analysis showed that FoxM1 expression was significantly
correlated with TNM stage and histological grade, metastasis. Experimentally, we 
found that down-regulation of FoxM1 inhibited cell proliferation, migration and
invasion. These results suggested that FOXM1 up-regulation was associated with
poor prognosis in bladder cancer, and therefore it might act as a prognostic
marker and a new potential target for bladder cancer treatment.

PMID: 23325617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 30;33(5):589-98. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.629. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

ErbB2, FoxM1 and 14-3-3<U+03B6> prime breast cancer cells for invasion in response to
ionizing radiation.

Kambach DM(1), Sodi VL(1), Lelkes PI(2), Azizkhan-Clifford J(1), Reginato MJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. (2)School of Biomedical Engineering, Drexel
University, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

ErbB2 is frequently highly expressed in premalignant breast cancers, including
ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS); however, little is known about the signals or
pathways it contributes to progression into the invasive/malignant state.
Radiotherapy is often used to treat early premalignant lesions regardless of
ErbB2 status. Here, we show that clinically relevant doses of ionizing radiation 
(IR)-induce cellular invasion of ErbB2-expressing breast cancer cells, as well as
MCF10A cells overexpressing ErbB2. ErbB2-negative breast cancer cells, such as
MCF7 and T47D, do not invade following treatment with IR nor do MCF10A cells
overexpressing epidermal growth factor receptor. ErbB2 becomes phosphorylated at 
tyrosine 877 in a dose- and time- dependent manner following exposure to X-rays, 
and activates downstream signaling cascades including PI3K/Akt. Inhibition of
these pathways, as well as inhibition of reactive oxygen species (ROS) with
antioxidants, prevents IR-induced invasion. Activation of ErbB2-dependent
signaling results in upregulation of the forkhead family transcription factor,
FoxM1, and its transcriptional targets, including matrix metalloproteinase 2
(MMP2). Inhibition of FoxM1 by RNA interference prevented induction of invasion
by IR, and overexpression of FoxM1 in MCF10A cells was sufficient to promote
IR-induced invasion. Moreover, we found that 14-3-3<U+03B6> is also upregulated by IR in
cancer cells in a ROS-dependent manner, is required for IR-induced invasion in
ErbB2-positive breast cancer cells and together with FoxM1 is sufficient for
invasion in ErbB2-negative breast cancer cells. Thus, our data show that
IR-mediated activation of ErbB2 and induction of 14-3-3<U+03B6> collaborate to regulate 
FoxM1 and promote invasion of breast cancer cells and furthermore, may serve as
therapeutic targets to enhance radiosensitivity of breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC3966179
PMID: 23318431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Horm Metab Res. 2013 Feb;45(2):102-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1331196. Epub 2013 Jan 
11.

Changes in differential gene expression in fibroblast cells from patients with
triple A syndrome under oxidative stress.

Koehler K(1), End K, Kind B, Landgraf D, Mitzscherling P, Huebner A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Children's Hospital, Technical
University Dresden, Dresden, Germany. Katrin.Koehler@uniklinikumdresden.de

The triple A syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations
in the AAAS gene, which encodes the nucleoporin ALADIN. Recently it was shown
that ALADIN plays a role in the import of different factors into the nucleus,
which prevent the cell from DNA damage and consecutive cell death under oxidative
stress. In order to investigate the changes in differential gene expression in
ALADIN-deficient or mutated cells under oxidative stress we used fibroblast cell 
cultures of triple A syndrome patients and compared these to controls. Analysis
of 84 genes, which are associated with oxidative stress and antioxidant defense, 
showed that 7 genes were significantly and differentially regulated, namely
BCL2/adenovirus E1B 19kD-interacting protein 3 (BNIP3), 24-dehydrocholesterol
reduc-tase (DHCR24), dual specificity phosphatase 1 (DUSP1), forkhead box M1
(FOXM1), nudix-type motif 1 (NUDT1), prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase 2
(PTGS2), and scavenger receptor class A, member 3 (SCARA3). Whereas in control
cells the expression of DHCR24, FOXM1, NUDT1, and SCARA3 was decreased after
paraquat treatment, the expression did not change significantly in patient cells.
However, the basal expression of SCARA3 and BNIP3 was significantly higher in
patient cells than in controls whereas PTGS2 was less expressed. Furthermore,
after paraquat treatment the expression of BNIP3, DUSP1, and PTGS2 was
significantly increased in control cells while in patient cells the increase of
DUSP1 and PTGS2 expression was significantly reduced. With this work we confirm
that cells of triple A patients show an altered induction or downregulation of
genes associated with oxidative stress and antioxidant defense.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23315990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Cancer Gene Ther. 2013 Feb;20(2):117-24. doi: 10.1038/cgt.2012.94. Epub 2013 Jan 
11.

Inhibition of FOXM1 transcription factor suppresses cell proliferation and tumor 
growth of breast cancer.

Yang C(1), Chen H, Yu L, Shan L, Xie L, Hu J, Chen T, Tan Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, Department of
Biomedical Engineering, College of Biology, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan,
China.

The forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor regulates the expression of
genes essential for cell proliferation and transformation and is implicated in
tumorigenesis and tumor progression. FOXM1 has been considered as a potential
target for the prevention and/or therapeutic intervention in human carcinomas. In
this study, we observed a strong expression of FOXM1 in clinical tissue specimens
and cell lines of human breast cancer and a correlation between FOXM1 levels and 
the proliferation ability in the tested MCF-7, MDA-MB-231 and ZR-75-30 cells. By 
using an adenovirus vector (named AdFOXM1shRNA) that expresses a short hairpin
RNA (shRNA) to downregulate FOXM1 expression specifically, we found that the
knockdown of FOXM1 expression diminished the proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth of the breast cancer cells. The FOXM1 silencing in
ZR-75-30 cells dramatically prevented the tumorigenicity of the
AdFOXM1shRNA-treated cells in vitro and in vivo. Furthermore, the efficacy of
AdFOXM1shRNA for tumor gene therapy was assessed with the breast cancer xenograft
mouse model and the tumor growth was significantly suppressed when inoculated
mice were injected with AdFOXM1shRNA in the tumors. Together, our results suggest
that FOXM1 is a potential therapeutic target for breast cancer and AdFOXM1shRNA
may be an additional gene therapeutic intervention for breast cancer treatment.

PMID: 23306612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Hepatology. 2013 May;57(5):2004-13. doi: 10.1002/hep.26233. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

p53 regulates a mitotic transcription program and determines ploidy in normal
mouse liver.

Kurinna S(1), Stratton SA, Coban Z, Schumacher JM, Grompe M, Duncan AW, Barton
MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular BiologyThe University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Functions of p53 during mitosis reportedly include prevention of polyploidy and
transmission of aberrant chromosomes. However, whether p53 plays these roles
during genomic surveillance in vivo and, if so, whether this is done via direct
or indirect means remain unknown. The ability of normal, mature hepatocytes to
respond to stimuli, reenter the cell cycle, and regenerate liver mass offers an
ideal setting to assess mitosis in vivo. In quiescent liver, normally high ploidy
levels in adult mice increased with loss of p53. Following partial hepatectomy,
p53(-/-) hepatocytes exhibited early entry into the cell cycle and prolonged
proliferation with an increased number of polyploid mitoses. Ploidy levels
increased during regeneration of both wild-type (WT) and p53(-/-) hepatocytes,
but only WT hepatocytes were able to dynamically resolve ploidy levels and return
to normal by the end of regeneration. We identified multiple cell cycle and
mitotic regulators, including Foxm1, Aurka, Lats2, Plk2, and Plk4, as directly
regulated by chromatin interactions of p53 in vivo. Over a time course of
regeneration, direct and indirect regulation of expression by p53 is mediated in 
a gene-specific manner.CONCLUSION: Our results show that p53 plays a role in
mitotic fidelity and ploidy resolution in hepatocytes of normal and regenerative 
liver.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3632650
PMID: 23300120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. EMBO J. 2013 Jan 23;32(2):231-44. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.336. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

Foxm1 transcription factor is required for lung fibrosis and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Balli D(1), Ustiyan V, Zhang Y, Wang IC, Masino AJ, Ren X, Whitsett JA,
Kalinichenko VV, Kalin TV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pulmonary Biology, The Perinatal
Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Alveolar epithelial cells (AECs) participate in the pathogenesis of pulmonary
fibrosis, producing pro-inflammatory mediators and undergoing
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Herein, we demonstrated the critical 
role of Forkhead Box M1 (Foxm1) transcription factor in radiation-induced
pulmonary fibrosis. Foxm1 was induced in AECs following lung irradiation.
Transgenic expression of an activated Foxm1 transcript in AECs enhanced
radiation-induced pneumonitis and pulmonary fibrosis, and increased the
expression of IL-1ß, Ccl2, Cxcl5, Snail1, Zeb1, Zeb2 and Foxf1. Conditional
deletion of Foxm1 from respiratory epithelial cells decreased radiation-induced
pulmonary fibrosis and prevented the increase in EMT-associated gene expression. 
siRNA-mediated inhibition of Foxm1 prevented TGF-ß-induced EMT in vitro. Foxm1
bound to and increased promoter activity of the Snail1 gene, a critical
transcriptional regulator of EMT. Expression of Snail1 restored TGF-ß-induced
loss of E-cadherin in Foxm1-deficient cells in vitro. Lineage-tracing studies
demonstrated that Foxm1 increased EMT during radiation-induced pulmonary fibrosis
in vivo. Foxm1 is required for radiation-induced pulmonary fibrosis by enhancing 
the expression of genes critical for lung inflammation and EMT.

PMCID: PMC3553386
PMID: 23288041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;26(19):897-900.

[Expression and clinicopathological significance of foxM1 gene in laryngeal
squamous cell carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang L(1), Wang P, Chen H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Dazu People's Hospital, Chongqing, 402360,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor 
(FoxM1) mRNA and protein in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (LSCC) and its
clinical significance.
METHOD: Immunohistochemistry was used to examine the expression of FoxM1 in 89
LSCC tissues, 89 adjacent normal tissues and 20 laryngeal papilloma (LP) tissues.
Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) was used to examine the 
expression of FoxM1 in 20 LSCC tissues, 20 LP tissues and 20 adjacent normal
tissues. The relationship between FoxM1 expression and the clinicopathological
parameters of LSCC were analyzed.
RESULT: FoxM1 mRNA and protein expression were gradually decreased from LSCC to
LP and normal tissues. The difference was significant (P<0.05). There was a
significantly correlation between FoxM1 and histologic differentiation, T stage, 
lymph node metastasis and clinical stage. Tumors with poorer differentiation, in 
higher T stage, with lymph node metastasis or in higher clinical stage presented 
higher FoxM1 expression than tumors with better differentiation, in lower T
stage, without lymph node metastasis or in lower clinical stage (P<0.05). The
positive expression of FoxM1 was not related with the age, gender or primary site
of LSCC patients (P>0.05).
CONCLUSION: The up-regulation of FoxM1 may play an important role in the invasion
and metastasis of LSCC.

PMID: 23285957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52578. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052578. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Targeting GRB7/ERK/FOXM1 signaling pathway impairs aggressiveness of ovarian
cancer cells.

Chan DW(1), Hui WW, Cai PC, Liu MX, Yung MM, Mak CS, Leung TH, Chan KK, Ngan HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, PR China. dwchan@hku.hk

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(10):e110304.

Ovarian cancer is a highly lethal disease with poor prognosis and especially in
high-grade tumor. Emerging evidence has reported that aberrant upregulation and
activation of GRB7, ERK as well as FOXM1 are closely associated with
aggresivenesss of human cancers. However, the interplay between these factors in 
the pathogenesis of human cancers still remains unclear. In this study, we found 
that GRB7 (P<0.0001), ERK phosphorylation (P<0.0001) and FOXM1 (P = 0.001) were
frequently increased and associated with high-grade tumors, as well as a high
tendency in association with advanced stage ovarian cancer by immunohistochemical
analysis. Intriguingly, the expressions of GRB7 (P<0.0001), ERK phosphorylation
(P<0.001) and FOXM1 (P<0.001) showed a significant stepwise increase pattern
along Grade 1 to Grade 3 ovarian cancers. Biochemical studies using western blot 
analysis demonstrated that enforced expression or knockdown of GRB7 showed GRB7
could elevate the levels of ERK phosphorylation and FOXM1, whereas enforced
expression of FOXM1 could not alter levels of GRB7 and ERK phosphorylation. But
inhibition of ERK signaling by U0126 or PD98059 could reduce the level of FOXM1
in GRB7-overexpressing ovarian cancer cells, suggesting that GRB7, ERK and FOXM1 
are regulated orderly. Moreover, inhibition of ERK activity by U0126 or PD98059, 
or decreased FOXM1 expression by Thiostrepton significantly inhibited cell
migration/invasion, tumor growth in vitro and in vivo. Collectively, our findings
confer that targeting GRB7/ERK/FOXM1 signaling cascade may be a promising
molecular therapeutic choice in combating ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3527599
PMID: 23285101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Mar;11(3):261-71. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0527. Epub
2012 Dec 27.

MnSOD promotes tumor invasion via upregulation of FoxM1-MMP2 axis and related
with poor survival and relapse in lung adenocarcinomas.

Chen PM(1), Wu TC, Shieh SH, Wu YH, Li MC, Sheu GT, Cheng YW, Chen CY, Lee H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical and Molecular Toxicology, Chung Shan Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan, ROC.

Manganese superoxide dismutase (MnSOD) is an antioxidant enzyme responsible for
the elimination of superoxide radical. The role of MnSOD in tumor progression in 
different human cancers is still controversial. In the present study, MnSOD
expression in lung cancer cells was explored by knockdown or overexpression using
transfection of a short hairpin RNA (shRNA) or an expression vector,
respectively, to determine whether MnSOD expression mediates lung cancer cell
migration, invasion, and oncogenic potential by increasing FoxM1 and MMP2
expression. Western blotting showed that FoxM1 and MMP2 expression was dependent 
on MnSOD expression, suggesting that FoxM1 could be upregulated by MnSOD. Three
FoxM1 promoters were constructed to verify this activation of FoxM1 by MnSOD and 
to determine the transcription factors responsible. Luciferase reporter and
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays indicated that MnSOD overexpression in lung 
cancer cells promoted binding of E2F1 and Sp1 to their putative FoxM1
promoter-binding sites and activated FoxM1 reporter activity. MnSOD also enhanced
the potential for cell migration, invasion, and anchorage-independent colony
growth on soft-agar plates, again via upregulation of FoxM1 and MMP2 expression. 
In patients with lung cancer, evaluation of MnSOD expression in lung tumors by
immunohistochemistry indicated a positive correlation between FoxM1 and MMP2 mRNA
expressions. Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression analysis revealed a poorer overall
survival (OS) and relapse-free survival (RFS) in patients with MnSOD-positive
tumors than with MnSOD-negative tumors. We conclude that MnSOD may promote tumor 
aggressiveness via upregulation of the FoxM1-MMP2 axis, and that MnSOD expression
can independently predict survival and relapse in patients with resected lung
adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 23271813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2012 Nov;39(12):1760-2.

[Clinical study of Peptide-cocktail vaccination with tegafur-uracil/leucovorin
for advanced colorectal cancer].

[Article in Japanese]

Sugiura F(1), Inoue K, Okuno K, Sukegawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Surgery, Kinki University, School of Medicine, Japan.

cDNA microarray technology coupled with laser microdissection has been used to
identify human leukocyte antigen(HLA)-A24-restricted epitope peptides as
potential targets for cancer vaccination in colorectal cancer patients. These
antigenic peptides were derived from 2 different testis cancer antigens, ring
finger protein 43(RNF43) and translocase of outer mitochondrial membrane
34(TOMM34). We conducted a clinical trial of vaccines against colorectal cancer
specific peptides(RNF43 and TOMM34) with tegafur-uracil/Leucovorin( UFT/LV) for
the treatment of advanced or recurrent colorectal cancer. The vaccinations were
well tolerated without any adverse events. The highest long-term survival was
observed in the group showing cytolytic T-lymphocyte (CTL) responses against both
RNF43 and TOMM34, followed by the group showing CTL responses against only RNF43 
or only TOMM34. A new study has been planned in order to obtain more
immunological responses, and we have started a clinical trial of vaccines against
multiple peptides[RNF43, TOMM34, forkhead box protein M1(FOXM1), maternal
embryonic leucine zipper kinase(MELK), holliday junction recognition
protein(HJURP), vascular endothelial growth factor receptor (VEGFR)1, and
VEGFR2]by using UFT/LV for the treatment of advanced or recurrent colorectal
cancer.

PMID: 23267878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Med Oncol. 2013 Mar;30(1):346. doi: 10.1007/s12032-012-0346-1. Epub 2012 Dec 22.

Increased expression of forkhead box M1 protein is associated with poor prognosis
in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Wu XR(1), Chen YH, Liu DM, Sha JJ, Xuan HQ, Bo JJ, Huang YR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of 
Medicine, No. 145 Middle Shandong Road, Shanghai 200001, China.

Forkhead box protein M1 (FoxM1) is crucial in the regulation of various
biological processes, including cell proliferation, organogenesis, and
angiogenesis. Overexpression of FoxM1 is associated with carcinogenesis. In this 
study, immunohistochemistry was carried out to examine FoxM1 expression in clear 
cell renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC), and these data were examined for correlation
with clinicopathological parameters and prognosis. FoxM1 protein had high
expression in 37 of 87 cases of ccRCC (42.5 %), which was significantly higher
than in normal tissues, and FoxM1 overexpression was significantly associated
with tumor stage (P = 0.005) and recurrence (P = 0.027). The Kaplan-Meier
survival analysis demonstrated that FoxM1 expression was significantly associated
with shorter recurrence-free survival and overall survival (P = 0.007 and P =
0.008, respectively). Multivariate analysis further demonstrated that FoxM1 was
an independent prognostic factor for patients with ccRCC. So FoxM1 might be a
potential molecular marker to predict the prognosis of patients with ccRCC.

PMID: 23263830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Cancer Lett. 2013 Apr 30;331(1):105-14. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.12.008. Epub
2012 Dec 20.

Negative regulation of transcription factor FoxM1 by p53 enhances
oxaliplatin-induced senescence in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Qu K(1), Xu X, Liu C, Wu Q, Wei J, Meng F, Zhou L, Wang Z, Lei L, Liu P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Medical
College, Xi'an Jiaotong University, 277 West Yanta Road, Xi'an 710061, China.

Previous studies have demonstrated the involvement of transcriptional factor
forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) in cellular senescence of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
In the present study, we revealed that oxaliplatin could induce senescence in HCC
cells, since advanced HCC patients with lower expression of FoxM1 were more
sensitive to oxaliplatin therapy. Our data indicated that due to the repression
by p53, FoxM1 played a critical role in oxaliplatin-induced senescence via
regulating cycle-related proteins p21, p27, cyclins B1 and D1. Furthermore,
inhibition of FoxM1, combined with oxaliplatin treatment, could significantly
promote the senescence of HCC cells. Taken together, our findings suggest that
FoxM1 may represent a promising therapeutic target for the medication of the
chemosensitivity to oxaliplatin in HCC patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23262037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Carcinog. 2014 May;53(5):380-91. doi: 10.1002/mc.21989. Epub 2012 Dec 19.

Aberrant overexpression of FOXM1 transcription factor plays a critical role in
lung carcinogenesis induced by low doses of arsenic.

Liu Y(1), Hock JM, Van Beneden RJ, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Maine Institute for Human Genetics and Health, EMHS, Brewer, Maine; Center for
Molecular Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan
Province, P.R. China.

Environmental or occupational exposure to low doses of arsenic induces a series
of health problems including cancer. The molecular events in arsenic-induced
carcinogenicity remain to be defined. In the NuLi-1 immortalized human lung
epithelial cell line with p53 and pRb deficiency, exposure to low doses of
arsenic trioxide for 72<U+2009>h promoted cell proliferation and upregulated the gene
transcription levels of FOXM1, CDC6, CDC25A, and cyclin D1, which are both
critical cell cycle regulatory genes and proto-oncogenes. Continuous in vitro
exposure to 1<U+2009>µM arsenic trioxide for 34 wks induced malignant cell
transformation, as evidenced by enhanced anchorage-independent cell growth. The
expression of FOXM1, CDC6, CDC25A, and Cyclin D1 was dynamically elevated at the 
gene transcription and protein levels in the process of cell transformation. The 
carcinogenic ability of transformed cell colonies coincides with the expression
levels of FOXM1 in in vitro anchorage-independent growth assays and in vivo tumor
xenograft formation assays. In reverse, the knockdown of FOXM1 in lung
adenocarcinoma A549 cells or arsenic-transformed NuLi-1 cells significantly
decreased anchorage-independent cell growth and tumor xenograft formation. The
transformed NuLi-1 cells showed genomic instability in the form of copy number
variation (CNV) at chromosome 1, 5, 6, 18, and 20, but not loss of heterozygosity
(LOH). These results showed for the first time that chronic exposure to low doses
of arsenic trioxide promoted lung carcinogenicity, in part by aberrantly
upregulating FOXM1 and its associated oncogenes, when the tumor suppressor genes 
p53 and pRb were inactivated.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23255470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Physiol. 2013 Mar 1;591(5):1325-38. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.244830. Epub
2012 Dec 17.

Wild-type offspring of heterozygous prolactin receptor-null female mice have
maladaptive ß-cell responses during pregnancy.

Huang C(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Calgary, Health Sciences Centre, 3330 Hospital Drive NW, Room
2281, Calgary, Alberta, Canada T2N 4N1. carol.huang@albertahealthservices.ca

Abstract  ß-Cell mass increases during pregnancy in adaptation to the insulin
resistance of pregnancy. This increase is accompanied by an increase in ß-cell
proliferation, a process that requires intact prolactin receptor (Prlr)
signalling. Previously, it was found that during pregnancy, heterozygous
prolactin receptor-null (Prlr(+/-)) mice had lower number of ß-cells, lower serum
insulin and higher blood glucose levels than wild-type (Prlr(+/+)) mice. An
unexpected observation was that the glucose homeostasis of the experimental mouse
depends on the genotype of her mother, such that within the Prlr(+/+) group, the 
Prlr(+/+) offspring derived from Prlr(+/+) mothers (Prlr(+/+(+/+))) had higher
ß-cell mass and lower blood glucose than those derived from Prlr(+/-) mothers
(Prlr(+/+(+/-))). Pathways that are known to regulate ß-cell proliferation during
pregnancy include insulin receptor substrate-2, Akt, menin, the serotonin
synthetic enzyme tryptophan hydroxylase-1, Forkhead box M1 and Forkhead box D3.
The aim of the present study was to determine whether dysregulation in these
signalling molecules in the islets could explain the maternal effect on the
phenotype of the offspring. It was found that the pregnancy-induced increases in 
insulin receptor substrate-2 and Akt expression in the islets were attenuated in 
the Prlr(+/+(+/-)) mice in comparison to the Prlr(+/+(+/+)) mice. The expression 
of Forkhead box D3, which plays a permissive role for ß-cell proliferation during
pregnancy, was also lower in the Prlr(+/+(+/-)) mice. In contrast, the
pregnancy-induced increases in phospho-Jak2, tryptophan hydroxylase-1 and FoxM1, 
as well as the pregnancy-associated reduction in menin expression, were
comparable between the two groups. There was also no difference in expression
levels of genes that regulate insulin synthesis and secretion (i.e. glucose
transporter 2, glucokinase and pancreatic and duodenal homeobox-1) between these 
two groups. Taken together, these results suggest that the in utero environment
of the Prlr(+/-) mother confers long-term changes in the pancreatic islets of her
offspring such that when the offspring themselves became pregnant, they cannot
adapt to the increased insulin demands of their own pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3607874
PMID: 23247113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51277. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051277. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

Novel interactions between FOXM1 and CDC25A regulate the cell cycle.

Sullivan C(1), Liu Y, Shen J, Curtis A, Newman C, Hock JM, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Maine Institute for Human Genetics and Health, Brewer, Maine, United States of
America.

FOXM1 is a critical regulator of the G1/S and G2/M cell cycle transitions, as
well as of the mitotic spindle assembly. Previous studies have suggested that
FOXM1 regulates CDC25A gene transcription, but the mechanism remains unknown.
Here, we provide evidence that FOXM1 directly regulates CDC25A gene transcription
via direct promoter binding and indirect activation of E2F-dependent pathways.
Prior literature reported that CDC25B and CDC25C activate CDK1/cyclinB complexes 
in order to enable phosphorylation of FOXM1. It was unknown if CDC25A functions
in a similar manner. We report that FOXM1 transcriptional activity is
synergistically enhanced when co-expressed with CDC25A. The increase is dependent
upon CDK1 phosphorylation of FOXM1 at T600, T611 and T620 residues. We also
report a novel protein interaction between FOXM1 and CDC25A via the C-terminus of
FOXM1. We demonstrate that the phosphorylation of Thr 600 and Thr 611 residues of
FOXM1 enhanced this interaction, and that the interaction is dependent upon
CDC25A phosphatase activity. Our work provides novel insight into the underlying 
mechanisms by which FOXM1 controls the cell cycle through its association with
CDC25A.

PMCID: PMC3519786
PMID: 23240008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Cancer Res. 2013 Feb 1;73(3):1232-44. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-2968. Epub
2012 Dec 11.

Epigenetic repression of miR-31 disrupts androgen receptor homeostasis and
contributes to prostate cancer progression.

Lin PC(1), Chiu YL, Banerjee S, Park K, Mosquera JM, Giannopoulou E, Alves P,
Tewari AK, Gerstein MB, Beltran H, Melnick AM, Elemento O, Demichelis F, Rubin
MA.

Author information: 
(1)DepartmentS of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Weill Cornell Medical
College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Androgen receptor signaling plays a critical role in prostate cancer
pathogenesis. Yet, the regulation of androgen receptor signaling remains elusive.
Even with stringent androgen deprivation therapy, androgen receptor signaling
persists. Here, our data suggest that there is a complex interaction between the 
expression of the tumor suppressor miRNA, miR-31, and androgen receptor
signaling. We examined primary and metastatic prostate cancer and found that
miR-31 expression was reduced as a result of promoter hypermethylation, and
importantly, the levels of miR-31 expression were inversely correlated with the
aggressiveness of the disease. As the expression of androgen receptor and miR-31 
was inversely correlated in the cell lines, our study further suggested that
miR-31 and androgen receptor could mutually repress each other. Upregulation of
miR-31 effectively suppressed androgen receptor expression through multiple
mechanisms and inhibited prostate cancer growth in vivo. Notably, we found that
miR-31 targeted androgen receptor directly at a site located in the coding
region, which was commonly mutated in prostate cancer. In addition, miR-31
suppressed cell-cycle regulators including E2F1, E2F2, EXO1, FOXM1, and MCM2.
Together, our findings suggest a novel androgen receptor regulatory mechanism
mediated through miR-31 expression. The downregulation of miR-31 may disrupt
cellular homeostasis and contribute to the evolution and progression of prostate 
cancer. We provide implications for epigenetic treatment and support clinical
development of detecting miR-31 promoter methylation as a novel biomarker.

PMCID: PMC3563734
PMID: 23233736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Ann Oncol. 2013 Apr;24(4):924-30. doi: 10.1093/annonc/mds594. Epub 2012 Dec 11.

An open-label study of lapatinib in women with HER-2-negative early breast
cancer: the lapatinib pre-surgical study (LPS study).

Coombes RC(1), Tat T, Miller ML, Reise JA, Mansi JL, Hadjiminas DJ, Shousha S,
Elsheikh SE, Lam EW, Horimoto Y, El-Bahrawy M, Aboagye EO, Contractor KB, Shaw
JA, Walker RA, Marconell MH, Palmieri C, Stebbing J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer, Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London,
1st Floor ICTEM, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

BACKGROUND: This phase II, open-label, multicentre study aimed to evaluate
changes in cell proliferation and biomarkers, as well as efficacy of lapatinib in
treatment-naïve patients with HER-2-negative primary breast cancer.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients received 1500 mg lapatinib for 28-42 days before
surgery with repeat biopsies and measurements. The primary end point was
inhibition of cell proliferation measured by Ki67; the secondary end points
included clinical response, adverse events and changes in FOXO3a, FOXM1, p-AKT
and HER-3.
RESULTS: Overall, there was no significant reduction in Ki67 with treatment
(assessment carried out in 28 of 31 subjects enrolled). However, four patients
(14%) showed a reduction in Ki67 =50%. Four of 25 patients (16%) had a partial
response to treatment judged by sequential ultrasound measurements. Response, in 
terms of either Ki67 or ultrasound, did not relate to changes in any biomarker
assessed at baseline, including the estrogen receptor (ER) and epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR). However, all four clinical responders were HER-3
positive, as were three of four Ki67 responders.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, a pre-surgical course of lapatinib monotherapy had little
effect on this group of patients; however, in subsets of patients, especially
those with HER-3-positive tumors, we observed either reduction in proliferation
(Ki67) or tumor size; EGFR/ER status had no impact.

PMID: 23233650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Neurooncol. 2013 Feb;111(3):245-55. doi: 10.1007/s11060-012-1018-x. Epub 2012
Dec 11.

Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase induces glioma cells proliferation and invasion by
stabilizing forkhead box M1.

Liu J(1), Guo S, Li Q, Yang L, Xia Z, Zhang L, Huang Z, Zhang N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The 1st Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, No 58, Zhongshan 2 Road, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province 510080,
People's Republic of China.

Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH) is the first enzyme branching from
glycolysis in the three-step serine biosynthetic pathway. Recent evidence has
shown that PHGDH is amplified in human breast cancer and melanoma and plays a key
role in cancer metabolism. However, PHGDH expression in glioma and a potential
non-metabolic role in tumorigenesis have not been reported. We analyzed PHGDH
levels in specimens from glioma patients and found that PHGDH, although negative 
in normal brain tissues, was highly expressed in astrocytic tumors and
increasingly expressed in more aggressive cancer types. Inhibition of PHGDH
expression in glioma cells downregulated the expression of VEGF, MMP-2, CHK2 and 
cyclin D1 and reduced glioma cell proliferation, invasion and tumorigenicity in
vitro and in vivo. Interestingly, we found that the oncogenic transcription
factor FOXM1 was also downregulated in PHDGH-silenced glioma cells. Using LC/LC
MS analysis, we identified PHGDH as a novel binding partner of FOXM1. PHGDH
interacted with and stabilized FOXM1 at the protein level, promoting the
proliferation, invasion and tumorigenicity of glioma cells. Our data identified
PHGDH as a potential prognostic marker of glial brain tumors and identified a
non-metabolic role for PHGDH in glioma tumorigenesis, providing a novel angle of 
targeting the PHGDH-FOXM1 axis in future brain tumor therapy.

PMCID: PMC3565087
PMID: 23229761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Int Med Res. 2012;40(5):1850-9.

Sleeping Beauty transposon system is a reliable gene delivery tool for hereditary
tyrosinaemia type 1 disease gene therapy: size of the foreign gene decides the
timing of stable integration into the host chromosomes.

Pan XJ(1), Ma ZZ, Zhang QJ, Fan L, Li QH.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Research Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study investigated compensation for loss of the
fumaryl-acetoacetate hydrolase gene (Fah) by gene therapy using the Sleeping
Beauty transposon system (SBTS), in a hereditary tyrosinaemia type 1 (HT-1) mouse
model (Fah-/-).
METHODS: Twenty Fah-/- study mice, five wild-type positive controls and five
Fah-/- negative controls were included. All Fah-/- mice received
2-(2-nitro-4-trifluoro-methylbenzoyl)-1,3-cyclo hexaedione (NTBC). Fah-/- study
mice were randomly injected with one of two SBTS constructs: Fah-SBTS (containing
mouse Fah gene), or forkhead box M1b (FOXM1B)-Fah-SBTS (containing mouse Fah and 
human FOXM1B genes). Firefly luciferase-SBTS was injected as a trace marker. NTBC
treatment stopped after construct injection; Fah-/- negative controls were kept
healthy with continued NTBC. Mice were weighed daily; the luciferase signal was
monitored by in vivo bioluminescence, and Fah and FOXM1B gene expression were
evaluated.
RESULTS: The Fah gene integrated into the mouse chromosomes within 1 week of
Fah-SBTS injection (mice survived without NTBC thereafter) and within 1 month of 
FOXM1B-Fah-SBTS injection (mice lost weight dramatically and needed additional
NTBC).
CONCLUSION: The shorter Fah gene had an advantage over the longer FOXM1B-Fah gene
for stable integration into the host mouse chromosomes.

PMID: 23206466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biomol Concepts. 2012 Dec;3(6):593-5. doi: 10.1515/bmc-2012-0029.

Paradoxical inhibition of cellular protein expression by proteasome inhibitors.

Gartel AL.

Abstract Proteasome inhibitors are used as anticancer drugs, however, the precise
mechanisms of their selective activity against cancer cells are not understood
well. While proteasome inhibitors stabilize the majority of cellular proteins
through inhibition of proteasome activity, they also paradoxically downregulate
several other proteins. We recently discovered that proteasome inhibitors
suppress mRNA and protein expression of FOXM1, NPM, and ARF proteins that are
involved in cancer. We postulated that proteasome inhibitors preferentially
stabilize negative regulators of transcription of these genes, which overrides
their protein stabilization. These data suggest a presence of multiple secondary 
mechanisms that may regulate transcription, degradation, or localization of
cellular proteins after treatment with proteasome inhibitors. Future experiments 
will identify these mechanisms and additional proteins suppressed by proteasome
inhibitors, and will help explain the role of protein suppression by proteasome
inhibitors in their anticancer activity.

PMID: 25436560  [PubMed]


400. J Biol Chem. 2013 Jan 18;288(3):1634-42. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.379362. Epub 2012 
Nov 28.

Forkhead box M1 is regulated by heat shock factor 1 and promotes glioma cells
survival under heat shock stress.

Dai B(1), Gong A, Jing Z, Aldape KD, Kang SH, Sawaya R, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M. D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is a key transcription factor regulating multiple
aspects of cell biology. Prior studies have shown that FoxM1 is overexpressed in 
a variety of human tumors, including brain tumor, and plays a critical role in
cancer development and progression. In this study we found that FoxM1 was
up-regulated by heat shock factor 1 (HSF1) under heat shock stress condition in
multiple cell lines. Knockdown of HSF1 with HSF1 siRNA or inhibition of HSF1 with
a HSF1 inhibitor abrogated heat shock-induced expression of FoxM1. Genetic
deletion of HSF1 in mouse embryo fibroblast cells also abolished heat shock
stress-induced FoxM1 expression. Moreover, we showed that HSF1 directly bound to 
FoxM1 promoter and increased FoxM1 promoter activity. Furthermore, we
demonstrated that FoxM1 was required for the G(2)-M phase progression through
regulating Cdc2, Cdc20, and Cdc25B under a mild heat shock stress but enhanced
cell survival under lethal heat shock stress condition. Finally, in human
glioblastoma specimens, FoxM1 overexpression correlated with elevated HSF1
expression. Our results indicate that FoxM1 is regulated by HSF1 and is critical 
for HSF1-mediated heat shock response. We demonstrated a novel mechanism of
stress resistance controlled by HSF1 and a new HSF-FoxM1 connection that mediates
cellular thermotolerance.

PMCID: PMC3548473
PMID: 23192351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e50094. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0050094. Epub 2012 Nov 20.

Transgenic expression of FoxM1 promotes endothelial repair following lung injury 
induced by polymicrobial sepsis in mice.

Huang X(1), Zhao YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois College of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.

Enhancing endothelial barrier integrity for the treatment of acute lung injury
(ALI) is an emerging novel therapeutic strategy. Our previous studies have
demonstrated the essential role of FoxM1 in mediating endothelial regeneration
and barrier repair following lipopolysaccharide-induced lung injury. However, it 
remains unclear whether FoxM1 expression is sufficient to promote endothelial
repair in experimental models of sepsis. Here, employing the FoxM1 transgenic
(FoxM1 Tg) mice, we showed that transgenic expression of FoxM1 promoted rapid
recovery of endothelial barrier function and survival in a clinically relevant
model of sepsis induced by cecal ligation and puncture (CLP). We observed lung
vascular permeability was rapidly recovered and returned to levels similar to
baseline at 48 h post-CLP challenge in FoxM1 Tg mice whereas it remained markedly
elevated in WT mice. Lung edema and inflammation were resolved only in FoxM1 Tg
mice at 24 h post-CLP. 5-bromo-2-deoxyuridine incorporation assay revealed a
drastic induction of endothelial proliferation in FoxM1 Tg lungs at 24h post-CLP,
correlating with early induction of expression of FoxM1 target genes essential
for cell cycle progression. Additionally, deletion of FoxM1 in endothelial cells,
employing the mouse model with endothelial cell-restricted disruption of FoxM1
(FoxM1 CKO) resulted in impaired endothelial repair following CLP challenge.
Together, these data suggest FoxM1 expression in endothelial cells is necessary
and sufficient to mediate endothelial repair and thereby promote survival
following sepsis challenge.

PMCID: PMC3502353
PMID: 23185540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Lung Cancer. 2013 Feb;79(2):173-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2012.10.019. Epub 2012 
Nov 20.

FoxM1 expression is significantly associated with cisplatin-based chemotherapy
resistance and poor prognosis in advanced non-small cell lung cancer patients.

Wang Y(1), Wen L, Zhao SH, Ai ZH, Guo JZ, Liu WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, State Key Discipline of Cell Biology, Xijing Hospital,
The Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, China.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is known to play an 
important role in the development and progression of many malignancies including 
lung cancer. However, the relationship of FoxM1 expression and the clinical
response to chemotherapy and prognosis in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
remains unknown.
METHODS: Total 162 NSCLC (stages IIIB and IV) patients who had tumor specimens
available before treatment were assessed for FoxM1 expression using
immunohistochemistry. Clinical significance was analyzed by Kaplan-Meier curves, 
log-rank test and multivariate Cox regression analysis. Sensitivities to
cisplatin were detected by the MTT assay and drug-resistance related genes were
analyzed by real-time PCR and western blot between DDP-sensitive A549 and the
corresponding DDP-resistant cell subline (A549/DDP). Furthermore, small
interfering RNA (siRNA) targeting FoxM1 was transfected into A549 and A549/DDP
cell lines in vitro and migration and invasion were examined separately by
Transwell chamber assay.
RESULTS: Patients with FoxM1 expression had a significantly lower response rate
(P=0.009) and poor progression-free survival (PFS, P=0.002) and overall survival 
(OS, P=0.007) than those without FoxM1 expression. Multivariate analyses
indicated that FoxM1 positivity was an independent prognostic factor for PFS
(P=0.006) and OS (P=0.021), respectively. Moreover, the expression of FoxM1 was
significantly higher in A549/DDP cell subline than in A549 cells at both mRNA and
protein levels. The FoxM1 inhibitor thiostrepton also showed efficacy in causing 
cell death and proliferative arrest in the cisplatin-resistant cells through the 
downregulation of FoxM1 expression. Knockdown of FoxM1 by siRNA suppressed cell
migration and invasion in A549 and A549/DDP cells. Cisplatin resistance in
A549/DDP cells could be partially reversed through siRNA-mediated FoxM1
inhibition.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of FoxM1 might be an independent prognostic marker
for advanced NSCLC patients and FoxM1 inhibition would be a potential strategy
for chemosensitization of NSCLC cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23177020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Cancer Ther. 2013 Jan;12(1):104-16. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-12-0781. Epub 
2012 Nov 19.

Genome and transcriptome sequencing in prospective metastatic triple-negative
breast cancer uncovers therapeutic vulnerabilities.

Craig DW(1), O'Shaughnessy JA, Kiefer JA, Aldrich J, Sinari S, Moses TM, Wong S, 
Dinh J, Christoforides A, Blum JL, Aitelli CL, Osborne CR, Izatt T, Kurdoglu A,
Baker A, Koeman J, Barbacioru C, Sakarya O, De La Vega FM, Siddiqui A, Hoang L,
Billings PR, Salhia B, Tolcher AW, Trent JM, Mousses S, Von Hoff D, Carpten JD.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, AZ 85004, USA.

Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is characterized by the absence of
expression of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, and HER-2. Thirty percent
of patients recur after first-line treatment, and metastatic TNBC (mTNBC) has a
poor prognosis with median survival of one year. Here, we present initial
analyses of whole genome and transcriptome sequencing data from 14 prospective
mTNBC. We have cataloged the collection of somatic genomic alterations in these
advanced tumors, particularly those that may inform targeted therapies. Genes
mutated in multiple tumors included TP53, LRP1B, HERC1, CDH5, RB1, and NF1.
Notable genes involved in focal structural events were CTNNA1, PTEN, FBXW7,
BRCA2, WT1, FGFR1, KRAS, HRAS, ARAF, BRAF, and PGCP. Homozygous deletion of
CTNNA1 was detected in 2 of 6 African Americans. RNA sequencing revealed
consistent overexpression of the FOXM1 gene when tumor gene expression was
compared with nonmalignant breast samples. Using an outlier analysis of gene
expression comparing one cancer with all the others, we detected expression
patterns unique to each patient's tumor. Integrative DNA/RNA analysis provided
evidence for deregulation of mutated genes, including the monoallelic expression 
of TP53 mutations. Finally, molecular alterations in several cancers supported
targeted therapeutic intervention on clinical trials with known inhibitors,
particularly for alterations in the RAS/RAF/MEK/ERK and PI3K/AKT/mTOR pathways.
In conclusion, whole genome and transcriptome profiling of mTNBC have provided
insights into somatic events occurring in this difficult to treat cancer. These
genomic data have guided patients to investigational treatment trials and provide
hypotheses for future trials in this irremediable cancer.

PMID: 23171949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(9):4739-43.

Involvement of FoxM1 in non-small cell lung cancer recurrence.

Xu N(1), Wu SD, Wang H, Wang Q, Bai CX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Predictive biomarkers for lung cancer recurrence after curative tumor
resection remain unclear. This study set out to assess the role of FoxM1 in the
recurrence of non-small cell lung cancer.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry for FoxM1 expression was performed on
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues from 165 NSCLC patients. Association of FoxM1
expression with clinicopathological parameters and disease free survival were
evaluated.
RESULTS: Our results indicated FoxM1 expression to be significantly associated
with poorer tissue differentiation (P =0.03), higher TNM stage (P <0.01), lymph
node metastasis (P <0.01), advanced tumor stage (P <0.01), and poorer disease
free survival (P <0.01). Multivariable analysis showed that FoxM1 expression
increased the hazard of recurrence (hazard ratio= 1.96, 95% CI, 1.04-3.17, P
<0.05), indicating that FoxM1 is an independent and significant predictor of lung
cancer recurrence.
CONCLUSION: Therefore, FoxM1 is an independent risk factor for recurrence of
NSCLC. Elevated FoxM1 expression could be used as an indicator of poor disease
free survival.

PMID: 23167412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Circ Res. 2013 Jan 18;112(2):267-77. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.112.277442. Epub
2012 Nov 14.

FoxO1 and FoxM1 transcription factors have antagonistic functions in neonatal
cardiomyocyte cell-cycle withdrawal and IGF1 gene regulation.

Sengupta A(1), Kalinichenko VV, Yutzey KE.

Author information: 
(1)The Heart Institute, Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Cincinnati 
Children's Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

RATIONALE: In the mammalian heart, cardiomyocytes withdraw from the cell cycle
and initiate hypertrophic growth soon after birth, but the transcriptional
regulatory mechanisms that control these neonatal transitions are not
well-defined.
OBJECTIVE: Forkhead family transcription factors have been implicated as positive
(forkhead box [Fox] transcription factor M1) and negative (FoxO1 and FoxO3)
regulators of cardiomyocyte proliferation prenatally, but their regulatory
interactions and functions in neonatal cell-cycle withdrawal have not been
reported previously. Potential regulators of Fox activity, including the
metabolic indicator AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), and Fox transcriptional 
targets (p21, p27, insulin-like growth factor 1 [IGF1]) also were examined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: In cultured neonatal rat cardiomyocytes, AMPK activates
FoxOs, and AMPK inhibition is sufficient to induce cell proliferation. In vivo,
combined loss of FoxO1 and FoxO3 specifically in cardiomyocytes leads to delayed 
cell-cycle withdrawal and increased expression of IGF1 and FoxM1. Conversely,
cardiomyocyte-specific loss of FoxM1 results in decreased neonatal cardiomyocyte 
cell proliferation, decreased expression of IGF1, and increased expression of
cell-cycle inhibitors p21 and p27. IGF1 is a direct downstream target of cardiac 
Fox transcription factors, which is negatively regulated by FoxOs and positively 
regulated by FoxM1, dependent on AMPK activation status.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support a regulatory mechanism whereby the balance of
FoxO and FoxM1 transcription factors integrates metabolic status, mediated by
AMPK, and cell-cycle regulation, through competitive regulation of target genes, 
including IGF1, in neonatal cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC3548965
PMID: 23152492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jan;33(2):371-86. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00934-12. Epub 2012 Nov
12.

FOXM1 promotes allergen-induced goblet cell metaplasia and pulmonary
inflammation.

Ren X(1), Shah TA, Ustiyan V, Zhang Y, Shinn J, Chen G, Whitsett JA, Kalin TV,
Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Childrens Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.

Chronic airway disorders, including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
cystic fibrosis, and asthma, are associated with persistent pulmonary
inflammation and goblet cell metaplasia and contribute to significant morbidity
and mortality worldwide. While the molecular pathogenesis of these disorders is
actively studied, little is known regarding the transcriptional control of goblet
cell differentiation and mucus hyperproduction. Herein, we demonstrated that
pulmonary allergen sensitization induces expression of FOXM1 transcription factor
in airway epithelial and inflammatory cells. Conditional deletion of the Foxm1
gene from either airway epithelium or myeloid inflammatory cells decreased goblet
cell metaplasia, reduced lung inflammation, and decreased airway resistance in
response to house dust mite allergen (HDM). FOXM1 induced goblet cell metaplasia 
and Muc5AC expression through the transcriptional activation of Spdef. FOXM1
deletion reduced expression of CCL11, CCL24, and the chemokine receptors CCR2 and
CX3CR1, resulting in decreased recruitment of eosinophils and macrophages to the 
lung. Deletion of FOXM1 from dendritic cells impaired the uptake of HDM antigens 
and decreased cell surface expression of major histocompatibility complex II (MHC
II) and costimulatory molecule CD86, decreasing production of Th2 cytokines by
activated T cells. Finally, pharmacological inhibition of FOXM1 by ARF peptide
prevented HDM-mediated pulmonary responses. FOXM1 regulates genes critical for
allergen-induced lung inflammation and goblet cell metaplasia.

PMCID: PMC3554115
PMID: 23149934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48713. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048713. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Postnatal ablation of Foxm1 from cardiomyocytes causes late onset cardiac
hypertrophy and fibrosis without exacerbating pressure overload-induced cardiac
remodeling.

Bolte C(1), Zhang Y, York A, Kalin TV, Schultz Jel J, Molkentin JD, Kalinichenko 
VV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America. Craig.Bolte@cchmc.org

Heart disease remains a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in the
industrialized world. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is the most common genetic
cardiovascular disorder and the most common cause of sudden cardiac death. Foxm1 
transcription factor (also known as HFH-11B, Trident, Win or MPP2) plays an
important role in the pathogenesis of various cancers and is a critical mediator 
of post-injury repair in multiple organs. Foxm1 has been previously shown to be
essential for heart development and proliferation of embryonic cardiomyocytes.
However, the role of Foxm1 in postnatal heart development and in cardiac injury
has not been evaluated. To delete Foxm1 in postnatal cardiomyocytes,
aMHC-Cre/Foxm1(fl/fl) mice were generated. Surprisingly, aMHC-Cre/Foxm1(fl/fl)
mice exhibited normal cardiomyocyte proliferation at postnatal day seven and had 
no defects in cardiac structure or function but developed cardiac hypertrophy and
fibrosis late in life. The development of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy and cardiac
fibrosis in aged Foxm1-deficient mice was associated with reduced expression of
Hey2, an important regulator of cardiac homeostasis, and increased expression of 
genes critical for cardiac remodeling, including MMP9, aSMA, fibronectin and
vimentin. We also found that following aortic constriction Foxm1 mRNA and protein
were induced in cardiomyocytes. However, Foxm1 deletion did not exacerbate
cardiac hypertrophy or fibrosis following chronic pressure overload. Our results 
demonstrate that Foxm1 regulates genes critical for age-induced cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy and cardiac fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC3493600
PMID: 23144938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 15;72(22):5658-62. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-0953. Epub 
2012 Nov 8.

FoxM1 and Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in glioma stem cells.

Gong A(1), Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center 
and Program in Cancer Biology, The University of Texas Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences at Houston, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Cancer stem cells may be responsible for tumor initiation and maintenance. The
molecular mechanisms that control cancer stem cells are related to alterations in
various signaling pathways, including the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway. The
canonical Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway is one of the major signaling systems
in stem and progenitor cells, and aberrant activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway is common in human cancers. As with ß-catenin, FoxM1 has been
found to play important roles in a number of cancers. In this review, we discuss 
the evidence that FoxM1 affects the expression and function of a variety of genes
that are critical to the survival, proliferation, invasion, angiogenesis, and
self-renewal of cancer stem cells. We highlight the pivotal roles of the
Wnt/ß-catenin and FoxM1 signaling pathways in neural stem and progenitor cells
and glioma stem cells. We also discuss the evidence for cross-talk between the
ß-catenin and FoxM1 signaling pathways in the regulation of the stemness and
tumorigenicity of glioma stem cells.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3500394
PMID: 23139209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 1;19(1):62-72. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-1588. Epub
2012 Nov 7.

The critical role of dysregulated FOXM1-PLAUR signaling in human colon cancer
progression and metastasis.

Li D(1), Wei P, Peng Z, Huang C, Tang H, Jia Z, Cui J, Le X, Huang S, Xie K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First
People's Hospital, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

PURPOSE: The mammalian Forkhead Box (Fox) transcription factor FOXM1 is
implicated in tumorigenesis including mouse intestinal cancer. However, the
clinical significance of FOXM1 signaling in human colorectal cancer pathogenesis 
remains unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We investigated FOXM1 expression in 203 cases of primary
colon cancer and matched normal colon tissue specimens and explored the
underlying mechanisms of altered FOXM1 expression and the impact of this altered 
expression on colon cancer growth and metastasis using in vitro and animal models
of colon cancer.
RESULTS: We found weak expression of FOXM1 protein in the colon mucosa, whereas
we observed strong FOXM1 expression in tumor-cell nuclei of colon cancer and
lymph node metastases. A Cox proportional hazards model revealed that FOXM1
expression was an independent prognostic factor in multivariate analysis.
Experimentally, overexpression of FOXM1 by gene transfer significantly promoted
the growth and metastasis of colon cancer cells in orthotopic mouse models,
whereas knockdown of FOXM1 expression by siRNA did the opposite. Promotion of
colon tumorigenesis by FOXM1 directly and significantly correlated with
activation of urokinase-type plasminogen activator receptor (PLAUR) expression
and elevation of invasion and metastasis.
CONCLUSIONS: Given the importance of FOXM1 in regulation of the expression of
genes key to cancer biology, dysregulated expression and activation of FOXM1 may 
play important roles in colon cancer progression and metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3537853
PMID: 23136192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Front Med. 2012 Dec;6(4):376-80. doi: 10.1007/s11684-012-0228-0. Epub 2012 Nov 3.

Role of the forkhead transcription factor FOXO-FOXM1 axis in cancer and drug
resistance.

Zhao F(1), Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, London W12 0NN, UK.

The forkhead transcription factors FOXO and FOXM1 have pivotal roles in
tumorigenesis and in mediating chemotherapy sensitivity and resistance. Recent
research shows that the forkhead transcription factor FOXM1 is a direct
transcriptional target repressed by the forkhead protein FOXO3a, a vital
downstream effector of the PI3K-AKT-FOXO signaling pathway. Intriguingly, FOXM1
and FOXO3a also compete for binding to the same gene targets, which have a role
in chemotherapeutic drug action and sensitivity. An understanding of the role and
regulation of the FOXO-FOXM1 axis will impact directly on our knowledge of
chemotherapeutic drug action and resistance in patients, and provide new insights
into the design of novel therapeutic strategy and reliable biomarkers for
prediction of drug sensitivity.

PMID: 23124885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e48160. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048160. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) gene is a new STAT3 transcriptional factor target and is 
essential for proliferation, survival and DNA repair of K562 cell line.

Mencalha AL(1), Binato R, Ferreira GM, Du Rocher B, Abdelhay E.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratório de Células-Tronco, Divisão de laboratórios do CEMO, Instituto
Nacional de Câncer, Rio de Janeiro, Brasil. amencalha@inca.gov.br

The forkhead box (Fox) M1 gene belongs to a superfamily of evolutionarily
conserved transcriptional regulators that are involved in a wide range of
biological processes, and its deregulation has been implicated in cancer
survival, proliferation and chemotherapy resistance. However, the role of FoxM1, 
the signaling involved in its activation and its role in leukemia are poorly
known. Here, we demonstrate by gene promoter analysis, Electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays that FoxM1 is 
a new target of the STAT3 transcriptional activator. Additionally, FoxM1 is
transcriptionally dependent on STAT3 signaling activation. Furthermore, we
verified that FoxM1 is crucial for K562 cell proliferation, cell cycle
checkpoints and viability and could be related to chemotherapeutic resistance. By
microarray analysis, we determined the signaling pathways related to FoxM1
expression and its role in DNA repair using K562 cells. Our results revealed new 
signaling involved in FoxM1 expression and its role in leukemic cells that
elucidate cellular mechanisms associated with the development of leukemia and
disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3480485
PMID: 23110199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jan;33(2):227-36. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00881-12. Epub 2012 Oct
29.

The forkhead transcription factor FOXM1 controls cell cycle-dependent gene
expression through an atypical chromatin binding mechanism.

Chen X(1), Müller GA, Quaas M, Fischer M, Han N, Stutchbury B, Sharrocks AD,
Engeland K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

There are nearly 50 forkhead (FOX) transcription factors encoded in the human
genome and, due to sharing a common DNA binding domain, they are all thought to
bind to similar DNA sequences. It is therefore unclear how these transcription
factors are targeted to specific chromatin regions to elicit specific biological 
effects. Here, we used chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing
(ChIP-seq) to investigate the genome-wide chromatin binding mechanisms used by
the forkhead transcription factor FOXM1. In keeping with its previous association
with cell cycle control, we demonstrate that FOXM1 binds and regulates a group of
genes which are mainly involved in controlling late cell cycle events in the G(2)
and M phases. However, rather than being recruited through canonical RYAAAYA
forkhead binding motifs, FOXM1 binding is directed via CHR (cell cycle genes
homology region) elements. FOXM1 binds these elements through protein-protein
interactions with the MMB transcriptional activator complex. Thus, we have
uncovered a novel and unexpected mode of chromatin binding of a FOX transcription
factor that allows it to specifically control cell cycle-dependent gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3554121
PMID: 23109430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Oncogene. 2013 Sep 26;32(39):4634-45. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.491. Epub 2012 Oct
29.

The Forkhead Box M1 protein regulates BRIP1 expression and DNA damage repair in
epirubicin treatment.

Monteiro LJ(1), Khongkow P, Kongsema M, Morris JR, Man C, Weekes D, Koo CY, Gomes
AR, Pinto PH, Varghese V, Kenny LM, Charles Coombes R, Freire R, Medema RH, Lam
EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, London, UK.

FOXM1 is implicated in genotoxic drug resistance but its role and mechanism of
action remain unclear. Here, we establish that <U+03B3>H2AX foci, indicative of DNA
double-strand breaks (DSBs), accumulate in a time-dependent manner in the
drug-sensitive MCF-7 cells but not in the resistant counterparts in response to
epirubicin. We find that FOXM1 expression is associated with epirubicin
sensitivity and DSB repair. Ectopic expression of FOXM1 can increase cell
viability and abrogate DSBs sustained by MCF-7 cells following epirubicin, owing 
to an enhancement in repair efficiency. Conversely, alkaline comet and <U+03B3>H2AX foci
formation assays show that Foxm1-null cells are hypersensitive to DNA damage,
epirubicin and <U+03B3>-irradiation. Furthermore, we find that FOXM1 is required for DNA
repair by homologous recombination (HR) but not non-homologous end joining
(NHEJ), using HeLa cell lines harbouring an integrated direct repeat green
fluorescent protein reporter for DSB repair. We also identify BRIP1 as a direct
transcription target of FOXM1 by promoter analysis and
chromatin-immunoprecipitation assay. In agreement, depletion of FOXM1 expression 
by small interfering RNA downregulates BRIP1 expression at the protein and mRNA
levels in MCF-7 and the epirubicin-resistant MCF-7 Epi(R) cells. Remarkably, the 
requirement for FOXM1 for DSB repair can be circumvented by reintroduction of
BRIP1, suggesting that BRIP1 is an important target of FOXM1 in DSB repair.
Indeed, like FOXM1, BRIP1 is needed for HR. These data suggest that FOXM1
regulates BRIP1 expression to modulate epirubicin-induced DNA damage repair and
drug resistance.

PMCID: PMC3874579
PMID: 23108394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Biochem Pharmacol. 2013 Mar 1;85(5):644-52. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2012.10.013. Epub 
2012 Oct 24.

Targeting FOXM1 in cancer.

Halasi M(1), Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, 
USA.

Oncogenic transcription factor FOXM1 is overexpressed in the majority of human
cancers. In addition, FOXM1 has been implicated in cell migration, invasion,
angiogenesis and metastasis. The important role of FOXM1 in cancer affirms its
significance for therapeutic intervention. Current data suggest that targeting
FOXM1 in mono- or combination therapy may have promising therapeutic benefits for
the treatment of cancer. However, challenges with the delivery of anti-FOXM1
siRNA to tumors and the absence of small molecules, which specifically inhibit
FOXM1, are delaying the development of FOXM1 inhibitors as feasible anticancer
drugs. In this review, we describe and summarize the efforts that have been made 
to target FOXM1 in cancer and the consequences of FOXM1 suppression in human
cancer cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23103567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Front Oncol. 2012 Oct 15;2:146. doi: 10.3389/fonc.2012.00146. eCollection 2012.

FOXM1 coming of age: time for translation into clinical benefits?

Teh MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical and Diagnostic Oral Sciences, Barts and The London School 
of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London London, UK.

A decade since the first evidence implicating the cell cycle transcription factor
Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) in human tumorigenesis, a slew of subsequent studies
revealed an oncogenic role of FOXM1 in the majority of human cancers including
oral, nasopharynx, oropharynx, esophagus, breast, ovary, prostate, lung, liver,
pancreas, kidney, colon, brain, cervix, thyroid, bladder, uterus, testis,
stomach, skin, and blood. Its aberrant upregulation in almost all different
cancer types suggests a fundamental role for FOXM1 in tumorigenesis. Its
dose-dependent expression pattern correlated well with tumor progression starting
from cancer predisposition and initiation, early premalignancy and progression,
to metastatic invasion. In addition, emerging studies have demonstrated a causal 
link between FOXM1 and chemotherapeutic drug resistance. Despite the
well-established multifaceted roles for FOXM1 in all stages of oncogenesis, its
translation into clinical benefit is yet to materialize. In this contribution, I 
reviewed and discussed how our current knowledge on the oncogenic mechanisms of
FOXM1 could be exploited for clinical use as biomarker for risk prediction, early
cancer screening, molecular diagnostics/prognostics, and/or companion diagnostics
for personalized cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3471356
PMID: 23087907  [PubMed]


416. Oncol Rep. 2013 Jan;29(1):103-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.2076. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Casticin induces growth suppression and cell cycle arrest through activation of
FOXO3a in hepatocellular carcinoma.

He L(1), Yang X, Cao X, Liu F, Quan M, Cao J.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College, Hunan Normal University, Changsha 410013, PR China.

Casticin, a polymethoxyflavone, has been reported to exert anticancer activities.
The objectives of this study were to examine the molecular mechanisms by which
casticin induces the growth inhibition and cell cycle arrest in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cells. The HCC cell lines Hep G2 and PLC/PRF/5
were cultured in vitro. The growth inhibitory effects of casticin were evaluated 
using clonogenic assays. The distribution of phases in the cell cycle was
analyzed using flow cytometry (FCM) analysis with propidium iodide (PI) staining.
Multiple molecular techniques, such as western blotting and gene transfection,
were used to explore the molecular mechanisms of action. Our data demonstrated
that casticin significantly inhibited cell viability and colony formation in HCC 
cells. Furthermore, it induced cell cycle arrest in the G2/M phase. Casticin
inhibited phosphorylation of the FOXO3a protein and decreased the expression of
FoxM1 and its downstream genes, such as cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK1), cdc25B
and cyclin B and increased the expression of p27KIP1. Silencing of FOXO3a
expression by small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection clearly attenuated the
inhibitory effects of casticin on FOXM1 expression and cell growth. Our findings 
provided clear evidence that casticin induces growth suppression and cell cycle
arrest through inhibition of FOXO3a phosphorylation causing inactivation of FOXM1
in HCC cells.

PMID: 23064420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Ann Surg Oncol. 2013 Mar;20(3):1035-43. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2680-0. Epub 2012
Oct 2.

Overexpression of forkhead box M1 transcription factor (FOXM1) is a potential
prognostic marker and enhances chemoresistance for docetaxel in gastric cancer.

Okada K(1), Fujiwara Y, Takahashi T, Nakamura Y, Takiguchi S, Nakajima K, Miyata 
H, Yamasaki M, Kurokawa Y, Mori M, Doki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, Osaka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mammalian forkhead box transcription factor 1 (FoxM1) has been
overexpressed and correlated with pathogenesis in a variety of human
malignancies. We investigated the expression status and clinical significance of 
its overexpression in gastric adenocarcinoma. Furthermore, we demonstrated
correlations between FoxM1 overexpression and drug resistance to chemotherapeutic
agents in gastric cancer cells and gastric cancer patients treated with
chemotherapy.
METHODS: Fifty-three (69%) of 77 tumors were diagnosed as positive for FoxM1 by
immunohistochemistry. Multivariate analysis identified FoxM1 expression as a
significant independent prognostic predictor for overall and disease-free
survival in gastric cancer patients (hazard ratio 3.9 and 3.5, respectively).
Furthermore, we investigated associations between FoxM1 overexpression and
clinical response of chemotherapy for patients with advanced gastric cancer.
RESULTS: Our clinical results showed that FoxM1 overexpression was significantly 
associated with resistance in chemotherapy of docetaxel in addition to
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) plus S-1 plus cisplatin (CDDP) and was not significant in
chemotherapy of 5-FU plus CDDP for patients with advanced gastric cancer. In
vitro experiments showed that Mkn7 transfected FoxM1 siRNA significantly reduced 
chemoresistance to docetaxel over that with parental cell lines and Mkn45
transfected with FoxM1 significantly enhanced chemoresistance to docetaxel over
that with parental cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed that FoxM1 was an independent prognostic factor in 
gastric cancer. Furthermore, we showed that FoxM1 was a critical molecule for
chemoresistance to a microtubule-stabilizing anticancer agent, docetaxel. Taken
together, those results suggest that inhibition of overexpressed FoxM1 will be a 
promising therapeutic strategy for advanced gastric cancer.

PMID: 23054116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Br J Cancer. 2012 Nov 6;107(10):1766-75. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.424. Epub 2012 Oct
4.

The FOXM1-PLK1 axis is commonly upregulated in oesophageal adenocarcinoma.

Dibb M(1), Han N, Choudhury J, Hayes S, Valentine H, West C, Ang YS, Sharrocks
AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Michael Smith Building,
Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PT, UK.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor FOXM1 is an important regulator of the cell 
cycle through controlling periodic gene expression during the G2 and M phases.
One key target for FOXM1 is the gene encoding the protein kinase PLK1 and PLK1
itself acts in a positive feedback loop to phosphorylate and activate FOXM1. Both
FOXM1 and PLK1 have been shown to be overexpressed in a variety of different
tumour types.
METHODS: We have used a combination of RT-PCR, western blotting, tissue
microarrays and metadata analysis of microarray data to study whether the
FOXM1-PLK1 regulatory axis is upregulated and operational in oesophageal
adenocarcinoma.
RESULTS: FOXM1 and PLK1 are expressed in oesophageal adenocarcinoma-derived cell 
lines and demonstrate cross-regulatory interactions. Importantly, we also
demonstrate the concomitant overexpression of FOXM1 and PLK1 in a large
proportion of oesophageal adenocarcinoma samples. This co-association was
extended to the additional FOXM1 target genes CCNB1, AURKB and CKS1. In a cohort 
of patients who subsequently underwent surgery, the expression of several FOXM1
target genes was prognostic for overall survival.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXM1 and its target gene PLK1 are commonly overexpressed in
oesophageal adenocarcinomas and this association can be extended to other FOXM1
target genes, providing potentially important biomarkers for predicting
post-surgery disease survival.

PMCID: PMC3493860
PMID: 23037713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Int J Cancer. 2013 May 1;132(9):2095-106. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27886. Epub 2012 Oct
25.

Exploiting FOXM1-orchestrated molecular network for early squamous cell carcinoma
diagnosis and prognosis.

Teh MT(1), Hutchison IL, Costea DE, Neppelberg E, Liavaag PG, Purdie K, Harwood
C, Wan H, Odell EW, Hackshaw A, Waseem A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical and Diagnostic Oral Sciences, Institute of Dentistry,
Barts & The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, England, United Kingdom. m.t.teh@qmul.ac.uk

Histopathological discordance with molecular phenotype of many human cancers
poses clinically challenging tasks for accurate cancer diagnosis, which impacts
on treatment strategy and patient outcome. Hence, an objective, accurate and
quantitative method is needed. A quantitative Malignancy Index Diagnostic System 
(qMIDS) was developed based on 14 FOXM1 (isoform B)-associated genes implicated
in the regulation of the cell cycle, differentiation, ageing, genomic stability, 
epigenetic and stem cell renewal, and two reference genes. Their mRNA expression 
levels were translated via a prospectively designed algorithm, into a metric
scoring system. Subjects from UK and Norway (n = 299) provided 359 head and neck 
tissue specimens. Diagnostic test performance was assessed using detection rate
(DR) and false-positive rate (FPR). The median qMIDS scores were 1.3, 2.9 and 6.7
in healthy tissue, dysplasia and head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC), 
respectively (UK prospective dataset, p<0.001); 1.4, 2.3 and 7.6 in unaffected,
oral lichen planus, or HNSCC, respectively (Norwegian retrospective dataset with 
up to 19 years survival data, p<0.001). At a qMIDS cut-off of 4.0, DR was 94% and
FPR was 3.2% (Norwegian dataset); and DR was 91% and FPR was 1.3% (UK dataset).
We further demonstrated the transferability of qMIDS for diagnosing premalignant 
human vulva (n = 58) and skin (n = 21) SCCs, illustrating its potential clinical 
use for other cancer types. This study provided evidence that qMIDS was able to
quantitatively diagnose and objectively stratify cancer aggressiveness. With
further validation, qMIDS could enable early HNSCC detection and guide
appropriate treatment. Early treatment intervention can lead to long-term
reduction in healthcare costs and improve patient outcome.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 23034676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046317. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

ZNF385B and VEGFA are strongly differentially expressed in serous ovarian
carcinomas and correlate with survival.

Elgaaen BV(1), Olstad OK, Sandvik L, Odegaard E, Sauer T, Staff AC, Gautvik KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecological Oncology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
bente.vilming.elgaaen@medisin.uio.no

BACKGROUND: The oncogenesis of ovarian cancer is poorly understood. The aim of
this study was to identify mRNAs differentially expressed between moderately and 
poorly differentiated (MD/PD) serous ovarian carcinomas (SC), serous ovarian
borderline tumours (SBOT) and superficial scrapings from normal ovaries (SNO),
and to correlate these mRNAs with clinical parameters including survival.
METHODS: Differences in mRNA expression between MD/PD SC, SBOT and SNO were
analyzed by global gene expression profiling (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>23), validated by RT-qPCR
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>41) and correlated with clinical parameters.
RESULTS: Thirty mRNAs differentially expressed between MD/PD SC, SBOT and SNO
were selected from the global gene expression analyses, and 21 were verified
(p<0.01) by RT-qPCR. Of these, 13 mRNAs were differentially expressed in MD/PD SC
compared with SNO (p<0.01) and were correlated with clinical parameters. ZNF385B 
was downregulated (FC<U+200A>=<U+200A>-130.5, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.2×10(-7)) and correlated with overall
survival (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03). VEGFA was upregulated (FC<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.1, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>6.0×10(-6)) and
correlated with progression-free survival (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.037). Increased levels of TPX2
and FOXM1 mRNAs (FC<U+200A>=<U+200A>28.5, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.7×10(-10) and FC<U+200A>=<U+200A>46.2, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>5.6×10(-4),
respectively) correlated with normalization of CA125 (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.03 and p<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.044,
respectively). Furthermore, we present a molecular pathway for MD/PD SC,
including VEGFA, FOXM1, TPX2, BIRC5 and TOP2A, all significantly upregulated and 
directly interacting with TP53.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified 21 mRNAs differentially expressed (p<0.01)
between MD/PD SC, SBOT and SNO. Thirteen were differentially expressed in MD/PD
SC, including ZNF385B and VEGFA correlating with survival, and FOXM1 and TPX2
with normalization of CA125. We also present a molecular pathway for MD/PD SC.

PMCID: PMC3460818
PMID: 23029477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cancer Lett. 2013 Jan 28;328(2):198-206. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.09.017. Epub 
2012 Sep 27.

Cancer genetics and genomics of human FOX family genes.

Katoh M(1), Igarashi M, Fukuda H, Nakagama H, Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Forkhead-box (FOX) family proteins, involved in cell growth and differentiation
as well as embryogenesis and longevity, are DNA-binding proteins regulating
transcription and DNA repair. The focus of this review is on the mechanisms of
FOX-related human carcinogenesis. FOXA1 is overexpressed as a result of gene
amplification in lung cancer, esophageal cancer, ER-positive breast cancer and
anaplastic thyroid cancer and is point-mutated in prostate cancer. FOXA1
overexpression in breast cancer and prostate cancer is associated with good or
poor prognosis, respectively. Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) within the
5'-UTR of the FOXE1 (TTF2) gene is associated with thyroid cancer risk. FOXF1
overexpression in breast cancer is associated with epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). FOXM1 is overexpressed owing to gene amplification in
basal-type breast cancer and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), and it is
transcriptionally upregulated owing to Hedgehog-GLI, hypoxia-HIF1a or YAP-TEAD
signaling activation. FOXM1 overexpression leads to malignant phenotypes by
directly upregulating CCNB1, AURKB, MYC and SKP2 and indirectly upregulating ZEB1
and ZEB2 via miR-200b downregulation. Tumor suppressor functions of FOXO
transcription factors are lost in cancer cells as a result of chromosomal
translocation, deletion, miRNA-mediated repression, AKT-mediated cytoplasmic
sequestration or ubiquitination-mediated proteasomal degradation. FOXP1 is
upregulated as a result of gene fusion or amplification in DLBCL and MALT
lymphoma and also repression of miRNAs, such as miR-1, miR-34a and miR-504. FOXP1
overexpression is associated with poor prognosis in DLBCL, gastric MALT lymphoma 
and hepatocellular carcinoma but with good prognosis in breast cancer. In
neuroblastoma, the entire coding region of the FOXR1 (FOXN5) gene is fused to the
MLL or the PAFAH1B gene owing to interstitial deletions. FOXR1 fusion genes
function as oncogenes that repress transcription of FOXO target genes.
Whole-genome sequencing data from tens of thousands of human cancers will uncover
the mutational landscape of FOX family genes themselves as well as FOX-binding
sites, which will be ultimately applied for cancer diagnostics, prognostics, and 
therapeutics.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23022474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Apr;228(4):835-45. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24232.

Mitochondrial-targeted nitroxides disrupt mitochondrial architecture and inhibit 
expression of peroxiredoxin 3 and FOXM1 in malignant mesothelioma cells.

Cunniff B(1), Benson K, Stumpff J, Newick K, Held P, Taatjes D, Joseph J,
Kalyanaraman B, Heintz NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine,
Burlington, Vermont 05405, USA.

Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is an intractable tumor of the peritoneal and pleural
cavities primarily linked to exposure to asbestos. Recently, we described an
interplay between mitochondrial-derived oxidants and expression of FOXM1, a
redox-responsive transcription factor that has emerged as a promising therapeutic
target in solid malignancies. Here we have investigated the effects of nitroxides
targeted to mitochondria via triphenylphosphonium (TPP) moieties on mitochondrial
oxidant production, expression of FOXM1 and peroxiredoxin 3 (PRX3), and cell
viability in MM cells in culture. Both Mito-carboxy-proxyl (MCP) and Mito-TEMPOL 
(MT) caused dose-dependent increases in mitochondrial oxidant production that was
accompanied by inhibition of expression of FOXM1 and PRX3 and loss of cell
viability. At equivalent concentrations TPP, CP, and TEMPOL had no effect on
these endpoints. Live cell ratiometric imaging with a redox-responsive green
fluorescent protein targeted to mitochondria (mito-roGFP) showed that MCP and MT,
but not CP, TEMPOL, or TPP, rapidly induced mitochondrial fragmentation and
swelling, morphological transitions that were associated with diminished ATP
levels and increased production of mitochondrial oxidants. Mdivi-1, an inhibitor 
of mitochondrial fission, did not rescue mitochondria from fragmentation by MCP. 
Immunofluorescence microscopy experiments indicate a fraction of FOXM1 coexists
in the cytoplasm with mitochondrial PRX3. Our results indicate that MCP and MT
inhibit FOXM1 expression and MM tumor cell viability via perturbations in redox
homeostasis caused by marked disruption of mitochondrial architecture, and
suggest that both compounds, either alone or in combination with thiostrepton or 
other agents, may provide credible therapeutic options for the management of MM.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3928986
PMID: 23018647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. FEBS Lett. 2012 Oct 19;586(20):3761-5. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2012.09.016. Epub
2012 Sep 23.

miR-134 inhibits epithelial to mesenchymal transition by targeting FOXM1 in
non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Li J(1), Wang Y, Luo J, Fu Z, Ying J, Yu Y, Yu W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Yinzhou People's Hospital, Ningbo 315040,
China.

Recent studies have implied that miRNAs act as crucial modulators for
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We found that miR-134 expression
correlated with invasive potential and EMT phenotype of NSCLC cells. Functional
assays demonstrated that miR-134 inhibited EMT in NSCLC cells. In addition, we
showed that Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) is a direct target of miR-134. Knockdown of
FOXM1 reversed EMT resembling that of miR-134 overexpression. We further found
that FOXM1 was involved in TGF-ß1-induced EMT in A549 cells. These findings
suggest that miR-134 acts as a novel EMT suppressor in NSCLC cells.

Copyright © 2012 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23010597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. J Transl Med. 2012 Sep 24;10:200. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-10-200.

Overexpression of FoxM1 is associated with tumor progression in patients with
clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Xue YJ(1), Xiao RH, Long DZ, Zou XF, Wang XN, Zhang GX, Yuan YH, Wu GQ, Yang J,
Wu YT, Xu H, Liu FL, Liu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, First Affiliated Hospital of Gannan Medical University,
No 23, Qing Nian Road, Ganzhou 341000, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Fork head box M1 (FoxM1) is a proliferation-associated transcription 
factor essential for cell cycle progression. Numerous studies have documented
that FoxM1 has multiple functions in tumorigenesis and its elevated levels are
frequently associated with cancer progression. The present study was conducted to
investigate the expression of FoxM1 and its prognostic significance in clear cell
renal cell carcinoma (ccRCC). Meanwhile, the function of FoxM1 in human ccRCC was
further investigated in cell culture models.
METHODS: Real-time quantitative PCR, western blot and immunohistochemistry were
used to explore FoxM1 expression in ccRCC cell lines and primary ccRCC clinical
specimens. FoxM1 expression was knocked down by small interfering RNA (siRNA) in 
Caki-1 and 786-O cells; proliferation, colony formation, cell cycle, migration,
invasion, and angiogenesis were assayed.
RESULTS: FoxM1 expression was up-regulated in the majority of the ccRCC clinical 
tissue specimens at both mRNA and protein levels. Clinic pathological analysis
showed that FoxM1 expression was significantly correlated with primary tumor
stage (P <0.001), lymph node metastasis (P = 0.01), distant metastasis (P =
0.01), TNM stage (P < 0.001) and histological grade (P = 0.003). The Kaplan-Meier
survival curves revealed that high FoxM1 expression was associated with poor
prognosis in ccRCC patients (P < 0.001). FoxM1 expression was an independent
prognostic marker of overall ccRCC patient survival in a multivariate analysis (P
= 0.008). Experimentally, we found that down-regulation of FoxM1 inhibited cell
proliferation and induced cell cycle arrest with reduced expression of cyclin B1,
cyclin D1, and Cdk2, and increased expression of p21 and p27. Also,
down-regulation of FoxM1 reduced expression and activity of matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), MMP-9 and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
resulting in the inhibition of migration, invasion, and angiogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that FoxM1 expression is likely to play
important roles in ccRCC development and progression, and that FoxM1 is a
prognostic biomarker and a promising therapeutic target for ccRCC.

PMCID: PMC3492118
PMID: 23006512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 15;72(22):5889-99. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1991. Epub 
2012 Sep 20.

Identification of FoxM1/Bub1b signaling pathway as a required component for
growth and survival of rhabdomyosarcoma.

Wan X(1), Yeung C, Kim SY, Dolan JG, Ngo VN, Burkett S, Khan J, Staudt LM, Helman
LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Section, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. xiaolinw@mail.nih.gov

We identified Bub1b as an essential element for the growth and survival of
rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) cells using a bar-coded, tetracycline-inducible short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) library screen. Knockdown of Bub1b resulted in suppression of
tumor growth in vivo, including the regression of established tumors. The
mechanism by which this occurs is via postmitotic endoreduplication checkpoint
and mitotic catastrophe. Furthermore, using a chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay, we found that Bub1b is a direct transcriptional target of Forkhead Box M1 
(FoxM1). Suppression of FoxM1 either by shRNA or the inhibitor siomycin A
resulted in reduction of Bub1b expression and inhibition of cell growth and
survival. These results show the important role of the Bub1b/FoxM1 pathway in RMS
and provide potential therapeutic targets.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3500453
PMID: 23002205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. BMC Neurosci. 2012 Sep 19;13:112. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-13-112.

Cul4B regulates neural progenitor cell growth.

Liu HC(1), Enikolopov G, Chen Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Slot
807, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cullin ubiquitin ligases are activated via the covalent modification 
of Cullins by the small ubiquitin-like protein nedd8 in a process called
neddylation. Genetic mutations of cullin-4b (cul4b) cause a prevalent type of
X-linked intellectual disability (XLID) in males, but the physiological function 
of Cul4B in neuronal cells remains unclear.
RESULTS: There are three major isoforms of Cul4B (1, 2, and 3) in human and
rodent tissues. By examining the endogenous Cul4B isoforms in the brain, this
study demonstrates that Cul4B-1 and Cul4B-2 isoforms are unneddylated and more
abundant in the brain whereas the lesser species Cul4B-3 that misses the
N-terminus present in the other two isoforms is neddylated. The data suggest that
the N-terminus of Cul4B inhibits neddylation in the larger isoforms.
Immunostaining of human NT-2 cells also shows that most Cul4B is unneddylated,
especially when it is localized in the process in G0-synchronized cells. This
study demonstrates that Cul4B accumulates during mitosis and downregulation of
Cul4B arrests NPCs and NT-2 cells in the G2/M phase of the cell cycle. In both
human and rodent brain tissues, Cul4B-positive cells accumulate ß-catenin in the 
dentate subgranular zone and the subventricular zone. These Cul4B-positive cells 
also co-express the MPM-2 mitotic epitope, suggesting that Cul4B is also
necessary for mitosis progression in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides first evidence that unneddylated Cul4B isoforms 
exist in the brain and are necessary for mitosis progression in NPCs. The data
suggest that unneddylated Cul4B isoforms specifically inhibits ß-catenin
degradation during mitosis. Furthermore, unneddylated Cul4B may play a role in
addition to cell cycle since it is exclusively localized to the processes in
starved NT-2 cells. Further analyses of the different isoforms of Cul4B will help
understand the cognitive deficits in Cul4B-linked XLID and give insights into
drug and biomarker discoveries.

PMCID: PMC3506489
PMID: 22992378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 5;426(4):659-63. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.013. Epub 2012 Sep 12.

Involvement of the transcription factor FoxM1 in contact inhibition.

Faust D(1), Al-Butmeh F, Linz B, Dietrich C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg-University, 
Obere Zahlbacherstr. 67, 55131 Mainz, Germany.

Contact inhibition is a crucial mechanism regulating proliferation in vitro and
in vivo. Although it is generally accepted that contact inhibition plays a
pivotal role in maintaining tissue homeostasis, the molecular mechanisms of
contact inhibition are still not fully understood. FoxM1 is known as a
proliferation-associated transcription factor and is upregulated in many cancer
types. Vice versa, anti-proliferative signals, such as TGF-ß and differentiation 
signals decrease FoxM1 expression. Here we investigated the role of FoxM1 in
contact inhibition in fibroblasts. We show that protein expression of FoxM1 is
severely and rapidly downregulated upon contact inhibition, probably by
inhibition of ERK activity, which then leads to decreased expression of cyclin A 
and polo-like kinase 1. Vice versa, ectopic expression of FoxM1 prevents the
decrease in cyclin A and polo-like kinase 1 and causes a two-fold increase in
saturation density indicating loss of contact inhibition. Hence, we show that
downregulation of FoxM1 is required for contact inhibition by regulating
expression of cyclin A and polo-like kinase 1.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22982677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Nov 1;18(21):5961-71. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0039.
Epub 2012 Sep 12.

FoxM1 inhibition sensitizes resistant glioblastoma cells to temozolomide by
downregulating the expression of DNA-repair gene Rad51.

Zhang N(1), Wu X, Yang L, Xiao F, Zhang H, Zhou A, Huang Z, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Scientific Research Section, The First Affiliated 
Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong Province, PR China.

PURPOSE: Recurrent glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is characterized by resistance
to radiotherapy and chemotherapy and a poor clinical prognosis. In this study, we
investigated the role of the oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1 in GBM cells'
resistance to alkylator temozolomide (TMZ) and its potential molecular mechanism.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: FoxM1 expression levels were measured by immunohistochemical
analysis in 38 pairs of primary and recurrent GBM tumor samples. Expression
levels were also measured in primary recurrent GBM cell lines, and their
responses to TMZ were characterized. In a mechanistic study, an siRNA array was
used to identify downstream genes, and a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay was 
used to confirm transcriptional regulation.
RESULTS: Recurrent tumors that were TMZ resistant expressed higher levels of
FoxM1 than did primary tumors. Recurrent GBM cell lines expressed higher levels
of FoxM1 and the DNA damage repair gene Rad51 and were resistant to TMZ. TMZ
treatment led to increased FoxM1 and Rad51 expression. FoxM1 knockdown inhibited 
Rad51 expression and sensitized recurrent GBM cells to TMZ cytotoxicity. FoxM1
directly regulated Rad51 expression through 2 FoxM1-specific binding sites in its
promoter. Rad51 reexpression partially rescued TMZ resistance in FoxM1-knockdown 
recurrent GBM cells. A direct correlation between FoxM1 expression and Rad51
expression was evident in recurrent GBM tumor samples.
CONCLUSION: Targeting the FoxM1-Rad51 axis may be an effective method to reverse 
TMZ resistance in recurrent GBM.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3639123
PMID: 22977194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. World J Gastroenterol. 2012 Sep 7;18(33):4618-26. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v18.i33.4618.

7-difluoromethoxyl-5,4'-di-n-octylgenistein inhibits growth of gastric cancer
cells through downregulating forkhead box M1.

Xiang HL(1), Liu F, Quan MF, Cao JG, Lv Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Engineering, Medical College, Hunan Normal University,
Changsha 410013, Hunan Province, China.

AIM: To investigate whether the 7-difluoromethoxyl-5, 4'-di-n-octylgenistein
(DFOG), a novel synthetic genistein analogue, affects the growth of gastric
cancer cells and its mechanisms.
METHODS: A series of genistein analogues were prepared by difluoromethylation and
alkylation, and human gastric cancer cell lines AGS and SGC-7901 cultured in
vitro were treated with various concentrations of genistein and genistein
analogues. The cell viability was measured by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. The
cells were incubated by DFOG at different concentrations. The growth inhibitory
effects were evaluated using MTT and clonogenic assay. The distribution of the
phase in cell cycle was analyzed using flow cytometric analysis with propidium
iodide staining. The expression of the transcription factor forkhead box M1
(FOXM1) was analyzed by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and
Western blotting. The expression levels of CDK1, Cdc25B, cyclin B and p27(KIP1)
protein were detected using Western blotting.
RESULTS: Nine of the genistein analogues had more effective antitumor activity
than genistein. Among the tested analogues, DFOG possessed the strongest activity
against AGS and SGC-7901 cells in vitro. DFOG significantly inhibited the cell
viability and colony formation of AGS and SGC-7901 cells. Moreover, DFOG
efficaciously arrested the cell cycle in G2/M phase. DFOG decreased the
expression of FOXM1 and its downstream genes, such as CDK1, Cdc25B, cyclin B, and
increased p27(KIP1) at protein levels. Knockdown of FOXM1 by small interfering
RNA before DFOG treatment resulted in enhanced cell growth inhibition in AGS
cells. Up-regulation of FOXM1 by cDNA transfection attenuated DFOG-induced cell
growth inhibition in AGS cells.
CONCLUSION: DFOG inhibits the growth of human gastric cancer cells by
down-regulating the FOXM1 expression.

PMCID: PMC3435790
PMID: 22969238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Gastroenterology. 2012 Dec;143(6):1609-1619.e4. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2012.08.043. Epub 2012 Sep 6.

Liver failure after extended hepatectomy in mice is mediated by a p21-dependent
barrier to liver regeneration.

Lehmann K(1), Tschuor C, Rickenbacher A, Jang JH, Oberkofler CE, Tschopp O,
Schultze SM, Raptis DA, Weber A, Graf R, Humar B, Clavien PA.

Author information: 
(1)Swiss Hepato-Pancreatico-Biliary Center, Department of Surgery, University
Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Extended liver resection leads to hepatic failure because of a
small remnant liver volume. Excessive parenchymal damage has been proposed as the
principal cause of this failure, but little is known about the contribution of a 
primary deficiency in liver regeneration. We developed a mouse model to assess
the regenerative capacity of a critically small liver remnant.
METHODS: Extended (86%) hepatectomy (eHx) was modified to minimize collateral
damage; effects were compared with those of standard (68%) partial hepatectomy
(pHx) in mice. Markers of liver integrity and survival were evaluated after
resection. Liver regeneration was assessed by weight gain, proliferative activity
(analyses of Ki67, proliferating cell nuclear antigen, phosphorylated histone 3, 
mitosis, and ploidy), and regeneration-associated molecules. Knockout mice were
used to study the role of p21.
RESULTS: Compared with pHx, survival of mice was reduced after eHx, and
associated with cholestasis and impaired liver function. However, no significant 
differences in hepatocyte death, sinusoidal injury, oxidative stress, or energy
depletion were observed between mice after eHx or pHx. No defect in the
initiation of hepatocyte proliferation was apparent. However, restoration of
liver mass was delayed after eHx and associated with inadequate induction of
Foxm1b and a p21-dependent delay in cell-cycle progression. In p21(-/-) mice, the
cell cycle was restored, the gain in liver weight was accelerated, and survival
improved after eHx.
CONCLUSIONS: Significant parenchymal injury is not required for liver failure to 
develop after extended hepatectomy. Rather, liver dysfunction after eHx results
from a transient, p21-dependent block before hepatocyte division. Therefore, a
deficiency in cell-cycle progression causes liver failure after extended
hepatectomy and can be overcome by inhibition of p21.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22960658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Gynecol Oncol. 2012 Dec;127(3):601-10. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2012.08.036. Epub
2012 Aug 31.

FOXM1 promotes tumor cell invasion and correlates with poor prognosis in
early-stage cervical cancer.

He SY(1), Shen HW, Xu L, Zhao XH, Yuan L, Niu G, You ZS, Yao SZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun
Yat-sen University, Zhongshan Second Road 58, Guangzhou 510700, PR China.
hsy5g777@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: The forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor plays crucial roles
in regulating the proliferation, differentiation, and transformation of cells.
Overexpression of FOXM1 is associated with a variety of aggressive solid
carcinomas, including cervical cancer. However, the precise role and molecular
mechanism responsible for the aggressive action of FOXM1 in cervical cancer
remain unclear. This study investigated the cellular and molecular aggressive
function of FOXM1 in cervical cancer.
METHODS: The FOXM1 gene and protein expression profiles were determined by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction, Western blotting and immunohistochemical 
staining, and other cellular and molecular approaches including gene
transfection, short hairpin RNA interference (RNAi), and wound-healing,
migration, and invasion assays.
RESULTS: FOXM1 expression was significantly up-regulated at both mRNA and protein
levels in early-stage cervical cancer, compared to cervical intraepithelial
neoplasia and normal cervical tissues. High levels of FOXM1 expression were
significantly associated with aggression in cervical cancer, and were an
independent prognostic factor for poor survival in early-stage cervical cancer
patients. Moreover, enforced expression of FOXM1 increased migration and invasion
of cancer cells, whereas RNAi-mediated knockdown of FOXM1 had the opposite
effect. In addition, up-regulation of FOXM1 increased the expression of matrix
metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and MMP-9 in vitro and in vivo, and activated the
Akt/glycogen synthase kinase-3ß/Snail pathway, resulting in the promotion of
migration and invasion of cervical cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that FOXM1 up-regulation is associated with
poor prognosis in early-stage cervical cancer, and therefore it may act as a
prognostic marker and a new potential target for cervical cancer treatment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22943878  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Biotechnol J. 2012 Nov;7(11):1395-404. doi: 10.1002/biot.201200188. Epub 2012 Oct
2.

Gene network analysis leads to functional validation of pathways linked to cancer
cell growth and survival.

Berger E(1), Vega N, Vidal H, Geloën A.

Author information: 
(1)Lyon University, INSERM, CarMeN Laboratory, INSA-Lyon, France.
emmanuelle.danty@univ-lyon1.fr

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) represents one of the most frequently diagnosed
human cancers; however, there are currently few treatment alternatives to
surgical resection. In this study we performed bioinformatic analysis of
previously published transcriptomic data in order to characterize liver specific 
networks, including biological functions, signaling pathways and transcription
factors, potentially dysregulated in HCC. By incorporating specific signaling
inhibitors into real-time proliferation assays using HepG2 cells, we then
validated these in silico results. We found that G protein subunits Gi/G0,
protein kinase C, Mek1/2, and Erk1/2 (P42/44), JAK1, PPARA and NF<U+03BA>B p65 subunit
were the major signaling molecules required for survival and proliferation of
human HCC cell lines. We also found that these pathways regulate the expression
of key hepatic transcription factors involved in cell differentiation, such as
CEBPA, EGR1, FOXM1 and PPARs. By combining bioinformatic and functional analyses,
major signaling pathways related to tumorigenicity in HCC are revealed, thereby
elucidating potential targets for drug therapies.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 22930530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2012 Sep 21;19(5):695-710. doi: 10.1530/ERC-12-0031. Print
2012 Oct.

FOXM1 is a molecular determinant of the mitogenic and invasive phenotype of
anaplastic thyroid carcinoma.

Bellelli R(1), Castellone MD, Garcia-Rostan G, Ugolini C, Nucera C, Sadow PM,
Nappi TC, Salerno P, Cantisani MC, Basolo F, Gago TA, Salvatore G, Santoro M.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, 'L. Califano',
Universita' Federico II, Napoli, Italy.

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma (ATC) is a very aggressive thyroid cancer. forkhead 
box protein M1 (FOXM1) is a member of the forkhead box family of transcription
factors involved in control of cell proliferation, chromosomal stability,
angiogenesis, and invasion. Here, we show that FOXM1 is significantly increased
in ATCs compared with normal thyroid, well-differentiated thyroid carcinomas
(papillary and/or follicular), and poorly differentiated thyroid carcinomas
(P=0.000002). Upregulation of FOXM1 levels in ATC cells was mechanistically
linked to loss-of-function of p53 and to the hyperactivation of the
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase/AKT/FOXO3a pathway. Knockdown of FOXM1 by RNA
interference inhibited cell proliferation by arresting cells in G2/M and reduced 
cell invasion and motility. This phenotype was associated with decreased
expression of FOXM1 target genes, like cyclin B1 (CCNB1), polo-like kinase 1
(PLK1), Aurora B (AURKB), S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (SKP2), and
plasminogen activator, urokinase: uPA (PLAU). Pharmacological inhibition of FOXM1
in an orthotopic mouse model of ATC reduced tumor burden and metastasization. All
together, these findings suggest that FOXM1 represents an important player in
thyroid cancer progression to the anaplastic phenotype and a potential
therapeutic target for this fatal cancer.

PMCID: PMC3637951
PMID: 22919068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Cell Cycle. 2012 Sep 15;11(18):3341-2. doi: 10.4161/cc.21841. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

The oncogenic transcription factor FOXM1 and anticancer therapy.

Gartel AL.

Comment on: Halasi M,et al. PLoS ONE 2012; 7:e31761.

PMCID: PMC3466533
PMID: 22918255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Biomark Med. 2012 Aug;6(4):499-501. doi: 10.2217/bmm.12.33.

Cells brainwashed by FOXM1: do they have potential as biomarkers of cancer?

Teh MT.

PMID: 22917149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e37046. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0037046. Epub 2012 Aug 20.

Transcriptional programs controlling perinatal lung maturation.

Xu Y(1), Wang Y, Besnard V, Ikegami M, Wert SE, Heffner C, Murray SA, Donahue LR,
Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)The Perinatal Institute and Section of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary
Biology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. yan.xu@cchmc.org

The timing of lung maturation is controlled precisely by complex genetic and
cellular programs. Lung immaturity following preterm birth frequently results in 
Respiratory Distress Syndrome (RDS) and Broncho-Pulmonary Dysplasia (BPD), which 
are leading causes of mortality and morbidity in preterm infants. Mechanisms
synchronizing gestational length and lung maturation remain to be elucidated. In 
this study, we designed a genome-wide mRNA expression time-course study from
E15.5 to Postnatal Day 0 (PN0) using lung RNAs from C57BL/6J (B6) and A/J mice
that differ in gestational length by ~30 hr (B6<A/J). Comprehensive
bioinformatics and functional genomics analyses were used to identify key
regulators, bioprocesses and transcriptional networks controlling lung
maturation. We identified both temporal and strain dependent gene expression
patterns during lung maturation. For time dependent changes, cell adhesion,
vasculature development, and lipid metabolism/transport were major bioprocesses
induced during the saccular stage of lung development at E16.5-E17.5. CEBPA,
PPARG, VEGFA, CAV1 and CDH1 were found to be key signaling and transcriptional
regulators of these processes. Innate defense/immune responses were induced at
later gestational ages (E18.5-20.5), STAT1, AP1, and EGFR being important
regulators of these responses. Expression of RNAs associated with the cell cycle 
and chromatin assembly was repressed during prenatal lung maturation and was
regulated by FOXM1, PLK1, chromobox, and high mobility group families of
transcription factors. Strain dependent lung mRNA expression differences peaked
at E18.5. At this time, mRNAs regulating surfactant and innate immunity were more
abundantly expressed in lungs of B6 (short gestation) than in A/J (long
gestation) mice, while expression of genes involved in chromatin assembly and
histone modification were expressed at lower levels in B6 than in A/J mice. The
present study systemically mapped key regulators, bioprocesses, and
transcriptional networks controlling lung maturation, providing the basis for new
therapeutic strategies to enhance lung function in preterm infants.

PMCID: PMC3423373
PMID: 22916088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Cancer. 2012 Aug 17;11:56. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-11-56.

The tumor suppressive role of miRNA-370 by targeting FoxM1 in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Zhang X(1), Zeng J, Zhou M, Li B, Zhang Y, Huang T, Wang L, Jia J, Chen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, No,107, Wenhua
Xi Road, Jinan, 250012, Shandong, P, R, China.

BACKGROUND: Recent evidence has accumulated that MicroRNA (miRNA) dysregulation
occurs in the majority of human malignancies including acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) and may contribute to onco-/leukemo-genesis.
METHODS: The expression levels of miR-370 and FoxM1 were assessed in 48 newly
diagnosed AML patients, 40 AML patients in 1st complete remission (CR) and 21
healthy controls. Quantitative real-time PCR, western blots, colony formation
assay, and ß-Galactosidase ( SA-ß-Gal) staining were used to characterize the
changes induced by overexpression or inhibition of miR-370 or FoxM1.
RESULTS: We found that the down-regulation of miR-370 expression was a frequent
event in both leukemia cell lines and primary leukemic cells from patients with
de novo AML. Lower levels of miR-370 expression were found in 37 of 48 leukemic
samples from AML patients compared to those in bone marrow cells derived from
healthy adult individuals. Ectopic expression of miR-370 in HL60 and K562 cells
led to cell growth arrest and senescence. In contrast, depletion of miR-370
expression using RNA interference enhanced the proliferation of those leukemic
cells. Mechanistically, miR-370 targets the transcription factor FoxM1, a well
established oncogenic factor promoting cell cycle progression. Moreover, when
HL60 and K562 cells were treated with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a DNA methylation
inhibitor, miR-370 expression was up-regulated, which indicates epigenetic
silencing of miR-370 in leukemic cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, miR-370 may function as a tumor suppressor by
targeting FoxM1, and the epigenetic silence of miR-370 thus leads to derepression
of FoxM1 expression and consequently contributes to AML development and
progression.

PMCID: PMC3533721
PMID: 22900969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Dev Biol. 2012 Oct 15;370(2):198-212. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.07.028. Epub 2012
Aug 2.

Foxm1 transcription factor is critical for proliferation and differentiation of
Clara cells during development of conducting airways.

Ustiyan V(1), Wert SE, Ikegami M, Wang IC, Kalin TV, Whitsett JA, Kalinichenko
VV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Respiratory epithelial cells are derived from cell progenitors in the foregut
endoderm that subsequently differentiate into the distinct cell types lining the 
conducting and alveolar regions of the lung. To identify transcriptional
mechanisms regulating differentiation and maintenance of respiratory epithelial
cells, we conditionally deleted Foxm1 transcription factor from the conducting
airways of the developing mouse lung. Conditional deletion of Foxm1 from Clara
cells, controlled by the Scgb1a1 promoter, dramatically altered airway structure 
and caused peribronchial fibrosis, resulting in airway hyperreactivity in adult
mice. Deletion of Foxm1 inhibited proliferation of Clara cells and disrupted the 
normal patterning of epithelial cell differentiation in the bronchioles, causing 
squamous and goblet cell metaplasia, and the loss of Clara and ciliated cells.
Surprisingly, conducting airways of Foxm1-deficient mice contained highly
differentiated cuboidal type II epithelial cells that are normally restricted to 
the alveoli. Lineage tracing studies showed that the ectopic alveolar type II
cells in Foxm1-deficient airways were derived from Clara cells. Deletion of Foxm1
inhibited Sox2 and Scgb1a1, both of which are critical for differentiation and
function of Clara cells. In co-transfection experiments, Foxm1 directly bound to 
and induced transcriptional activity of Scgb1a1 and Sox2 promoters. Foxm1 is
required for differentiation and maintenance of epithelial cells lining
conducting airways.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3449302
PMID: 22885335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e42141. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042141. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Detection of IGF2BP3, HOXB7, and NEK2 mRNA expression in brush cytology specimens
as a new diagnostic tool in patients with biliary strictures.

Nischalke HD(1), Schmitz V, Luda C, Aldenhoff K, Berger C, Feldmann G, Sauerbruch
T, Spengler U, Nattermann J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 1, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

INTRODUCTION: It is a challenging task to distinguish between benign and
malignant lesions in patients with biliary strictures. Here we analyze whether
determination of target gene mRNA levels in intraductal brush cytology specimens 
may be used to improve the diagnosis of bile duct carcinoma.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Brush cytology specimens from 119 patients with biliary
strictures (malignant: n = 72; benign: n = 47) were analyzed in a retrospective
cohort study. mRNA of IGF-II mRNA-binding protein 3 (IGF2BP3), homeobox B7
(HOXB7), Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1), kinesin family member 2C (KIF2C) and
serine/threonine kinase NEK2 was determined by semi-quantitative RT-PCR using the
<U+0394>Ct method.
RESULTS: IGF2BP3 (p<0.0001), HOXB7 (p<0.0001), and NEK2 (p<0.0001) mRNA
expression levels were significantly increased in patients with
cholangiocarcinoma or pancreatic cancer. Median <U+0394>Ct values differed by 3.5 cycles
(IGF2BP3), 2.8 cycles (HOXB7) and 1.3 cycles (NEK2) corresponding to 11-fold,
7-fold and 2.5-fold increased mRNA levels in malignant versus benign samples.
Sensitivity to detect biliary cancer was 76.4% for IGF2BP3 (80.9% specificity);
72.2% for HOXB7 (78.7% specificity) and 65.3% for NEK2 (72.3% specificity),
whereas routine cytology reached only 43.1% sensitivity (85.4% specificity).
Diagnostic precision was further improved, when all three molecular markers were 
assessed in combination (77.8% sensitivity, 87.2% specificity) and achieved 87.5%
sensitivity and 87.2% specificity when molecular markers were combined with
routine cytology.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that measuring IGF2BP3, HOXB7 and NEK2 mRNA levels 
by RT-PCR in addition to cytology has the potential to improve detection of
malignant biliary disorders from brush cytology specimens.

PMCID: PMC3413695
PMID: 22879911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Neurosci. 2012 Aug 8;32(32):10971-81.

Upregulation of the E3 ligase NEDD4-1 by oxidative stress degrades IGF-1 receptor
protein in neurodegeneration.

Kwak YD(1), Wang B, Li JJ, Wang R, Deng Q, Diao S, Chen Y, Xu R, Masliah E, Xu H,
Sung JJ, Liao FF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
College of Medicine, Memphis, Tennessee 38163, USA.

The importance of ubiquitin E3 ligases in neurodegeneration is being increasingly
recognized. The crucial role of NEDD4-1 in neural development is well
appreciated; however, its role in neurodegeneration remains unexplored. Herein,
we report increased NEDD4-1 expression in the degenerated tissues of several
major neurodegenerative diseases. Moreover, its expression is upregulated in
cultured neurons in response to various neurotoxins, including zinc and hydrogen 
superoxide, via transcriptional activation likely mediated by the reactive oxygen
species (ROS)-responsive FOXM1B. Reduced protein levels of the insulin-like
growth factor receptor (IGF-1Rß) were observed as a consequence of upregulated
NEDD4-1 via the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Overexpression of a familial mutant 
form of superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) (G93A) in neuroblastoma cells resulted in a
similar reduction of IGF-1Rß protein. This inverse correlation between NEDD4-1
and IGF-1Rß was also observed in the cortex and spinal cords of mutant (G93A)
SOD1 transgenic mice at a presymptomatic age, which was similarly induced by in
vivo-administered zinc in wild-type C57BL/6 mice. Furthermore, histochemistry
reveals markedly increased NEDD4-1 immunoreactivity in the
degenerating/degenerated motor neurons in the lumbar anterior horn of the spinal 
cord, suggesting a direct causative role for NEDD4-1 in neurodegeneration.
Indeed, downregulation of NEDD4-1 by shRNA or overexpression of a catalytically
inactive form rescued neurons from zinc-induced cell death. Similarly, neurons
with a NEDD4-1 haplotype are more resistant to apoptosis, largely due to
expression of higher levels of IGF-1Rß.Together, our work identifies a novel
molecular mechanism for ROS-upregulated NEDD4-1 and the subsequently reduced
IGF-1Rß signaling in neurodegeneration.

PMCID: PMC3681290
PMID: 22875931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Nov;33(11):2250-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs249. Epub 2012 Jul
25.

The TNF-a/ROS/HIF-1-induced upregulation of FoxMI expression promotes HCC
proliferation and resistance to apoptosis.

Xia L(1), Mo P, Huang W, Zhang L, Wang Y, Zhu H, Tian D, Liu J, Chen Z, Zhang Y, 
Chen Z, Hu H, Fan D, Nie Y, Wu K.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive
Diseases, Fourth Military Medical University Xi'an 710032, Shaanxi Province,
People's Republic of China.

The proliferation-specific transcription factor Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) acts as a
master regulator of cancer cell growth and survival and plays an important role
in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. However, the molecular mechanisms
that regulate FoxM1 expression remain largely unknown. In the current study, we
demonstrated that tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-aa induced FoxM1 expression and
transactivated its promoter activity in hepatoma cells. Serial 5" deletion and
site-directed mutagenesis revealed that the induction of FoxM1 expression by
TNF-a was dependent upon the hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF1)-1 and HIF1-3/4
binding sites within the FoxM1 promoter. Furthermore, at the transcriptional
level, the stabilization of HIF-1a via reactive oxygen species generation led to 
the binding of HIF-1a to the FoxM1 promoter and resulted in increased FoxM1
expression. The inhibition of both HIF-1a expression and reactive oxygen species 
generation significantly decreased TNF-a-induced FoxM1 overexpression.
Consequently, the upregulation of FoxM1 promoted the proliferation of hepatoma
cells and enhanced their resistance to TNF-a-induced apoptosis. Consistently,
there was a positive correlation between HIF-1a and FoxM1 expression in 406 human
hepatocellular carcinoma tissues, and the combination of these two parameters was
a powerful predictor of poor prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma patients after
curative resection. Here, we report a new molecular mechanism by which FoxM1
expression is regulated by the TNF-a/reactive oxygen species/HIF-1 pathway, and
this mechanism results in the proliferation of hepatoma cells and their
resistance to apoptosis.

PMID: 22831955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Oct;32(19):3838-50. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00355-12. Epub 2012 Jul 
23.

Foxm1 mediates cross talk between Kras/mitogen-activated protein kinase and
canonical Wnt pathways during development of respiratory epithelium.

Wang IC(1), Snyder J, Zhang Y, Lander J, Nakafuku Y, Lin J, Chen G, Kalin TV,
Whitsett JA, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pulmonary Biology, Perinatal Institute of the Cincinnati
Childrens Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
I-Ching.Wang@cchmc.org

While Kras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and canonical Wnt/ß-catenin
are critical for lung morphogenesis, mechanisms integrating these important
signaling pathways during lung development are unknown. Herein, we demonstrate
that the Foxm1 transcription factor is a key downstream target of activated
Kras(G12D). Deletion of Foxm1 from respiratory epithelial cells during lung
formation prevented structural abnormalities caused by activated Kras(G12D).
Kras/Foxm1 signaling inhibited the activity of canonical Wnt signaling in the
developing lung in vivo. Foxm1 decreased T-cell factor (TCF) transcriptional
activity induced by activated ß-catenin in vitro. Depletion of Foxm1 by short
interfering RNA (siRNA) increased nuclear localization of ß-catenin, increased
expression of ß-catenin target genes, and decreased mRNA and protein levels of
the ß-catenin inhibitor Axin2. Axin2 mRNA was reduced in distal lung epithelium
of Foxm1-deficient mice. Foxm1 directly bound to and increased transcriptional
activity of the Axin2 promoter region. Foxm1 is required for Kras signaling in
distal lung epithelium and provides a mechanism integrating Kras and canonical
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling during lung development.

PMCID: PMC3457538
PMID: 22826436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Cell Rep. 2012 Jun 28;1(6):715-29. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.05.005. Epub 2012
Jun 7.

FoxM1 regulates mammary luminal cell fate.

Carr JR(1), Kiefer MM, Park HJ, Li J, Wang Z, Fontanarosa J, DeWaal D, Kopanja D,
Benevolenskaya EV, Guzman G, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

Elevated expression of FoxM1 in breast cancer correlates with an undifferentiated
tumor phenotype and a negative clinical outcome. However, a role for FoxM1 in
regulating mammary differentiation was not known. Here, we identify another
function of FoxM1, the ability to act as a transcriptional repressor, which plays
an important role in regulating the differentiation of luminal epithelial
progenitors. Regeneration of mammary glands with elevated levels of FoxM1 leads
to aberrant ductal morphology and expansion of the luminal progenitor pool.
Conversely, knockdown of FoxM1 results in a shift toward the differentiated
state. FoxM1 mediates these effects by repressing the key regulator of luminal
differentiation, GATA-3. Through association with DNMT3b, FoxM1 promotes
methylation of the GATA-3 promoter in an Rb-dependent manner. This study
identifies FoxM1 as a critical regulator of mammary differentiation with
significant implications for the development of aggressive breast cancers.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3401379
PMID: 22813746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Sep;10(9):1189-202. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

The p38 MAPK-MK2 axis regulates E2F1 and FOXM1 expression after epirubicin
treatment.

de Olano N(1), Koo CY, Monteiro LJ, Pinto PH, Gomes AR, Aligue R, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, London W12 0NN, UK.

E2F1 is responsible for the regulation of FOXM1 expression, which plays a key
role in epirubicin resistance. Here, we examined the role and regulation of E2F1 
in response to epirubicin in cancer cells. We first showed that E2F1 plays a key 
role in promoting FOXM1 expression, cell survival, and epirubicin resistance as
its depletion by siRNA attenuated FOXM1 induction and cell viability in response 
to epirubicin. We also found that the p38-MAPK activity mirrors the expression
patterns of E2F1 and FOXM1 in both epirubicin-sensitive and -resistant MCF-7
breast cancer cells, suggesting that p38 has a role in regulating E2F1 expression
and epirubicin resistance. Consistently, studies using pharmacologic inhibitors, 
siRNA knockdown, and knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) revealed that p38
mediates the E2F1 induction by epirubicin and that the induction of E2F1 by p38
is, in turn, mediated through its downstream kinase MK2 [mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK)-activated protein kinase 2; MAPKAPK2]. In agreement, in
vitro phosphorylation assays showed that MK2 can directly phosphorylate E2F1 at
Ser-364. Transfection assays also showed that E2F1 phosphorylation at Ser-364
participates in its induction by epirubicin but also suggests that other
phosphorylation events are also involved. In addition, the p38-MK2 axis can also 
limit c-jun-NH(2)-kinase (JNK) induction by epirubicin and, notably, JNK
represses FOXM1 expression. Collectively, these findings underscore the
importance of p38-MK2 signaling in the control of E2F1 and FOXM1 expression as
well as epirubicin sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC3447739
PMID: 22802261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 24;287(35):29887-98. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.371682. Epub
2012 Jul 5.

Aurora B is regulated by the mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (MAPK/ERK) signaling pathway and is a valuable potential 
target in melanoma cells.

Bonet C(1), Giuliano S, Ohanna M, Bille K, Allegra M, Lacour JP, Bahadoran P,
Rocchi S, Ballotti R, Bertolotto C.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1065, Centre Méditerranéen de Médecine Moléculaire, Equipe 1, Biologie
et Pathologies des Mélanocytes de la Pigmentation Cutanée au Mélanome, Nice
F-06204, France.

Metastatic melanoma is a deadly skin cancer and is resistant to almost all
existing treatment. Vemurafenib, which targets the BRAFV600E mutation, is one of 
the drugs that improves patient outcome, but the patients next develop secondary 
resistance and a return to cancer. Thus, new therapeutic strategies are needed to
treat melanomas and to increase the duration of v-Raf murine sarcoma viral
oncogene homolog B1 (BRAF) inhibitor response. The ERK pathway controls cell
proliferation, and Aurora B plays a pivotal role in cell division. Here, we
confirm that Aurora B is highly expressed in metastatic melanoma cells and that
Aurora B inhibition triggers both senescence-like phenotypes and cell death in
melanoma cells. Furthermore, we show that the BRAF/ERK axis controls Aurora B
expression at the transcriptional level, likely through the transcription factor 
FOXM1. Our results provide insight into the mechanism of Aurora B regulation and 
the first molecular basis of Aurora B regulation in melanoma cells. The
inhibition of Aurora B expression that we observed in vemurafenib-sensitive
melanoma cells was rescued in cells resistant to this drug. Consistently, these
latter cells remain sensitive to the effect of the Aurora B inhibitor.
Noteworthy, wild-type BRAF melanoma cells are also sensitive to Aurora B
inhibition. Collectively, our findings, showing that Aurora B is a potential
target in melanoma cells, particularly in those vemurafenib-resistant, may open
new avenues to improve the treatment of metastatic melanoma.

PMCID: PMC3436153
PMID: 22767597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e39404. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039404. Epub 2012 Jun 25.

Peroxiredoxin 3 is a redox-dependent target of thiostrepton in malignant
mesothelioma cells.

Newick K(1), Cunniff B, Preston K, Held P, Arbiser J, Pass H, Mossman B, Shukla
A, Heintz N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Vermont College of Medicine,
Burlington, Vermont, United States of America.

Thiostrepton (TS) is a thiazole antibiotic that inhibits expression of FOXM1, an 
oncogenic transcription factor required for cell cycle progression and resistance
to oncogene-induced oxidative stress. The mechanism of action of TS is unclear
and strategies that enhance TS activity will improve its therapeutic potential.
Analysis of human tumor specimens showed FOXM1 is broadly expressed in malignant 
mesothelioma (MM), an intractable tumor associated with asbestos exposure. The
mechanism of action of TS was investigated in a cell culture model of human MM.
As for other tumor cell types, TS inhibited expression of FOXM1 in MM cells in a 
dose-dependent manner. Suppression of FOXM1 expression and coincidental
activation of ERK1/2 by TS were abrogated by pre-incubation of cells with the
antioxidant N-acetyl-L-cysteine (NAC), indicating its mechanism of action in MM
cells is redox-dependent. Examination of the mitochondrial thioredoxin reductase 
2 (TR2)-thioredoxin 2 (TRX2)-peroxiredoxin 3 (PRX3) antioxidant network revealed 
that TS modifies the electrophoretic mobility of PRX3. Incubation of recombinant 
human PRX3 with TS in vitro also resulted in PRX3 with altered electrophoretic
mobility. The cellular and recombinant species of modified PRX3 were resistant to
dithiothreitol and SDS and suppressed by NAC, indicating that TS covalently
adducts cysteine residues in PRX3. Reduction of endogenous mitochondrial TRX2
levels by the cationic triphenylmethane gentian violet (GV) promoted modification
of PRX3 by TS and significantly enhanced its cytotoxic activity. Our results
indicate TS covalently adducts PRX3, thereby disabling a major mitochondrial
antioxidant network that counters chronic mitochondrial oxidative stress.
Redox-active compounds like GV that modify the TR2/TRX2 network may significantly
enhance the efficacy of TS, thereby providing a combinatorial approach for
exploiting redox-dependent perturbations in mitochondrial function as a
therapeutic approach in mesothelioma.

PMCID: PMC3382597
PMID: 22761781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38599. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038599. Epub 2012 Jun 27.

Two mechanisms regulate keratin K15 expression in keratinocytes: role of PKC/AP-1
and FOXM1 mediated signalling.

Bose A(1), Teh MT, Hutchison IL, Wan H, Leigh IM, Waseem A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical and Diagnostic Oral Sciences, Institute of Dentistry,
Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Keratin 15 (K15) is a type I keratin that is used as a marker of stem
cells. Its expression is restricted to the basal layer of stratified epithelia,
and the bulge in hair follicles. However, in certain clinical situations
including oral lichen planus, K15 is induced in suprabasal layers, which is
inconsistent with the role of a stem cell marker. This study provides insights
into the mechanisms of K15 expression in the basal and differentiating
keratinocytes.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Human keratinocytes were differentiated by three 
different methods; suspension in methylcellulose, high cell density and treatment
with phorbol ester. The expression of mRNA was determined by quantitative PCR and
protein by western blotting and immunostaining. Keratinocytes in suspension
suppressed ß1-integrin expression, induced differentiation-specific markers and
K15, whereas FOXM1 (a cell cycle regulated protein) and K14 were downregulated.
Rescuing ß1-integrin by either fibronectin or the arginine-glycine-aspartate
peptide suppressed K15 but induced K14 and FOXM1 expression. Specific inhibition 
of PKCd, by siRNA, and AP-1 transcription factor, by TAM67 (dominant negative
c-Jun), suppressed K15 expression, suggesting that PKC/AP-1 pathway plays a role 
in the differentiation-specific expression of K15. The basal cell-specific K15
expression may involve FOXM1 because ectopic expression of the latter is known to
induce K15. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation, we have identified a single
FOXM1 binding motif in the K15 promoter.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The data suggests that K15 is induced during terminal
differentiation mediated by the down regulation of ß1-integrin. However, this
cannot be the mechanism of basal/stem cell-specific K15 expression in stratified 
epithelia, because basal keratinocytes do not undergo terminal differentiation.
We propose that there are two mechanisms regulating K15 expression in stratified 
epithelia; differentiation-specific involving PKC/AP-1 pathway, and
basal-specific mediated by FOXM1, and therefore the use of K15 expression as a
marker of stem cells must be viewed with caution.

PMCID: PMC3384677
PMID: 22761689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Aug;23(16):3079-93. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E11-02-0170. Epub 2012
Jun 27.

Live-cell monitoring of periodic gene expression in synchronous human cells
identifies Forkhead genes involved in cell cycle control.

Grant GD(1), Gamsby J, Martyanov V, Brooks L 3rd, George LK, Mahoney JM, Loros
JJ, Dunlap JC, Whitfield ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
03755, USA.

We developed a system to monitor periodic luciferase activity from cell
cycle-regulated promoters in synchronous cells. Reporters were driven by a
minimal human E2F1 promoter with peak expression in G1/S or a basal promoter with
six Forkhead DNA-binding sites with peak expression at G2/M. After cell cycle
synchronization, luciferase activity was measured in live cells at 10-min
intervals across three to four synchronous cell cycles, allowing unprecedented
resolution of cell cycle-regulated gene expression. We used this assay to screen 
Forkhead transcription factors for control of periodic gene expression. We
confirmed a role for FOXM1 and identified two novel cell cycle regulators, FOXJ3 
and FOXK1. Knockdown of FOXJ3 and FOXK1 eliminated cell cycle-dependent
oscillations and resulted in decreased cell proliferation rates. Analysis of
genes regulated by FOXJ3 and FOXK1 showed that FOXJ3 may regulate a network of
zinc finger proteins and that FOXK1 binds to the promoter and regulates DHFR,
TYMS, GSDMD, and the E2F binding partner TFDP1. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
followed by high-throughput sequencing analysis identified 4329 genomic loci
bound by FOXK1, 83% of which contained a FOXK1-binding motif. We verified that a 
subset of these loci are activated by wild-type FOXK1 but not by a FOXK1 (H355A) 
DNA-binding mutant.

PMCID: PMC3418304
PMID: 22740631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Oncol Rep. 2012 Sep;28(3):992-8. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1859. Epub 2012 Jun 12.

27-hydroxycholesterol and the expression of three estrogen-sensitive proteins in 
MCF7 cells.

Cruz P(1), Epuñán MJ, Ramírez ME, Torres CG, Valladares LE, Sierralta WD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolic Regulation, INTA-University of Chile,
Santiago 7830489, Chile.

The principal aim of this study was to analyze in estrogen receptor-positive MCF7
cells the response of three estrogen-dependent proteins to 27-hydroxycholesterol 
(27OHC), a major circulating cholesterol metabolite. Immunofluorescence,
immunoblotting and immunogold labelling analyses of MCF7 cells exposed for up to 
72 h to 2 nM estradiol (E2) or to 2 µM 27OHC demonstrated similar responses in
the expression of MnSOD and ERß compared to the non-stimulated cells. Thus, the
results confirm 27OHC's function as a novel selective estrogen receptor modulator
(SERM). The epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT), observed in MCF7 cells
stimulated for longer than 48 h with 2 µM 27OHC, was accompanied by lower
immunoreactive levels of nuclear FOXM1 in comparison to E2-treated cells. The
results presented in this study are discussed taking into consideration the
relationship of hypercholesterolemia, 27OHC production, ROS synthesis and
macrophage infiltration, potentially occurring in obese patients with
ERa-positive, infiltrated mammary tumors.

PMID: 22710948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Front Physiol. 2012 Jun 4;3:183. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2012.00183. eCollection 2012.

Mechanistic insights into aging, cell-cycle progression, and stress response.

Postnikoff SD(1), Harkness TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Saskatchewan Saskatoon, 
SK, Canada.

The longevity of an organism depends on the health of its cells. Throughout life 
cells are exposed to numerous intrinsic and extrinsic stresses, such as free
radicals, generated through mitochondrial electron transport, and ultraviolet
irradiation. The cell has evolved numerous mechanisms to scavenge free radicals
and repair damage induced by these insults. One mechanism employed by the yeast
Saccharomycescerevisiae to combat stress utilizes the Anaphase Promoting Complex 
(APC), an essential multi-subunit ubiquitin-protein ligase structurally and
functionally conserved from yeast to humans that controls progression through
mitosis and G1. We have observed that yeast cells expressing compromised APC
subunits are sensitive to multiple stresses and have shorter replicative and
chronological lifespans. In a pathway that runs parallel to that regulated by the
APC, members of the Forkhead box (Fox) transcription factor family also regulate 
stress responses. The yeast Fox orthologs Fkh1 and Fkh2 appear to drive the
transcription of stress response factors and slow early G1 progression, while the
APC seems to regulate chromatin structure, chromosome segregation, and resetting 
of the transcriptome in early G1. In contrast, under non-stress conditions, the
Fkhs play a complex role in cell-cycle progression, partially through activation 
of the APC. Direct and indirect interactions between the APC and the yeast Fkhs
appear to be pivotal for lifespan determination. Here we explore the potential
for these interactions to be evolutionarily conserved as a mechanism to balance
cell-cycle regulation with stress responses.

PMCID: PMC3366476
PMID: 22675309  [PubMed]


451. Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 15;72(16):4141-53. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3834. Epub 
2012 May 22.

Perturbation of Rb, p53, and Brca1 or Brca2 cooperate in inducing metastatic
serous epithelial ovarian cancer.

Szabova L(1), Yin C, Bupp S, Guerin TM, Schlomer JJ, Householder DB, Baran ML, Yi
M, Song Y, Sun W, McDunn JE, Martin PL, Van Dyke T, Difilippantonio S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Preclinical Research, Advanced Biomedical Computing
Center, SAIC at Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer Research, Mouse Cancer
Genetics Program, NCI-Frederick, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

The majority of human high-grade serous epithelial ovarian cancer (SEOC) is
characterized by frequent mutations in p53 and alterations in the RB and FOXM1
pathways. A subset of human SEOC harbors a combination of germline and somatic
mutations as well as epigenetic dysfunction for BRCA1/2. Using Cre-conditional
alleles and intrabursal induction by Cre-expressing adenovirus in genetically
engineered mice, we analyzed the roles of pathway perturbations in epithelial
ovarian cancer initiation and progression. Inactivation of RB-mediated tumor
suppression induced surface epithelial proliferation with progression to stage I 
carcinoma. Additional biallelic inactivation and/or missense p53 mutation in the 
presence or absence of Brca1/2 caused progression to stage IV disease. As in
human SEOC, mice developed peritoneal carcinomatosis, ascites, and distant
metastases. Unbiased gene expression and metabolomic profiling confirmed that Rb,
p53, and Brca1/2-triple mutant tumors aligned with human SEOC, and not with other
intraperitoneal cancers. Together, our findings provide a novel resource for
evaluating disease etiology and biomarkers, therapeutic evaluation, and improved 
imaging strategies in epithelial ovarian cancer.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3421072
PMID: 22617326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. J Hepatol. 2012 Sep;57(3):600-12. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.04.020. Epub 2012 May 
18.

Upregulated FoxM1 expression induced by hepatitis B virus X protein promotes
tumor metastasis and indicates poor prognosis in hepatitis B virus-related
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xia L(1), Huang W, Tian D, Zhu H, Zhang Y, Hu H, Fan D, Nie Y, Wu K.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Xijing Hospital of Digestive
Diseases, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, Shaanxi Province,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is a master regulator of tumor
metastasis that plays an important role in the development of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). However, whether or not FoxM1 contributes to the progression of 
HBV-associated HCC (HBV-HCC) remains unknown. Therefore, we aimed at
investigating the clinicopathologic significance of FoxM1 in HBV-HCC and the
potential role of FoxM1 in hepatitis B virus X (HBx)-mediated invasiveness and
metastasis.
METHODS: The expression of FoxM1 and its functional targets matrix
metalloproteinase-7 (MMP-7), RhoC, and Rho-kinase 1 (ROCK1) in human HBV-HCC
tissues was detected by immunohistochemistry. Luciferase reporter, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, and electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to
measure the transcriptional regulation of FoxM1 promoter by HBx. The effect of
FoxM1 on HBx-mediated invasiveness and metastasis was analyzed by transwell
assays and an orthotopic metastatic model.
RESULTS: FoxM1 overexpression correlated with multiple malignant characteristics 
and indicated poor prognosis of HBV-HCC patients. FoxM1 expression was an
independent factor affecting the recurrence and survival of patients with HBV-HCC
after surgical resection. FoxM1 promoted hepatoma cell invasion and metastasis by
promoting MMP-7, RhoC, and ROCK1 expression, while FoxM1 overexpression was
associated with elevated expressions of these proteins in HBV-HCC tissues. HBx
upregulated FoxM1 expression through the ERK/CREB pathway, and FoxM1 inhibition
significantly decreased HBx-enhanced hepatoma cell invasion in vitro and lung
metastasis in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a new molecular mechanism for HBV-associated
hepatocarcinogenesis that involves the activation of FoxM1 expression by HBx
through the ERK/CREB pathway, thereby leading to invasion and metastasis of
hepatoma cells.

Crown Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22613004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Cancer Res. 2012 Jul;10(7):914-24. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-11-0449. Epub
2012 May 15.

Analysis of gene expression regulated by the ETV5 transcription factor in OV90
ovarian cancer cells identifies FOXM1 overexpression in ovarian cancer.

Llauradó M(1), Majem B, Castellví J, Cabrera S, Gil-Moreno A, Reventós J, Ruiz A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Unit in Biomedicine and Translational and Pediatrics Oncology,
Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Epithelial ovarian cancer is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy and the fifth
leading cause of cancer death in women in the Western world. ETS transcription
factors have been implicated in the regulation of gene expression during a
variety of biologic processes including cell growth and differentiation. We
recently examined the role of the ETS transcription factor ETV5 in epithelial
ovarian cancer and described ETV5 as being upregulated in ovarian tumor samples
as compared with ovarian tissue controls. In ovarian cancer cells, we showed that
ETV5 regulated the expression of cell adhesion molecules, enhancing ovarian
cancer cell survival in anchorage-independent conditions and suggesting that it
plays a role in ovarian cancer cell dissemination and metastasis into the
peritoneal cavity. To understand the role of ETV5 transcription factor during
ovarian cancer cell dissemination, we analyzed by gene expression microarray
technology those genes whose expression was altered in an ovarian cancer cell
line with a stable downregulation of ETV5. The analysis of the genes and
signaling pathways under the control of ETV5 in OV90 cells has unraveled new
signaling pathways that interact with ETV5, among them the cell-cycle progression
and the TGFß signaling pathway. In addition, we found that the downregulation of 
ETV5 reduced the expression of the oncogenic transcription factor FOXM1.
Consistently, FOXM1 was overexpressed in ovarian tumor samples, and its
transcriptional levels increased with ETV5 transcription in ovarian tumor
samples. Moreover, FOXM1 expression levels increased with tumor grade, suggesting
a role in the progression of ovarian cancer.

PMID: 22589409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Oct;33(10):1843-53. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs167. Epub 2012
May 10.

FOXM1 mediates Dox resistance in breast cancer by enhancing DNA repair.

Park YY(1), Jung SY, Jennings NB, Rodriguez-Aguayo C, Peng G, Lee SR, Kim SB, Kim
K, Leem SH, Lin SY, Lopez-Berestein G, Sood AK, Lee JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Transcription factors are direct effectors of altered signaling pathways in
cancer and frequently determine clinical outcomes in cancer patients. To uncover 
new transcription factors that would determine clinical outcomes in breast
cancer, we systematically analyzed gene expression data from breast cancer
patients. Our results revealed that Forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) is the
top-ranked survival-associated transcription factor in patients with
triple-negative breast cancer. Surprisingly, silencing FOXM1 expression led
breast cancer cells to become more sensitive to doxorubicin (Dox). We found that 
FOXM1-dependent resistance to Dox is mediated by regulating DNA repair genes. We 
further demonstrated that NF<U+03BA>B1 interacts with FOXM1 in the presence of Dox to
protect breast cancer cells from DNA damage. Finally, silencing FOXM1 expression 
in breast cancer cells in a mouse xenograft model significantly sensitized the
cells to Dox. Our systematic approaches identified an unexpected role of FOXM1 in
Dox resistance by regulating DNA repair genes, and our findings provide
mechanistic insights into how FOXM1 mediates resistance to Dox and evidence that 
FOXM1 may be a promising therapeutic target for sensitizing breast cancer cells
to Dox.

PMCID: PMC3529559
PMID: 22581827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Oncogene. 2013 Mar 21;32(12):1594-600. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.151. Epub 2012 May
7.

The Trop-2 signalling network in cancer growth.

Guerra E(1), Trerotola M, Aloisi AL, Tripaldi R, Vacca G, La Sorda R, Lattanzio
R, Piantelli M, Alberti S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cancer Pathology, Department of Oncology and Experimental Medicine and
CeSI, Foundation University 'G. d'Annunzio', Chieti, Italy.

Our findings show that upregulation of a wild-type Trop-2 has a key controlling
role in human cancer growth, and that tumour development is quantitatively driven
by Trop-2 expression levels. However, little is known about the regulation of
expression of the TROP2 gene. Hence, we investigated the TROP2 transcription
control network. TROP2 expression was shown to depend on a highly interconnected 
web of transcription factors: TP63/TP53L, ERG, GRHL1/Get-1 (grainyhead-like
epithelial transactivator), HNF1A/TCF-1 (T-cell factor), SPI1/PU.1, WT (Wilms'
tumour)1, GLIS2, AIRE (autoimmune regulator), FOXM1 (forkhead box M1) and FOXP3, 
with HNF4A as the major network hub. TROP2 upregulation was shown to subsequently
drive the expression and activation of CREB1 (cyclic AMP-responsive-element
binding protein), Jun, NF-<U+03BA>B, Rb, STAT1 and STAT3 through induction of the cyclin
D1 and ERK (extracellular signal regulated kinase)/MEK (MAPK/ERK kinase)
pathways. Growth-stimulatory signalling through NF-<U+03BA>B, cyclin D1 and ERK was
shown to require an intact Trop-2 cytoplasmic tail. Network hubs and interacting 
partners are co-expressed with Trop-2 in primary human tumours, supporting a role
of this signalling network in cancer growth.

PMID: 22562244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Cancer Inform. 2012;11:87-111. doi: 10.4137/CIN.S8633. Epub 2012 Apr 19.

Major Functional Transcriptome of an Inferred Center Regulator of an ER(-) Breast
Cancer Model System.

Liu LY(1), Chang LY, Kuo WH, Hwa HL, Lin YS, Huang SF, Chen CN, Chang KJ, Hsieh
FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Agronomy, Biometry Division, National Taiwan University, Taipei,
Taiwan.

We aimed to find clinically relevant gene activities ruled by the signal
transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) proteins in an ER(-) breast
cancer population via network approach. STAT3 is negatively associated with both 
lymph nodal category and stage. MYC is a component of STAT3 network. MYC and
STAT3 may co-regulate gene expressions for Warburg effect, stem cell like
phenotype, cell proliferation and angiogenesis. We identified a STAT3 network in 
silico showing its ability in predicting its target gene expressions primarily
for specific tumor subtype, tumor progression, treatment options and prognostic
features. The aberrant expressions of MYC and STAT3 are enriched in triple
negatives (TN). They promote histological grade, vascularity, metastasis and
tumor anti-apoptotic activities. VEGFA, STAT3, FOXM1 and METAP2 are druggable
targets. High levels of METAP2, MMP7, IGF2 and IGF2R are unfavorable prognostic
factors. STAT3 is an inferred center regulator at early cancer development
predominantly in TN.

PMCID: PMC3337785
PMID: 22553414  [PubMed]


457. PLoS One. 2012;7(4):e35552. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035552. Epub 2012 Apr 16.

Deep RNA sequencing reveals novel cardiac transcriptomic signatures for
physiological and pathological hypertrophy.

Song HK(1), Hong SE, Kim T, Kim do H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Sciences and Systems Biology Research Center, Gwangju Institute
of Science and Technology (GIST), Gwangju, Republic of Korea.

Although both physiological hypertrophy (PHH) and pathological hypertrophy (PAH) 
of the heart have similar morphological appearances, only PAH leads to fatal
heart failure. In the present study, we used RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) to
determine the transcriptomic signatures for both PHH and PAH. Approximately 13-20
million reads were obtained for both models, among which PAH showed more
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (2,041) than PHH (245). The expression of
417 genes was barely detectable in the normal heart but was suddenly activated in
PAH. Among them, Foxm1 and Plk1 are of particular interest, since Ingenuity
Pathway Analysis (IPA) using DEGs and upstream motif analysis showed that they
are essential hub proteins that regulate the expression of downstream proteins
associated with PAH. Meanwhile, 52 genes related to collagen, chemokines, and
actin showed opposite expression patterns between PHH and PAH. MAZ-binding motifs
were enriched in the upstream region of the participating genes. Alternative
splicing (AS) of exon variants was also examined using RNA-Seq data for PAH and
PHH. We found 317 and 196 exon inclusions and exon exclusions, respectively, for 
PAH, and 242 and 172 exon inclusions and exclusions, respectively for PHH. The AS
pattern was mostly related to gains or losses of domains, changes in activity,
and localization of the encoded proteins. The splicing variants of 8 genes (i.e.,
Fhl1, Rcan1, Ndrg2, Synpo, Ttll1, Cxxc5, Egfl7, and Tmpo) were experimentally
confirmed. Multilateral pathway analysis showed that the patterns of quantitative
(DEG) and qualitative (AS) changes differ depending on the type of pathway in PAH
and PHH. One of the most significant changes in PHH is the severe downregulation 
of autoimmune pathways accompanied by significant AS. These findings revealed the
unique transcriptomic signatures of PAH and PHH and also provided a more
comprehensive understanding at both the quantitative and qualitative levels.

PMCID: PMC3327670
PMID: 22523601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Aug;1819(8):855-62. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.03.008.
Epub 2012 Mar 30.

Binding of FoxM1 to G2/M gene promoters is dependent upon B-Myb.

Down CF(1), Millour J, Lam EW, Watson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Imperial College, London, UK.

The promoters of genes which regulate entry into and progress through mitosis are
typically induced maximally in G2 by transcription factors that include B-Myb and
FoxM1. As FoxM1 gene transcription is a target of B-Myb, we investigated in this 
study how these transcription factors functionally interact to regulate these
G2/M genes. Using a 3T3 cell line containing floxed B-myb alleles (B-myb(F/F))
that could be conditionally deleted by Cre recombinase, we confirmed that B-myb
knockout caused both decreased mRNA expression of several G2/M genes, including
FoxM1, and delayed entry into mitosis. Although FoxM1 protein expression was
actually unaffected by B-myb knockout when quiescent B-myb(F/F) 3T3 cells
re-entered the cell cycle upon serum-stimulation, chromatin immunoprecipitation
revealed that FoxM1 binding to G2/M promoters was substantially reduced. FoxM1
transcriptional activity requires sequential phosphorylation by Cyclin-dependent 
kinases and Plk1, which are B-Myb target genes, and we found that phosphorylation
at Plk1-specific sites was somewhat reduced upon B-myb knockout. Neither this
effect nor nuclear accumulation of FoxM1, which was unaffected by B-myb knockout,
was sufficient to account for the dependence on B-Myb for FoxM1 promoter binding,
however. More significantly, assays using paired Birc5 (survivin)
promoter-luciferase reporters with either wild-type or mutated Myb binding sites 
showed that FoxM1 was unable to bind and activate the promoter in the absence of 
B-Myb binding. Our data suggest that B-Myb is required as a pioneer factor to
enable FoxM1 binding to G2/M gene promoters and explains how these transcription 
factors may collaborate to induce mitosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22513242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e34329. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0034329. Epub 2012 Mar 26.

FOXM1 induces a global methylation signature that mimics the cancer epigenome in 
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Teh MT(1), Gemenetzidis E, Patel D, Tariq R, Nadir A, Bahta AW, Waseem A,
Hutchison IL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical and Diagnostic Oral Sciences, Institute of Dentistry,
Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, London, England, United Kingdom. m.t.teh@qmul.ac.uk

The oncogene FOXM1 has been implicated in all major types of human cancer. We
recently showed that aberrant FOXM1 expression causes stem cell compartment
expansion resulting in the initiation of hyperplasia. We have previously shown
that FOXM1 regulates HELLS, a SNF2/helicase involved in DNA methylation,
implicating FOXM1 in epigenetic regulation. Here, we have demonstrated using
primary normal human oral keratinocytes (NOK) that upregulation of FOXM1
suppressed the tumour suppressor gene p16(INK4A) (CDKN2A) through promoter
hypermethylation. Knockdown of HELLS using siRNA re-activated the mRNA expression
of p16(INK4A) and concomitant downregulation of two DNA methyltransferases DNMT1 
and DNMT3B. The dose-dependent upregulation of endogenous FOXM1 (isoform B)
expression during tumour progression across a panel of normal primary NOK strains
(n<U+200A>=<U+200A>8), dysplasias (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>5) and head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC)
cell lines (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>11) correlated positively with endogenous expressions of HELLS,
BMI1, DNMT1 and DNMT3B and negatively with p16(INK4A) and involucrin. Bisulfite
modification and methylation-specific promoter analysis using absolute
quantitative PCR (MS-qPCR) showed that upregulation of FOXM1 significantly
induced p16(INK4A) promoter hypermethylation (10-fold, P<0.05) in primary NOK
cells. Using a non-bias genome-wide promoter methylation microarray profiling
method, we revealed that aberrant FOXM1 expression in primary NOK induced a
global hypomethylation pattern similar to that found in an HNSCC (SCC15) cell
line. Following validation experiments using absolute qPCR, we have identified a 
set of differentially methylated genes, found to be inversely correlated with in 
vivo mRNA expression levels of clinical HNSCC tumour biopsy samples. This study
provided the first evidence, using primary normal human cells and tumour tissues,
that aberrant upregulation of FOXM1 orchestrated a DNA methylation signature that
mimics the cancer methylome landscape, from which we have identified a unique
FOXM1-induced epigenetic signature which may have clinical translational
potentials as biomarkers for early cancer screening, diagnostic and/or
therapeutic interventions.

PMCID: PMC3312909
PMID: 22461910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Oncol Rep. 2012 Jun;27(6):1857-64. doi: 10.3892/or.2012.1739. Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Apoptosis induced by 7-difluoromethoxyl-5,4'-di-n-octyl genistein via the
inactivation of FoxM1 in ovarian cancer cells.

Ning Y(1), Li Q, Xiang H, Liu F, Cao J.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical college, Guangzhou 510120, 
PR China.

Genistein, 5,7,4'-trihydroxylisoflavone, a major component of soybean products,
has been reported to possess anticancer activities. We examined the antitumor
effects of 7-difluoromethoxyl-5,4'-di-n-octylgenistein (DFOG), a novel synthetic 
genistein derivative, on human ovarian cancer cells as well as the molecular
mechanism. The growth-inhibitory effects of genistein and DFOG were determined
using MTT assay and clonogenic assay in CoC1 and SKOV3 human ovarian cancer
cells. Apoptotic activities of DFOG were observed using histone/DNA ELISA assay
and flow cytometry with propidium iodide (PI) staining. Multiple molecular
techniques, such as RT-PCR, western blot analysis, siRNA and cDNA transfection
were used to explore the molecular mechanism. We demonstrated that nine of the
genistein derivatives had a more effective antitumor activity than genistein.
Among the afore-mentioned derivatives, DFOG presented with the strongest activity
against CoC1 and SKOV3 cells in vitro. DFOG and genistein inhibited the growth of
CoC1 and SKOV3 cells, accompanied by cell cycle arrest in the G2/M phase. DFOG
caused apoptotic cell death with concomitant attenuation of Forkhead box protein 
M1 (FoxM1) and its downstream genes, such as survivin, cdc25B, cyclin B, and
increased p27KIP1. Downregulation of FoxM1 by siRNA followed by DFOG treatment
resulted in enhanced cell growth inhibition and induction of apoptosis.
Upregulation of FoxM1 by cDNA transfection attenuated DFOG-induced cell growth
inhibition and apoptotic cell death. Our results show that the molecular role of 
FoxM1 in mediating the biological effects of DFOG and genistein in human ovarian 
cancer cells suggests that FoxM1 could be a novel target for the treatment of
human ovarian cancer.

PMID: 22447287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2012 May;33(5):675-81. doi: 10.1038/aps.2011.188. Epub 2012
Mar 26.

FoxM1 mediated resistance to gefitinib in non-small-cell lung cancer cells.

Xu N(1), Zhang X, Wang X, Ge HY, Wang XY, Garfield D, Yang P, Song YL, Bai CX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China.

AIM: Gefitinib is effective in only approximately 20% of patients with
non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), and the underlying mechanism remains unclear.
FoxM1 is upregulated in NSCLC and associated with a poor prognosis in NSCLC
patients. In this study, we examined the possible role of FoxM1 in gefitinib
resistance and the related mechanisms.
METHODS: Gefitinib resistant human lung adenocarcinoma cell line SPC-A-1 and
gefitinib-sensitive human lung mucoepidermoid carcinoma cell line NCI-H292 were
used. mRNA and protein expression of FoxM1 and other factors were tested with
quantitative RT PCR and Western blot analysis. RNA interference was performed to 
suppress FoxM1 expression in SPC-A-1 cells, and lentiviral infection was used to 
overexpress FoxM1 in H292 cells. MTT assay and flow cytometry were used to
examine the proliferation and apoptosis of the cells.
RESULTS: Treatment of SPC-A-1 cells with gefitinib (1 and 10 µmol/L) upregulated 
the expression of FoxM1 in time- and concentration-dependent manners, while
gefitinib (1 µmol/L) downregulated in H292 cells. In SPC-A-1 cells treated with
gefitinib (1 µmol/L), the expression of several downstream targets of FoxM1,
including survivin, cyclin B1, SKP2, PLK1, Aurora B kinase and CDC25B, were
significantly upregulated. Overexpression of FoxM1 increased the resistance in
H292 cells, while attenuated FoxM1 expression restored the sensitivity to
gefitinib in SPC-A-1 cells by inhibiting proliferation and inducing apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that FoxM1 plays an important role in the
resistance of NSCLC cells to gefitinib in vitro. FoxM1 could be used as a
therapeutic target to overcome the resistance to gefitinib.

PMCID: PMC4010351
PMID: 22447226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2012 Apr;16 Suppl 2:S119-29. doi:
10.1517/14728222.2012.656092. Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Premetastatic niche: ready for new therapeutic interventions?

Zoccoli A(1), Iuliani M, Pantano F, Imperatori M, Intagliata S, Vincenzi B,
Marchetti P, Papapietro N, Denaro V, Tonini G, Santini D.

Author information: 
(1)Campus Bio-Medico University, Department of Medical Oncology, Rome, Italy.

INTRODUCTION: Bone marrow-derived cells (BMDC) localize in premetastatic niche
through chemokines and integrins signals and establish clusters that precede the 
arrival of even single metastatic tumor cell at distant site. CSCs demonstrate an
increased metastatic propensity and would seem likely candidates for the
acquisition of migratory capabilities and propagation of heterogeneous tumor cell
populations to different target organs. Sonic Hedgehog (SHH), FOXM1 and Notch
pathways and signaling molecules such as integrin and chemokine could dictate
their fate.
AREAS COVERED: In this review, the molecular mechanisms of premetastatic niche
onset are summarized.
EXPERT OPINION: Premetastatic niche is defined as a fertile microenvironment that
forms in metastatic target organ and facilitates the invasion, survival and/or
proliferation of metastatic tumor cells, providing a novel mechanism for the
promotion of metastasis. Drugs targeting premetastatic niche could represent a
new promising therapeutic approach in the treatment of bone metastases.

PMID: 22443277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. World Neurosurg. 2012 May-Jun;77(5-6):594-6. doi: 10.1016/j.wneu.2012.03.001.
Epub 2012 Mar 16.

FoxM1 is vital in the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathogenesis of gliomas.

Abla AA, Turner JD, Sanai N.

PMID: 22430325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Future Oncol. 2012 Mar;8(3):223-6. doi: 10.2217/fon.12.1.

FoxM1: a potential drug target for glioma.

Li Y, Zhang S, Huang S.

PMCID: PMC3627536
PMID: 22409458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31761. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031761. Epub 2012 Feb 29.

Suppression of FOXM1 sensitizes human cancer cells to cell death induced by
DNA-damage.

Halasi M(1), Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America.

Irradiation and DNA-damaging chemotherapeutic agents are commonly used in
anticancer treatments. Following DNA damage FOXM1 protein levels are often
elevated. In this study, we sought to investigate the potential role of FOXM1 in 
programmed cell death induced by DNA-damage. Human cancer cells after FOXM1
suppression were subjected to doxorubicin or <U+03B3>-irradiation treatment. Our
findings indicate that FOXM1 downregulation by stable or transient knockdown
using RNAi or by treatment with proteasome inhibitors that target FOXM1 strongly 
sensitized human cancer cells of different origin to DNA-damage-induced
apoptosis. We showed that FOXM1 suppresses the activation of pro-apoptotic JNK
and positively regulates anti-apoptotic Bcl-2, suggesting that JNK activation and
Bcl-2 down-regulation could mediate sensitivity to DNA-damaging agent-induced
apoptosis after targeting FOXM1. Since FOXM1 is widely expressed in human
cancers, our data further support the fact that it is a valid target for
combinatorial anticancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3290538
PMID: 22393369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Genes Dev. 2012 Mar 1;26(5):474-89. doi: 10.1101/gad.181933.111.

The MuvB complex sequentially recruits B-Myb and FoxM1 to promote mitotic gene
expression.

Sadasivam S(1), Duan S, DeCaprio JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Cell cycle progression is dependent on two major waves of gene expression. Early 
cell cycle gene expression occurs during G1/S to generate factors required for
DNA replication, while late cell cycle gene expression begins during G2 to
prepare for mitosis. Here we demonstrate that the MuvB complex-comprised of LIN9,
LIN37, LIN52, LIN54, and RBBP4-serves an essential role in three distinct
transcription complexes to regulate cell cycle gene expression. The MuvB complex,
together with the Rb-like protein p130, E2F4, and DP1, forms the DREAM complex
during quiescence and represses expression of both early and late genes. Upon
cell cycle entry, the MuvB complex dissociates from p130/DREAM, binds to B-Myb,
and reassociates with the promoters of late genes during S phase. MuvB and B-Myb 
are required for the subsequent recruitment of FoxM1 to late gene promoters
during G2. The MuvB complex remains bound to FoxM1 during peak late cell cycle
gene expression, while B-Myb binding is lost when it undergoes
phosphorylation-dependent, proteasome-mediated degradation during late S phase.
Our results reveal a novel role for the MuvB complex in recruiting B-Myb and
FoxM1 to promote late cell cycle gene expression and in regulating cell cycle
gene expression from quiescence through mitosis.

PMCID: PMC3305985
PMID: 22391450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Br J Cancer. 2012 Mar 13;106(6):1177-86. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.55. Epub 2012 Feb 
23.

Hedgehog pathway activation in human transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder.

Pignot G(1), Vieillefond A, Vacher S, Zerbib M, Debre B, Lidereau R,
Amsellem-Ouazana D, Bieche I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Service d'Urologie, Université Paris Descartes,
Sorbonne Paris Cité, 27 rue du Faubourg Saint Jaques, Paris F-75014, France.
gg_pignot@yahoo.fr

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (Hh) signalling pathway functions as an organiser in
embryonic development. Recent studies have shown constitutive activation of this 
pathway in various malignancies, but its role in bladder cancer remains poorly
studied.
METHODS: Expression levels of 31 genes and 9 microRNAs (miRNAs) involved in the
Hh pathway were determined by quantitative real-time RT-PCR in 71 bladder tumour 
samples (21 muscle-invasive (MIBC) and 50 non-muscle-invasive (NMIBC) bladder
cancers), as well as in 6 bladder cancer cell lines.
RESULTS: The SHH ligand gene and Gli-inducible target genes (FOXM1, IGF2, OSF2,
H19, and SPP1) were overexpressed in tumour samples as compared with normal
bladder tissue. SHH overexpression was found in 96% of NMIBC and 52% of MIBC
samples, as well as in two bladder cancer cell lines. Altered expression of
miRNAs supported their oncogene or tumour-suppressor gene status. In univariate
analysis, high expression levels of PTCH2, miRNA-92A, miRNA-19A, and miRNA-20A
were associated with poorer overall survival in MIBC (P=0.02, P=0.012, P=0.047,
and P=0.036, respectively).
CONCLUSION: We observed constitutive activation of the Hh pathway in most NMIBC
and about 50% of MIBC. We also found that some protein-coding genes and miRNAs
involved in the Hh pathway may have prognostic value at the individual level.

PMCID: PMC3304423
PMID: 22361633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Gene Med. 2012 Apr;14(4):231-40. doi: 10.1002/jgm.2614.

Adenovirus-mediated RNA interference targeting FOXM1 transcription factor
suppresses cell proliferation and tumor growth of nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Chen H(1), Yang C, Yu L, Xie L, Hu J, Zeng L, Tan Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Biology,
Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan, China.

BACKGROUND: The Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor, which regulates the
expression of genes essential for cell proliferation and transformation, is
implicated in tumorigenesis and tumor progression. FOXM1 has attracted much
attention as a potential target for the prevention and/or therapeutic
intervention in human carcinomas.
METHODS: The levels of FOXM1 expression in clinical tissue specimens and cell
lines of human malignant nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) were measured. Knockdown 
of FOXM1 expression was performed by small interfering RNA in NPC cells. An
adenovirus vector (named AdFOXM1shRNA) was constructed to express a short hairpin
RNA specific to FOXM1. The efficacy of AdFOXM1shRNA for tumor gene therapy in NPC
cells and an in vivo NPC grafting model was assessed.
RESULTS: A strong expression of FOXM1 was observed in clinical tissue specimens
and cell lines of human NPC. Knockdown of FOXM1 expression by FOXM1 specific
small interfering RNA diminished the NPC cell proliferation. The infection of
AdFOXM1shRNA in NPC cells resulted in the knockdown of FOXM1 mRNA and protein
levels, correlated with the reduction of proliferation and anchorage-independent 
growth of the cancer cells. The growth of NPC tumors was significantly suppressed
when inoculated mice were injected with AdFOXM1shRNA in the tumor.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, our results suggest that FOXM1 is a potential therapeutic 
target for NPC and AdFOXM1shRNA may be an additional gene therapeutic
intervention to be evaluated in future treatment strategies for patients with
NPC.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22359343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Acta Histochem. 2012 Dec;114(8):755-62. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2012.01.002. Epub
2012 Feb 11.

FOXM1 expression correlates with tumor invasion and a poor prognosis of
colorectal cancer.

Chu XY(1), Zhu ZM, Chen LB, Wang JH, Su QS, Yang JR, Lin Y, Xue LJ, Liu XB, Mo
XB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, School of Medicine, Nanjing 
University, Jiangsu, China. xiaoyuanchu55@yahoo.com.cn

FOXM1, a member of the Forkhead Box (Fox) family of transcription factors, plays 
a critical role in tumor development and metastasis. The aim of this study was to
elucidate its role in colorectal cancer (CRC), particularly prognosis and
metastasis. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot assays were used to measure
the expression levels of FOXM1 mRNA and protein in 15 CRC and adjacent normal
mucosa tissues. Immunohistochemical assay was performed to detect FOXM1 protein
expression in 112 CRC tissues and further determine its clinicopathological and
prognostic significance. RNA interference (RNAi) was used to knockdown endogenous
FOXM1 expression in CRC cell lines and to analyze the effects of FOXM1 knockdown 
on migration and invasion of CRC cells. The relative expression levels of FOXM1
mRNA and protein were significantly higher in CRC tissues than in adjacent normal
mucosa tissues (P<0.01). In addition, the immunostaining of FOXM1 protein was
stronger in CRC tissues than in adjacent normal mucosa tissues. By statistical
analysis, we showed that high FOXM1 expression was closely correlated with the
presence of lymph node metastasis, incidence of liver metastasis, and advanced
TNM stage. Moreover, the cumulative 5-year survival rate of CRC patients with
high FOXM1 expression was lower than that of those with low FOXM1 expression
(P=0.0047). Multivariate analysis showed that the status of FOXM1 expression was 
an independent prognostic factor for CRC patients (P=0.025). Furthermore,
RNAi-mediated FOXM1 knockdown could significantly inhibit growth, migration and
invasion of CRC cells. Our results showed that FOXM1 over-expression is a
molecular marker predicting increased invasive/metastatic potential of CRC and a 
poorer prognosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22326401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Histopathology. 2012 Apr;60(5):731-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.04137.x. Epub
2012 Feb 1.

Differential expression of forkhead box M1 and its downstream cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitors p27(kip1) and p21(waf1/cip1) in the diagnosis of pulmonary
neuroendocrine tumours.

Ha SY(1), Lee CH, Chang HK, Chang S, Kwon KY, Lee EH, Roh MS, Seo B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Gachon University of Medicine and Science, Incheon,
South Korea.

AIMS: Pulmonary neuroendocrine (NE) tumours represent a spectrum of
phenotypically distinct entities with different biological behaviours.
Difficulties in classifying these tumours are frequently encountered in clinical 
practice. Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is essential for the development of various
cancers and is a proliferation-specific transcription factor that regulates
transcription of cell cycle genes, including cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
p27(kip1) and p21(waf1/cip1) . This study was performed to determine the utility 
of FoxM1, p27(kip1) and p21(waf1/cip1) as immunomarkers for subtyping pulmonary
NE tumours.
METHODS AND RESULTS: FoxM1, p27(kip1) and p21(waf1/cip1) expression was evaluated
by immunohistochemistry in 60 pulmonary NE tumours [19 typical carcinoids (TCs), 
six atypical carcinoids (ACs), 17 large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas (LCNECs)
and 18 small cell lung cancers (SCLCs)]. The frequencies of FoxM1 and
p21(waf1/cip1) expression were significantly different between TCs and ACs (each 
P = 0.009), and those of FoxM1 and p27(kip1) expression were significantly
different between LCNECs and SCLCs (P = 0.012 and P = 0.002, respectively). The
combined FoxM1((-)) /p21(waf1/cip1(-)) and FoxM1((+)) /p27(kip1(high)) phenotypes
had the best diagnostic accuracy for distinguishing TCs from ACs, and SCLCs from 
LCNECs, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: FoxM1, p27(kip1) and p21(waf1/cip1) showed distinct immunoreactivity
according to histological subtype, which may be of value as an ancillary test in 
the differential diagnosis of pulmonary NE tumours.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22296117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30790. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030790. Epub 2012 Jan 23.

AKT signaling mediates IGF-I survival actions on otic neural progenitors.

Aburto MR(1), Magariños M, Leon Y, Varela-Nieto I, Sanchez-Calderon H.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomedicas Alberto Sols, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Otic neurons and sensory cells derive from common progenitors whose
transition into mature cells requires the coordination of cell survival,
proliferation and differentiation programmes. Neurotrophic support and survival
of post-mitotic otic neurons have been intensively studied, but the bases
underlying the regulation of programmed cell death in immature proliferative otic
neuroblasts remains poorly understood. The protein kinase AKT acts as a node,
playing a critical role in controlling cell survival and cell cycle progression. 
AKT is activated by trophic factors, including insulin-like growth factor I
(IGF-I), through the generation of the lipidic second messenger
phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate by phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K). Here we
have investigated the role of IGF-dependent activation of the PI3K-AKT pathway in
maintenance of otic neuroblasts.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: By using a combination of organotypic cultures of
chicken (Gallus gallus) otic vesicles and acoustic-vestibular ganglia, Western
blotting, immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization, we show that
IGF-I-activation of AKT protects neural progenitors from programmed cell death.
IGF-I maintains otic neuroblasts in an undifferentiated and proliferative state, 
which is characterised by the upregulation of the forkhead box M1 (FoxM1)
transcription factor. By contrast, our results indicate that post-mitotic
p27(Kip)-positive neurons become IGF-I independent as they extend their neuronal 
processes. Neurons gradually reduce their expression of the Igf1r, while they
increase that of the neurotrophin receptor, TrkC.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Proliferative otic neuroblasts are dependent on the
activation of the PI3K-AKT pathway by IGF-I for survival during the otic neuronal
progenitor phase of early inner ear development.

PMCID: PMC3264639
PMID: 22292041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Oncogene. 2012 Dec 6;31(49):5117-22. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.5. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

YAP induces malignant mesothelioma cell proliferation by upregulating
transcription of cell cycle-promoting genes.

Mizuno T(1), Murakami H, Fujii M, Ishiguro F, Tanaka I, Kondo Y, Akatsuka S,
Toyokuni S, Yokoi K, Osada H, Sekido Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Oncology, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan.

Malignant mesothelioma (MM) shows frequent inactivation of the neurofibromatosis 
type 2 (NF2) -tumor-suppressor gene. Recent studies have documented that the
Hippo signaling pathway, a downstream cascade of Merlin (a product of NF2), has a
key role in organ size control and carcinogenesis by regulating cell
proliferation and apoptosis. We previously reported that MMs show overexpression 
of Yes-associated protein (YAP) transcriptional coactivator, the main downstream 
effector of the Hippo signaling pathway, which results from the inactivation of
NF2, LATS2 and/or SAV1 genes (the latter two encoding core components of the
mammalian Hippo pathway) or amplification of YAP itself. However, the detailed
roles of YAP remain unclear, especially the target genes of YAP that enhance MM
cell growth and survival. Here, we demonstrated that YAP-knockdown inhibited cell
motility, invasion and anchorage-independent growth as well as cell proliferation
of MM cells in vitro. We analyzed genes commonly regulated by YAP in three MM
cell lines with constitutive YAP-activation, and found that the major subsets of 
YAP-upregulating genes encode cell cycle regulators. Among them, YAP directly
induced the transcription of CCND1 and FOXM1, in cooperation with TEAD
transcription factor. We also found that knockdown of CCND1 and FOXM1 suppressed 
MM cell proliferation, although the inhibitory effects were less evident than
those of YAP knockdown. These results indicate that constitutive YAP activation
in MM cells promotes cell cycle progression giving more aggressive phenotypes to 
MM cells.

PMID: 22286761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Curr Top Med Chem. 2012;12(1):50-2.

Mechanisms of apoptosis induced by anticancer compounds in melanoma cells.

Gartel AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, Department of Medicine, 840, S. Wood St.,
Room 1041, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. agartel@uic.edu

The sensitivity of cancer cells to apoptosis induced by anticancer drugs in vitro
may be a predictor of their sensitivity to these drugs in vivo. In this review I 
summarize recent data describing anticancer drug-induced apoptosis in human
melanoma cells. Proteasome inhibitors alone, or in combination with other drugs, 
efficiently induce apoptosis in melanoma cells. It has been shown that apoptosis 
induced by proteasome inhibitors is linked to suppression of transcription factor
FoxM1 and upregulation of the proapoptotic Noxa protein. In addition, proteasome 
inhibitors stabilize the antiapoptotic Mcl-1 protein, and its suppression leads
to more robust apoptosis in melanoma cells. Drugs targeting B-Raf (BAY 54-9085)
or IKKb (BMS-345541) have been tested in melanoma cell lines, and it has been
shown that the proapoptotic activity of both drugs depends on the inhibition of
NF-kB in melanoma cells. A synthetic analog of dsRNA in complex with a polycation
stimulated autophagy via induction of dsRNA helicase MDA-5 followed by apoptosis 
that was partially modulated by Noxa. These data may provide important
information needed for designing more efficient combinations of anticancer drugs 
against melanoma.

© 2012 Bentham Science Publishers

PMID: 22280162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 30;287(14):11070-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.302547. Epub
2012 Jan 24.

Critical role of O-Linked ß-N-acetylglucosamine transferase in prostate cancer
invasion, angiogenesis, and metastasis.

Lynch TP(1), Ferrer CM, Jackson SR, Shahriari KS, Vosseller K, Reginato MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19102, USA.

Cancer cells universally increase glucose and glutamine consumption, leading to
the altered metabolic state known as the Warburg effect; one metabolic pathway,
highly dependent on glucose and glutamine, is the hexosamine biosynthetic
pathway. Increased flux through the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway leads to
increases in the post-translational addition of O-linked ß-N-acetylglucosamine
(O-GlcNAc) to various nuclear and cytosolic proteins. A number of these target
proteins are implicated in cancer, and recently, O-GlcNAcylation was shown to
play a role in breast cancer; however, O-GlcNAcylation in other cancers remains
poorly defined. Here, we show that O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) is overexpressed in
prostate cancer compared with normal prostate epithelium and that OGT protein and
O-GlcNAc levels are elevated in prostate carcinoma cell lines. Reducing
O-GlcNAcylation in PC3-ML cells was associated with reduced expression of matrix 
metalloproteinase (MMP)-2, MMP-9, and VEGF, resulting in inhibition of invasion
and angiogenesis. OGT-mediated regulation of invasion and angiogenesis was
dependent upon regulation of the oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1, a key
regulator of invasion and angiogenesis, as reducing OGT expression led to
increased FoxM1 protein degradation. Conversely, overexpression of a
degradation-resistant FoxM1 mutant abrogated OGT RNAi-mediated effects on
invasion, MMP levels, angiogenesis, and VEGF expression. Using a mouse model of
metastasis, we found that reduction of OGT expression blocked bone metastasis.
Altogether, these data suggest that as prostate cancer cells alter glucose and
glutamine levels, O-GlcNAc modifications and OGT levels become elevated and are
required for regulation of malignant properties, implicating OGT as a novel
therapeutic target in the treatment of cancer.

PMCID: PMC3322861
PMID: 22275356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Haematologica. 2012 Jul;97(7):1092-100. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2011.053421. Epub
2012 Jan 22.

Overexpression of FoxM1 offers a promising therapeutic target in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma.

Uddin S(1), Hussain AR, Ahmed M, Siddiqui K, Al-Dayel F, Bavi P, Al-Kuraya KS.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genomic Research, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research,
Riyadh 11211 Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: FoxM1 has been shown to play a critical role in the pathogenesis of
various epithelial malignancies. However, its role in lymphoid malignancies has
not been fully clarified. We, therefore, investigated the role of FoxM1
expression in a large cohort of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma samples and panel
of cell lines.
DESIGN AND METHODS: FoxM1 expression was investigated in a large series of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma tissues in a tissue microarray format by
immunohistochemistry. Apoptosis was measured by flow cytometry and protein
expression was detected by immunoblotting using diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
cell lines following treatment with either pharmacological inhibitor of FoxM1 or 
small interference RNA knockdown strategy. Invasion/migration and soft agar
colony assays were also performed following treatment with FoxM1 inhibitor.
RESULTS: FoxM1 expression was detected in 84.6% of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
tumors and found to be significantly associated with proliferative tumor marker
Ki67 (P<0.0001), matrix metalloproteinases-2 (P=0.0008), matrix
metalloproteinases-9 (P=0.0002), S-phase kinase associated protein-2 (P<0.0001)
and inversely associated with p27 expression (P=0.0215). Expression of small
interference RNA targeted against FoxM1 or treatment of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma cells with thiostrepton caused its downregulation accompanied by
decreased expression of matrix metalloproteinases-2 and matrix
metalloproteinases-9. Inhibition of FoxM1 in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cells 
also decreased invasive and migratory capability, and induced caspase dependent
apoptosis via activation of the mitochondrial apoptotic pathway. Finally,
combined thiostrepton and bortezomib at sub-toxic doses led to efficient
apoptosis in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, these results suggest that FoxM1 is over-expressed in
the majority of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma samples. These data also indicate
that targeting FoxM1 signaling can serve as a potential therapeutic modality in
the management of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3396683
PMID: 22271891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Pancreas. 2012 May;41(4):629-35. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e31823bcef2.

Overexpression of FOXM1 is associated with poor prognosis and clinicopathologic
stage of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Xia JT(1), Wang H, Liang LJ, Peng BG, Wu ZF, Chen LZ, Xue L, Li Z, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Municipal Hospital of
Guangzhou, Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

OBJECTIVES: Oncogenic transcription factor forkhead box M1 (FoxM1)-related
clinicopathologic characteristics and prognosis of patients with pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) have not been identified. Our aim of studying FoxM1
expression level and survival rate of PDA is to determine whether FoxM1 is a
valuable prognostic predictor for PDA patients.
METHODS: Expressional levels of FoxM1 mRNA and protein in paired pancreatic
cancer lesions and adjacent noncancerous tissues were examined by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting. FoxM1 expression
was analyzed by immunohistochemistry in 80 patients with PDA. The correlations
between FoxM1 immunostaining levels and clinicopathologic factors, as well as the
follow-up data of patients, were analyzed statistically.
RESULTS: FoxM1 protein and mRNA levels were elevated in pancreatic carcinoma
lesions compared with the paired adjacent noncancerous tissues. A high level of
expression of FoxM1 was significantly correlated with clinical staging (P =
0.004), lymph node metastasis (P = 0.009), and histological differentiation (P = 
0.017). Patients with a higher FoxM1 expression had a significantly shorter
survival time than those patients with lower FoxM1 expression (P < 0.001). The
multivariate analysis revealed that FoxM1 could serve as an independent factor of
poor prognosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our finding indicates that FoxM1 could be used as prognostic
molecular marker and therapeutic target for PDA.

PMID: 22249132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jan;28(1):29-32.

[Effects and molecular mechanisms of inhibiting FOXM1 expression on ovarian
cancer cell line SKOV3 by Lentiviral vector].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen GQ(1), Yao ZW, Qi HB, Zhang H, Luo Y, Qin XF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, the First Affiliated Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China. cgq@19841001@126.com

AIM: To investigate the effects and possible molecular mechanisms of inhibiting
FOXM1 expression on SKOV3 cells by lentiviral vector targeting FOXM1 shRNA.
METHODS: SKOV3 cells were infected by lentiviral vector targeting FOXM1 shRNA
with a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 20, then growth curve of SKOV3 cells
was determined by MTT assay, cell cycle was analysed by flow cytometry(FCM), and 
the expression of mRNA and protein of FOXM1, Cyclin D1, PLK1 by Real time PCR and
Western blot.
RESULTS: Lentiviral vector targeting FOXM1 shRNA with a multiplicity of infection
(MOI) of 20 could significantly inhibit the growth of SKOV3 cells. After infected
by lentiviral vector targeting FOXM1 shRNA, the G(0);/G(1); phase cells increased
and the S-phase cells decreased, and the expression of mRNA and protein of FOXM1,
Cyclin D1, PLK1 of SKOV3 cells were significantly down-regulated.
CONCLUSION: Inhibiting FOXM1 expression has a significantly effect of inhibiting 
proliferation on SKOV3 cells. Blocking SKOV3 cells in the G(0);/G(1); phase by
down-regulating the expression of Cyclin D1, PLK1 protein may be its mechanism.

PMID: 22230500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Oncotarget. 2011 Dec;2(12):1218-26.

The suppression of FOXM1 and its targets in breast cancer xenograft tumors by
siRNA.

Wang M(1), Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, 60612,
USA.

As an oncogenic transcription factor, the Forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) is
overexpressed in human tumors. FOXM1 promotes tumorigenesis by regulating genes
associated with cell cycle progression and cell proliferation, and its inhibition
in cell lines has been shown to sensitize cells to apoptosis. In this report, we 
examined the possibility of suppressing FOXM1 in tumors in vivo, through the
administration of FoxM1-specific siRNA. Firstly, we determined the functionality 
of siRNA treatment in subcutaneous MDA-MB-231-luc breast cancer tumors. We found 
that upon encapsulation into a PEI-based delivery agent, fluorescently-labeled
siRNA was retained within tumors when administered intratumorally. Injection of
anti-luciferase siRNA was also able to suppress tumor-associated luciferase for
at least 48 hours. More importantly, repeat administrations of PEI-encapsulated
anti-FoxM1 siRNA resulted in the reduced expression of FOXM1 protein levels in
tumors. In addition, both the protein levels and mRNA levels of cdc25B and Aurora
B Kinase, transcriptional targets of FOXM1 were also reduced in tumors treated
with anti-FoxM1 siRNA. p27, an indirect target of FOXM1 associated with growth
inhibition was further found be increased in tumors treated with FoxM1-siRNA. Our
data suggests that anti-FoxM1 siRNA can be functional when administered into
tumors in an in vivo system, and that anti-FoxM1 siRNA holds potential as part of
a therapy for cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC3282079
PMID: 22203467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Front Biosci (Elite Ed). 2012 Jan 1;4:410-25.

Novel targets for detection of cancer and their modulation by chemopreventive
natural compounds.

Ahmad A(1), Sakr WA, Rahman KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Cancer affects the lives of millions of people. Several signaling pathways have
been proposed as therapeutic targets for cancer therapy, and many more continue
to be validated. With the identification and validation of therapeutic targets
comes the question of designing novel strategies to effectively counter such
targets. Natural compounds from dietary sources form the basis of many ancient
medicinal systems. They are pleiotropic i.e. they act on multiple targets, and,
therefore, are often the first agents to be tested against a novel therapeutic
target. This review article summarizes the knowledge so far on some actively
pursued targets - Notch, CXCR4, Wnt and sonic hedgehog (shh) pathways, the
process of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) as well as molecular markers
such as uPA-uPAR, survivin, FoxM1, and the microRNAs. We have performed an
extensive survey of literature to list modulation of these targets by natural
agents such as curcumin, indole-3-carbinol (I3C), 3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM),
resveratrol, epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG), genistein etc. We believe that
this review will stimulate further research for elucidating and appreciating the 
value of these wonderful gifts from nature.

PMID: 22201883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Cancer Res. 2012 Feb 1;72(3):655-65. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3102. Epub
2011 Dec 22.

A novel FoxM1-caveolin signaling pathway promotes pancreatic cancer invasion and 
metastasis.

Huang C(1), Qiu Z, Wang L, Peng Z, Jia Z, Logsdon CD, Le X, Wei D, Huang S, Xie
K.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Pancreatic Diseases Research, Department of General
Surgery, Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated First People's Hospital,
Shanghai, PR China.

Caveolin-1 (Cav-1), a principal structural component of caveolar membrane
domains, contributes to cancer development but its precise functional roles and
regulation remain unclear. In this study, we determined the oncogenic function of
Cav-1 in preclinical models of pancreatic cancer and in human tissue specimens.
Cav-1 expression levels correlated with metastatic potential and
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in both mouse and human pancreatic cancer
cells. Elevated levels in cells promoted EMT, migration, invasion, and metastasis
in animal models, whereas RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown inhibited
these processes. We determined that levels of Cav-1 and the Forkhead
transcription factor FoxM1 correlated directly in pancreatic cancer cells and
tumor tissues. Enforced expression of FoxM1 increased Cav-1 levels, whereas
RNAi-mediated knockdown of FoxM1 had the opposite effect. FoxM1 directly bound to
the promoter region of Cav-1 gene and positively transactivated its activity.
Collectively, our findings defined Cav-1 as an important downstream oncogenic
target of FoxM1, suggesting that dysregulated signaling of this novel FoxM1-Cav-1
pathway promotes pancreatic cancer development and progression.

©2012 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3271134
PMID: 22194465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jan 6;417(1):601-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.12.014. Epub 2011 Dec 11.

Liver tumor formation by a mutant retinoblastoma protein in the transgenic mice
is caused by an upregulation of c-Myc target genes.

Wang B(1), Hikosaka K, Sultana N, Sharkar MT, Noritake H, Kimura W, Wu YX,
Kobayashi Y, Uezato T, Miura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine,
Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Japan.

The retinoblastoma (Rb) tumor suppressor encodes a nuclear phosphoprotein that
regulates cellular proliferation, apoptosis and differentiation. In order to
adapt itself to these biological functions, Rb is subjected to modification
cycle, phosphorylation and dephosphorylation. To directly determine the effect of
phosphorylation-resistant Rb on liver development and function, we generated
transgenic mice expressing phosphorylation-resistant human mutant Rb (mt-Rb)
under the control of the rat hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 gene promoter/enhancer. 
Expression of mt-Rb in the liver resulted in macroscopic neoplastic nodules
(adenomas) with ~50% incidence within 15 months old. Interestingly, quantitative 
reverse transcriptase-PCR analysis showed that c-Myc was up-regulated in the
liver of mt-Rb transgenic mice irrespective of having tumor tissues or no tumor. 
In tumor tissues, several c-Myc target genes, Foxm1, c-Jun, c-Fos, Bmi1 and Skp2,
were also up-regulated dramatically. We determined whether mt-Rb activated the
Myc promoter in the HTP9 cells and demonstrated that mt-Rb acted as an inhibitor 
of wild-type Rb-induced repression on the Myc promoter. Our results suggest that 
continued upregulation of c-Myc target genes promotes the liver tumor formation
after about 1 year of age.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22182413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jan 27;287(5):3019-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.295816. Epub 2011 
Dec 13.

p21 cooperates with DDB2 protein in suppression of ultraviolet ray-induced skin
malignancies.

Stoyanova T(1), Roy N, Bhattacharjee S, Kopanja D, Valli T, Bagchi S,
Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Cancer Center, University
of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

Exposure to ultraviolet rays (UV) in sunlight is the main cause of skin cancer.
Here, we show that the p53-induced genes DDB2 and p21 are down-regulated in skin 
cancer, and in the mouse model they functionally cooperate to prevent UV-induced 
skin cancer. Our previous studies demonstrated an antagonistic role of DDB2 and
p21 in nucleotide excision repair and apoptosis. Surprisingly, we find that the
loss of p21 restores nucleotide excision repair and apoptosis in Ddb2(-/-) mice, 
but it does not protect from UV-mediated skin carcinogenesis. In contrast,
Ddb2(-/-)p21(-/-) mice are significantly more susceptible to UV-induced skin
cancer than the Ddb2(-/-) or the p21(-/-) mice. We provide evidence that p21
deletion in the Ddb2(-/-) background causes a strong increase in cell
proliferation. The increased proliferation in the Ddb2(-/-)p21(-/-) background is
related to a severe deficiency in UV-induced premature senescence. Also, the
oncogenic pro-proliferation transcription factor FOXM1 is overexpressed in the
p21(-/-) background. Our results show that the anti-proliferative and the
pro-senescence pathways of DDB2 and p21 are critical protection mechanisms
against skin malignancies.

PMCID: PMC3270959
PMID: 22167187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Gastroenterology. 2012 Mar;142(3):531-42. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.11.034. Epub
2011 Dec 7.

Disruption of Klf4 in villin-positive gastric progenitor cells promotes formation
and progression of tumors of the antrum in mice.

Li Q(1), Jia Z, Wang L, Kong X, Li Q, Guo K, Tan D, Le X, Wei D, Huang S, Mishra 
L, Xie K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2012 Mar;142(3):424-8.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Krüppel-like factor 4 (Klf4) is a putative gastric tumor
suppressor gene. Rare, villin-positive progenitor cells in the gastric antrum
have multilineage potential. We investigated the function of Klf4 in these cells 
and in gastric carcinogenesis.
METHODS: We created mice with disruption of Klf4 in villin-positive antral mucosa
cells (Villin-Cre(+);Klf4(fl/fl) mice). Villin-Cre(+);Klf4(fl/fl) and control
mice were given drinking water with or without 240 ppm N-methyl-N-nitrosourea at 
5 weeks of age and thereafter on alternating weeks for a total of 10 weeks.
Gastric mucosa samples were collected at 35, 50, or 80 weeks of age from mice
that were and were not given N-methyl-N-nitrosourea, and analyzed by
histopathologic and molecular analyses. Findings were compared with those from
human gastric tumor specimens.
RESULTS: Preneoplasia formed progressively in the antrum in 35- to 80-week-old
Villin-Cre(+);Klf4(fl/fl) mice. Gastric tumors developed in 29% of 80-week-old
Villin-Cre(+);Klf4(fl/fl) mice, which were located exclusively in the lesser
curvature of the antrum. N-methyl-N-nitrosourea accelerated tumor formation, and 
tumors developed significantly more frequently in Villin-Cre(+);Klf4(fl/fl) mice 
than in control mice, at 35 and 50 weeks of age. Mouse and human gastric tumors
had reduced expression of Krüppel-like factor 4 and increased expression of FoxM1
compared with healthy gastric tissue. Expression of Krüppel-like factor 4
suppressed transcription of FoxM1.
CONCLUSIONS: Inactivation of Klf4 in villin-positive gastric progenitor cells
induces transformation of the gastric mucosa and tumorigenesis in the antrum in
mice. Villin-Cre(+);Klf4(fl/fl) have greater susceptibility to chemical-induced
gastric carcinogenesis and increased rates of gastric tumor progression than
control mice.

Copyright Â© 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3477581
PMID: 22155367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Oncogene. 2012 Aug 23;31(34):3875-88. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.549. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Foxm1 transcription factor is required for macrophage migration during lung
inflammation and tumor formation.

Balli D(1), Ren X, Chou FS, Cross E, Zhang Y, Kalinichenko VV, Kalin TV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Perinatal Institute of Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Macrophages have a key role in tumor-associated pulmonary inflammation that
supports the proliferation of tumor cells and promotes lung tumor growth.
Although increased numbers of tumor-associated macrophages are linked to poor
prognosis in lung cancer patients, little is known regarding the transcriptional 
mechanisms controlling recruitment of macrophages during lung tumorigenesis.
Forkhead Box m1 (Foxm1) transcription factor is induced in multiple cell types
within tumor lesions and its increased expression is associated with poor
prognosis in patients with lung adenocarcinomas. To determine the role of Foxm1
in recruitment of tumor-associated macrophages, a mouse line with
macrophage-specific Foxm1 deletion was generated (macFoxm1(-/-)). Lung
tumorigenesis was induced using a 3-methylcholanthrene/butylated hydroxytoluene
(BHT; 3,5-di-t-butyl-4-hydroxytoluene) tumor initiation/promotion protocol.
Ablation of Foxm1 in macrophages reduced the number and size of lung tumors in
macFoxm1(-/-) mice. Decreased tumorigenesis was associated with diminished
proliferation of tumor cells and decreased recruitment of macrophages during the 
early stages of tumor formation. The expression levels of the pro-inflammatory
genes iNOS, Cox-2, interleukin-1b (IL-1b) and IL-6, as well as the
migration-related genes macrophage inflammatory protein-1 (MIP-1a), MIP-2 and
MMP-12, were decreased in macrophages isolated from macFoxm1(-/-) mice. Migration
of Foxm1-deficient macrophages was reduced in vitro. The chemokine receptors
responsible for monocyte recruitment to the lung, CX(3)CR1 and CXCR4, were
decreased in Foxm1-deficient monocytes. In co-transfection experiments, Foxm1
directly bound to and transcriptionally activated the CX(3)CR1 promoter. Adoptive
transfer of wild-type monocytes to macFoxm1(-/-) mice restored BHT-induced
pulmonary inflammation to the levels observed in control mice. Expression of
Foxm1 in macrophages is required for pulmonary inflammation, recruitment of
macrophages into tumor sites and lung tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC3297705
PMID: 22139074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Jan;26(1):27-36. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-0042. Epub 2011 Dec 1.

FXR protects lung from lipopolysaccharide-induced acute injury.

Zhang L(1), Li T, Yu D, Forman BM, Huang W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation and Drug Discovery, Beckman Research Institute,
City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Jan;26(1):1.

Acute lung injury and its more severe form, acute respiratory distress syndrome, 
are characterized by an acute inflammatory response in the airspaces and lung
parenchyma. The nuclear receptor farnesoid X receptor (FXR) is expressed in
pulmonary artery endothelial cells. Here, we report a protective role of FXR in a
lipopolysaccharide-induced mouse model of acute lung injury. Upon intratracheal
injection of lipopolysaccharide, FXR-/- mice showed higher lung endothelial
permeability, released more bronchoalveolar lavage cells to the alveoli, and
developed acute pneumonia. Cell adhesion molecules were expressed at higher
levels in FXR-/- mice as compared with control mice. Furthermore, lung
regeneration was much slower in FXR-/- mice. In vitro experiments showed that FXR
activation blocked TNFa-induced expression of P-selectin but stimulated
proliferation of lung microvascular endothelial cells through up-regulation of
Foxm1b. In addition, expression of a constitutively active FXR repressed the
expression of proinflammatory genes and improved lung permeability and lung
regeneration in FXR-/- mice. This study demonstrates a critical role of FXR in
suppressing the inflammatory response in lung and promoting lung repair after
injury.

PMCID: PMC3248324
PMID: 22135065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Cell Cycle. 2011 Dec 15;10(24):4341-2. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.24.18544. Epub 2011 Dec
15.

Thiostrepton, proteasome inhibitors and FOXM1.

Gartel AL.

PMCID: PMC3272263
PMID: 22134246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2011;12(7):1785-8.

Deletion of Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor reduces malignancy in laryngeal 
squamous carcinoma cells.

Chen W(1), Yuan K, Tao ZZ, Xiao BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, The Central hospital of
Wuhan, Wuhan, China. cw99990@hotmail.com

The transcription factor, Forkhead Box M1 (FoxM1), has a specific expression
pattern during the cell cycle. It also plays an important role in cellular
developmental pathways and in the maintenance of homeostasis between cell
proliferation and apoptosis. However, the precise role and molecular mechanisms
associated with FoxM1 in laryngeal squamous carcinoma remain unclear. Therefore, 
laryngeal squamous carcinoma cells were transfected with FoxM1-targeted small
interfering RNA (siRNA) and compared with cells transfected with a control siRNA.
Assays of these two treatment groups detected a decrease in cell viability
associated with down-regulation of FoxM1 expression, and resulted in an
inhibition of cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. These phenotypes were 
also associated changes in expression of VEGF and MMP-2, a decrease in expression
of cyclin B, and an increase in expression of p27. These findings suggest that
deregulation of FoxM1 protein signaling is sufficient to affect tumorigenesis and
cancer progression. These results also indicate that inhibition of FoxM1
represents an attractive target for cancer therapy.

PMID: 22126565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Laryngoscope. 2011 Dec;121(12):2598-603. doi: 10.1002/lary.22379.

Linking expression of FOXM1, CEP55 and HELLS to tumorigenesis in oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma.

Janus JR(1), Laborde RR, Greenberg AJ, Wang VW, Wei W, Trier A, Olsen SM, Moore
EJ, Olsen KD, Smith DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Division of Laboratory Medicine and
Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

OBJECTIVES/HYPOTHESIS: To investigate the relationship between the expression of 
FOXM1, CEP55, and HELLS in oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma to human
papillomavirus (HPV), smoking, and tumor stage.
STUDY DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
METHODS: Transcriptome data were analyzed from matched tumor-normal samples taken
from patients with oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma. Data were previously
generated using deep-sequencing techniques (mRNA-Seq). Transcript levels of all
three genes were validated using the NanoString nCounter system in a larger group
of patients. Analyses were conducted to assess possible associations between
expression levels and HPV infection status, smoking status, or tumor staging.
RESULTS: FOXM1, CEP55, and HELLS were all overexpressed in oropharyngeal squamous
cell carcinoma tissue when compared to normal tissue. Significant trends were
found between expression levels of FOXM1, CEP55, and HELLS and tumor staging.
Tumors staged 3 or greater showed significantly higher levels of expression
compared with those staged 1. No significant association or trend was found
between expression of any genes of interest and etiologic subgroupings (i.e.,
HPV, smoking).
CONCLUSIONS: FOXM1, CEP55, and HELLS were all overexpressed in oropharyngeal
squamous cell carcinoma. Gene expression is related to tumor stage. The
significant association between the expression of these genes and advanced tumor 
stage suggest that they may play a role in tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2011 The American Laryngological, Rhinological, and Otological
Society, Inc.

PMID: 22109759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cancer Cell. 2011 Nov 15;20(5):620-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.10.001.

A systematic screen for CDK4/6 substrates links FOXM1 phosphorylation to
senescence suppression in cancer cells.

Anders L(1), Ke N, Hydbring P, Choi YJ, Widlund HR, Chick JM, Zhai H, Vidal M,
Gygi SP, Braun P, Sicinski P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215, 
USA. lars.anders.hms@gmail.com

Cyclin D-dependent kinases (CDK4 and CDK6) are positive regulators of cell cycle 
entry and they are overactive in the majority of human cancers. However, it is
currently not completely understood by which cellular mechanisms CDK4/6 promote
tumorigenesis, largely due to the limited number of identified substrates. Here
we performed a systematic screen for substrates of cyclin D1-CDK4 and cyclin
D3-CDK6. We identified the Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor as a
common critical phosphorylation target. CDK4/6 stabilize and activate FOXM1,
thereby maintain expression of G1/S phase genes, suppress the levels of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS), and protect cancer cells from senescence. Melanoma cells,
unlike melanocytes, are highly reliant on CDK4/6-mediated senescence suppression,
which makes them particularly susceptible to CDK4/6 inhibition.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3237683
PMID: 22094256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Exp Dermatol. 2011 Dec;20(12):998-1003. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0625.2011.01388.x.

Centella asiatica extracts modulate hydrogen peroxide-induced senescence in human
dermal fibroblasts.

Kim YJ(1), Cha HJ, Nam KH, Yoon Y, Lee H, An S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Skin Care and Beauty, Osan University, Osan Cosmetology Research
Institute, Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea.

Centella asiatica (C. asiatica) is a pharmacological plant in South Asia. It has 
been demonstrated that C. asiatica extracts containing various pentacyclic
triterpenes exert healing effects, especially wound healing and collagen
synthesis in skin. However, there are few studies on the effect of C. asiatica
extracts on stress-induced premature senescence (SIPS). To determine whether H(2)
O(2) -induced senescence is affected by C. asiatica extracts, we performed
senescence analysis on cultured human dermal fibroblasts (HDFs). We also analysed
whole gene expression level using microarrays and showed that 39 mRNAs are
differentially expressed in H(2) O(2) -induced HDFs with and without treatment
with C. asiatica extracts. These genes regulate apoptosis, gene silencing, cell
growth, transcription, senescence, DNA replication and the spindle checkpoint.
Differential expression of FOXM1, E2F2, MCM2, GDF15 and BHLHB2 was confirmed
using semi-quantitative PCR. In addition, C. asiatica extracts rescued the H(2)
O(2) -induced repression of replication in HDFs. Therefore, the findings
presented here suggest that C. asiatica extracts might regulate SIPS by
preventing repression of DNA replication and mitosis-related gene expression.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22092576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Cell Cycle. 2011 Nov 15;10(22):3827-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.22.18211. Epub 2011 Nov
15.

Proteasome inhibitors suppress expression of NPM and ARF proteins.

Pandit B(1), Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Proteasome inhibitors stabilize numerous proteins by inhibiting their
degradation. Previously we have demonstrated that proteasome inhibitors
thiostrepton, MG132 and bortezomib paradoxically inhibit transcriptional activity
and mRNA/protein expression of FOXM1. Here we demonstrate that, in addition to
FOXM1, the same proteasome inhibitors also decrease mRNA and protein expression
of NPM and ARF genes. These data suggest that proteasome inhibitors may suppress 
gene expression by stabilizing their transcriptional inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3266112
PMID: 22071628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jan;97(1):E1-E13. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-1506. Epub
2011 Nov 2.

FoxM1 and its association with matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) signaling pathway 
in papillary thyroid carcinoma.

Ahmed M(1), Uddin S, Hussain AR, Alyan A, Jehan Z, Al-Dayel F, Al-Nuaim A,
Al-Sobhi S, Amin T, Bavi P, Al-Kuraya KS.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genomic Research, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research
Centre, MBC#98-16, P.O. Box 3354, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.

CONTEXT: Forkhead boxM1 (FoxM1) transcription factor has been shown to promote
pathogenesis of several malignancies. FoxM1 has also been shown to be associated 
with matrix metalloproteinases (MMP) in various cancers. However, little is known
about its function in papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC).
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we investigated the role of FoxM1 in pathogenesis in a 
large series of PTC in a tissue microarray format followed by in vitro and in
vivo studies using PTC cell lines and nude mice.
DESIGN: Expression of FoxM1 and its associated proteins were investigated in
Middle Eastern PTC samples by immunohistochemistry. Apoptosis was measured by
flow cytometry and immunoblotting. Invasion and migration studies were performed 
using 8-µm Transwell plates.
RESULTS: FoxM1 was overexpressed in 28.4% of PTC and significantly associated
with activated matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) (P = 0.0004), X-linked
inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP) (P = 0.0024), and B-cell lymphoma-extra
large (Bcl-XL) (P = 0.0014) expression. Treatment of PTC cell lines with
thiostrepton, an inhibitor of FoxM1, resulted in inhibition of cell viability via
induction of apoptosis. In addition, thiostrepton treatment of PTC cells or
expression of FoxM1-specific small interfering RNA down-regulated expression of
FoxM1 accompanied with decreased MMP-2 and MMP-9 expression. Furthermore,
inhibition of FoxM1 attenuated migration and invasion of PTC cells.
Interestingly, overexpression of FoxM1 rescued the effects of thiostrepton in PTC
cell lines. Finally, treatment of PTC cell line xenografts with thiostrepton
resulted in growth inhibition of tumors in nude mice via down-regulation of FoxM1
and MMP-9 and MMP-2.
CONCLUSION: Altogether, this is the first study showing that FoxM1 and its
associated signaling pathway play a critical role in the pathogenesis of PTC and 
may be a potential target for therapeutic intervention for treatment of these
cancers.

PMID: 22049175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2012 Apr;46(4):431-6. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2011-0128OC.
Epub 2011 Oct 27.

Hypoxia-induced pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cell proliferation is controlled
by forkhead box M1.

Raghavan A(1), Zhou G, Zhou Q, Ibe JC, Ramchandran R, Yang Q, Racherla H,
Raychaudhuri P, Raj JU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612, USA.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a devastating disease, and no effective 
treatments are available. Hypoxia-induced pulmonary artery remodeling, including 
smooth muscle cell proliferation, contributes to PAH, but the exact mechanisms
underlying this abnormal process are largely undefined. The forkhead box M1
(FoxM1) transcription factor regulates cancer cell growth by modulating gene
expression critical for cell cycle progression. Here, we report for the first
time, to the best of our knowledge, a novel function of FoxM1 in the
hypoxia-stimulated proliferation of human pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells
(HPASMCs). Exposure to hypoxia caused a marked up-regulation of FoxM1 gene
expression, mainly at the transcription level, and this induction correlated with
HPASMC cell proliferation. The knockdown of FoxM1 inhibited the
hypoxia-stimulated proliferation of HPASMCs. We found that the knockdown of
HIF-2a, but not HIF-1a, diminished FoxM1 induction in response to hypoxia.
However, the knockdown of FoxM1 did not alter expression levels of HIF-2a or
HIF-1a, suggesting that HIF-2a is an upstream regulator of FoxM1. Furthermore,
the knockdown of FoxM1 prevented the hypoxia-induced expression of aurora A
kinase and cyclin D1. Collectively, our results suggest that hypoxia induces
FoxM1 gene expression in an HIF-2a-dependent pathway, thereby promoting HPASMC
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC3359951
PMID: 22033266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e25991. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025991. Epub 2011 Oct 10.

Identification of a predominant co-regulation among kinetochore genes,
prospective regulatory elements, and association with genomic instability.

Reinhold WC(1), Erliandri I, Liu H, Zoppoli G, Pommier Y, Larionov V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United
States of America. wcr@mail.nih.gov

The NCI-60 cell line panel is the most extensively characterized set of cells in 
existence, and has been used extensively as a screening tool for drug discovery. 
Previously, the potential of this panel has not been applied to the fundamental
cellular processes of chromosome segregation. In the current study, we used data 
from multiple microarray platforms accumulated for the NCI-60 to characterize an 
expression pattern of genes involved in kinetochore assembly. This analysis
revealed that 17 genes encoding the constitutive centromere associated network of
the kinetochore core (the CCAN complex) plus four additional genes with
established importance in kinetochore maintenance (CENPE, CENPF, INCENP, and
MIS12) exhibit similar patterns of expression in the NCI-60, suggesting a
mechanism for co-regulated transcription of these genes which is maintained
despite the multiple genetic and epigenetic rearrangements accumulated in these
cells (such as variations in DNA copy number and karyotypic complexity). A
complex group of potential regulatory influences are identified for these genes, 
including the transcription factors CREB1, E2F1, FOXE1, and FOXM1, DNA copy
number variation, and microRNAs has-miR-200a, 23a, 23b, 30a, 30c, 27b, 374b, 365.
Thus, our results provide a template for experimental studies on the regulation
of genes encoding kinetochore proteins, the process that, when aberrant, leads to
the aneuploidy that is a hallmark of many cancers. We propose that the comparison
of expression profiles in the NCI-60 cell line panel could be a tool for the
identification of other gene groups whose products are involved in the assembly
of organelle protein complexes.

PMCID: PMC3189923
PMID: 22016797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Cancer Cell. 2011 Oct 18;20(4):427-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.08.016.

FoxM1 promotes ß-catenin nuclear localization and controls Wnt target-gene
expression and glioma tumorigenesis.

Zhang N(1), Wei P, Gong A, Chiu WT, Lee HT, Colman H, Huang H, Xue J, Liu M, Wang
Y, Sawaya R, Xie K, Yung WK, Medema RH, He X, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2011 Oct 18;20(4):415-6.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is essential for stem cell regulation and tumorigenesis, 
but its molecular mechanisms are not fully understood. Here, we report that FoxM1
is a downstream component of Wnt signaling and is critical for ß-catenin
transcriptional function in tumor cells. Wnt3a increases the level and nuclear
translocation of FoxM1, which binds directly to ß-catenin and enhances ß-catenin 
nuclear localization and transcriptional activity. Genetic deletion of FoxM1 in
immortalized neural stem cells abolishes ß-catenin nuclear localization. FoxM1
mutations that disrupt the FoxM1-ß-catenin interaction or FoxM1 nuclear import
prevent ß-catenin nuclear accumulation in tumor cells. FoxM1-ß-catenin
interaction controls Wnt target gene expression, is required for glioma
formation, and represents a mechanism for canonical Wnt signaling during
tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3199318
PMID: 22014570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Cancer Cell. 2011 Oct 18;20(4):415-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.10.003.

Location, location, location: FoxM1 mediates ß-catenin nuclear translocation and 
promotes glioma tumorigenesis.

Bowman A(1), Nusse R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Lorry I.
Lokey Stem Cell Research Building, Stanford University, School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305-5458, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2011 Oct 18;20(4):427-42.

Genetic alterations in the Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF-signaling pathway are commonly found
in human tumors, but not in glioblastomas. In this issue of Cancer Cell, Zhang
et al. report that FoxM1 mediates ß-catenin nuclear translocation in
glioblastoma, suggesting a novel mechanism for glioblastoma progression in the
absence of conventional Wnt/ß-catenin pathway activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22014565  [PubMed]


497. Hepatology. 2012 Mar;55(3):833-45. doi: 10.1002/hep.24736. Epub 2011 Dec 19.

AKT (v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog 1) and N-Ras (neuroblastoma ras 
viral oncogene homolog) coactivation in the mouse liver promotes rapid
carcinogenesis by way of mTOR (mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1), FOXM1
(forkhead box M1)/SKP2, and c-Myc pathways.

Ho C(1), Wang C, Mattu S, Destefanis G, Ladu S, Delogu S, Armbruster J, Fan L,
Lee SA, Jiang L, Dombrowski F, Evert M, Chen X, Calvisi DF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Activation of v-akt murine thymoma viral oncogene homolog (AKT) and Ras pathways 
is often implicated in carcinogenesis. However, the oncogenic cooperation between
these two cascades in relationship to hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development 
remains undetermined. To investigate this issue, we generated a mouse model
characterized by combined overexpression of activated forms of AKT and
neuroblastoma Ras viral oncogene homolog (N-Ras) protooncogenes in the liver by
way of hydrodynamic gene transfer. The molecular mechanisms underlying crosstalk 
between AKT and N-Ras were assessed in the mouse model and further evaluated in
human and murine HCC cell lines. We found that coexpression of AKT and N-Ras
resulted in a dramatic acceleration of liver tumor development when compared with
mice overexpressing AKT alone, whereas N-Ras alone did not lead to tumor
formation. At the cellular level, concomitant up-regulation of AKT and N-Ras
resulted in increased proliferation and microvascularization when compared with
AKT-injected mice. Mechanistic studies suggested that accelerated
hepatocarcinogenesis driven by AKT and N-Ras resulted from a strong activation of
mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1). Furthermore, elevated
expression of FOXM1/SKP2 and c-Myc also contributed to rapid tumor growth in
AKT/Ras mice, yet by way of mTORC1-independent mechanisms. The biological effects
of coactivation of AKT and N-Ras were then recapitulated in vitro using HCC cell 
lines, which supports the functional significance of mTORC1, FOXM1/SKP2, and
c-Myc signaling cascades in mediating AKT and N-Ras-induced liver tumor
development.CONCLUSION: Our data demonstrate the in vivo crosstalk between the
AKT and Ras pathways in promoting liver tumor development, and the pivotal role
of mTORC1-dependent and independent pathways in mediating AKT and Ras induced
hepatocarcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3269553
PMID: 21993994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Biol Chem. 2011 Dec 2;286(48):41425-33. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.270843. Epub 2011
Oct 6.

Nucleophosmin interacts with FOXM1 and modulates the level and localization of
FOXM1 in human cancer cells.

Bhat UG(1), Jagadeeswaran R, Halasi M, Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Using mass spectrometric analysis we found that oncogenic transcription factor
FOXM1 that is overexpressed in a majority of human cancers interacts with
multifunctional protein NPM, which is also overexpressed in a variety of human
tumors. Coimmunoprecipitation and glutathione S-transferase pull-down experiments
demonstrated that NPM forms a complex with FOXM1 and also identified the regions 
responsible for their interaction. Immunofluorescence microscopy confirmed the
interaction between FOXM1 and NPM in cancer and immortal cells. Furthermore,
knockdown of NPM in immortal and cancer cells led to significant down-regulation 
of FOXM1 similar to its levels in normal cells, suggesting that NPM might
modulate FOXM1 level. In addition, in OCI/AML3 leukemia cells where mutant NPM is
localized in the cytoplasm we found that typically nuclear FOXM1 was
predominantly co-localized with NPM in the cytoplasm, while NPM knockdown led to 
the disappearance of FOXM1 from the cytoplasm, suggesting that NPM may also
determine intracellular localization of FOXM1. Knockdown of FOXM1 or NPM in MIA
PaCa-2 pancreatic cancer cells inhibited anchorage-dependent and independent
growth in cell culture, and tumor growth in nude mice. In addition,
over-expression of FOXM1 reversed the effect of NPM knockdown in vitro. Our data 
suggest that in cancer cells NPM interacts with FOXM1 and their interaction is
required for sustaining the level and localization of FOXM1. Targeting the
interaction between FOXM1 and NPM by peptides or small molecules may represent a 
novel therapeutic strategy against cancer.

PMCID: PMC3308854
PMID: 21979956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Jan;1819(1):28-37. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2011.09.004. 
Epub 2011 Sep 29.

FOXM1: From cancer initiation to progression and treatment.

Koo CY(1), Muir KW, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital Campus, London W12 0NN, UK.

The Forkhead box protein M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor is a regulator of myriad
biological processes, including cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, cell 
differentiation, DNA damage repair, tissue homeostasis, angiogenesis and
apoptosis. Elevated FOXM1 expression is found in cancers of the liver, prostate, 
brain, breast, lung, colon, pancreas, skin, cervix, ovary, mouth, blood and
nervous system, suggesting it has an integral role in tumorigenesis. Recent
research findings also place FOXM1 at the centre of cancer progression and drug
sensitivity. In this review the involvement of FOXM1 in various aspects of
cancer, in particular its role and regulation within the context of cancer
initiation, progression, and cancer drug response, will be summarised and
discussed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21978825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. World J Surg. 2012 Jan;36(1):90-7. doi: 10.1007/s00268-011-1302-5.

Cytoplasmic Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
significantly correlates with pathological disease stage.

Hui MK(1), Chan KW, Luk JM, Lee NP, Chung Y, Cheung LC, Srivastava G, Tsao SW,
Tang JC, Law S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Esophageal cancer is a deadly cancer with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma
(ESCC) as the major type. Until now there has been a lack of reliable prognostic 
markers for this malignancy. This study aims to investigate the clinical
correlation between Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1)and patients' parameters in
ESCC.METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was performed to investigate the expression
and localization of FoxM1 in 64ESCC tissues and 10 nontumor esophageal tissues
randomly selected from 64 patients before these data were used for clinical
correlations.
RESULTS: Cytoplasmic and nuclear expressions of FoxM1 were found in 63 and 16 of 
the 64 ESCC tissues, respectively.Low cytoplasmic expression of FoxM1 was
correlated with early pathological stage in ESCC (P = 0.018),while patients with 
nuclear FoxM1 were younger in age than those without nuclear expression
(P\0.001).Upregulation of FoxM1 mRNA was found in five ESCCcell lines (HKESC-1,
HKESC-2, HKESC-3, HKESC-4,and SLMT-1) when compared to non-neoplastic esophageal 
squamous cell line NE-1 using quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR).
Except for HKESC-3, all studied ESCC cell lines demonstrated a high expression of
FoxM1 protein using immunoblot. A high mRNA level of FoxM1 was observed in all of
the ESCC tissues examined when compared to their adjacent nontumor tissues using 
qPCR.
CONCLUSION: Cytoplasmic FoxM1 was correlated with pathological stage and might be
a biomarker for advanced ESCC.

PMCID: PMC3243851
PMID: 21976009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Anticancer Res. 2011 Oct;31(10):3289-99.

Polo-like kinase 1 inhibition as a new therapeutic modality in therapy of
cholangiocarcinoma.

Thrum S(1), Lorenz J, Mössner J, Wiedmann M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Rheumatology, University of Leipzig, Leipzig,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Cholangiocarcinoma (CC) is highly resistant to chemotherapy and
radiation, and is, therefore, difficult to cure. Polo-like kinases (Plks) are
increasingly recognized as key regulators of mitosis, meiosis and cytokinesis.
Alterations in PLK1- expression have been brought into relation with
tumorigenesis, thus rendering PLK1 suppression an interesting target for tumor
therapy. BI 2536, the first compound of the chemical class of
dihydropteridinones, is a highly selective and potent inhibitor of PLK1.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Retardation of cell proliferation by BI 2536 was tested in
14 CC cell lines by cell viability assay. Moreover, molecular activity of BI 2536
was investigated by Western blot, flow cytometry and real time- polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR). Apposition of gemcitabine, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and
insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor (IGF-1R) retardant NVP-AEW541 was also
examined.
RESULTS: BI 2536 subdued proliferation in all CC cell lines, however, reaction
was stronger in gallbladder carcinoma. Therapy with BI 2536 did not result in a
significant change in phosphorylation of histone H3, AKT, and p42/44. However,
exposure of cells to this compound caused arrest at the G(2)/M-checkpoint and a
surge in apoptosis. Moreover, PLK1 and FOXM1 were concurrently present in all
cell lines, proposing a role for their involvement. Use of a mixture of BI 2536
with 5-FU or NVP-AEW541 resulted in synergism, while a mixture with gemcitabine
resulted in additive activity.
CONCLUSION: These experiments indicate that BI 2536 is effective against CC and
increases the potency of 5-FU and NVP-AEW541.

PMID: 21965739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Endocrinology. 2011 Dec;152(12):4589-600. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1462. Epub 2011
Sep 27.

Loss of Foxd3 results in decreased ß-cell proliferation and glucose intolerance
during pregnancy.

Plank JL(1), Frist AY, LeGrone AW, Magnuson MA, Labosky PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0494, USA.

A complete molecular understanding of ß-cell mass expansion will be useful for
the improvement of therapies to treat diabetic patients. During normal periods of
metabolic challenges, such as pregnancy, ß-cells proliferate, or self-renew, to
meet the new physiological demands. The transcription factor Forkhead box D3
(Foxd3) is required for maintenance and self-renewal of several diverse
progenitor cell lineages, and Foxd3 is expressed in the pancreatic primordium
beginning at 10.5 d postcoitum, becoming localized predominantly to ß-cells after
birth. Here, we show that mice carrying a pancreas-specific deletion of Foxd3
have impaired glucose tolerance, decreased ß-cell mass, decreased ß-cell
proliferation, and decreased ß-cell size during pregnancy. In addition, several
genes known to regulate proliferation, Foxm1, Skp2, Ezh2, Akt2, and Cdkn1a, are
misregulated in islets isolated from these Foxd3 mutant mice. Together, these
data place Foxd3 upstream of several pathways critical for ß-cell mass expansion 
in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3230055
PMID: 21952247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Cell Cycle. 2011 Oct 1;10(19):3269-73. doi: 10.4161/cc.10.19.17735. Epub 2011 Oct
1.

FoxM1 knockdown sensitizes human cancer cells to proteasome inhibitor-induced
apoptosis but not to autophagy.

Pandit B(1), Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Apoptosis has been widely accepted as the primary mechanism of drug-induced cell 
death. Recently, a second type of cell death pathway has been demonstrated:
autophagy, also called programmed type II cell death. Autophagy is a highly
regulated process, by which selected components of a cell are degraded. It
primarily functions as a cell survival mechanism under stress. However,
persistent stress can also promote extensive autophagy leading to cell death.
Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1), an oncogenic transcription factor that is abundantly
expressed in a wide range of human cancers. Here we evaluated the role of FoxM1
in sensitivity of human cancer cells to proteasome inhibitor-induced apoptosis
and autophagy. We found that FoxM1 knockdown sensitized the human cancer cells to
apoptotic cell death induced by proteasome inhibitors, such as, MG132, bortezomib
and thiostrepton, while it did not affect the levels of autophagy following
treatment with these drugs.

© 2011 Landes Bioscience

PMCID: PMC3233624
PMID: 21941087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Nov 1;17(21):6791-801. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-1214. 
Epub 2011 Sep 14.

Expression of FoxM1 is required for the proliferation of medulloblastoma cells
and indicates worse survival of patients.

Priller M(1), Pöschl J, Abrão L, von Bueren AO, Cho YJ, Rutkowski S, Kretzschmar 
HA, Schüller U.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuropathology, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.

PURPOSE: The transcription factor Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is a key regulator of
cell-cycle progression. It is involved in the development of multiple organs, and
we have previously reported on its important role for the mitotic entry of
cerebellar granule neuron precursors. Constitutive expression of FoxM1 is
required for the growth of multiple cancer types. This study aimed to determine
its role in medulloblastoma, the most frequent malignant brain tumor in childhood
that can derive from cerebellar granule neuron precursors.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We evaluated the expression of FoxM1 together with its
prognostic value in two independent series of human medulloblastoma samples using
immunohistochemistry (n = 43) and gene expression arrays (n = 193). The
functional impact of FoxM1 expression was characterized by knockdown experiments 
in four human medulloblastoma cell lines, and the thiazole antibiotic siomycin A 
was tested to downregulate FoxM1 and inhibit tumor cell growth.
RESULTS: FoxM1 was highly expressed in all subtypes of medulloblastoma.
Importantly, expression levels of FoxM1 significantly correlated with unfavorable
clinical outcome in univariate analysis (P = 0.0005), and FoxM1 was identified as
an independent prognostic marker by multivariate analysis (P = 0.037). Knockdown 
of FoxM1 in medulloblastoma cell lines resulted in a significant decrease of cell
viability which was caused by a failure in mitotic spindle formation and
caspase-dependent mitotic catastrophe. Siomycin A significantly inhibited the
expression of FoxM1 and the growth of medulloblastoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: FoxM1 may be used as an additional prognostic marker and may
represent a potential novel target to treat patients suffering from
medulloblastoma.

©2011 AACR

PMID: 21918172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 21;109(8):2802-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1108781108. Epub 2011 Sep 9.

Integrated molecular profiles of invasive breast tumors and ductal carcinoma in
situ (DCIS) reveal differential vascular and interleukin signaling.

Kristensen VN(1), Vaske CJ, Ursini-Siegel J, Van Loo P, Nordgard SH,
Sachidanandam R, Sørlie T, Wärnberg F, Haakensen VD, Helland Å, Naume B, Perou
CM, Haussler D, Troyanskaya OG, Børresen-Dale AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, and Cancer Clinic, Oslo
University Hospital Radiumhospitalet, 0310 Oslo, Norway.

We use an integrated approach to understand breast cancer heterogeneity by
modeling mRNA, copy number alterations, microRNAs, and methylation in a pathway
context utilizing the pathway recognition algorithm using data integration on
genomic models (PARADIGM). We demonstrate that combining mRNA expression and DNA 
copy number classified the patients in groups that provide the best predictive
value with respect to prognosis and identified key molecular and stromal
signatures. A chronic inflammatory signature, which promotes the development
and/or progression of various epithelial tumors, is uniformly present in all
breast cancers. We further demonstrate that within the adaptive immune lineage,
the strongest predictor of good outcome is the acquisition of a gene signature
that favors a high T-helper 1 (Th1)/cytotoxic T-lymphocyte response at the
expense of Th2-driven humoral immunity. Patients who have breast cancer with a
basal HER2-negative molecular profile (PDGM2) are characterized by high
expression of protumorigenic Th2/humoral-related genes (24-38%) and a low Th1/Th2
ratio. The luminal molecular subtypes are again differentiated by low or high
FOXM1 and ERBB4 signaling. We show that the interleukin signaling profiles
observed in invasive cancers are absent or weakly expressed in healthy tissue but
already prominent in ductal carcinoma in situ, together with ECM and cell-cell
adhesion regulating pathways. The most prominent difference between low and high 
mammographic density in healthy breast tissue by PARADIGM was that of STAT4
signaling. In conclusion, by means of a pathway-based modeling methodology
(PARADIGM) integrating different layers of molecular data from whole-tumor
samples, we demonstrate that we can stratify immune signatures that predict
patient survival.

PMCID: PMC3286992
PMID: 21908711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011 Dec;10(12):2287-97. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0536.
Epub 2011 Sep 8.

Micelle-encapsulated thiostrepton as an effective nanomedicine for inhibiting
tumor growth and for suppressing FOXM1 in human xenografts.

Wang M(1), Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, 840, S. Wood St.,
Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

The thiazole antiobiotic, thiostrepton, has been found to induce cell death in
cancer cells through proteasome inhibition. As a proteasome inhibitor,
thiostrepton has also been shown to suppress the expression of FOXM1, the
oncogenic forkhead transcription factor overexpressed in cancer cells. In this
study, we explored the potential in vivo anticancer properties of thiostrepton,
delivered through nanoparticle encapsulation to xenograft models of breast and
liver cancer. We encapsulated thiostrepton into micelles assembled from
amphiphilic lipid-PEG (polyethylene glycol) molecules, where thiostrepton is
solubilized within the inner lipid compartment of the micelle. Upon assembly,
hydrophobic thiostrepton molecules are solubilized into the lipid component of
the micelle shell, formed through the self-assembly of amphipilic lipid-PEG
molecules. Maximum accumulation of micelle-thiostrepton nanoparticles (100 nm in 
diameter, -16 mV in zeta potential) into tumors was found at 4 hours
postadministration and was retained for at least 24 hours. Upon continuous
treatment, we found that nanoparticle-encapsulated thiostrepton reduced tumor
growth rates of MDA-MB-231 and HepG2 cancer xenografts. Furthermore, we show for 
the first time the in vivo suppression of the oncogenic FOXM1 after treatment
with proteasome inhibitors. Immunoblotting and immunohistochemical staining also 
showed increased apoptosis in the treated tumors, as indicated by cleaved
caspase-3 expression. Our data suggest that the thiazole antibiotic/proteasome
inhibitor thiostrepton, when formulated into nanoparticles, may be highly suited 
as a nanomedicine for treating human cancer.

PMCID: PMC3237785
PMID: 21903609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Hepatol. 2012 Feb;56(2):389-96. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2011.08.008. Epub 2011 Aug 
31.

MicroRNA-135a contributes to the development of portal vein tumor thrombus by
promoting metastasis in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Liu S(1), Guo W, Shi J, Li N, Yu X, Xue J, Fu X, Chu K, Lu C, Zhao J, Xie D, Wu
M, Cheng S, Liu S.

Author information: 
(1)Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Portal vein tumor thrombus (PVTT) has previously been
demonstrated to correlate with poor prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Approximately 50-80% of HCC is accompanied by portal or hepatic vein invasion.
The underlying mechanisms of PVTT development remain unclear. This study aimed to
elucidate the role of miR-135a in PVTT tumorigenesis.
METHODS: In the present study, we investigated the expression of microRNAs and
mRNAs in PVTT tissues using advanced microRNA and cDNA microarray techniques.
MicroRNA (miR)-135a was noted to be highly over-expressed in PVTT and the cell
line CSQT-2 and was selected for further study. We characterized the function of 
miR-135a in vitro and in vivo. We also analyzed the clinical relevance of
miR-135a in relation to the prognosis and survival of HCC patients with PVTT.
RESULTS: Our analyses found that the miRNA and mRNA expression profiles of PVTT
were distinct from the parenchyma tumor. Overexpression of miR-135a favors
invasive and metastatic behavior in vitro. Furthermore, in a CSQT-2 orthotopic
transplantation nude mouse model, blockade of miR-135a significantly reduced PVTT
incidence. We also found that miR-135a was transcribed by forkhead box M1
(FOXM1), and metastasis suppressor 1 (MTSS1) was identified as the direct and
functional target of miR-135a. Additionally, the cohort analysis revealed the
relevance of miR-135a with respect to the prognosis and survival of HCC patients 
with PVTT.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest an important role for miR-135a in promoting PVTT
tumorigenesis and indicate the potential application of miR-135a in PVTT therapy.

Copyright © 2011 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21888875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 23;413(2):230-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.08.075. Epub 2011 Aug 22.

The transcription factor FOXM1c is activated by protein kinase CK2, protein
kinase A (PKA), c-Src and Raf-1.

Wierstra I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Medical School Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 
D-30625 Hannover, Germany. iwiwiwi@web.de

The transcription factor FOXM1c possesses a very strong C-terminal TAD
(transactivation domain), but full-length FOXM1c is only a weak transactivator
because the TAD is completely inhibited by the auto-inhibitory N-terminus. The
N-terminus blocks the TAD by directly binding to the TAD. Accordingly, FOXM1c
deletion mutants without N-terminus are strong transactivators. Therefore, the
question arises whether signals exist, which activate full-length FOXM1c by
releasing the FOXM1c-TAD from its inhibition by the N-terminus. Indeed,
full-length FOXM1c is strongly activated by protein kinase CK2 and PKA (protein
kinase A). Both CK2 and PKA do not activate a FOXM1c deletion mutant without
N-terminus demonstrating that the activation of FOXM1c by CK2 and PKA depends on 
the presence of the N-terminus. Consequently, CK2 and PKA activate FOXM1c by
alleviating the inhibition of FOXM1c by its N-terminus. The presence of two
potential CK2 phosphorylation sites and two potential PKA phosphorylation sites
in the N-terminus of FOXM1c suggests that CK2 and PKA may activate FOXM1c through
phosphorylation of the FOXM1c N-terminus. Thus, CK2 and PKA strongly activate
full-length FOXM1c because they alleviate the repression of FOXM1c by its own
auto-inhibitory N-terminus. Also c-Src activates full-length FOXM1c by relieving 
the inhibition of FOXM1c by its N-terminus. In contrast, Raf-1 activates FOXM1c
independently of the FOXM1c N-terminus. In summary, this study shows for the
first time that FOXM1c is activated by the four kinases CK2, PKA, c-Src and
Raf-1.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21875579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2011 Jun;33(6):426-30.

[Correlation between expression of forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) and
clinicopathological features and prognosis in patients with non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC)].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu YQ(1), Guo RH, Liu LK, Gao W, Zhu CJ, Wei J, Shu YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) and its
correlation with clinicopathological features and prognosis in patients with
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC).
METHODS: The expression of FOXM1 in 68 cases of NSCLC was detected by
immunohistochemistry. The FOXM1 expression in 6 tumor tissues (3 cases with
negative and 3 cases with positive expression of FOXM1) was analyzed by Western
blotting to confirm the immunohistochemical results. The correlation of the
expression of FOXM1 with clinicopathalogical features and overall survival of the
NSCLC patients was analyzed.
RESULTS: The expression of FOXM1 protein was detected in the nuclei or cytoplasms
of the tumor cells. The positive expression rate of FOXM1 was 36.8% (25/68).
Western blotting confirmed the immunohistochemical results. The expression level 
of FOXM1 in advanced stage cancer was significantly higher than that in early
stage NSCLC (P = 0.001). The median OS was 23.0 months in patients with negative 
expression of FOXM1 and 13.0 months in those with positive expression (P =
0.001). Univariate analysis revealed that histological grade, lymph nodes status,
TNM stage and FOXM1 expression were significantly associated with prognosis in
the NSCLC patients (P < 0.05). The Cox multivariate analysis demonstrated that
lymph nodes status, TNM stage and FOXM1 expression were independent poor
prognostic factors (P < 0.05).
CONCLUSION: The expression status of FOXM1 in NSCLC is an independent prognostic 
factor and negatively correlated with prognosis.

PMID: 21875482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Nat Chem. 2011 Aug 21;3(9):725-31. doi: 10.1038/nchem.1114.

The transcription factor FOXM1 is a cellular target of the natural product
thiostrepton.

Hegde NS(1), Sanders DA, Rodriguez R, Balasubramanian S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1EW, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Chem. 2011 Oct;3(10):829.

Transcription factors are proteins that bind specifically to defined DNA
sequences to promote gene expression. Targeting transcription factors with small 
molecules to modulate the expression of certain genes has been notoriously
difficult to achieve. The natural product thiostrepton is known to reduce the
transcriptional activity of FOXM1, a transcription factor involved in
tumorigenesis and cancer progression. Herein we demonstrate that thiostrepton
interacts directly with FOXM1 protein in the human breast cancer cells MCF-7.
Biophysical analyses of the thiostrepton-FOXM1 interaction provide additional
insights on the molecular mode of action of thiostrepton. In cellular
experiments, we show that thiostrepton can inhibit the binding of FOXM1 to
genomic target sites. These findings illustrate the potential druggability of
transcription factors and provide a molecular basis for targeting the FOXM1
family with small molecules.

PMID: 21860463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Oncogene. 2012 Apr 5;31(14):1845-58. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.368. Epub 2011 Aug 22.

FOXO3a represses VEGF expression through FOXM1-dependent and -independent
mechanisms in breast cancer.

Karadedou CT(1), Gomes AR, Chen J, Petkovic M, Ho KK, Zwolinska AK, Feltes A,
Wong SY, Chan KY, Cheung YN, Tsang JW, Brosens JJ, Khoo US, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Cancer Research-UK Labs, Imperial College
London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, UK.

Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) has a central role in breast cancer
development and progression, but the mechanisms that control its expression are
poorly understood. Breast cancer tissue microarrays revealed an inverse
correlation between the Forkhead transcription factor Forkhead box class O
(FOXO)3a and VEGF expression. Using the lapatinib-sensitive breast cancer cell
lines BT474 and SKBR3 as model systems, we tested the possibility that VEGF
expression is negatively regulated by FOXO3a. Lapatinib treatment of BT474 or
SKBR3 cells resulted in nuclear translocation and activation of FOXO3a, followed 
by a reduction in VEGF expression. Transient transfection and inducible
expression experiments showed that FOXO3a represses the proximal VEGF promoter,
whereas another Forkhead member, FOXM1, induces VEGF expression. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation and oligonucleotide pull-down assays showed that both FOXO3a 
and FOXM1 bind a consensus Forkhead response element (FHRE) in the VEGF promoter.
Upon lapatinib stimulation, activated FOXO3a displaces FOXM1 bound to the FHRE
before recruiting histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) to the promoter, leading to
decreased histones H3 and H4 acetylation, and concomitant transcriptional
inhibition of VEGF. These results show that FOXO3a-dependent repression of target
genes in breast cancer cells, such as VEGF, involves competitive displacement of 
DNA-bound FOXM1 and active recruitment of transcriptional repressor complexes.

PMCID: PMC3232453
PMID: 21860419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e23790. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0023790. Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Aberrant activation of ERK/FOXM1 signaling cascade triggers the cell
migration/invasion in ovarian cancer cells.

Lok GT(1), Chan DW, Liu VW, Hui WW, Leung TH, Yao KM, Ngan HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China.

Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is a proliferation-associated transcription factor
essential for cell cycle progression. Numerous studies have documented that FOXM1
has multiple functions in tumorigenesis and its elevated levels are frequently
associated with cancer progression. Here, we characterized the role of ERK/FOXM1 
signaling in mediating the metastatic potential of ovarian cancer cells.
Immunohistochemical (IHC), immunoblotting and semi-quantitative RT-PCR analyses
found that both phospho-ERK and FOXM1 were frequently upregulated in ovarian
cancers. Intriguingly, the overexpressed phospho-ERK (p<0.001) and FOXM1
(p<0.001) were significantly correlated to high-grade ovarian tumors with
aggressive behavior such as metastasized lymph node (5 out of 6). Moreover, the
expressions of phospho-ERK and FOXM1 had significantly positive correlation
(p<0.001). Functionally, ectopic expression of FOXM1B remarkably enhanced cell
migration/invasion, while FOXM1C not only increased cell proliferation but also
promoted cell migration/invasion. Conversely, inhibition of FOXM1 expression by
either thiostrepton or U0126 could significantly impair FOXM1 mediated oncogenic 
capacities. However, the down-regulation of FOXM1 by either thiostrepton or U0126
required the presence of p53 in ovarian cancer cells. Collectively, our data
suggest that over-expression of FOXM1 might stem from the constitutively active
ERK which confers the metastatic capabilities to ovarian cancer cells. The
impairment of metastatic potential of cancer cells by FOXM1 inhibitors
underscores its therapeutic value in advanced ovarian tumors.

PMCID: PMC3157468
PMID: 21858223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e22566. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022566. Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Calcium prevents tumorigenesis in a mouse model of colorectal cancer.

Wang JL(1), Lin YW, Chen HM, Kong X, Xiong H, Shen N, Hong J, Fang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of
Medicine, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Institute of Digestive Disease, Shanghai,
China.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: Calcium has been proposed as a mediator of the
chemoprevention of colorectal cancer (CRC), but the comprehensive mechanism
underlying this preventive effect is not yet clear. Hence, we conducted this
study to evaluate the possible roles and mechanisms of calcium-mediated
prevention of CRC induced by 1,2-dimethylhydrazine (DMH) in mice.
METHODS: For gene expression analysis, 6 non-tumor colorectal tissues of mice
from the DMH + Calcium group and 3 samples each from the DMH and control groups
were hybridized on a 4×44 K Agilent whole genome oligo microarray, and selected
genes were validated by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Functional
analysis of the microarray data was performed using KEGG and Gene Ontology (GO)
analyses. Hub genes were identified using Pathway Studio software.
RESULTS: The tumor incidence rates in the DMH and DMH + Calcium groups were 90%
and 40%, respectively. Microarray gene expression analysis showed that S100a9,
Defa20, Mmp10, Mmp7, Ptgs2, and Ang2 were among the most downregulated genes,
whereas Per3, Tef, Rnf152, and Prdx6 were significantly upregulated in the DMH + 
Calcium group compared with the DMH group. Functional analysis showed that the
Wnt, cell cycle, and arachidonic acid pathways were significantly downregulated
in the DMH + Calcium group, and that the GO terms related to cell
differentiation, cell cycle, proliferation, cell death, adhesion, and cell
migration were significantly affected. Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) and nuclear factor
kappa-B (NF-<U+03BA>B) were considered as potent hub genes.
CONCLUSION: In the DMH-induced CRC mouse model, comprehensive mechanisms were
involved with complex gene expression alterations encompassing many altered
pathways and GO terms. However, how calcium regulates these events remains to be 
studied.

PMCID: PMC3157344
PMID: 21857934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Front Mol Neurosci. 2011 Jul 25;4:11. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2011.00011. eCollection 
2011.

The role of insulin-like growth factor-I in the physiopathology of hearing.

Murillo-Cuesta S(1), Rodríguez-de la Rosa L, Cediel R, Lassaletta L, Varela-Nieto
I.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Evaluación Neurofuncional no Invasiva, Instituto de
Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones
Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid Madrid, Spain.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) belongs to the family of polypeptides of
insulin, which play a central role in embryonic development and adult nervous
system homeostasis by endocrine, autocrine, and paracrine mechanisms. IGF-I is
fundamental for the regulation of cochlear development, growth, and
differentiation, and its mutations are associated with hearing loss in mice and
men. Low levels of IGF-I have been shown to correlate with different human
syndromes showing hearing loss and with presbyacusis. Animal models are
fundamental to understand the genetic, epigenetic, and environmental factors that
contribute to human hearing loss. In the mouse, IGF-I serum levels decrease with 
aging and there is a concomitant hearing loss and retinal degeneration. In the
Igf1(-/-) null mouse, hearing loss is due to neuronal loss, poor innervation of
the sensory hair cells, and age-related stria vascularis alterations. In the
inner ear, IGF-I actions are mediated by intracellular signaling networks, RAF,
AKT, and p38 MAPK protein kinases modulate the expression and activity of
transcription factors, as AP1, MEF2, FoxM1, and FoxP3, leading to the regulation 
of cell cycle and metabolism. Therapy with rhIGF-I has been approved in humans
for the treatment of poor linear growth and certain neurodegenerative diseases.
This review will discuss these findings and their implications in new IGF-I-based
treatments for the protection or repair of hearing loss.

PMCID: PMC3146045
PMID: 21845174  [PubMed]


15. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 23;286(38):33029-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.253724. Epub
2011 Aug 3.

Protein phosphatase 2A (B55a) prevents premature activation of forkhead
transcription factor FoxM1 by antagonizing cyclin A/cyclin-dependent
kinase-mediated phosphorylation.

Alvarez-Fernández M(1), Halim VA, Aprelia M, Laoukili J, Mohammed S, Medema RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology and Cancer Genomics Centre, UMC Utrecht,
Universiteitsweg 100, Stratenum 2.118, Utrecht 3584 CG, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 11;286(45):39674. Laoukili, Jamila [added].

The forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 controls expression of a large number of 
genes that are specifically expressed during the G(2) phase of the cell cycle.
Throughout most of the cell cycle, FoxM1 activity is restrained by an
autoinhibitory mechanism, involving a repressor domain present in the N-terminal 
part of the protein. Activation of FoxM1 in G(2) is achieved by Cyclin
A/Cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk)-mediated phosphorylation, which alleviates
autoinhibition by the N-terminal repressor domain. Here, we show that FoxM1
interacts with B55a, a regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase 2A (PP2A). B55a 
binds the catalytic subunit of PP2A, and this promotes dephosphorylation and
inactivation of FoxM1. Indeed, we find that overexpression of B55a results in
decreased FoxM1 activity. Inversely, depletion of B55a results in premature
activation of FoxM1. The activation of FoxM1 that is observed upon depletion of
B55a is fully dependent on Cyclin A/Cdk-mediated phosphorylation of FoxM1. Taken 
together, these data demonstrate that B55a acts to antagonize Cyclin
A/Cdk-dependent activation of FoxM1, to ensure that FoxM1 activity is restricted 
to the G(2) phase of the cell cycle.

PMCID: PMC3190881
PMID: 21813648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22217. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022217. Epub 2011 Jul 14.

Expression of Foxm1 transcription factor in cardiomyocytes is required for
myocardial development.

Bolte C(1), Zhang Y, Wang IC, Kalin TV, Molkentin JD, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America. Craig.Bolte@cchmc.org

Forkhead Box M1 (Foxm1) is a transcription factor essential for organ
morphogenesis and development of various cancers. Although complete deletion of
Foxm1 in Foxm1(-/-) mice caused embryonic lethality due to severe abnormalities
in multiple organ systems, requirements for Foxm1 in cardiomyocytes remain to be 
determined. This study was designed to elucidate the cardiomyocyte-autonomous
role of Foxm1 signaling in heart development. We generated a new mouse model in
which Foxm1 was specifically deleted from cardiomyocytes (Nkx2.5-Cre/Foxm1(fl/f) 
mice). Deletion of Foxm1 from cardiomyocytes was sufficient to disrupt heart
morphogenesis and induce embryonic lethality in late gestation.
Nkx2.5-Cre/Foxm1(fl/fl) hearts were dilated with thinning of the ventricular
walls and interventricular septum, as well as disorganization of the myocardium
which culminated in cardiac fibrosis and decreased capillary density.
Cardiomyocyte proliferation was diminished in Nkx2.5-Cre/Foxm1(fl/fl) hearts
owing to altered expression of multiple cell cycle regulatory genes, such as
Cdc25B, Cyclin B(1), Plk-1, nMyc and p21(cip1). In addition, Foxm1 deficient
hearts displayed reduced expression of CaMKIId, Hey2 and myocardin, which are
critical mediators of cardiac function and myocardial growth. Our results
indicate that Foxm1 expression in cardiomyocytes is critical for proper heart
development and required for cardiomyocyte proliferation and myocardial growth.

PMCID: PMC3136509
PMID: 21779394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Am J Pathol. 2011 Sep;179(3):1148-56. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.05.052. Epub
2011 Jul 16.

ERß1 represses FOXM1 expression through targeting ERa to control cell
proliferation in breast cancer.

Horimoto Y(1), Hartman J, Millour J, Pollock S, Olmos Y, Ho KK, Coombes RC,
Poutanen M, Mäkelä SI, El-Bahrawy M, Speirs V, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College, London, UK.

In this study, we investigated the effects of ectopic estrogen receptor (ER)ß1
expression in breast cancer cell lines and nude mice xenografts and observed that
ERß1 expression suppresses tumor growth and represses FOXM1 mRNA and protein
expression in ERa-positive but not ERa-negative breast cancer cells. Furthermore,
a significant inverse correlation exists between ERß1 and FOXM1 expression at
both protein and mRNA transcript levels in ERa-positive breast cancer patient
samples. Ectopic ERß1 expression resulted in decreased FOXM1 protein and mRNA
expression only in ERa-positive but not ERa-negative breast carcinoma cell lines,
suggesting that ERß1 represses ERa-dependent FOXM1 transcription. Reporter gene
assays showed that ERß1 represses FOXM1 transcription through an
estrogen-response element located within the proximal promoter region that is
also targeted by ERa. The direct binding of ERß1 to the FOXM1 promoter was
confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis, which also showed that
ectopic expression of ERß1 displaces ERa from the endogenous FOXM1 promoter.
Forced expression of ERß1 promoted growth suppression in MCF-7 cells, but the
anti-proliferative effects of ERß1 could be overridden by overexpression of
FOXM1, indicating that FOXM1 is an important downstream target of ERß1 signaling.
Together, these findings define a key anti-proliferative role for ERß1 in breast 
cancer development through negatively regulating FOXM1 expression.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3157253
PMID: 21763263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Nature. 2011 Jun 29;474(7353):609-15. doi: 10.1038/nature10166.

Integrated genomic analyses of ovarian carcinoma.

Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network.

Collaborators: Bell D, Berchuck A, Birrer M, Chien J, Cramer D, Dao F, Dhir R,
DiSaia P, Gabra H, Glenn P, Godwin A, Gross J, Hartmann L, Huang M, Huntsman D,
Iacocca M, Imielinski M, Kalloger S, Karlan B, Levine D, Mills G, Morrison C,
Mutch D, Olvera N, Orsulic S, Park K, Petrelli N, Rabeno B, Rader J, Sikic B,
Smith-McCune K, Sood A, Bowtell D, Penny R, Testa J, Chang K, Dinh H, Drummond J,
Fowler G, Gunaratne P, Hawes A, Kovar C, Lewis L, Morgan M, Newsham I, Santibanez
J, Reid J, Trevino L, Wu Y-, Wang M, Muzny D, Wheeler D, Gibbs R, Getz G,
Lawrence M, Cibulskis K, Sivachenko A, Sougnez C, Voet D, Wilkinson J, Bloom T,
Ardlie K, Fennell T, Baldwin J, Gabriel S, Lander E, Ding LL, Fulton R, Koboldt
D, McLellan M, Wylie T, Walker J, O'Laughlin M, Dooling D, Fulton L, Abbott R,
Dees N, Zhang Q, Kandoth C, Wendl M, Schierding W, Shen D, Harris C, Schmidt H,
Kalicki J, Delehaunty K, Fronick C, Demeter R, Cook L, Wallis J, Lin L, Magrini
V, Hodges J, Eldred J, Smith S, Pohl C, Vandin F, Raphael B, Weinstock G, Mardis 
E, Wilson R, Meyerson M, Winckler W, Getz G, Verhaak R, Carter S, Mermel C,
Saksena G, Nguyen H, Onofrio R, Lawrence M, Hubbard D, Gupta S, Crenshaw A, Ramos
A, Ardlie K, Chin L, Protopopov A, Zhang J, Kim T, Perna I, Xiao Y, Zhang H, Ren 
G, Sathiamoorthy N, Park R, Lee E, Park P, Kucherlapati R, Absher M, Waite L,
Sherlock G, Brooks J, Li J, Xu J, Myers R, Laird PW, Cope L, Herman J, Shen H,
Weisenberger D, Noushmehr H, Pan F, Triche T Jr, Berman B, Van Den Berg D,
Buckley J, Baylin S, Spellman P, Purdom E, Neuvial P, Bengtsson H, Jakkula L,
Durinck S, Han J, Dorton S, Marr H, Choi Y, Wang V, Wang N, Ngai J, Conboy J,
Parvin B, Feiler H, Speed T, Gray J, Levine A, Socci N, Liang Y, Taylor B,
Schultz N, Borsu L, Lash A, Brennan C, Viale A, Sander C, Ladanyi M, Hoadley K,
Meng S, Du Y, Shi Y, Li L, Turman Y, Zang D, Helms E, Balu S, Zhou X, Wu J, Topal
M, Hayes D, Perou C, Getz G, Voet D, Saksena G, Zhang J, Zhang H, Wu C, Shukla S,
Cibulskis K, Lawrence M, Sivachenko A, Jing R, Park R, Liu Y, Park P, Noble M,
Chin L, Carter H, Kim D, Karchin R, Spellman P, Purdom E, Neuvial P, Bengtsson H,
Durinck S, Han J, Korkola J, Heiser L, Cho R, Hu Z, Parvin B, Speed T, Gray J,
Schultz N, Cerami E, Taylor B, Olshen A, Reva B, Antipin Y, Shen R, Mankoo P,
Sheridan R, Ciriello G, Chang W, Bernanke J, Borsu L, Levine D, Ladanyi M, Sander
C, Haussler D, Benz C, Stuart J, Benz S, Sanborn J, Vaske C, Zhu J, Szeto C,
Scott G, Yau C, Hoadley K, Du Y, Balu S, Hayes D, Perou C, Wilkerson M, Zhang N, 
Akbani R, Baggerly K, Yung W, Mills G, Weinstein J, Penny R, Shelton T, Grimm D, 
Hatfield M, Morris S, Yena P, Rhodes P, Sherman M, Paulauskis J, Millis S, Kahn
A, Greene J, Sfeir R, Jensen M, Chen J, Whitmore J, Alonso S, Jordan J, Chu A,
Zhang J, Barker A, Compton C, Eley G, Ferguson M, Fielding P, Gerhard D, Myles R,
Schaefer C, Mills Shaw K, Vaught J, Vockley J, Good P, Guyer M, Ozenberger B,
Peterson J, Thomson E.

Erratum in
    Nature. 2012 Oct 11;490(7419):298.

A catalogue of molecular aberrations that cause ovarian cancer is critical for
developing and deploying therapies that will improve patients' lives. The Cancer 
Genome Atlas project has analysed messenger RNA expression, microRNA expression, 
promoter methylation and DNA copy number in 489 high-grade serous ovarian
adenocarcinomas and the DNA sequences of exons from coding genes in 316 of these 
tumours. Here we report that high-grade serous ovarian cancer is characterized by
TP53 mutations in almost all tumours (96%); low prevalence but statistically
recurrent somatic mutations in nine further genes including NF1, BRCA1, BRCA2,
RB1 and CDK12; 113 significant focal DNA copy number aberrations; and promoter
methylation events involving 168 genes. Analyses delineated four ovarian cancer
transcriptional subtypes, three microRNA subtypes, four promoter methylation
subtypes and a transcriptional signature associated with survival duration, and
shed new light on the impact that tumours with BRCA1/2 (BRCA1 or BRCA2) and CCNE1
aberrations have on survival. Pathway analyses suggested that homologous
recombination is defective in about half of the tumours analysed, and that NOTCH 
and FOXM1 signalling are involved in serous ovarian cancer pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC3163504
PMID: 21720365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 1;71(13):4329-33. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0640. Epub
2011 Jun 28.

FoxM1: a master regulator of tumor metastasis.

Raychaudhuri P(1), Park HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 606077170, USA. pradip@uic.edu

The FoxM1 transcription factor gene is overexpressed in cancer. Its expression is
stimulated by oncogenic signaling pathways and reactive oxygen species. It is
also a target of regulation by the tumor suppressor genes. The transcriptional
activity of FoxM1 depends upon activation by cyclin and cyclin-dependent kinases 
as well as Plk1. FoxM1 stimulates expression of several genes involved in the
cell cycle progression. Moreover, it supports proliferation of tumor cells by
stimulating expression of the antioxidant genes and reducing oxidative stress. A 
new study provides evidence that FoxM1, in the absence of its inhibitor, the
tumor suppressor Arf, drives metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). It
induces an epithelial-mesenchymal-like transition phenotype in HCC cells,
increases cell migration, and induces premetastatic niche at the distal organ of 
metastasis. FoxM1 directly activates genes involved in multiple steps of
metastasis. In this review, we discuss the evidence for a master regulatory role 
of FoxM1 in tumor metastasis.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3129416
PMID: 21712406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Exp Med. 2011 Jul 4;208(7):1473-84. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102041. Epub 2011 Jun
27.

FoxM1 mediates the progenitor function of type II epithelial cells in repairing
alveolar injury induced by Pseudomonas aeruginosa.

Liu Y(1), Sadikot RT, Adami GR, Kalinichenko VV, Pendyala S, Natarajan V, Zhao
YY, Malik AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. yuruliu@uic.edu

The alveolar epithelium is composed of the flat type I cells comprising 95% of
the gas-exchange surface area and cuboidal type II cells comprising the rest.
Type II cells are described as facultative progenitor cells based on their
ability to proliferate and trans-differentiate into type I cells. In this study, 
we observed that pneumonia induced by intratracheal instillation of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa (PA) in mice increased the expression of the forkhead transcription
factor FoxM1 in type II cells coincidentally with the induction of alveolar
epithelial barrier repair. FoxM1 was preferentially expressed in the Sca-1(+)
subpopulation of progenitor type II cells. In mice lacking FoxM1 specifically in 
type II cells, type II cells showed decreased proliferation and impaired
trans-differentiation into type I cells. Lungs of these mice also displayed
defective alveolar barrier repair after injury. Expression of FoxM1 in the
knockout mouse lungs partially rescued the defective trans-differentiation
phenotype. Thus, expression of FoxM1 in type II cells is essential for their
proliferation and transition into type I cells and for restoring alveolar barrier
homeostasis after PA-induced lung injury.

PMCID: PMC3135362
PMID: 21708928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Breast Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 29;13(3):R70. doi: 10.1186/bcr2913.

Reversal of endocrine resistance in breast cancer: interrelationships among
14-3-3<U+03B6>, FOXM1, and a gene signature associated with mitosis.

Bergamaschi A(1), Christensen BL, Katzenellenbogen BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Illinois and
College of Medicine at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Despite the benefits of estrogen receptor (ER)-targeted endocrine
therapies in breast cancer, many tumors develop resistance. 14-3-3 <U+03B6>/YWHAZ, a
member of the 14-3-3 family of conserved proteins, is over-expressed in several
types of cancer, and our previous work showed that high expression of 14-3-3<U+03B6> in 
ER-positive breast cancers was associated with a poor clinical outcome for women 
on tamoxifen. Therefore, we now probe the role of 14-3-3<U+03B6> in endocrine
resistance, and we examine the functional dimensions and molecular basis that
underlie 14-3-3<U+03B6> activities.
METHODS: From analyses of four independent breast cancer microarray datasets from
nearly 400 women, we characterized a gene signature that correlated strongly with
high expression of 14-3-3<U+03B6> in breast tumors and examined its association with
breast cancer molecular subtypes and clinical-pathological features. We
investigated the effects of altering 14-3-3<U+03B6> levels in ER-positive, endocrine
sensitive and resistant breast cancer cells on the regulation of 14-3-3<U+03B6>
signature genes, and on cellular signaling pathways and cell phenotypic
properties.
RESULTS: The gene signature associated with high 14-3-3<U+03B6> levels in breast tumors 
encompassed many with functions in mitosis and cytokinesis, including aurora
kinase-B, polo-like kinase-1, CDC25B, and BIRC5/survivin. The gene signature
correlated with early recurrence and risk of metastasis, and was found
predominantly in luminal B breast cancers, the more aggressive ER-positive
molecular subtype. The expression of the signature genes was significantly
decreased or increased upon reduction or overexpression of 14-3-3<U+03B6> in ER-positive
breast cancer cells, indicating their coregulation. 14-3-3<U+03B6> also played a
critical role in the regulation of FOXM1, with 14-3-3<U+03B6> acting upstream of FOXM1
to regulate cell division-signature genes. Depletion of 14-3-3<U+03B6> markedly
increased apoptosis, reduced proliferation and receptor tyrosine kinase (HER2 and
EGFR) signaling, and, importantly, reversed endocrine resistance.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals that 14-3-3<U+03B6> is a key predictive marker for risk 
of failure on endocrine therapy and serves a pivotal role impacting growth factor
signaling, and promoting cell survival and resistance to endocrine therapies.
Targeting 14-3-3<U+03B6> and its coregulated proteins, such as FOXM1, should prove
valuable in restoring endocrine sensitivity and reducing risk of breast cancer
recurrence.

PMCID: PMC3218959
PMID: 21707964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Sep;123(1):113-22. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr166. Epub 2011 Jun
24.

Gender-specific interplay of signaling through ß-catenin and CAR in the
regulation of xenobiotic-induced hepatocyte proliferation.

Braeuning A(1), Heubach Y, Knorpp T, Kowalik MA, Templin M, Columbano A, Schwarz 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Institute of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology 
and Toxicology, University of Tübingen, 72074 Tübingen, Germany.

Aberrant signaling through the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway is a critical determinant in
human and rodent liver carcinogenesis and generally accepted to be a potent
driver of proliferation. Xenobiotic agonists of the constitutive androstane
receptor (CAR) induce massive acute hyperplasia of mouse liver and facilitate the
outgrowth of hepatocellular carcinomas with activated ß-catenin. In the present
study, the interplay of ß-catenin-dependent and CAR-dependent signaling in the
liver and its effect on hepatocyte proliferation were analyzed in transgenic mice
with hepatocyte-specific knockout of Ctnnb1 (encoding ß-catenin) following
treatment with two CAR agonists, 1,4-bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]-benzene
(TCPOBOP) and phenobarbital. Hepatocyte-specific knockout of ß-catenin inhibited 
CAR agonists-induced hepatocyte proliferation in male mice. By contrast, the
proliferative effect of CAR agonists was strongly augmented in female ß-catenin
knockout animals. This was due to prolonged proliferation of the knockout
hepatocytes. CAR-mediated hepatocyte proliferation was, at least in part,
dependent on estrogen signaling and was associated with enhanced expression of
FoxM1 and elevated activity of the PDK1/p90RSK pathway. In conclusion, our study 
shows that gender-specific factors determine whether ß-catenin signaling plays a 
pro- or an antiproliferative role in the regulation of mouse hepatocyte
proliferation induced by CAR agonists.

PMID: 21705713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 1;17(13):4414-24. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0431.
Epub 2011 May 23.

Natura-alpha targets forkhead box m1 and inhibits androgen-dependent and
-independent prostate cancer growth and invasion.

Li Y(1), Ligr M, McCarron JP, Daniels G, Zhang D, Zhao X, Ye F, Wang J, Liu X,
Osman I, Mencher SK, Lepor H, Wang LG, Ferrari A, Lee P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, New
York, USA.

Erratum in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 1;17(17):5838.
    Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 1;17(13):OF1.

PURPOSE: The development of new effective therapeutic agents with minimal side
effects for prostate cancer (PC) treatment is much needed. Indirubin, an active
molecule identified in the traditional Chinese herbal medicine-Qing Dai (Indigo
naturalis), has been used to treat leukemia for decades. However, the anticancer 
properties of Natura-alpha, an indirubin derivative, are not well studied in
solid tumors, particularly in PC.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The growth kinetics and invasion ability of on human PC cell
lines with or without Natura-alpha treatment were measured by cell proliferation 
and invasion assays. The antitumor effects of Natura-alpha were examined in nude 
mice tumor xenograft models, and in a patient with advanced hormone-refractory
metastatic PC. Signal network proteins targeted by Natura-alpha were analyzed by 
using proteomic pathway array analysis (PPAA) on xenografts.
RESULTS: Natura-alpha inhibited the growth of both androgen-dependent (LNCaP) and
androgen-independent (LNCaP-AI, PC-3, and DU145) PC cells with IC(50) between 4
to 10 mmol/L, and also inhibited invasion of androgen-independent PC cells. Its
antitumor effects were further evident in in vivo tumor reduction in
androgen-dependent and androgen-independent nude mice tumor xenograft models and 
reduced tumor volume in the patient with hormone refractory metastatic PC. PPAA
revealed that antiproliferative and antiinvasive activities of Natura-alpha on PC
might primarily be through its downregulation of Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) protein.
Forced overexpression of FOXM1 largely reversed the inhibition of growth and
invasion by Natura-alpha.
CONCLUSION: Natura-alpha could serve as a novel and effective therapeutic agent
for treatment of both hormone-sensitive and hormone-refractory PC with minimal
side effects.

PMCID: PMC3196615
PMID: 21606178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2011 Jul 23;52(8):5441-8. doi: 10.1167/iovs.10-6973.

Reversal of stathmin-mediated microtubule destabilization sensitizes
retinoblastoma cells to a low dose of antimicrotubule agents: a novel synergistic
therapeutic intervention.

Mitra M(1), Kandalam M, Sundaram CS, Verma RS, Maheswari UK, Swaminathan S,
Krishnakumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ocular Pathology, Vision Research Foundation, Sankara
Nethralaya, Tamil Nadu, India.

PURPOSE: To explore the possibility of stathmin as an effective therapeutic
target and to evaluate the synergistic combination of stathmin RNAi and the
antimicrotubule agents paclitaxel and vincristine to retinoblastoma Y79 cells.
METHODS: RNAi-mediated specific inhibition of stathmin expression in Y79 cells
was shown by real-time quantitative RT-PCR (RT-Q-PCR), its effect on cell
proliferation by MTT assay, cell invasion using matrigel, microtubule
polymerization by immunohistochemistry, apoptosis, cell cycle analysis by flow
cytometry analysis, and the changes in FOXM1 protein expression were studied by
Western blot. The effect of combination treatment of stathmin siRNA and
paclitaxel/vincristine was studied by assessing cell viability and apoptosis.
RESULTS: Short interfering RNA-mediated transient stathmin downregulation
resulted in a marked inhibition of retinoblastoma cell proliferation and cell
invasion in vitro. Stathmin inhibition promoted Y79 cells to G2/M phase, and
ultimately there were increased apoptotic events as evidenced by higher caspase-3
activation and cleaved poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase expression. Cells transfected 
with stathmin siRNA showed long and bundled microtubule polymers and sensitized
the Y79 cells significantly to paclitaxel and vincristine.
CONCLUSIONS: Stathmin may be a pivotal determinant for retinoblastoma
tumorigenesis and chemosensitivity. Strategies to inhibit stathmin will help to
enhance the cytotoxic effect of paclitaxel while reducing toxicity (or side
effects) to normal cells caused by high doses.

PMID: 21546534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Cancer Ther. 2011 Jun;10(6):1046-58. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-11-0024. Epub
2011 Apr 25.

ATM and p53 regulate FOXM1 expression via E2F in breast cancer epirubicin
treatment and resistance.

Millour J(1), de Olano N, Horimoto Y, Monteiro LJ, Langer JK, Aligue R, Hajji N, 
Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer, Department of Surgery andCancer, Imperial College London, 
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London, UK.

In this report, we investigated the role and regulation of forkhead box M1
(FOXM1) in breast cancer and epirubicin resistance. We generated
epirubicin-resistant MCF-7 breast carcinoma (MCF-7-EPI(R)) cells and found FOXM1 
protein levels to be higher in MCF-7-EPI(R) than in MCF-7 cells and that FOXM1
expression is downregulated by epirubicin in MCF-7 but not in MCF-7-EPI(R) cells.
We also established that there is a loss of p53 function in MCF-7-EPI(R) cells
and that epirubicin represses FOXM1 expression at transcription and gene promoter
levels through activation of p53 and repression of E2F activity in MCF-7 cells.
Using p53(-/-) mouse embryo fibroblasts, we showed that p53 is important for
epirubicin sensitivity. Moreover, transient promoter transfection assays showed
that epirubicin and its cellular effectors p53 and E2F1 modulate FOXM1
transcription through an E2F-binding site located within the proximal promoter
region. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis also revealed that epirubicin
treatment increases pRB (retinoblastoma protein) and decreases E2F1 recruitment
to the FOXM1 promoter region containing the E2F site. We also found
ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) protein and mRNA to be overexpressed in the
resistant MCF-7-EPI(R) cells compared with MCF-7 cells and that epirubicin could 
activate ATM to promote E2F activity and FOXM1 expression. Furthermore,
inhibition of ATM in U2OS cells with caffeine or depletion of ATM in MCF-7-EPI(R)
with short interfering RNAs can resensitize these resistant cells to epirubicin, 
resulting in downregulation of E2F1 and FOXM1 expression and cell death. In
summary, our data show that ATM and p53 coordinately regulate FOXM1 via E2F to
modulate epirubicin response and resistance in breast cancer.

PMID: 21518729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 15;71(12):4292-302. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-4087. Epub
2011 Apr 20.

FoxM1 in tumorigenicity of the neuroblastoma cells and renewal of the neural
progenitors.

Wang Z(1), Park HJ, Carr JR, Chen YJ, Zheng Y, Li J, Tyner AL, Costa RH, Bagchi
S, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607-7170, USA.

Malignant neuroblastomas contain stem-like cells. These tumors also overexpress
the Forkhead box transcription factor FoxM1. In this study, we investigated the
roles of FoxM1 in the tumorigenicity of neuroblastoma. We showed that depletion
of FoxM1 inhibits anchorage-independent growth and tumorigenicity in mouse
xenografts. Moreover, knockdown of FoxM1 induces differentiation in neuroblastoma
cells, suggesting that FoxM1 plays a role in the maintenance of the
undifferentiated progenitor population. We showed that inhibition of FoxM1 in
malignant neuroblastoma cells leads to the downregulation of the pluripotency
genes sex determining region Y box 2 (Sox2) and Bmi1. We provided evidence that
FoxM1 directly activates expression of Sox2 in neuroblastoma cells. By using a
conditional deletion system and neurosphere cultures, we showed that FoxM1 is
important for expression of Sox2 and Bmi1 in the mouse neural stem/progenitor
cells and is critical for its self-renewal. Together, our observations suggested 
that FoxM1 plays an important role in the tumorigenicity of the aggressive
neuroblastoma cells through maintenance of the undifferentiated state.

PMCID: PMC3771352
PMID: 21507930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Sep;112(9):2296-306. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23150.

Over-expression of FoxM1 leads to epithelial-mesenchymal transition and cancer
stem cell phenotype in pancreatic cancer cells.

Bao B(1), Wang Z, Ali S, Kong D, Banerjee S, Ahmad A, Li Y, Azmi AS, Miele L,
Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University,
Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

FoxM1 is known to play important role in the development and progression of many 
malignancies including pancreatic cancer. Studies have shown that the acquisition
of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) phenotype and induction of cancer
stem cell (CSC) or cancer stem-like cell phenotypes are highly inter-related, and
contributes to drug resistance, tumor recurrence, and metastasis. The molecular
mechanism(s) by which FoxM1 contributes to the acquisition of EMT phenotype and
induction of CSC self-renewal capacity is poorly understood. Therefore, we
established FoxM1 over-expressing pancreatic cancer (AsPC-1) cells, which showed 
increased cell growth, clonogenicity, and cell migration. Moreover,
over-expression of FoxM1 led to the acquisition of EMT phenotype by activation of
mesenchymal cell markers, ZEB1, ZEB2, Snail2, E-cadherin, and vimentin, which is 
consistent with increased sphere-forming (pancreatospheres) capacity and
expression of CSC surface markers (CD44 and EpCAM). We also found that
over-expression of FoxM1 led to decreased expression of miRNAs (let-7a, let-7b,
let-7c, miR-200b, and miR-200c); however, re-expression of miR-200b inhibited the
expression of ZEB1, ZEB2, vimentin as well as FoxM1, and induced the expression
of E-cadherin, leading to the reversal of EMT phenotype. Finally, we found that
genistein, a natural chemo-preventive agent, inhibited cell growth,
clonogenicity, cell migration and invasion, EMT phenotype, and formation of
pancreatospheres consistent with reduced expression of CD44 and EpCAM. These
results suggest, for the first time, that FoxM1 over-expression is responsible
for the acquisition of EMT and CSC phenotype, which is in part mediated through
the regulation of miR-200b and these processes, could be easily attenuated by
genistein.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3155646
PMID: 21503965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cancer Lett. 2011 Jul 28;306(2):214-22. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.03.009. Epub
2011 Apr 11.

FOXM1 expression predicts the prognosis in hepatocellular carcinoma patients
after orthotopic liver transplantation combined with the Milan criteria.

Sun H(1), Teng M, Liu J, Jin D, Wu J, Yan D, Fan J, Qin X, Tang H, Peng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Affiliated First People's Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, School of Medicine, Shanghai 200080, China.

Molecular biomarker has been proposed to improve patient selection and
post-transplant prognostication, but rare achievement has been made. In the
present study, Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) expression and its prognostic role have
been investigated in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) treated by orthotopic liver
transplantation (OLT). We found that the notably higher level of FOXM1 in tumors 
was associated with malignant pathological features of HCC and unfavorable
outcome after OLT. The status of FOXM1 expression combined with the Milan
criteria could make the prognostication more accurate and may be of particular
interest for expanding the criteria in selecting transplant candidates.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21482449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Curr Drug Targets. 2011 Aug;12(9):1256-66.

FOXO and FOXM1 in cancer: the FOXO-FOXM1 axis shapes the outcome of cancer
chemotherapy.

Wilson MS(1), Brosens JJ, Schwenen HD, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research-UK Labs and Department of Surgery and Cancer, Hammersmith
Campus, London W12 0NN, UK.

FOXO transcription factors, functioning downstream of the PI3K-PTEN-AKT (PKB)
signalling cascade, are essential for cell proliferation, differentiation, DNA
damage repair, and apoptosis. Recent research indicates that the related
transcription factor FOXM1 is a direct target of repression by FOXO proteins.
Inactivation of FOXO or overexpression of FOXM1 is associated with tumorigenesis 
and cancer progression. In addition, the cytostatic and cytotoxic effects of a
diverse spectrum of anti-cancer drugs, such as paclitaxel, doxorubicin,
lapatinib, gefitinib, imatinib, and cisplatin, are mediated through the
activation of FOXO3a and/or the inhibition of its target FOXM1. Paradoxically,
FOXO proteins also contribute to drug resistance by driving the expression of
genes important for drug efflux as well as DNA repair and cell survival pathways 
in drug resistant cancers. Given its pivotal roles of in drug sensitivity as well
as resistance, targeting the FOXO-FOXM1 axis could be a viable strategy for
treatment of cancer and for overcoming drug resistance. Studying the expression
profiles of the components of the FOXO-FOXM1 axis, and their cofactors, in cancer
patients might also help to predict and monitor their clinical response to
chemotherapy. A better understanding of the mechanism by which FOXO and FOXM1 are
regulated, as well as their roles in drug sensitivity and resistance, may render 
these proteins crucial prognostic markers and therapeutic targets for breast
cancer and other malignancies.

© 2011 Bentham Science Publishers Ltd.

PMID: 21443467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Oncol Rep. 2011 Jun;25(6):1533-9. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1230. Epub 2011 Mar 22.

Overexpression of Forkhead box M1 protein associates with aggressive tumor
features and poor prognosis of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Sun HC(1), Li M, Lu JL, Yan DW, Zhou CZ, Fan JW, Qin XB, Tang HM, Peng ZH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200080, PR China.

The aim of this study was to detect the expression of the Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1)
protein in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and to associate FOXM1 expression
with clinicopathological features of the patients, and predict the prognosis of
patients with FOXM1 expression. Surgical tissue specimens from 151 HCC patients
were subjected to a tissue microarray construction and immunohistochemistry
analysis of FOXM1 and the proliferation marker proliferating cell nuclear antigen
(PCNA). The data showed that the FOXM1 protein was expressed in 59.3% of the HCC 
tissues, which was significantly higher compared to that of the surrounding
non-tumorous tissues (23.8%; P<0.001). Moreover, FOXM1 expression was positively 
correlated with the labeling index of PCNA (P<0.001) in HCC and with aggressive
tumor phenotypes, such as larger tumor size, multiple tumors, bilobar
involvement, poor tumor cell differentiation, advanced stage and macrovascular
invasion (P<0.05). In addition, HCC patients with FOXM1-positive tumors had a
poorer recurrence-free and overall survival after hepatectomy than those with
FOXM1-negative tumors. Multivariate Cox regression analysis demonstrated that
FOXM1 expression was an independent predictor of unfavorable outcome (P<0.05).
The data from the current study suggest that FOXM1 may play an important role in 
HCC progression and could be further evaluated as a prognostic biomarker and
potential therapeutic target.

PMID: 21431285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 May 1;252(3):307-17. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2011.03.003. Epub 2011 Mar 23.

Proteomic profiling revealed the functional networks associated with mitotic
catastrophe of HepG2 hepatoma cells induced by
6-bromine-5-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzaldehyde.

Zhang B(1), Huang B, Guan H, Zhang SM, Xu QZ, He XP, Liu XD, Wang Y, Shang ZF,
Zhou PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Toxicology and Oncology, Beijing Institute of
Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, PR China.

Mitotic catastrophe, a form of cell death resulting from abnormal mitosis, is a
cytotoxic death pathway as well as an appealing mechanistic strategy for the
development of anti-cancer drugs. In this study,
6-bromine-5-hydroxy-4-methoxybenzaldehyde was demonstrated to induce DNA
double-strand break, multipolar spindles, sustain mitotic arrest and generate
multinucleated cells, all of which indicate mitotic catastrophe, in human
hepatoma HepG2 cells. We used proteomic profiling to identify the differentially 
expressed proteins underlying mitotic catastrophe. A total of 137 differentially 
expressed proteins (76 upregulated and 61 downregulated proteins) were
identified. Some of the changed proteins have previously been associated with
mitotic catastrophe, such as DNA-PKcs, FoxM1, RCC1, cyclin E, PLK1-pT210, 14-3-3s
and HSP70. Multiple isoforms of 14-3-3, heat-shock proteins and tubulin were
upregulated. Analysis of functional significance revealed that the
14-3-3-mediated signaling network was the most significantly enriched for the
differentially expressed proteins. The modulated proteins were found to be
involved in macromolecule complex assembly, cell death, cell cycle, chromatin
remodeling and DNA repair, tubulin and cytoskeletal organization. These findings 
revealed the overall molecular events and functional signaling networks
associated with spindle disruption and mitotic catastrophe.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21419150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 12;108(15):6323-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1017689108. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Hyperactivation of anandamide synthesis and regulation of cell-cycle progression 
via cannabinoid type 1 (CB1) receptors in the regenerating liver.

Mukhopadhyay B(1), Cinar R, Yin S, Liu J, Tam J, Godlewski G, Harvey-White J,
Mordi I, Cravatt BF, Lotersztajn S, Gao B, Yuan Q, Schuebel K, Goldman D, Kunos
G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Physiological Studies, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Apr 19;108(16):6339-40.

The mammalian liver regenerates upon tissue loss, which induces quiescent
hepatocytes to enter the cell cycle and undergo limited replication under the
control of multiple hormones, growth factors, and cytokines. Endocannabinoids
acting via cannabinoid type 1 receptors (CB(1)R) promote neural progenitor cell
proliferation, and in the liver they promote lipogenesis. These findings suggest 
the involvement of CB(1)R in the control of liver regeneration. Here we report
that mice lacking CB(1)R globally or in hepatocytes only and wild-type mice
treated with a CB(1)R antagonist have a delayed proliferative response to
two-thirds partial hepatectomy (PHX). In wild-type mice, PHX leads to increased
hepatic expression of CB(1)R and hyperactivation of the biosynthesis of the
endocannabinoid anandamide in the liver via an in vivo pathway involving
conjugation of arachidonic acid and ethanolamine by fatty-acid amide hydrolase.
In wild-type but not CB(1)R(-/-) mice, PHX induces robust up-regulation of key
cell-cycle proteins involved in mitotic progression, including cyclin-dependent
kinase 1 (Cdk1), cyclin B2, and their transcriptional regulator forkhead box
protein M1 (FoxM1), as revealed by ultrahigh-throughput RNA sequencing and
pathway analysis and confirmed by real-time PCR and Western blot analyses.
Treatment of wild-type mice with anandamide induces similar changes mediated via 
activation of the PI3K/Akt pathway. We conclude that activation of hepatic CB(1)R
by newly synthesized anandamide promotes liver regeneration by controlling the
expression of cell-cycle regulators that drive M phase progression.

PMCID: PMC3076854
PMID: 21383171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 9;6(2):e16913. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016913.

Analysis of the transcriptional program of developing induced regulatory T cells.

Prots I(1), Skapenko A, Lipsky PE, Schulze-Koops H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Medizinische Poliklinik, University of Munich,
Munich, Germany.

CD25+ regulatory T cells develop in the thymus (nTregs), but may also be
generated in the periphery upon stimulation of naive CD4 T cells under
appropriate conditions (iTregs). To gain insight into the mechanisms governing
iTreg development, we performed longitudinal transcriptional profiling of CD25+ T
cells during their differentiation from uncommitted naive CD4 T cells. Microarray
analysis of mRNA from CD25+ iTregs early after stimulation revealed expression of
genes involved in cell cycle progression and T cell activation, which largely
overlapped with genes expressed in CD25+ effector T cells (Teffs) used as a
control. Whereas expression of these genes remained elevated in Teffs, it
declined gradually in developing iTregs, resulting in a more quiescent phenotype 
in mature iTregs. A similar pattern of kinetics was observed for biological
processes and for intracellular pathways over-represented within the expressed
genes. A maximum dichotomy of transcriptional activity between iTregs and Teffs
was reached at late stages of their maturation. Of interest, members of the FoxO 
and FoxM1 transcription factor family pathways exhibited a reciprocal expression 
pattern in iTregs and Teffs, suggesting a role of these transcription factors in 
determining T cell fate.

PMCID: PMC3036712
PMID: 21347372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Hum Pathol. 2011 Aug;42(8):1185-93. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2010.06.017. Epub 2011
Feb 21.

Overexpression of Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B in
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma: a potential indicator for poor prognosis.

Jiang LZ(1), Wang P, Deng B, Huang C, Tang WX, Lu HY, Chen HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing 400016, PR China. pearl1984@hotmail.com

The Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B have been shown to
play important roles in the development and progression of human cancers.
However, the functional significance of Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor in
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma and the correlation between Forkhead Box M1
transcription factor and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B remain unclear. In the current study, 
we have shown that Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B
were significantly overexpressed in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma tissues and
precancerous lesions, compared with adjacent normal tissues (both P < .001). The 
overexpression of Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor was significantly
associated with histologic differentiation (rs = 0.321, P = .002), T stage (rs = 
0.276, P = .009), lymph node metastasis (rs = 0.266, P = .012), and clinical
stage (rs = 0.272, P = .010); overexpression of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B was
significantly associated with T stage (rs = 0.404, P < .001), lymph node
metastasis (rs = 0.293, P = .005), and clinical stage (rs = 0.425, P < .001).
Overexpressions of both Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor and nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B were associated with worse overall survival (P = .041 and P < .001,
respectively). Multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that T stage, lymph
node metastasis, and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B were independent prognostic factors for
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma (P = .038, P = .014, and P = .005,
respectively). Furthermore, a significant correlation was observed between
Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (rs = 0.683, P <
.001), indicating the potential direct or indirect interaction between them. In
conclusion, our results suggest that overexpressions of Forkhead Box M1
transcription factor and nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and the possible interaction between
them may play important roles in the development and progression of laryngeal
squamous cell carcinoma, and Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor and nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B may serve as useful prognostic markers for laryngeal squamous cell
carcinoma.

Crown Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21334713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Hepatol. 2011 Oct;55(4):885-95. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.12.037. Epub 2011 Feb 
18.

Insufficient bile acid signaling impairs liver repair in CYP27(-/-) mice.

Meng Z(1), Liu N, Fu X, Wang X, Wang YD, Chen WD, Zhang L, Forman BM, Huang W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation and Drug Discovery, Beckman Research Institute,
City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Previous studies indicate that bile acids (BAs) promote normal
liver regeneration and repair after injury. However, the impact of insufficient
BA signaling, which is observed in patients with BA sequestrant medication or
cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX) disease, on liver injury is still unknown.
Our aim is to determine the outcomes of reduced BA levels upon liver injury.
METHODS: Seventy percent partial hepatectomy (PH) and carbon tetrachloride
(CCl(4)) treatment were performed using CYP27(-/-) mice, a genetic animal model
with low BA levels. The liver repair of CYP27(-/-) mice after the treatments was 
characterized by histological staining, chemical analysis, and quantitative
real-time PCR.
RESULTS: CYP27(-/-) mice exhibited enhanced CCl(4)-induce liver injury, and
defective liver regeneration and prolonged steatosis after 70% PH. Due to the
insufficient BA signaling, farnesoid X receptor (FXR) activities were
significantly reduced in CYP27(-/-) livers after 70% PH. Activation of FXR by
either 0.2% cholic acid feeding or oral infusion of an FXR agonist greatly
promoted liver regeneration in CYP27(-/-) mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Normal physiological levels of BAs are required for liver repair.
Patients with BA sequestrant medications or CTX disease due to CYP27 gene
mutations may have an increased risk of liver failure, and treatment with FXR
ligands can promote liver regeneration of patients with low BA levels.

Copyright © 2011 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21334403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Transcription. 2010 Jul-Aug;1(1):32-5. doi: 10.4161/trns.1.1.12063.

Transcriptional regulation underlying recovery from a DNA damage-induced arrest.

Alvarez-Fernández M(1), Medema RH, Lindqvist A.

Author information: 
(1)UMC Utrecht, the Netherlands.

When the DNA of a cell is damaged, cell cycle progression is arrested and cell
cycle-specific transcription is inhibited. However, cell cycle-specific
transcription is required for eventual recovery from the DNA damage-induced
arrest. Here we discuss recent findings that demonstrate how transcription is
fine-tuned during the DNA damage response and how this controls the capacity to
recover from a DNA damage arrest in G(2) phase.

PMCID: PMC3035183
PMID: 21327155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Apr 1;17(7):1924-34. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-1551.
Epub 2011 Feb 16.

Array-based comparative genomic hybridization identifies CDK4 and FOXM1
alterations as independent predictors of survival in malignant peripheral nerve
sheath tumor.

Yu J(1), Deshmukh H, Payton JE, Dunham C, Scheithauer BW, Tihan T, Prayson RA,
Guha A, Bridge JA, Ferner RE, Lindberg GM, Gutmann RJ, Emnett RJ, Salavaggione L,
Gutmann DH, Nagarajan R, Watson MA, Perry A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, USA.

PURPOSE: Malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors (MPNST) are highly aggressive
sarcomas with variable patient survival and few known prognostically relevant
genomic biomarkers. To identify survival-associated genomic biomarkers, we
performed high-resolution array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) on
a large set of MPNSTs.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Candidate gene alterations identified by aCGH in 38 MPNSTs
were validated at the DNA, RNA, and protein levels on these same tumors and an
independent set of 87 MPNST specimens.
RESULTS: aCGH revealed highly complex copy number alterations, including both
previously reported and completely novel loci. Four regions of copy number gain
were associated with poor patient survival. Candidate genes in these regions
include SOX5 (12p12.1), NOL1 and MLF2 (12p13.31), FOXM1 and FKBP1 (12p13.33), and
CDK4 and TSPAN31 (12q14.1). Alterations of these candidate genes and several
others of interest (ERBB2, MYC and TP53) were confirmed by at least 1
complementary methodology, including DNA and mRNA quantitative real-time PCR,
mRNA expression profiling, and tissue microarray-based fluorescence in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Multivariate analysis showed that CDK4
gain/amplification and increased FOXM1 protein expression were the most
significant independent predictors for poor survival in MPNST patients (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides new and independently confirmed candidate genes
that could serve as genomic biomarkers for overall survival in MPNST patients.

PMID: 21325289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Mol Cancer. 2011 Feb 11;10(1):15. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-10-15.

Identification of early molecular markers for breast cancer.

Kretschmer C(1), Sterner-Kock A, Siedentopf F, Schoenegg W, Schlag PM, Kemmner W.

Author information: 
(1)Research Group Surgical Oncology, ECRC, Robert-Rössle-Str, 10, 13125 Berlin,
Germany. celine.schaefer@charite.de

BACKGROUND: The ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) of the mammary gland represents
an early, pre-invasive stage in the development of invasive breast carcinoma.
Since DCIS is a curable disease, it would be highly desirable to identify
molecular markers that allow early detection. Mice transgenic for the WAP-SV40
early genome region were used as a model for DCIS development. Gene expression
profiling was carried out on DCIS-bearing mice and control animals. Additionally,
a set of human DCIS and invasive mammary tumors were analyzed in a similar
fashion. Enhanced expression of these marker genes in human and murine samples
was validated by quantitative RT-PCR. Besides, marker gene expression was also
validated by immunohistochemistry of human samples. Furthermore in silico
analyses using an online microarray database were performed.
RESULTS: In DCIS-mice seven genes were identified that were significantly
up-regulated in DCIS: DEPDC1, NUSAP1, EXO1, RRM2, FOXM1, MUC1 and SPP1. A similar
up-regulation of homologues of the murine genes was observed in human DCIS
samples. Enhanced expression of these genes in DCIS and IDC (invasive ductal
carcinoma) was validated by quantitative RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry.
CONCLUSIONS: By comparing murine markers for the ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) 
of the mammary gland with genes up-regulated in human DCIS-samples we were able
to identify a set of genes which might allow early detection of DCIS and invasive
carcinomas in the future. The similarities between gene expression in DCIS and
invasive carcinomas in our data suggest that the early detection and treatment of
DCIS is of utmost relevance for the survival of patients who are at high risk of 
developing breast carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC3045364
PMID: 21314937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cell Cycle. 2011 Mar 1;10(5):760-6. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

The transcription factor FOXM1c binds to and transactivates the promoter of the
tumor suppressor gene E-cadherin.

Wierstra I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Medical School Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
iwiwiwi@web.de

This study demonstrates for the first time that FOXM1c transactivates the murine 
E-cadherin promoter. It shows also that the purified DNA-binding domain of FOXM1c
binds to the murine and human E-cadherin promoters in vitro, namely to a
perfectly conserved FOXM1 site. Thus, this study identifies E-cadherin as a new
direct FOXM1c target gene. This finding is surprising because E-cadherin is a
tumor suppressor gene whereas FOXM1 is a proliferation-associated and
tumorigenesis-promoting transcription factor. The transmembrane glycoprotein
E-cadherin mediates cell-cell adhesion in adherens junctions. Its expression is
frequently lost or reduced in human tumors, which correlates with poor prognosis.
Downregulation of E-cadherin represents a central event in
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. In contrast, FOXM1 contributes to oncogenic
transformation and participates in tumor initiation and progression. It is
overexpressed in many human cancers and a high FOXM1 level correlates with poor
prognosis. FOXM1 stimulates cell proliferation and promotes cell cycle
progression at the G1/S- and G2/M-transitions. The surprising finding that FOXM1c
transactivates the promoter of the tumor suppressor gene E-cadherin points to a
tumor-suppressive property of FOXM1. This view is supported by FOXM1's new tumor 
suppressor role as others reported that urethane-induced lung tumorigenesis is
increased in mice with an endothelial cell-specific foxm1 deletion.

© 2011 Landes Bioscience

PMID: 21311221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 May;50(5):313-26. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20856. Epub
2011 Feb 8.

Integrative genomic profiling reveals conserved genetic mechanisms for
tumorigenesis in common entities of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Green MR(1), Aya-Bonilla C, Gandhi MK, Lea RA, Wellwood J, Wood P, Marlton P,
Griffiths LR.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Centre, Griffith Health Institute, Griffith University, QLD,
Australia.

Recent developments in genomic technologies have resulted in increased
understanding of pathogenic mechanisms and emphasized the importance of central
survival pathways. Here, we use a novel bioinformatic based integrative genomic
profiling approach to elucidate conserved mechanisms of lymphomagenesis in the
three commonest non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) entities: diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, and B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia. By
integrating genome-wide DNA copy number analysis and transcriptome profiling of
tumor cohorts, we identified genetic lesions present in each entity and
highlighted their likely target genes. This revealed a significant enrichment of 
components of both the apoptosis pathway and the mitogen activated protein kinase
pathway, including amplification of the MAP3K12 locus in all three entities,
within the set of genes targeted by genetic alterations in these diseases.
Furthermore, amplification of 12p13.33 was identified in all three entities and
found to target the FOXM1 oncogene. Amplification of FOXM1 was subsequently found
to be associated with an increased MYC oncogenic signaling signature, and
siRNA-mediated knock-down of FOXM1 resulted in decreased MYC expression and
induced G2 arrest. Together, these findings underscore genetic alteration of the 
MAPK and apoptosis pathways, and genetic amplification of FOXM1 as conserved
mechanisms of lymphomagenesis in common NHL entities. Integrative genomic
profiling identifies common central survival mechanisms and highlights them as
attractive targets for directed therapy.

2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21305641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Clin Invest Med. 2011 Feb 1;34(1):E1-7.

Expression and significance of FOXM1 in human cervical cancer: a tissue
micro-array study.

Guan P(1), Chen H, Li HJ, Duan J, Chen JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan
University, PR China.

OBJECTIVE: This study was designed to investigate the expression and significance
of the Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor in human cervical cancer.
METHODS: The expression of FOXM1 protein was assessed in tissue microarrays
containing 102 cervical cancer tissues by the Streptavidin-Peroxidase (SP)
immunohistochemistry technique. The relationship between FOXM1 protein and
clinico-pathological features (pathological stages, pathological types, TNM
stage) was analyzed.
RESULTS: FOXM1 protein was located in the cytoplasma and/or nucleus. The overall 
expression of FOXM1 in the cytoplasm and nucleus was not associated with T stages
(P=0.217) or lymph node status (P=0.313). The nuclear expression of FOXM1 protein
was not associated with T stage (P=0.508) or lymph node status (P=0.345).
Elevated translocation and activity of FOXM1 were discovered with a secondary
analysis that showed that the differences of the nuclear expression of FOXM1,
among different pathological stages, were statistically significant (P < 0.05).
The nuclear expression of FOXM1 in low differential cervical cancer tissues was
significantly higher than in high differential cervical cancer tissues (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSION: The overexpression of FOXM1 protein in cervical cancer maybe
associated with the progression of cervical cancer, and could be a potentially
novel tumor marker useful for diagnosis and therapy of cervical cancer.

PMID: 21291630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Am J Pathol. 2011 Feb;178(2):537-47. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2010.10.020.

Genome-wide expression analysis of Middle Eastern colorectal cancer reveals FOXM1
as a novel target for cancer therapy.

Uddin S(1), Ahmed M, Hussain A, Abubaker J, Al-Sanea N, AbdulJabbar A, Ashari LH,
Alhomoud S, Al-Dayel F, Jehan Z, Bavi P, Siraj AK, Al-Kuraya KS.

Author information: 
(1)Human Cancer Genomic Research, Research Center, King Faisal Specialist
Hospital and Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

To identify genes potentially playing an important role in the progression of
colorectal carcinoma (CRC), we screened global gene expression using cDNA
expression array on 41 CRC tissue samples and 25 noncancerous colorectal tissue
samples. Among the up-regulated genes, forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) has been shown to 
play a critical role in pathogenesis of various malignancies. Using
immunohistochemistry on 448 Saudi CRC samples in tissue microarray format, FoxM1 
protein overexpression was seen in 66% of CRC tissues and was significantly
associated with poorly differentiated and highly proliferative tumors (P = 0.0200
and 0.0018, respectively). FoxM1 expression was also significantly associated
with MMP-9 protein expression (P = 0.0002). In vitro data using CRC cell lines
showed that inhibition of FoxM1 by thiostrepton resulted in inhibition of
proliferation and induction of apoptosis in a dose-dependent manner.
Overexpression of FoxM1 potentiated cell proliferation, cell transformation, and 
migration/invasion of CRC cells via up-regulation of FoxM1 target genes MMP2 and 
MMP9 and protected these cells from thiostrepton-mediated antiproliferative
effects. Finally, in vivo, overexpression of FoxM1 promoted growth of CRC-cell
line xenograft tumors in nude mice. Altogether, our data indicate that FoxM1
signaling contributes to aggressiveness in a subset of CRC and that the FOXM1
gene may serve as a useful molecular biomarker and potential therapeutic target.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3070566
PMID: 21281787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Cell Cycle. 2011 Feb 1;10(3):396-405. Epub 2011 Feb 1.

Multiple faces of FoxM1 transcription factor: lessons from transgenic mouse
models.

Kalin TV(1), Ustiyan V, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology and Perinatal Institute of the Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH, USA.
Tatiana.Kalin@cchmc.org

FoxM1 transcription factor (previously called HFH-11B, Trident, FoxM1b, Win, and 
MPP2) is expressed in actively dividing cells and critical for cell cycle
progression. FoxM1 expression is induced in a variety of tissues during
embryogenesis, and Foxm1 (-/-) mice exhibit embryonic lethal phenotype due to
multiple abnormalities in the liver, heart, lung and blood vessels. FoxM1 levels 
are dramatically decreased in adult tissues, but FoxM1 expression is re-activated
during organ injury and numerous cancers. In this review, we discussed the role
of FoxM1 in different cell lineages using recent data from transgenic mouse
models with conditional "gain-of-function" and "loss-of-function" of FoxM1, as
well as tissue samples from human patients. In addition, we provided experimental
data showing additional sites of FoxM1 expression in the mouse embryo. Novel
cell-autonomous roles of FoxM1 in embryonic development, organ injury and cancer 
formation in vivo were analyzed. Potential application of these findings for the 
diagnosis and treatment of human diseases were discussed.

PMCID: PMC3115014
PMID: 21270518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Apr 15;20(8):1560-73. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr033. Epub 2011 Jan 
25.

APP-dependent up-regulation of Ptch1 underlies proliferation impairment of neural
precursors in Down syndrome.

Trazzi S(1), Mitrugno VM, Valli E, Fuchs C, Rizzi S, Guidi S, Perini G,
Bartesaghi R, Ciani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and General Physiology, University of Bologna, Italy.

Mental retardation in Down syndrome (DS) appears to be related to severe
neurogenesis impairment during critical phases of brain development. Recent lines
of evidence in the cerebellum of a mouse model for DS (the Ts65Dn mouse) have
shown a defective responsiveness to Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), a potent mitogen that
controls cell division during brain development, suggesting involvement of the
Shh pathway in the neurogenesis defects of DS. Based on these premises, we sought
to identify the molecular mechanisms underlying derangement of the Shh pathway in
neural precursor cells (NPCs) from Ts65Dn mice. By using an in vitro model of
NPCs obtained from the subventricular zone and hippocampus, we found that
trisomic NPCs had an increased expression of the Shh receptor Patched1 (Ptch1), a
membrane protein that suppresses the action of a second receptor, Smoothened
(Smo), thereby maintaining the pathway in a repressed state. Partial silencing of
Ptch1 expression in trisomic NPCs restored cell proliferation, indicating that
proliferation impairment was due to Ptch1 overexpression. The overexpression of
Ptch1 in trisomic NPCs resulted from increased levels of AICD [a
transcription-promoting fragment of amyloid precursor protein (APP)] and
increased AICD binding to the Ptch1 promoter. Our data provide novel evidence
that Ptch1 overexpression underlies derangement of the Shh pathway in trisomic
NPCs with consequent proliferation impairment. The demonstration that Ptch1
overexpression in trisomic NPCs is due to an APP fragment provides a link between
this trisomic gene and the defective neuronal production that characterizes the
DS brain.

PMID: 21266456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Oncogene. 2011 May 19;30(20):2356-66. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.611. Epub 2011 Jan
17.

Activation of nuclear factor-kappa B signalling promotes cellular senescence.

Rovillain E(1), Mansfield L, Caetano C, Alvarez-Fernandez M, Caballero OL, Medema
RH, Hummerich H, Jat PS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, London,
UK.

Cellular senescence is a programme of irreversible cell cycle arrest that normal 
cells undergo in response to progressive shortening of telomeres, changes in
telomeric structure, oncogene activation or oxidative stress. The underlying
signalling pathways, of major clinicopathological relevance, are unknown. We
combined genome-wide expression profiling with genetic complementation to
identify genes that are differentially expressed when conditionally immortalised 
human fibroblasts undergo senescence upon activation of the p16-pRB and p53-p21
tumour suppressor pathways. This identified 816 up and 961 downregulated genes
whose expression was reversed when senescence was bypassed. Overlay of this data 
set with the meta-signatures of genes upregulated in cancer showed that nearly
50% of them were downregulated upon senescence showing that even though
overcoming senescence may only be one of the events required for malignant
transformation, nearly half of the genes upregulated in cancer are related to it.
Moreover 65 of the up and 26 of the downregulated genes are known downstream
targets of nuclear factor (NF)-<U+03BA>B suggesting that senescence was associated with 
activation of the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. Direct perturbation of this pathway bypasses
growth arrest indicating that activation of NF-<U+03BA>B signalling has a causal role in
promoting senescence.

PMCID: PMC3080811
PMID: 21242976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Apr;126(3):803-10. doi: 10.1007/s10549-011-1345-1. 
Epub 2011 Jan 12.

Young age, increased tumor proliferation and FOXM1 expression predict early
metastatic relapse only for endocrine-dependent breast cancers.

Yau C(1), Wang Y, Zhang Y, Foekens JA, Benz CC.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Developmental Therapeutics Program, Buck Institute for Age
Research, 8001 Redwood Blvd., Novato, CA 94945, USA.

It is unclear if earlier onset (<40 years) and greater proliferative capacity
confer an equally poor prognosis to endocrine-dependent and endocrine-independent
breast cancers. Available outcome (distant metastasis-free survival, DMFS) and
expression microarray data from 621 adjuvant treatment-naïve, node-negative
primary breast cancers were pooled for prognostic evaluation of age-at-diagnosis 
(< 40 years vs. = 40 years) and tumor proliferative capacity relative to estrogen
receptor status (n = 400 ER-positive, n = 221 ER-negative). Transcriptome
measures of proliferative capacity included a proliferation score (PS) based on a
61-gene proliferation signature and the single gene surrogate, FOXM1.
Kaplan-Meier analyses revealed no significant difference in DMFS between
ER-positive and ER-negative cases >5 years after diagnosis. In contrast, younger 
age and higher proliferative capacity resulted in significantly more metastatic
events cumulated over 15 years, but only in ER-positive breast cancers where
positive correlations between age and proliferation were observed. While strongly
correlated, FOXM1 and PS did not appear equivalent in relation to age and
prognosis. The poor prognosis associated with breast cancer arising before age 40
or with higher proliferative capacity pertains only to endocrine-dependent
(ER-positive) breast cancer, indicating that different biological processes drive
the metastatic potential of ER-negative breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4337964
PMID: 21225456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. EMBO Mol Med. 2011 Jan;3(1):21-34. doi: 10.1002/emmm.201000107. Epub 2010 Dec 17.

Deregulation of FoxM1b leads to tumour metastasis.

Park HJ(1), Gusarova G, Wang Z, Carr JR, Li J, Kim KH, Qiu J, Park YD, Williamson
PR, Hay N, Tyner AL, Lau LF, Costa RH, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, UIC-Cancer Center, College 
of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

The forkhead box M1b (FoxM1b) transcription factor is over-expressed in human
cancers, and its expression often correlates with poor prognosis. Previously,
using conditional knockout strains, we showed that FoxM1b is essential for
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) development. However, over-expression of FoxM1b
had only marginal effects on HCC progression. Here we investigated the effect of 
FoxM1b expression in the absence of its inhibitor Arf. We show that transgenic
expression of FoxM1b in an Arf-null background drives hepatic fibrosis and
metastasis of HCC. We identify novel mechanisms of FoxM1b that are involved in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, cell motility, invasion and a pre-metastatic
niche formation. FoxM1b activates the Akt-Snail1 pathway and stimulates
expression of Stathmin, lysyl oxidase, lysyl oxidase like-2 and several other
genes involved in metastasis. Furthermore, we show that an Arf-derived peptide,
which inhibits FoxM1b, impedes metastasis of the FoxM1b-expressing HCC cells. The
observations indicate that FoxM1b is a potent activator of tumour metastasis and 
that the Arf-mediated inhibition of FoxM1b is a critical mechanism for
suppression of tumour metastasis.

Copyright © 2011 EMBO Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC3401999
PMID: 21204266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 1;71(1):40-50. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2004.

Endothelial cell-specific deletion of transcription factor FoxM1 increases
urethane-induced lung carcinogenesis.

Balli D(1), Zhang Y, Snyder J, Kalinichenko VV, Kalin TV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Neonatology, Perinatal and Pulmonary Biology, the Perinatal
Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center and University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Vascular endothelial cells provide essential support to the tumor
microenvironment, but little is known about the transcriptional control of
endothelial functions during tumorigenesis. Here we define a critical role for
the Forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 in modulating the development of
tumor-associated endothelial cells. Pulmonary tumorigenesis induced by urethane
administration was compared in mice genetically deleted for FoxM1 in endothelial 
cells (enFoxm1(-/-) mice). Notably, lung tumor number and size were increased in 
enFoxm1(-/-) mice. Increased tumorigenesis was associated with increased
proliferation of tumor cells and increased expression of c-Myc and cyclin D1.
Furthermore, perivascular infiltration by inflammatory cells was elevated and
inflammatory cells in BAL fluid were increased. Expression of Flk-1 (vascular
endothelial growth factor receptor 2) and FoxF1, known regulators of pulmonary
inflammation, was decreased in enFoxm1(-/-) mice. siRNA-mediated knockdown of
FoxM1 in endothelial cells reduced Flk-1 and FoxF1 expression, which was driven
by direct transcriptional induction by FoxM1 as target genes. Endothelial
specific deletion of FoxM1 in vivo or in vitro also decreased expression of Sfrp1
(secreted frizzled-related protein 1), a known inhibitor of canonical Wnt
signaling, in a manner that was associated with increased Wnt signaling. Taken
together, our results suggest that endothelial-specific expression of FoxM1
limits lung inflammation and canonical Wnt signaling in lung epithelial cells,
thereby restricting lung tumorigenesis.

© 2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3075588
PMID: 21199796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Med Oncol. 2012 Mar;29(1):10-5. doi: 10.1007/s12032-010-9777-8. Epub 2010 Dec 30.

Ursolic acid induces apoptosis by suppressing the expression of FoxM1 in MCF-7
human breast cancer cells.

Wang JS(1), Ren TN, Xi T.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, China Pharmaceutical University, 210009
Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

Ursolic acid (UA), a naturally occurring pentacyclic triterpene, is a potent in
vitro anticancer agent, acting through control of growth, apoptosis, and
differentiation. As the anticancer effect and the mechanism of action of ursolic 
acid on human breast cancer cells has not been extensively studied, we performed 
an evaluation of the effects of UA on apoptosis in MCF-7 cells. UA was found to
inhibit the proliferation of MCF-7 cells in a concentration and time-dependent
manner. After treatment, UA-induced apoptosis was accompanied by a significant
decrease in CyclinD1/CDK4 expression, which can be regulated by FoxM1. Previous
studies demonstrated that FoxM1 orchestrates the transcription of genes that are 
essential for cell cycle progression and cell proliferation. The result of
Western blot suggested that ursolic acid inhibited the expression of FoxM1. Taken
together, the data suggest that the proapoptotic effect of UA on MCF-7 cells is
mediated by inhibition of FoxM1 and is highly correlated with inactivation of
CyclinD1/CDK4.

PMID: 21191671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Int J Biol Sci. 2010 Dec 15;6(7):806-26.

SRp20 is a proto-oncogene critical for cell proliferation and tumor induction and
maintenance.

Jia R(1), Li C, McCoy JP, Deng CX, Zheng ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Virus RNA Biology Laboratory, HIV and AIDS Malignancy Branch, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA.

Tumor cells display a different profile of gene expression than their normal
counterparts. Perturbations in the levels of cellular splicing factors can alter 
gene expression, potentially leading to tumorigenesis. We found that splicing
factor SRp20 (SFRS3) is highly expressed in cancers. SRp20 regulated the
expression of Forkhead box transcription factor M1 (FoxM1) and two of its
transcriptional targets, PLK1 and Cdc25B, and controlled cell cycle progression
and proliferation. Cancer cells with RNAi-mediated reduction of SRp20 expression 
exhibited G2/M arrest, growth retardation, and apoptosis. Increased SRp20
expression in rodent fibroblasts promoted immortal cell growth and
transformation. More importantly, we found that SRp20 promoted tumor induction
and the maintenance of tumor growth in nude mice and rendered immortal rodent
fibroblasts tumorigenic. Collectively, these results suggest that increased SRp20
expression in tumor cells is a critical step for tumor initiation, progression,
and maintenance.

PMCID: PMC3005347
PMID: 21179588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Apr;32(4):576-83. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq277. Epub 2010 Dec 
20.

Constitutive active/androstane receptor promotes hepatocarcinogenesis in a mouse 
model of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis.

Takizawa D(1), Kakizaki S, Horiguchi N, Yamazaki Y, Tojima H, Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Molecular Science, Gunma University Graduate School
of Medicine, 3-39-15 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan.

The nuclear receptor constitutive active/androstane receptor (CAR) acts as a
sensor of toxic byproducts derived from the endogenous metabolism and exogenous
chemicals. We previously reported that CAR is responsible for exacerbating
hepatic injury and fibrosis in a dietary model of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis
(NASH) via upregulation of lipid peroxidation. In this study, we investigated the
pathological roles of the CAR in the development of hepatocellular carcinoma in
NASH model. CAR+/+ and CAR-/- mice were fed methionine- and choline-deficient
(MCD) diet after tumor initiation with a single dose of the genotoxic carcinogen 
diethylnitrosamine (DEN) at 2 weeks of age. Interestingly, the MCD diet
dramatically promoted DEN-induced hepatocarcinogenesis in CAR+/+ mice. However,
the deletion of CAR leads to a significantly lower tumor incidence and smaller
tumor diameter. Hepatocytes of MCD-treated-CAR+/+ mice showed a significantly
higher staining frequency of Ki-67, a marker of cell proliferation, and exhibited
a higher expression of c-Myc and FoxM1 transcripts compared with MCD-treated
CAR-/- mice. Immunohistochemistry revealed the nuclear translocation of CAR thus 
suggesting that the activation of CAR signaling increased in the hepatocytes of
CAR+/+ mice fed MCD diet. In addition, in vitro experiments using the CAR stably 
expressed cell line with TCPOBOP have suggested that CAR activation directly
leads to cell proliferation. Survival was significantly lower in the CAR+/+ mice 
fed the MCD diet in comparison with the CAR-/- mice. Taken together, these
results suggest that CAR may therefore play a critical role in the
hepatocarcinogenesis of the murine NASH model via the upregulation of cell
proliferation.

PMID: 21173431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Int J Cancer. 2011 Oct 1;129(7):1781-91. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25839. Epub 2011 Mar 8.

3,3'-Diindolylmethane enhances taxotere-induced growth inhibition of breast
cancer cells through downregulation of FoxM1.

Ahmad A(1), Ali S, Wang Z, Ali AS, Sethi S, Sakr WA, Raz A, Rahman KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Erratum in
    Int J Cancer. 2014 Nov 1;135(9):E10.

Emerging evidence suggests that the transcription factor Forkhead Box M1 (FoxM1) 
is associated with aggressive human carcinomas, including breast cancer. Because 
elevated expression of FoxM1 has been observed in human breast cancers, FoxM1 has
attracted much attention in recent years as a potential target for the prevention
and/or therapeutic intervention in breast cancer. However, no information is
currently available regarding how downregulation of FoxM1 could be achieved for
breast cancer prevention and therapy. Here, we report for the first time that
3,3'-diindolylmethane (DIM), a nontoxic dietary chemopreventive agent could
effectively downregulate FoxM1 in various breast cancer cell lines. Using gene
transfection, real-time reverse transcription-PCR, Western blotting, invasion and
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assays, we found
that DIM could enhance Taxotere-induced growth inhibition of breast cancer cells,
and decreased invasive capacity of breast cancer cells was observed after either 
treatment alone or the combination. These effects were associated with
downregulation of FoxM1. We also found that knock down of FoxM1 expression by
small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection increased DIM-induced cell growth
inhibition, whereas over-expression of FoxM1 by cDNA transfection attenuated
DIM-induced cell growth inhibition, suggesting the mechanistic role of FoxM1.
Most importantly, the combination treatment significantly inhibited tumor growth 
in severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) mice, and the results were correlated 
with the downregulation of FoxM1 in tumor remnants. We conclude that inactivation
of FoxM1 and its target genes by DIM could enhance the therapeutic efficacy of
Taxotere in breast cancer, which could be a useful strategy for the prevention
and/or treatment of breast cancer.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMCID: PMC3803115
PMID: 21154750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Biol Rep. 2011 Apr;38(4):2665-71. doi: 10.1007/s11033-010-0408-4. Epub 2010
Nov 23.

Hepatic expression profile of forkhead transcription factor genes in normal
Balb/c mice and their dynamic changes after bile duct ligation.

Yang P(1), Huang S, Liu D, Zhou Q, Wen YA, Xiang Y, Sun S, Lai X, Dong Y, Zhang
L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, the First Affiliated Hospital, Chongqing
Medical University, No.1 Youyi Road, Yuzhong District, Chongqing, 400016,
People's Republic of China.

Dysregulation of Forkhead box (Fox) transcription factor family genes was
previously shown to lead to congenital disorders, diabetes mellitus, and
carcinogenesis, and recent reports suggested that several Fox genes play
important roles in the pathogenesis of liver fibrosis. The present study was
initiated to determine the expression profiles of the Fox genes in normal Balb/c 
mouse liver and their dynamic expression changes during fibrogenesis induced by
experimental bile duct ligation (BDL). RT-PCR was employed to detect 18 FOX
family members including FOXO1, FOXO3, FOXM1, and FOXL1 in normal mouse liver.
FQ-PCR was performed to analyze the dynamic mRNA expression changes of nine
inflammation- or proliferation-related FOX family genes in BDL mice. Results
showed that all the 18 Fox genes were expressed in the normal mouse liver, among 
which the expression of FOXO1 and FOXO3 were found to be the highest. The
inflammation and proliferation-related FOX family genes were found to be
dynamically changed during BDL-induced liver injury with reduced FOXO1 and
enhanced FOXOL1 and FOXM1, indicating their potential involvement in the
pathogenesis of liver fibrosis. This is the first systematic evaluation of
hepatic expression of FOX genes in both normal and BDL mice.

PMID: 21104447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 15;70(22):9515-26. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-2173. Epub 
2010 Nov 9.

Induction of human epithelial stem/progenitor expansion by FOXM1.

Gemenetzidis E(1), Elena-Costea D, Parkinson EK, Waseem A, Wan H, Teh MT.

Author information: 
(1)Queen Mary University of London, Barts and The London School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Institute of Dentistry, Centre for Clinical and Diagnostic Oral
Sciences, London, England.

Erratum in
    Cancer Res. 2011 Jan 1;71(1):290.

Stem cells are permanent residents of tissues and thought to be targets of cancer
initiation. The frequent, and often early, upregulation of the FOXM1
transcription factor in the majority of human cancers suggests that it may
participate in the initiation of human tumorigenesis. However, this hypothesis
has not been tested. Herein, we show that targeting the ectopic expression of
FOXM1 to the highly clonogenic cells of primary human keratinocytes with
stem/progenitor cell properties, but not to differentiating cells, caused clonal 
expansion in vitro. We show, using a functional three-dimensional organotypic
epithelial tissue regeneration system, that ectopic FOXM1 expression perturbed
epithelial differentiation generating a hyperproliferative phenotype reminiscent 
of that seen in human epithelial hyperplasia. Furthermore, transcriptional
expression analysis of a panel of 28 epithelial differentiation-specific genes
reveals a role for FOXM1 in the suppression of epithelial differentiation. This
study provides the first evidence that FOXM1 participates in an early oncogenic
pathway that predisposes cells to tumorigenesis by expanding the stem/progenitor 
compartment and deregulating subsequent keratinocyte terminal differentiation.
This finding reveals an important window of susceptibility to oncogenic signals
in epithelial stem/progenitor cells prior to differentiation, and may provide a
significant benefit to the design of cancer therapeutic interventions that target
oncogenesis at its earliest incipient stage.

Copyright © 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3044465
PMID: 21062979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 10;285(50):39211-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.156026. Epub
2010 Oct 6.

Butyrate-rich colonic microenvironment is a relevant selection factor for
metabolically adapted tumor cells.

Serpa J(1), Caiado F, Carvalho T, Torre C, Gonçalves LG, Casalou C, Lamosa P,
Rodrigues M, Zhu Z, Lam EW, Dias S.

Author information: 
(1)Angiogenesis Group, Instituto Português de Oncologia de Francisco Gentil,
Centro de Lisboa, EPE (CIPM/IPOLFG), Lisbon 1099-023, Portugal.

The short chain fatty acid (SCFA) butyrate is a product of colonic fermentation
of dietary fibers. It is the main source of energy for normal colonocytes, but
cannot be metabolized by most tumor cells. Butyrate also functions as a histone
deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor to control cell proliferation and apoptosis. In
consequence, butyrate and its derived drugs are used in cancer therapy. Here we
show that aggressive tumor cells that retain the capacity of metabolizing
butyrate are positively selected in their microenvironment. In the mouse
xenograft model, butyrate-preselected human colon cancer cells gave rise to
subcutaneous tumors that grew faster and were more angiogenic than those derived 
from untreated cells. Similarly, butyrate-preselected cells demonstrated a
significant increase in rates of homing to the lung after intravenous injection. 
Our data showed that butyrate regulates the expression of VEGF and its receptor
KDR at the transcriptional level potentially through FoxM1, resulting in the
generation of a functional VEGF:KDR autocrine growth loop. Cells selected by
chronic exposure to butyrate express higher levels of MMP2, MMP9, a2 and a3
integrins, and lower levels of E-cadherin, a marker for epithelial to mesenchymal
transition. The orthotopic model of colon cancer showed that cells preselected by
butyrate are able to colonize the animals locally and at distant organs, whereas 
control cells can only generate a local tumor in the cecum. Together our data
shows that a butyrate-rich microenvironment may select for tumor cells that are
able to metabolize butyrate, which are also phenotypically more aggressive.

PMCID: PMC2998102
PMID: 20926374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Cell Prolif. 2010 Oct;43(5):494-504. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2010.00699.x.

Two-fold elevation of expression of FoxM1 transcription factor in mouse embryonic
fibroblasts enhances cell cycle checkpoint activity by stimulating p21 and Chk1
transcription.

Tan Y(1), Chen Y, Yu L, Zhu H, Meng X, Huang X, Meng L, Ding M, Wang Z, Shan L.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Engineering Center and State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and
Chemometrics, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan, China. yjtan@hnu.cn

OBJECTIVES: Forkhead Box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor regulates expression of 
cell cycle effective genes and is stabilized by checkpoint kinase 2 (Chk2) to
stimulate expression of DNA repair enzymes in response to DNA damage. This study 
intended to test whether FoxM1 is involved in cell cycle checkpoint pathways.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Analysis of senescence and cell proliferation in FoxM1
transgenic (TG) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) with 2-fold elevation of
FoxM1, and overexpression or knockdown of FoxM1 in an inducible FoxM1 expression 
cell line, or FoxM1 siRNA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays (EMSA), and cotransfection to determine FoxM1 transcription
targets, as well as RNase protection assays and western blot analysis, were
performed.
RESULTS: Two-fold elevation of FoxM1 in FoxM1-TG-MEFs resulted in low levels of
cell proliferation and increase in permanent cell cycle arrest at early passages 
(from passage 6 to 9). These phenotypes correlated with increased phosphorylation
of p53 on Ser15, elevated expression of cell cycle inhibitor p21 and Chk1 at
passage 3. FoxM1 was stabilized in response to DNA damage in MEFs and FoxM1
overexpression induced p21. Knockdown of FoxM1 resulted in decrease in Chk1.
ChIP, EMSA and cotransfection assays confirmed that FoxM1 stimulated promoters of
p21 and Chk1.
CONCLUSIONS: Chk1 and p21 are direct transcription targets of FoxM1 and FoxM1
participates in transcriptional responses to stress in normal cells.

PMID: 20887555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2011 Jul;45(1):101-10. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2010-0149OC. 
Epub 2010 Sep 20.

Sox2 activates cell proliferation and differentiation in the respiratory
epithelium.

Tompkins DH(1), Besnard V, Lange AW, Keiser AR, Wert SE, Bruno MD, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Pulmonary Biology, 
MLC 7029, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Sox2, a transcription factor critical for the maintenance of embryonic stem cells
and induction of pluripotent stem cells, is expressed exclusively in the
conducting airway epithelium of the lung, where it is required for
differentiation of nonciliated, goblet, and ciliated cells. To determine the role
of Sox2 in respiratory epithelial cells, Sox2 was selectively and conditionally
expressed in nonciliated airway epithelial cells and in alveolar type II cells in
the adult mouse. Sox2 induced epithelial cell proliferation within 3 days of
expression. Epithelial cell proliferation was associated with increased Ki-67 and
cyclin D1 staining. Expression of cell cycle genes, including FoxM1, Ccna2
(Cyclin A2), Ccnb2 (Cyclin B2), and Ccnd1 (Cyclin D1), was increased. Consistent 
with a role in cell proliferation, Sox2 activated the transcription of FoxM1 in
vitro. In alveoli, Sox2 caused hyperplasia and ectopic differentiation of
epithelial cells to those with morphologic and molecular characteristics of
conducting airway epithelium. Sox2 induced the expression of conducting airway
epithelial specific genes, including Scgb1a1, Foxj1, Tubb3, and Cyp2f2. Although 
prolonged expression of Sox2 caused cell proliferation and epithelial
hyperplasia, Sox2 did not induce pulmonary tumors. Sox2 induces proliferation of 
respiratory epithelial cells and, subsequently, partially reprograms alveolar
epithelial cells into cells with characteristics of the conducting airways.

PMCID: PMC3145063
PMID: 20855650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Nov;30(22):5381-93. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00876-10. Epub 2010 Sep 
13.

Forkhead box M1 transcription factor is required for macrophage recruitment
during liver repair.

Ren X(1), Zhang Y, Snyder J, Cross ER, Shah TA, Kalin TV, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research Foundation, 
3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Acute liver injury results from exposure to toxins, pharmacological agents, or
viral infections, contributing to significant morbidity and mortality worldwide. 
While hepatic inflammation is critical for liver repair, the transcriptional
mechanisms required for the recruitment of inflammatory cells to the liver are
not understood. Forkhead box M1 (Foxm1) transcription factor is a master
regulator of hepatocyte proliferation, but its role in inflammatory cells remains
unknown. In this study, we generated transgenic mice in which Foxm1 was deleted
from myeloid-derived cells, including macrophages, monocytes, and neutrophils.
Carbon tetrachloride liver injury was used to demonstrate that myeloid-specific
Foxm1 deletion caused a delay in liver repair. Although Foxm1 deficiency did not 
influence neutrophil infiltration into injured livers, the total numbers of
mature macrophages were dramatically reduced. Surprisingly, Foxm1 deficiency did 
not influence the proliferation of macrophages or their monocytic precursors but 
impaired monocyte recruitment during liver repair. Expression of L-selectin and
the CCR2 chemokine receptor, both critical for monocyte recruitment to injured
tissues, was decreased. Foxm1 induced transcriptional activity of the mouse CCR2 
promoter in cotransfection experiments. Adoptive transfer of monocytes to
Foxm1-deficient mice restored liver repair and rescued liver function. Foxm1 is
critical for liver repair and is required for the recruitment of monocytes to the
injured liver.

PMCID: PMC2976366
PMID: 20837707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Nov;31(11):2012-21. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq185. Epub 2010
Sep 7.

The FOXM1 transcriptional factor promotes the proliferation of leukemia cells
through modulation of cell cycle progression in acute myeloid leukemia.

Nakamura S(1), Hirano I, Okinaka K, Takemura T, Yokota D, Ono T, Shigeno K,
Shibata K, Fujisawa S, Ohnishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka, Japan. satonaka@hama-med.ac.jp

FOXM1 is an important cell cycle regulator and regulates cell proliferation. In
addition, FOXM1 has been reported to contribute to oncogenesis in various
cancers. However, it is not clearly understood how FOXM1 contributes to acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) cell proliferation. In this study, we investigated the
cellular and molecular function of FOXM1 in AML cells. The FOXM1 messenger RNA
(mRNA) expressed in AML cell lines was predominantly the FOXM1B isoform, and its 
levels were significantly higher than in normal high aldehyde dehydrogenase
activity (ALDH(hi)) cells. Reduction of FOXM1 expression in AML cells inhibited
cell proliferation compared with control cells, through induction of G(2)/M cell 
cycle arrest, a decrease in the protein expression of Aurora kinase B, Survivin, 
Cyclin B1, S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 and Cdc25B and an increase in the 
protein expression of p21(Cip1) and p27(Kip1). FOXM1 messenger RNA (mRNA) was
overexpressed in all 127 AML clinical specimens tested (n = 21, 56, 32 and 18 for
M1, M2, M4 and M5 subtypes, respectively). Compared with normal ALDH(hi) cells,
FOXM1 gene expression was 1.65- to 2.26-fold higher in AML cells. Moreover, the
FOXM1 protein was more strongly expressed in AML-derived ALDH(hi) cells compared 
with normal ALDH(hi) cells. In addition, depletion of FOXM1 reduced colony
formation of AML-derived ALDH(hi) cells due to inhibition of Cdc25B and Cyclin B1
expression. In summary, we found that FOXM1B mRNA is predominantly expressed in
AML cells and that aberrant expression of FOXM1 induces AML cell proliferation
through modulation of cell cycle progression. Thus, inhibition of FOXM1
expression represents an attractive target for AML therapy.

PMID: 20823107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Dev Biol. 2010 Nov 15;347(2):301-14. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.08.027. Epub 2010 
Sep 21.

Increased expression of FoxM1 transcription factor in respiratory epithelium
inhibits lung sacculation and causes Clara cell hyperplasia.

Wang IC(1), Zhang Y, Snyder J, Sutherland MJ, Burhans MS, Shannon JM, Park HJ,
Whitsett JA, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Perinatal Institute of the Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Research Foundation, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45229, 
USA. I-Ching.Wang@cchmc.org

Foxm1 is a member of the Forkhead Box (Fox) family of transcription factors.
Foxm1 (previously called Foxm1b, HFH-11B, Trident, Win, or MPP2) is expressed in 
multiple cell types and plays important roles in cellular proliferation,
differentiation and tumorigenesis. Genetic deletion of Foxm1 from mouse
respiratory epithelium during initial stages of lung development inhibits lung
maturation and causes respiratory failure after birth. However, the role of Foxm1
during postnatal lung morphogenesis remains unknown. In the present study, Foxm1 
expression was detected in epithelial cells of conducting and peripheral airways 
and changing dynamically with lung maturation. To discern the biological role of 
Foxm1 in the prenatal and postnatal lung, a novel transgenic mouse line that
expresses a constitutively active form of FoxM1 (FoxM1 N-terminal deletion mutant
or FoxM1-<U+0394>N) under the control of lung epithelial-specific SPC promoter was
produced. Expression of the FoxM1-<U+0394>N transgene during embryogenesis caused
epithelial hyperplasia, inhibited lung sacculation and expression of the type II 
epithelial marker, pro-SPC. Expression of FoxM1-<U+0394>N mutant during the postnatal
period did not influence alveologenesis but caused focal airway hyperplasia and
increased proliferation of Clara cells. Likewise, expression of FoxM1-<U+0394>N mutant
in conducting airways with Scgb1a1 promoter was sufficient to induce Clara cell
hyperplasia. Furthermore, FoxM1-<U+0394>N cooperated with activated K-Ras to induce lung
tumor growth in vivo. Increased activity of Foxm1 altered lung sacculation,
induced proliferation in the respiratory epithelium and accelerated lung tumor
growth, indicating that precise regulation of Foxm1 is critical for normal lung
morphogenesis and development of lung cancer.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2957513
PMID: 20816795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cell Cycle. 2010 Aug 15;9(16):3233-42. doi: 10.4161/cc.9.16.12599. Epub 2010 Aug 
2.

Regulation of yeast forkhead transcription factors and FoxM1 by cyclin-dependent 
and polo-like kinases.

Murakami H(1), Aiba H, Nakanishi M, Murakami-Tonami Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medicine,
Nagoya City University, Nagoya, Japan. hmura@med.nagoya-cu.ac.jp

Members of the forkhead-box (Fox) family of transcription factors are present in 
many eukaryotes. More than 100 such proteins that share homology in the
winged-helix DNA-binding domain have been identified in higher eukaryotes. This
family of transcription factors is implicated in the regulation of a variety of
cellular processes, including the cell cycle, apoptosis, DNA repair, stress
resistance and metabolism. A subfamily of Fox proteins are required to activate
expression of the genes encoding B-type cyclins, Cdc25 and Polo-like kinase (Plk)
during the mitotic cell cycle and meiosis in organisms from yeast to mammals.
These proteins are activators of cyclin-dependent kinase 1 (Cdk1). Cdk1 and Plk
phosphorylate Fox and its associated proteins at different sites, resulting in
activation or repression of Fox transcriptional activity, depending on the target
genes. In addition to their documented transcriptional functions, Fox proteins
are involved in the regulation of pre-mRNA processing, at least in yeast. In this
review, we will focus on the role of Fox proteins in the fission yeast
Schizosaccharomyces pombe and budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, in addition
to the role of FoxM1 in mammals in the cell cycle and in pre-mRNA processing, as 
revealed in recent studies.

PMID: 20716958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Stem Cells. 2010 Oct;28(10):1751-9. doi: 10.1002/stem.496.

B-Myb is critical for proper DNA duplication during an unperturbed S phase in
mouse embryonic stem cells.

Lorvellec M(1), Dumon S, Maya-Mendoza A, Jackson D, Frampton J, García P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Research, College of Medical and Dental Sciences,
University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, United Kingdom.

A common feature of early embryo cells from the inner cell mass (ICM) and of ESCs
is an absolute dependence on an atypical cell cycle in which the G1 phase is
shortened to preserve their self-renewing and pluripotent nature. The
transcription factor B-Myb has been attributed a role in proliferation, in
particular during the G2/M phases of the cell cycle. Intriguingly, B-Myb levels
in ICM/ESCs are greater than 100 times compared with those in normal
proliferating cells, suggesting a particularly important function for this
transcription factor in pluripotent stem cells. B-Myb is essential for embryo
development beyond the preimplantation stage, but its role in ICM/ESCs remains
unclear. Using a combination of mouse genetics, single DNA fiber analyses and
high-resolution three-dimensional (3D) imaging, we demonstrate that B-Myb has no 
influence on the expression of pluripotency factors, but instead B-Myb ablation
leads to stalling of replication forks and superactivation of replication
factories that result in disorganization of the replication program and an
increase in double-strand breaks. These effects are partly due to aberrant
transcriptional regulation of cell cycle proliferation factors, namely c-Myc and 
FoxM1, which dictate normal S phase progression. We conclude that B-Myb acts
crucially during the S phase in ESCs by facilitating proper progression of
replication, thereby protecting the cells from genomic damage. Our findings have 
particular relevance in the light of the potential therapeutic application of
ESCs and the need to maintain their genomic integrity.

PMCID: PMC4214134
PMID: 20715180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Histol Histopathol. 2010 Oct;25(10):1269-75.

Nuclear accumulation of glioma-associated oncogene 2 protein and enhanced
expression of forkhead-box transcription factor M1 protein in human
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Lin M(1), Guo LM, Liu H, Du J, Yang J, Zhang LJ, Zhang B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing,
China.

The hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has been reported to be crucial in human
carcinogenesis and tumor progression. Glioma-associated oncogenes (Gli), are zinc
finger transcription factors which mediate the transcriptional response to Hh
signaling. To explore the role of Gli in the development and progression of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), we investigated the expression of Gli2 and FoxM1 
(forkhead-box transcription factor M1) which is one of the Gli downstream target 
genes modulating cell cycle progression in 91 specimens of human HCCs with
immunohistochemistry. These immunostaining results were compared with various
clinicopathologic parameters. Immunoreactivity of Gli2 and FoxM1 was observed
respectively in 84.6% (77/91) and 80.2% (73/91) cases of HCC tumor tissues, and
this was considerably higher than expression in the peritumoral tissues.
Distribution of Gli2 and FoxM1 proteins in tumor cells was nuclear with or
without cytoplasmic staining, or cytoplasmic alone. Statistically, increased
nuclear immunopositivity of Gli2 protein correlated significantly with poorer
tumor differentiation (P<0.05), as well as with portal vein tumor thrombosis
(P<0.05). In addition, overexpression of FoxM1 protein was significantly
associated with increased tumor grade (P<0.01) and advanced tumor stage (P<0.05).
Moreover, there was a significant association between the expressions of Gli2 and
FoxM1 proteins in HCC (r=0.464, P=0.000). This is consistent with the concept
that in human HCC, the Hh signaling pathway is involved in the differentiation
and proliferation of tumor cells, in part through inducing nuclear accumulation
of Gli2 protein and subsequent upregulation of FoxM1 protein.

PMID: 20712011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Dec;38(22):8027-38. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq715. Epub 2010
Aug 11.

Foxm1 transcription factor is required for maintenance of pluripotency of P19
embryonal carcinoma cells.

Xie Z(1), Tan G, Ding M, Dong D, Chen T, Meng X, Huang X, Tan Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Biology,
Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan 410082, China.

Transcription factor Foxm1 plays a critical role during embryonic development and
its expression is repressed during retinoic acid (RA)-induced differentiation of 
pluripotent P19 embryonal carcinoma cells at the early stage, correlated with
downregulation of expression of pluripotency markers. To study whether Foxm1
participates in the maintenance of pluripotency of stem cells, we knock down
Foxm1 expression in P19 cells and identify that Oct4 are regulated directly by
Foxm1. Knockdown of Foxm1 also results in spontaneous differentiation of P19
cells to mesodermal derivatives, such as muscle and adipose tissues. Maintaining 
Foxm1 expression prevents the downregulation of pluripotency-related
transcription factors such as Oct4 and Nanog during P19 cell differentiation.
Furthermore, overexpression of FOXM1 alone in RA-differentiated P19 cells (4
days) or human newborn fibroblasts restarts the expression of pluripotent genes
Oct4, Nanog and Sox2. Together, our results suggest a critical involvement of
Foxm1 in maintenance of stem cell pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC3001083
PMID: 20702419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Methods Mol Biol. 2010;647:113-23. doi: 10.1007/978-1-60761-738-9_6.

Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling stimulates the nuclear translocation and transactivating
activity of FOXM1.

Ma RY(1), Tong TH, Leung WY, Yao KM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, 
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

The proliferation-associated transcription factor FOXM1 is essential for cell
cycle progression into mitosis. Using synchronized human fibroblasts we detected,
by immunostaining, that FOXM1 is localized predominantly in the cytoplasm in
cells at late-G1 and S phases. Nuclear translocation occurs just before
progression into the G2/M phase of the cell cycle and requires activity of the
Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling pathway. Using pharmacological modulators, we demonstrated
that activity of the Raf/MEK/MAPK pathway is both necessary and sufficient for
the nuclear translocation of FOXM1. Consistent with FoxM1c being the major
isoform expressed in proliferating fibroblasts, constitutively active MEK1
enhances the transactivating effect of FOXM1c, but not FOXM1b, on the cyclin B1
promoter in transient reporter assays. Here, we describe in detail the methods
involved in generating these findings, which support the notion that FOXM1 is an 
effector of Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling in G2/M regulation.

PMID: 20694663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Exp Med. 2010 Aug 2;207(8):1675-85. doi: 10.1084/jem.20091857. Epub 2010 Jul
26.

FoxM1 regulates re-annealing of endothelial adherens junctions through
transcriptional control of beta-catenin expression.

Mirza MK(1), Sun Y, Zhao YD, Potula HH, Frey RS, Vogel SM, Malik AB, Zhao YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Center for Lung and Vascular Biology,
University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Repair of the injured vascular intima requires a series of coordinated events
that mediate both endothelial regeneration and reannealing of adherens junctions 
(AJs) to form a restrictive endothelial barrier. The forkhead transcription
factor FoxM1 is essential for endothelial proliferation after vascular injury.
However, little is known about mechanisms by which FoxM1 regulates endothelial
barrier reannealing. Here, using a mouse model with endothelial cell
(EC)-restricted disruption of FoxM1 (FoxM1 CKO) and primary cultures of ECs with 
small interfering RNA (siRNA)-mediated knockdown of FoxM1, we demonstrate a novel
requisite role of FoxM1 in mediating endothelial AJ barrier repair through the
transcriptional control of beta-catenin. In the FoxM1 CKO lung vasculature, we
observed persistent microvessel leakage characterized by impaired reannealing of 
endothelial AJs after endothelial injury. We also showed that FoxM1 directly
regulated beta-catenin transcription and that reexpression of beta-catenin
rescued the defective AJ barrier-reannealing phenotype of FoxM1-deficient ECs.
Knockdown of beta-catenin mimicked the phenotype of defective barrier recovery
seen in FoxM1-deficient ECs. These data demonstrate that FoxM1 is required for
reannealing of endothelial AJs in order to form a restrictive endothelial barrier
through transcriptional control of beta-catenin expression. Therefore, means of
activating FoxM1-mediated endothelial repair represent a new therapeutic strategy
for the treatment of inflammatory vascular diseases associated with persistent
vascular barrier leakiness such as acute lung injury.

PMCID: PMC2916140
PMID: 20660612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Sep;24(9):1822-34. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0082. Epub 2010 Jul 
21.

FoxM1 is up-regulated by obesity and stimulates beta-cell proliferation.

Davis DB(1), Lavine JA, Suhonen JI, Krautkramer KA, Rabaglia ME, Sperger JM,
Fernandez LA, Yandell BS, Keller MP, Wang IM, Schadt EE, Attie AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA.
dbd@medicine.wisc.edu

beta-Cell mass expansion is one mechanism by which obese animals compensate for
insulin resistance and prevent diabetes. FoxM1 is a transcription factor that can
regulate the expression of multiple cell cycle genes and is necessary for the
maintenance of adult beta-cell mass, beta-cell proliferation, and glucose
homeostasis. We hypothesized that FoxM1 is up-regulated by nondiabetic obesity
and initiates a transcriptional program leading to beta-cell proliferation. We
performed gene expression analysis on islets from the nondiabetic C57BL/6
Leptin(ob/ob) mouse, the diabetic BTBR Leptin(ob/ob) mouse, and an F2
Leptin(ob/ob) population derived from these strains. We identified obesity-driven
coordinated up-regulation of islet Foxm1 and its target genes in the nondiabetic 
strain, correlating with beta-cell mass expansion and proliferation. This
up-regulation was absent in the diabetic strain. In the F2 Leptin(ob/ob)
population, increased expression of Foxm1 and its target genes segregated with
higher insulin and lower glucose levels. We next studied the effects of FOXM1b
overexpression on isolated mouse and human islets. We found that FoxM1 stimulated
mouse and human beta-cell proliferation by activating many cell cycle phases. We 
asked whether FOXM1 expression is also responsive to obesity in human islets by
collecting RNA from human islet donors (body mass index range: 24-51). We found
that the expression of FOXM1 and its target genes is positively correlated with
body mass index. Our data suggest that beta-cell proliferation occurs in adult
obese humans in an attempt to expand beta-cell mass to compensate for insulin
resistance, and that the FoxM1 transcriptional program plays a key role in this
process.

PMCID: PMC2940473
PMID: 20660304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Jan;112(1):78-88. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22770.

Down-regulation of Notch-1 is associated with Akt and FoxM1 in inducing cell
growth inhibition and apoptosis in prostate cancer cells.

Wang Z(1), Li Y, Ahmad A, Banerjee S, Azmi AS, Kong D, Wojewoda C, Miele L,
Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University,
Detroit, MI, USA. zhiweiwang@med.wayne.edu

Although many studies have been done to uncover the mechanisms by which
down-regulation of Notch-1 exerts its anti-tumor activity against a variety of
human malignancies, the precise molecular mechanisms remain unclear. In the
present study, we investigated the cellular consequence of Notch-1
down-regulation and also assessed the molecular consequence of Notch-1-mediated
alterations of its downstream targets on cell viability and apoptosis in prostate
cancer (PCa) cells. We found that the down-regulation of Notch-1 led to the
inhibition of cell growth and induction of apoptosis, which was mechanistically
linked with down-regulation of Akt and FoxM1, suggesting for the first time that 
Akt and FoxM1 are downstream targets of Notch-1 signaling. Moreover, we found
that a "natural agent" (genistein) originally discovered from soybean could cause
significant reduction in cell viability and induced apoptosis of PCa cells, which
was consistent with down-regulation of Notch-1, Akt, and FoxM1. These results
suggest that down-regulation of Notch-1 by novel agents could become a newer
approach for the prevention of tumor progression and/or treatment, which is
likely to be mediated via inactivation of Akt and FoxM1 signaling pathways in
PCa.

PMCID: PMC3792569
PMID: 20658545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Jan;226(1):194-204. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22326.

FOXM1 expression mediates growth suppression during terminal differentiation of
HO-1 human metastatic melanoma cells.

Huynh KM(1), Soh JW, Dash R, Sarkar D, Fisher PB, Kang D.

Author information: 
(1)Ilsong Institute of Life Science, Hallym University, Kyonggi-do, Republic of
Korea.

Induction of terminal differentiation represents a potentially less toxic cancer 
therapy. Treatment of HO-1 human metastatic melanoma cells with IFN-ß plus
mezerein (MEZ) promotes terminal differentiation with an irreversible loss of
growth potential. During this process, the transcription factor FOXM1 is
down-regulated potentially inhibiting transactivation of target genes including
those involved in G(2)/M progression and cell proliferation. We investigated the 
mechanism of FOXM1 down-regulation and its physiological role in terminal
differentiation. Genetic and pharmacological studies revealed that FOXM1
down-regulation was primarily caused by MEZ activation of PKCa and co-treatment
with IFN-ß plus MEZ augmented the effect of PKCa. Promoter analysis with a
mutated E-box on the FOXM1 promoter, and in vitro and in vivo binding assays
confirm a direct role of c-Myc on FOXM1 expression. Reduction of c-Myc and
overexpression of Mad1 by IFN-ß plus MEZ treatment should cause potent and
persistent reduction of FOXM1 expression during terminal differentiation.
Overexpression of FOXM1 restored expression of cell cycle-associated genes and
increased the proportion of cells in the S phase. Our experiments support a model
for terminal differentiation in which FOXM1 down-regulation via activation of
PKCa followed by suppression of c-Myc expression, are causal events in promoting 
growth inhibition during terminal differentiation.

PMID: 20658516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 24;285(39):30214-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.104513. Epub
2010 Jul 7.

Essential role of p400/mDomino chromatin-remodeling ATPase in bone marrow
hematopoiesis and cell-cycle progression.

Fujii T(1), Ueda T, Nagata S, Fukunaga R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Chemistry, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Yoshida-Konoe, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

p400/mDomino is an ATP-dependent chromatin-remodeling protein that catalyzes the 
deposition of histone variant H2A.Z into nucleosomes to regulate gene expression.
We previously showed that p400/mDomino is essential for embryonic development and
primitive hematopoiesis. Here we generated a conditional knock-out mouse for the 
p400/mDomino gene and investigated the role of p400/mDomino in adult bone marrow 
hematopoiesis and in the cell-cycle progression of embryonic fibroblasts. The
Mx1-Cre- mediated deletion of p400/mDomino resulted in an acute loss of nucleated
cells in the bone marrow, including committed myeloid and erythroid cells as well
as hematopoietic progenitor and stem cells. A hematopoietic colony assay revealed
a drastic reduction in colony-forming activity after the deletion of
p400/mDomino. Moreover, the loss of p400/mDomino in mouse embryonic fibroblasts
(MEFs) resulted in strong growth inhibition. Cell-cycle analysis revealed that
the mDomino-deficient MEFs exhibited a pleiotropic cell-cycle defect at the S and
G(2)/M phases, and polyploid and multi-nucleated cells with micronuclei emerged. 
DNA microarray analysis revealed that the p400/mDomino deletion from MEFs caused 
the impaired expression of many cell-cycle-regulatory genes, including
G(2)/M-specific genes targeted by the transcription factors FoxM1 and c-Myc.
These results indicate that p400/mDomino plays a key role in cellular
proliferation by controlling the expression of cell-cycle-regulatory genes.

PMCID: PMC2943321
PMID: 20610385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Cancer Biother Radiopharm. 2010 Jun;25(3):289-98. doi: 10.1089/cbr.2009.0697.

The ultrastructural study of tumorigenic cells using nanobiomarkers.

Pavon LF(1), Marti LC, Sibov TT, Malheiros SM, Oliveira DM, Guilhen DD,
Camargo-Mathias MI, Amaro Junior E, Gamarra LF.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto do Cérebro, Instituto Israelita de Ensino e Pesquisa Albert
Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil. lorenap@einstein.br

Despite recent advances, patients with malignant brain tumors still have a poor
prognosis. Glioblastoma (WHO grade 4 astrocytoma), the most malignant brain
tumor, represents 50% of all astrocytomas, with a median survival rate of <1
year. It is, therefore, extremely important to search for new diagnostic and
therapeutic approaches for patients with glioblastoma. This study describes the
application of superparamagnetic nanoparticles of iron oxide, as well as
monoclonal antibodies, of immunophenotypic significance, conjoined to quantum
dots for the ultrastructural assessment of glioblastoma cells. For this proposal,
an immunophenotypic study by flow cytometry was carried out, followed by
transmission electron microscopy analysis. The process of tumor cell labeling
using nanoparticles can successfully contribute to the identification of
tumorigenic cells and consequently for better understanding of glioblastoma
genesis and recurrence. In addition, this method may help further studies in
tumor imaging, diagnosis, and prognostic markers detection.

PMID: 20578834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Syst Biol. 2010 Jun 8;6:377. doi: 10.1038/msb.2010.31.

A human B-cell interactome identifies MYB and FOXM1 as master regulators of
proliferation in germinal centers.

Lefebvre C(1), Rajbhandari P, Alvarez MJ, Bandaru P, Lim WK, Sato M, Wang K,
Sumazin P, Kustagi M, Bisikirska BC, Basso K, Beltrao P, Krogan N, Gautier J,
Dalla-Favera R, Califano A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Columbia University, New 
York, NY 10032, USA.

Assembly of a transcriptional and post-translational molecular interaction
network in B cells, the human B-cell interactome (HBCI), reveals a hierarchical, 
transcriptional control module, where MYB and FOXM1 act as synergistic master
regulators of proliferation in the germinal center (GC). Eighty percent of genes 
jointly regulated by these transcription factors are activated in the GC,
including those encoding proteins in a complex regulating DNA pre-replication,
replication, and mitosis. These results indicate that the HBCI analysis can be
used for the identification of determinants of major human cell phenotypes and
provides a paradigm of general applicability to normal and pathologic tissues.

PMCID: PMC2913282
PMID: 20531406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Cancer Res. 2010 Jun 15;70(12):5054-63. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0545. Epub 
2010 Jun 8.

FoxM1 mediates resistance to herceptin and paclitaxel.

Carr JR(1), Park HJ, Wang Z, Kiefer MM, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60607-7170, USA.

Inherent and acquired therapeutic resistance in breast cancer remains a major
clinical challenge. In human breast cancer samples, overexpression of the
oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1 has been suggested to be a marker of poor
prognosis. In this study, we report that FoxM1 overexpression confers resistance 
to the human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 monoclonal antibody Herceptin and
microtubule-stabilizing drug paclitaxel, both as single agents and in
combination. FoxM1 altered microtubule dynamics to protect tumor cells from
paclitaxel-induced apoptosis. Mechanistic investigations revealed that the
tubulin-destabilizing protein Stathmin, whose expression also confers resistance 
to paclitaxel, is a direct transcriptional target of FoxM1. Significantly,
attenuating FoxM1 expression by small interfering RNA or an alternate reading
frame (ARF)-derived peptide inhibitor increased therapeutic sensitivity. Our
findings indicate that targeting FoxM1 could relieve therapeutic resistance in
breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2893542
PMID: 20530690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Hepatology. 2010 May;51(5):1735-43. doi: 10.1002/hep.23547.

MicroRNAs control hepatocyte proliferation during liver regeneration.

Song G(1), Sharma AD, Roll GR, Ng R, Lee AY, Blelloch RH, Frandsen NM,
Willenbring H.

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) constitute a new class of regulators of gene expression. Among
other actions, miRNAs have been shown to control cell proliferation in
development and cancer. However, whether miRNAs regulate hepatocyte proliferation
during liver regeneration is unknown. We addressed this question by performing
2/3 partial hepatectomy (2/3 PH) on mice with hepatocyte-specific inactivation of
DiGeorge syndrome critical region gene 8 (DGCR8), an essential component of the
miRNA processing pathway. Hepatocytes of these mice were miRNA-deficient and
exhibited a delay in cell cycle progression involving the G(1) to S phase
transition. Examination of livers of wildtype mice after 2/3 PH revealed
differential expression of a subset of miRNAs, notably an induction of miR-21 and
repression of miR-378. We further discovered that miR-21 directly inhibits Btg2, 
a cell cycle inhibitor that prevents activation of forkhead box M1 (FoxM1), which
is essential for DNA synthesis in hepatocytes after 2/3 PH. In addition, we found
that miR-378 directly inhibits ornithine decarboxylase (Odc1), which is known to 
promote DNA synthesis in hepatocytes after 2/3 PH.CONCLUSION: Our results show
that miRNAs are critical regulators of hepatocyte proliferation during liver
regeneration. Because these miRNAs and target gene interactions are conserved,
our findings may also be relevant to human liver regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3108060
PMID: 20432256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. PLoS One. 2010 Apr 19;5(4):e10210. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010210.

Massively parallel signature sequencing and bioinformatics analysis identifies
up-regulation of TGFBI and SOX4 in human glioblastoma.

Lin B(1), Madan A, Yoon JG, Fang X, Yan X, Kim TK, Hwang D, Hood L, Foltz G.

Author information: 
(1)Swedish Neuroscience Institute, Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, Washington,
United States of America. Biaoyang.Lin@swedish.org

BACKGROUND: A comprehensive network-based understanding of molecular pathways
abnormally altered in glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is essential for developing
effective therapeutic approaches for this deadly disease.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Applying a next generation sequencing technology,
massively parallel signature sequencing (MPSS), we identified a total of 4535
genes that are differentially expressed between normal brain and GBM tissue. The 
expression changes of three up-regulated genes, CHI3L1, CHI3L2, and FOXM1, and
two down-regulated genes, neurogranin and L1CAM, were confirmed by quantitative
PCR. Pathway analysis revealed that TGF- beta pathway related genes were
significantly up-regulated in GBM tumor samples. An integrative pathway analysis 
of the TGF beta signaling network identified two alternative TGF-beta signaling
pathways mediated by SOX4 (sex determining region Y-box 4) and TGFBI
(Transforming growth factor beta induced). Quantitative RT-PCR and
immunohistochemistry staining demonstrated that SOX4 and TGFBI expression is
elevated in GBM tissues compared with normal brain tissues at both the RNA and
protein levels. In vitro functional studies confirmed that TGFBI and SOX4
expression is increased by TGF-beta stimulation and decreased by a specific
inhibitor of TGF-beta receptor 1 kinase.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our MPSS database for GBM and normal brain tissues
provides a useful resource for the scientific community. The identification of
non-SMAD mediated TGF-beta signaling pathways acting through SOX4 and TGFBI (GENE
ID:7045) in GBM indicates that these alternative pathways should be considered,
in addition to the canonical SMAD mediated pathway, in the development of new
therapeutic strategies targeting TGF-beta signaling in GBM. Finally, the
construction of an extended TGF-beta signaling network with overlaid gene
expression changes between GBM and normal brain extends our understanding of the 
biology of GBM.

PMCID: PMC2856677
PMID: 20419098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Oral Oncol. 2010 Jul;46(7):536-42. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2010.03.022. Epub 
2010 Apr 18.

Downstream targets of FOXM1: CEP55 and HELLS are cancer progression markers of
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Waseem A(1), Ali M, Odell EW, Fortune F, Teh MT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical and Diagnostic Oral Sciences, Institute of Dentistry,
Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, Turner Street, London E1 2AD, England, United Kingdom.

We recently showed that upregulation of a key oncogene FOXM1 precedes head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) malignancy. Furthermore, we also identified 
a centrosomal protein CEP55 and a DNA helicase/putative stem cell marker HELLS,
which are both downstream targets of FOXM1. In this study, we have investigated
the expression profiles of CEP55 and HELLS using immunohistochemistry and
quantified by digital densitometry in a tissue panel (20 samples) consisting of
normal oral mucosa, dysplasias, HNSCC and lymph node metastasis (LnMet) samples. 
Furthermore, we corroborated our findings using absolute real-time PCR (qPCR) on 
a panel of 12 primary normal human oral keratinocytes, five dysplasia and 10
HNSCC cell lines. Finally, we validated our study using bioinformatics microarray
analysis on an independent HNSCC patient cohort (four normal and 16 tumours). In 
normal oral mucosa, CEP55 protein was detected at very low level within the upper
differentiated layers. In contrast, CEP55 was highly expressed in oral dysplasia 
whereas only moderate expression was detected in HNSCC and LnMet. Low level of
HELLS expression was detected in the basal cell layer of the normal oral mucosa, 
moderate level was seen in dysplasia and high levels in both HNSCC and LnMet.
These expression patterns were consistent with both qPCR data from the cell line 
panel and microarray data analysis of TNM-stage defined HNSCC samples confirming 
the progressive expression pattern of CEP55 and HELLS. To our knowledge, this is 
the first pilot study demonstrating that both CEP55 and HELLS mRNA and protein
expression positively correlate with pre-malignancy and HNSCC progression. This
study provides strong evidence that CEP55 and HELLS may be used in conjunction
with FOXM1 as a biomarker set for early cancer detection and indicators of
malignant conversion and progression.

PMID: 20400365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mol Med. 2010 Jul-Aug;16(7-8):262-70. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2010.00005. Epub 2010
Mar 26.

Gene expression profiling of the hedgehog signaling pathway in human meningiomas.

Laurendeau I(1), Ferrer M, Garrido D, D'Haene N, Ciavarelli P, Basso A, Vidaud M,
Bieche I, Salmon I, Szijan I.

Author information: 
(1)UMR745, INSERM, Université Paris-Descartes, Faculté des Sciences
Pharmaceutiques et Biologiques, Paris, France.

The Hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway has an important role during embryogenesis
and in adult life, regulating proliferation, angiogenesis, matrix remodeling and 
stem-cell renewal. Deregulation of the Hh pathway is involved in tumor
development, since mutations in several components of this pathway were found in 
patients with basal cell carcinoma, medulloblastoma and other tumors; however,
the role of Hh in meningiomas has not been studied yet. Meningiomas represent 30%
of primary cranial tumors, are mostly benign and prevail in the second half of
life. Novel therapies for meningiomas such as targeted molecular agents could use
Hh pathway components. To provide information concerning molecular alterations,
by use of real-time RT-PCR, we studied expression at the mRNA level of 32 Hh
pathway and target genes in 36 meningioma specimens of different grades. mRNA
levels of 16 genes, involved mainly in Hh pathway activation and cell
proliferation, increased in meningiomas in comparison with normal tissue, whereas
those of 7 genes, mainly related to Hh pathway repression, decreased. The most
significant changes occurred in signal transduction (SMO) and GLI-transcription
factor genes, and the target FOXM1 mRNA attained the highest values; their
over-expression was found in aggressive and in benign tumors. Some
proliferation-related genes (SPP1, IGF2) were overexpressed in higher meningioma 
grades. A correlation in expression between genes with a similar function was
also found. Our results show a marked activation of the Hh pathway in
meningiomas, which may be important for their biological and clinical
characterization and would be useful for gene therapy.

PMCID: PMC2896461
PMID: 20386868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. EMBO Rep. 2010 Jun;11(6):452-8. doi: 10.1038/embor.2010.46. Epub 2010 Apr 9.

Recovery from a DNA-damage-induced G2 arrest requires Cdk-dependent activation of
FoxM1.

Alvarez-Fernández M(1), Halim VA, Krenning L, Aprelia M, Mohammed S, Heck AJ,
Medema RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, UMC Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, Stratenum
2.118, Utrecht 3584 CG, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    EMBO Rep. 2010 Jun;11(6):411-2.

Activation of the DNA-damage checkpoint culminates in the inhibition of
cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) complexes to prevent cell-cycle progression. We
have shown recently that Cdk activity is required for activation of the Forkhead 
transcription factor FoxM1, an important regulator of gene expression in the G2
phase of the cell cycle. Here, we show that FoxM1 is transcriptionally active
during a DNA-damage-induced G2 arrest and is essential for checkpoint recovery.
Paradoxically, Cdk activity, although reduced after checkpoint activation, is
required to maintain FoxM1-dependent transcription during the arrest and for
expression of pro-mitotic targets such as cyclin A, cyclin B and Plk1. Indeed, we
find that cells need to retain sufficient levels of Cdk activity during the
DNA-damage response to maintain cellular competence to recover from a
DNA-damaging insult.

PMCID: PMC2892325
PMID: 20379221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Cancer Biol Ther. 2010 Jun 15;9(12):1008-16. Epub 2010 Jun 6.

Negative regulation of the oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1 by
thiazolidinediones and mithramycin.

Petrovic V(1), Costa RH, Lau LF, Raychaudhuri P, Tyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois,
College of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA.

The Forkhead Box transcription factor FoxM1 regulates expression of genes that
promote cell cycle progression, and it plays essential roles in the development
of liver, lung, prostate and colorectal tumors. Thiazolidinediones (TZDs)
activate the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR<U+03B3>), a
ligand-activated nuclear receptor transcription factor. We found that treatment
of the human hepatoma cell lines HepG2 and PLC/PRF/5 cells with TZDs leads to
inhibition of FoxM1 gene expression. No PPAR<U+03B3>/retinoid X receptor (RXR) consensus
DNA binding sites were detected in the FoxM1 promoter extending to -10 kb
upstream, and knockdown of PPAR<U+03B3> had no impact on TZD mediated downregulation of 
FoxM1 expression. Previously, others showed that PPAR<U+03B3> agonists inhibit the
expression and DNA-binding activity of the Sp1 transcription factor. Here we show
that Sp1 binds to the FoxM1 promoter region and positively regulates FoxM1
transcription, while mithramycin, a chemotherapy drug that specifically binds GC 
rich sequences in the DNA and inhibits activities of Sp1, inhibits expression of 
FoxM1. Our data suggest that TZD mediated suppression of Sp1 is responsible for
downregulation of FoxM1 gene expression. Inhibition of FoxM1 expression by TZDs
provides a new mechanism for TZD mediated negative regulation of cancer cell
growth. FoxM1 expression and activity in cancer cells can be targeted using PPAR<U+03B3>
agonists or the anti-neoplastic antibiotic mithramycin.

PMCID: PMC3005150
PMID: 20372080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Jul;38(13):4527-38. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq194. Epub 2010
Mar 31.

Structure of the FoxM1 DNA-recognition domain bound to a promoter sequence.

Littler DR(1), Alvarez-Fernández M, Stein A, Hibbert RG, Heidebrecht T, Aloy P,
Medema RH, Perrakis A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmaanlaan
121, 1066 CX, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

FoxM1 is a member of the Forkhead family of transcription factors and is
implicated in inducing cell proliferation and some forms of tumorigenesis. It
binds promoter regions with a preference for tandem repeats of a consensus
'TAAACA' recognition sequence. The affinity of the isolated FoxM1 DNA-binding
domain for this site is in the micromolar range, lower than observed for other
Forkhead proteins. To explain these FoxM1 features, we determined the crystal
structure of its DNA-binding domain in complex with a tandem recognition
sequence. FoxM1 adopts the winged-helix fold, typical of the Forkhead family.
Neither 'wing' of the fold however, makes significant contacts with the DNA,
while the second, C-terminal, wing adopts an unusual ordered conformation across 
the back of the molecule. The lack of standard DNA-'wing' interactions may be a
reason for FoxM1's relatively low affinity. The role of the 'wings' is possibly
undertaken by other FoxM1 regions outside the DBD, that could interact with the
target DNA directly or mediate interactions with other binding partners. Finally,
we were unable to show a clear preference for tandem consensus site recognition
in DNA-binding, transcription activation or bioinformatics analysis; FoxM1's
moniker, 'Trident', is not supported by our data.

PMCID: PMC2910063
PMID: 20360045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Pharm Res. 2010 Jun;27(6):1159-68. doi: 10.1007/s11095-010-0106-x. Epub 2010 Mar 
31.

FoxM1 is a novel target of a natural agent in pancreatic cancer.

Wang Z(1), Ahmad A, Banerjee S, Azmi A, Kong D, Li Y, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, 740 HWCRC, 4100 JohnR Street, Detroit, Michigan 48201, USA.

PURPOSE: Pancreatic cancer remains the fourth most common cause of cancer-related
death in the United States. Therefore, novel strategies for the prevention and/or
treatment are urgently needed. Genistein has been found to be responsible for
lowering the rate of pancreatic cancer. However, the molecular mechanisms by
which genistein elicits its effects on pancreatic cancer cells has not been fully
elucidated. Therefore, the purpose of the current study was to elucidate the
anti-cancer mechanism(s) of genistein.
METHODS: Multiple molecular techniques, such as Real-time RT-PCR, Western blot
analysis, invasion assay, immunofluorescence assay, gene transfection, MTT assay,
and Histone/DNA ELISA, were used.
RESULTS: We found that genistein inhibited cell growth accompanied by induction
of apoptosis with concomitant attenuation of FoxM1 and its downstream genes, such
as survivin, cdc25a, MMP-9, and VEGF, resulting in the inhibition of pancreatic
cancer cell invasion. We also found that down-regulation of FoxM1 by siRNA prior 
to genistein treatment resulted in enhanced cell growth inhibition and induction 
of apoptosis.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report showing the molecular role of FoxM1 in
mediating the biological effects of genistein in pancreatic cancer cells,
suggesting that FoxM1 could be a novel target for the treatment of pancreatic
cancer.

PMCID: PMC2975383
PMID: 20354770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Apr 13;107(15):6864-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1002746107. Epub 2010 Mar 29.

Attenuation of Forkhead signaling by the retinal determination factor DACH1.

Zhou J(1), Wang C, Wang Z, Dampier W, Wu K, Casimiro MC, Chepelev I, Popov VM,
Quong A, Tozeren A, Zhao K, Lisanti MP, Pestell RG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA
19107, USA.

The Drosophila Dachshund (Dac) gene, cloned as a dominant inhibitor of the
hyperactive growth factor mutant ellipse, encodes a key component of the retinal 
determination gene network that governs cell fate. Herein, cyclic amplification
and selection of targets identified a DACH1 DNA-binding sequence that resembles
the FOX (Forkhead box-containing protein) binding site. Genome-wide in silico
promoter analysis of DACH1 binding sites identified gene clusters populating
cellular pathways associated with the cell cycle and growth factor signaling.
ChIP coupled with high-throughput sequencing mapped DACH1 binding sites to
corresponding gene clusters predicted in silico and identified as weight matrix
resembling the cyclic amplification and selection of targets-defined sequence.
DACH1 antagonized FOXM1 target gene expression, promoter occupancy in the context
of local chromatin, and contact-independent growth. Attenuation of FOX function
by the cell fate determination pathway has broad implications given the diverse
role of FOX proteins in cellular biology and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2872468
PMID: 20351289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Carcinogenesis. 2010 Jun;31(6):1132-41. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgq058. Epub 2010 Mar
29.

EPS8 upregulates FOXM1 expression, enhancing cell growth and motility.

Wang H(1), Teh MT, Ji Y, Patel V, Firouzabadian S, Patel AA, Gutkind JS, Yeudall 
WA.

Author information: 
(1)Philips Institute of Oral and Craniofacial Molecular Biology, Virginia
Commonwealth University, 521 N. 11th Street, Richmond, VA 23298-0566, USA.

Previous studies from our laboratory have indicated that overexpression of the
epidermal growth factor receptor pathway substrate 8 (EPS8) enhances cell
proliferation, migration and tumorigenicity in vivo, although the mechanisms
involved remain unexplored. A microarray screen to search for potential mediators
of EPS8 identified upregulation of multiple cell cycle-related targets such as
the transcription factor FOXM1 and several of its reported downstream mediators, 
including cdc20, cyclin B1, cyclin A, aurora-B kinase and cdc25C in cells with
elevated EPS8, as well as matrix metalloproteinase-9, which we reported
previously to be upregulated by EPS8-dependent mechanisms. Cells engineered to
overexpress FOXM1 showed increased proliferation, similar to EPS8-overexpressing 
cells. Conversely, targeted knockdown of FOXM1 in EPS8-overexpressing cells
reduced proliferation. Cotransfection of EPS8 with a FOXM1-luciferase reporter
plasmid into 293-T- or SVpgC2a-immortalized buccal keratinocytes demonstrated
that EPS8 enhances FOXM1 promoter activity, whereas chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays revealed elevated levels of acetylated histone H3 associated with the
FOXM1 promoter in cells expressing high levels of EPS8. Treatment of
EPS8-overexpressing cells with inhibitors of phosphoinositide 3-OH kinase or AKT 
reduced expression of FOXM1 and aurora-B kinase, a transcriptional target of
FOXM1. Overexpression of EPS8 induced expression of the chemokine ligands CXCL5
and CXCL12 in a FOXM1-dependent manner, which was blocked by LY294002 or a
dominant-negative form of AKT. Additionally, overexpression of FOXM1 enhanced
cell migration, whereas targeted knockdown of CXCL5 or inhibition of AKT reduced 
migration of EPS8-expressing cells. These data suggest that EPS8 enhances cell
proliferation and migration in part by deregulating FOXM1 activity and inducing
CXC-chemokine expression, mediated by PI3K- and AKT-dependent mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2878363
PMID: 20351091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Cancer Res. 2010 Apr 1;70(7):2951-61. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-3909. Epub
2010 Mar 23.

FoxM1B regulates NEDD4-1 expression, leading to cellular transformation and full 
malignant phenotype in immortalized human astrocytes.

Dai B(1), Pieper RO, Li D, Wei P, Liu M, Woo SY, Aldape KD, Sawaya R, Xie K,
Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Unit 1004, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Our recent studies have shown that the FoxM1B transcription factor is
overexpressed in human glioma tissues and that the level of its expression
correlates directly with glioma grade. However, whether FoxM1B plays a role in
the early development of glioma (i.e., in transformation) is unknown. In this
study, we found that the FoxM1B molecule causes cellular transformation and tumor
formation in normal human astrocytes (NHA) immortalized by p53 and pRB
inhibition. Moreover, brain tumors that arose from intracranial injection of
FoxM1B-expressing immortalized NHAs displayed glioblastoma multiforme (GBM)
phenotypes, suggesting that FoxM1B overexpression in immortalized NHAs not only
transforms the cells but also leads to GBM formation. Mechanistically, our
results showed that overexpression of FoxM1B upregulated NEDD4-1, an E3 ligase
that mediates the degradation and downregulation of phosphatase and tensin
homologue (PTEN) in multiple cell lines. Decreased PTEN in turn resulted in the
hyperactivation of Akt, which led to phosphorylation and cytoplasmic retention of
FoxO3a. Blocking Akt activation with phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt inhibitors
inhibited the FoxM1B-induced transformation of immortalized NHAs. Furthermore,
overexpression of FoxM1B in immortalized NHAs increased the expression of
survivin, cyclin D1, and cyclin E, which are important molecules for tumor
growth. Collectively, these results indicate that overexpression of FoxM1B, in
cooperation with p53 and pRB inhibition in NHA cells, promotes astrocyte
transformation and GBM formation through multiple mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2848915
PMID: 20332230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Oncogene. 2010 May 20;29(20):2983-95. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.47. Epub 2010 Mar 8.

FOXM1 is a transcriptional target of ERalpha and has a critical role in breast
cancer endocrine sensitivity and resistance.

Millour J(1), Constantinidou D, Stavropoulou AV, Wilson MS, Myatt SS, Kwok JM,
Sivanandan K, Coombes RC, Medema RH, Hartman J, Lykkesfeldt AE, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, London W12 0NN, UK.

In this study, we investigated the regulation of FOXM1 expression by estrogen
receptor alpha (ERalpha) and its role in hormonal therapy and endocrine
resistance. FOXM1 protein and mRNA expression was regulated by ER-ligands,
including estrogen, tamoxifen (OHT) and fulvestrant (ICI182780; ICI) in breast
carcinoma cell lines. Depletion of ERalpha by RNA interference (RNAi) in MCF-7
cells downregulated FOXM1 expression. Reporter gene assays showed that ERalpha
activates FOXM1 transcription through an estrogen-response element (ERE) located 
within the proximal promoter region. The direct binding of ERalpha to the FOXM1
promoter was confirmed in vitro by mobility shift and DNA pull-down assays and in
vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis. Our data also revealed
that upon OHT treatment ERalpha recruits histone deacetylases to the ERE site of 
the FOXM1 promoter, which is associated with a decrease in histone acetylation
and transcription activity. Importantly, silencing of FOXM1 by RNAi abolished
estrogen-induced MCF-7 cell proliferation and overcame acquired tamoxifen
resistance. Conversely, ectopic expression of FOXM1 abrogated the cell cycle
arrest mediated by the anti-estrogen OHT. OHT repressed FOXM1 expression in
endocrine sensitive but not resistant breast carcinoma cell lines. Furthermore,
qRT-PCR analysis of breast cancer patient samples revealed that there was a
strong and significant positive correlation between ERalpha and FOXM1 mRNA
expression. Collectively, these results show FOXM1 to be a key mediator of the
mitogenic functions of ERalpha and estrogen in breast cancer cells, and also
suggest that the deregulation of FOXM1 may contribute to anti-estrogen
insensitivity.

PMCID: PMC2874720
PMID: 20208560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Oncogene. 2010 May 13;29(19):2831-42. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.41. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

Nutrient sensor O-GlcNAc transferase regulates breast cancer tumorigenesis
through targeting of the oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1.

Caldwell SA(1), Jackson SR, Shahriari KS, Lynch TP, Sethi G, Walker S, Vosseller 
K, Reginato MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 1;10(11):1712-3.

Cancer cells upregulate glycolysis, increasing glucose uptake to meet energy
needs. A small fraction of a cell's glucose enters the hexosamine biosynthetic
pathway (HBP), which regulates levels of O-linked beta-N-acetylglucosamine
(O-GlcNAc), a carbohydrate posttranslational modification of diverse nuclear and 
cytosolic proteins. We discovered that breast cancer cells upregulate the HBP,
including increased O-GlcNAcation and elevated expression of O-GlcNAc transferase
(OGT), which is the enzyme catalyzing the addition of O-GlcNAc to proteins.
Reduction of O-GlcNAcation through RNA interference of OGT in breast cancer cells
leads to inhibition of tumor growth both in vitro and in vivo and is associated
with decreased cell-cycle progression and increased expression of the cell-cycle 
inhibitor p27(Kip1). Elevation of p27(Kip1) was associated with decreased
expression and activity of the oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1, a known
regulator of p27(Kip1) stability through transcriptional control of Skp2.
Reducing O-GlcNAc levels in breast cancer cells decreased levels of FoxM1 protein
and caused a decrease in multiple FoxM1-specific targets, including Skp2.
Moreover, reducing O-GlcNAcation decreased cancer cell invasion and was
associated with the downregulation of matrix metalloproteinase-2, a known FoxM1
target. Finally, pharmacological inhibition of OGT in breast cancer cells had
similar anti-growth and anti-invasion effects. These findings identify O-GlcNAc
as a novel mechanism through which alterations in glucose metabolism regulate
cancer growth and invasion and suggest that OGT may represent novel therapeutic
targets for breast cancer.

PMID: 20190804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Cancer. 2010 Feb 26;9:45. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-45.

Upregulation of FOXM1 induces genomic instability in human epidermal
keratinocytes.

Teh MT(1), Gemenetzidis E, Chaplin T, Young BD, Philpott MP.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical and Diagnostic Oral Sciences, Institute of Dentistry,
Barts and the London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, Turner Street, London E1 2AD, UK. m.t.teh@qmul.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The human cell cycle transcription factor FOXM1 is known to play a
key role in regulating timely mitotic progression and accurate chromosomal
segregation during cell division. Deregulation of FOXM1 has been linked to a
majority of human cancers. We previously showed that FOXM1 was upregulated in
basal cell carcinoma and recently reported that upregulation of FOXM1 precedes
malignancy in a number of solid human cancer types including oral, oesophagus,
lung, breast, kidney, bladder and uterus. This indicates that upregulation of
FOXM1 may be an early molecular signal required for aberrant cell cycle and
cancer initiation.
RESULTS: The present study investigated the putative early mechanism of UVB and
FOXM1 in skin cancer initiation. We have demonstrated that UVB dose-dependently
increased FOXM1 protein levels through protein stabilisation and accumulation
rather than de novo mRNA expression in human epidermal keratinocytes. FOXM1
upregulation in primary human keratinocytes triggered pro-apoptotic/DNA-damage
checkpoint response genes such as p21, p38 MAPK, p53 and PARP, however, without
causing significant cell cycle arrest or cell death. Using a high-resolution
Affymetrix genome-wide single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) mapping technique, we
provided the evidence that FOXM1 upregulation in epidermal keratinocytes is
sufficient to induce genomic instability, in the form of loss of heterozygosity
(LOH) and copy number variations (CNV). FOXM1-induced genomic instability was
significantly enhanced and accumulated with increasing cell passage and this
instability was increased even further upon exposure to UVB resulting in whole
chromosomal gain (7p21.3-7q36.3) and segmental LOH (6q25.1-6q25.3).
CONCLUSION: We hypothesise that prolonged and repeated UVB exposure selects for
skin cells bearing stable FOXM1 protein causes aberrant cell cycle checkpoint
thereby allowing ectopic cell cycle entry and subsequent genomic instability. The
aberrant upregulation of FOXM1 serves as a 'first hit' where cells acquire
genomic instability which in turn predisposes cells to a 'second hit' whereby
DNA-damage checkpoint response (eg. p53 or p16) is abolished to allow damaged
cells to proliferate and accumulate genetic aberrations/mutations required for
cancer initiation.

PMCID: PMC2907729
PMID: 20187950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Aspects Med. 2010 Apr;31(2):179-93. doi: 10.1016/j.mam.2010.02.007. Epub 2010
Feb 20.

Prognostic markers and putative therapeutic targets for hepatocellular carcinoma.

Frau M(1), Biasi F, Feo F, Pascale RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Division of Experimental Pathology and
Oncology, University of Sassari, 07100 Sassari, Italy.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most frequent human cancer and a
fatal disease. Therapies with pharmacological agents do not improve the prognosis
of patients with unresectable HCC. This emphasizes the need to identify new
targets for early diagnosis, chemoprevention, and treatment of the disease.
Available evidence indicates that clinical outcome of HCC could reflect the
genetic predisposition to cancer development and progression. Numerous loci
controlling HCC progression have been identified in rodents. In this review, we
describe results of recent studies on effector mechanisms of
susceptibility/resistance genes, responsible for HCC progression, aimed at
identifying new putative prognostic markers and therapeutic targets of this
tumor. Highest c-myc amplification and overexpression, alterations of iNOS
crosstalk with IKK/NF-kB and RAS/ERK signaling, ubiquitination of ERK and cell
cycle inhibitors, and deregulation of FOXM1 and cell cycle key genes occur in
rapidly progressing dysplastic nodules and HCC, induced in genetic susceptible
rat strains, compared to the lesions of resistant rats. Notably, alterations of
these mechanisms in human HCC subtypes with poorer or better prognosis, are
similar to those present in genetically susceptible and resistant rats,
respectively, and function as prognostic markers and therapeutic targets.
Attempts to cure advanced HCC by molecular therapy directed against specific
targets led to modest survival benefit. Thus, efforts are necessary to identify
and test, in pre-clinical and clinical studies, new therapeutic targets for
combined molecular treatments of HCC. They may take advantage from the
comparative analysis of signal transduction in HCCs differently prone to
progress, in rats and humans.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20176048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 16;5(2):e9229. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009229.

FoxM1, a forkhead transcription factor is a master cell cycle regulator for mouse
mature T cells but not double positive thymocytes.

Xue L(1), Chiang L, He B, Zhao YY, Winoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology and Cancer Research Laboratory,
University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California, United States of
America.

FoxM1 is a forkhead box transcription factor and a known master regulator
required for different phases of the cell cycle. In cell lines, FoxM1 deficient
cells exhibit delayed S phase entry, aneuploidy, polyploidy and can't complete
mitosis. In vivo, FoxM1 is expressed mostly in proliferating cells but is
surprisingly also found in non-proliferating CD4(+)CD8(+) double positive
thymocytes. Here, we addressed the role of FoxM1 in T cell development by
generating and analyzing two different lines of T-cell specific FoxM1 deficient
mice. As expected, FoxM1 is required for proliferation of early thymocytes and
activated mature T cells. Defective expression of many cell cycle proteins was
detected, including cyclin A, cyclin B1, cdc2, cdk2, p27 and the Rb family
members p107 and p130 but surprisingly not survivin. Unexpectedly, loss of FoxM1 
only affects a few cell cycle proteins in CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocytes and has little 
effect on their sensitivity to apoptosis and the subsequent steps of T cell
differentiation. Thus, regulation of cell cycle genes by FoxM1 is stage- and
context-dependent.

PMCID: PMC2821927
PMID: 20169079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2010 Mar;31(3):361-6. doi: 10.1038/aps.2010.4. Epub 2010 Feb 
15.

Knockdown of FoxM1 by siRNA interference decreases cell proliferation, induces
cell cycle arrest and inhibits cell invasion in MHCC-97H cells in vitro.

Wu QF(1), Liu C, Tai MH, Liu D, Lei L, Wang RT, Tian M, Lü Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital, Xi'an
Jiaotong University, China.

AIM: To investigate the effects of small interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of
forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) on the proliferation and invasion capacities of human
hepatocellular carcinoma MHCC-97H cells in vitro.
METHODS: The expression levels of FoxM1 in human hepatocellular carcinoma
samples, adjacent non-hepatocellular carcinoma liver samples and MHCC-97 cell
lines were detected by RT-PCR and Western blotting. FoxM1 siRNA was transfected
into MHCC-97H cells with Lipofectamine 2000. Cell growth was evaluated by
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay, and
cell cycle analysis was performed by flow cytometry. Protein expression levels
were evaluated by Western blotting. Anchorage-independent growth and the invasive
potency of MHCC-97H cells were measured by soft agar colony formation and a
transwell cell invasion assay, respectively.
RESULTS: FoxM1 was over-expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma samples compared to
adjacent non-hepatocellular carcinoma liver samples. FoxM1 siRNA was successfully
transfected into MHCC-97H cells, resulting in the significant inhibition of FoxM1
mRNA and protein expression. Down-regulation of FoxM1 inhibited cell
proliferation, caused cell cycle arrest, and decreased invasion of MHCC-97H
cells. Compared with control and mock groups, the FoxM1 siRNA transfected cells
showed decreased protein expressions of cyclin B1 and cyclin D1, whereas p27
protein expression was increased. Down-regulation of FoxM1 reduced the expression
of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2) and urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA).
CONCLUSION: FoxM1 is functionally involved in hepatocellular carcinoma cell
proliferation and invasion and is a potential target for hepatocellular carcinoma
therapy.

PMCID: PMC4002417
PMID: 20154714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009 Sep 15;89(34):2424-8.

[Role of inhibition of transcription factor forkhead box M1 expression by RNA
interference in the proliferation and invasiveness of non-small cell lung cancer 
cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhou L(1), Zhang PH, Xu X, Xu N, Gao L, Bai CX, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the change of proliferation and invasiveness of
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines SPC-A-1, A549 and LTEP-a-2 with
forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) expression deficiency.
METHODS: A siRNA targeting FoxM1 was designed to deplete the FoxM1 expression of 
these cell lines and an unrelated siRNA used as control. Real-time RT-PCR and
Western blotting were used to examine the FoxM1 expression in mRNA and protein
level respectively. Colony assay, wound healing assay and transwell chamber assay
were employed to evaluate the colony formation ability and invasiveness of FoxM1 
deficient cells.
RESULTS: The designed siRNA could efficiently deplete FoxM1 expression by 83.9%, 
83.6% and 88.6% in SPC-A-1, A549 and LTEP-a-2 cell lines respectively. Real-time 
RT-PCR and Western blot test showed that the FoxM1 protein was also depleted. The
colony formation numbers (136.0 +/- 15.5, 87.0 +/- 2.6 and 121.7 +/- 9.4
respectively) and invasion cell numbers (19.2 +/- 2.5, 4.2 +/- 0.8 and 6.2 +/-
1.8 respectively) of FoxM1 deficient SPC-A-1, A549 and LTEP-a-2 cell lines were
significantly fewer than those of the unrelated-siRNA transfected group (colony
formation numbers were 222.3 +/- 20.5, 164.7 +/- 14.1 and 260.7 +/- 13.5
respectively, and invasive cell numbers were 81.4 +/- 6.2, 39.2 +/- 4.6 and 35.6 
+/- 3.0 respectively, all P < 0.01). The cell migration rate of siFoxM1 deficient
SPC-A-1 (52.6% +/- 7.8%) was significantly lower than that of the unrelated-siRNA
transfected group (85.3% +/- 18.6%, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The proliferation and invasiveness of several NSCLC cell lines were 
significantly inhibited after the FoxM1 gene expression was depleted. It suggests
that inhibiting the FoxM1 expression might be a promising way for lung cancer
therapy.

PMID: 20137699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 25;5(1):e8699. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008699.

RNA microarray analysis in prenatal mouse cochlea reveals novel IGF-I target
genes: implication of MEF2 and FOXM1 transcription factors.

Sanchez-Calderon H(1), Rodriguez-de la Rosa L, Milo M, Pichel JG, Holley M,
Varela-Nieto I.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomedicas Alberto Sols, CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain.
hsanchez@iib.uam.es

BACKGROUND: Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) provides pivotal cell survival
and differentiation signals during inner ear development throughout evolution.
Homozygous mutations of human IGF1 cause syndromic sensorineural deafness,
decreased intrauterine and postnatal growth rates, and mental retardation. In the
mouse, deficits in IGF-I result in profound hearing loss associated with reduced 
survival, differentiation and maturation of auditory neurons. Nevertheless,
little is known about the molecular basis of IGF-I activity in hearing and
deafness.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A combination of quantitative RT-PCR, subcellular
fractionation and Western blotting, along with in situ hybridization studies show
IGF-I and its high affinity receptor to be strongly expressed in the embryonic
and postnatal mouse cochlea. The expression of both proteins decreases after
birth and in the cochlea of E18.5 embryonic Igf1(-/-) null mice, the balance of
the main IGF related signalling pathways is altered, with lower activation of Akt
and ERK1/2 and stronger activation of p38 kinase. By comparing the Igf1(-/-) and 
Igf1(+/+) transcriptomes in E18.5 mouse cochleae using RNA microchips and
validating their results, we demonstrate the up-regulation of the FoxM1
transcription factor and the misexpression of the neural progenitor transcription
factors Six6 and Mash1 associated with the loss of IGF-I. Parallel, in silico
promoter analysis of the genes modulated in conjunction with the loss of IGF-I
revealed the possible involvement of MEF2 in cochlear development. E18.5
Igf1(+/+) mouse auditory ganglion neurons showed intense MEF2A and MEF2D nuclear 
staining and MEF2A was also evident in the organ of Corti. At P15, MEF2A and
MEF2D expression were shown in neurons and sensory cells. In the absence of
IGF-I, nuclear levels of MEF2 were diminished, indicating less transcriptional
MEF2 activity. By contrast, there was an increase in the nuclear accumulation of 
FoxM1 and a corresponding decrease in the nuclear cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p27(Kip1).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We have defined the spatiotemporal expression of
elements involved in IGF signalling during inner ear development and reveal novel
regulatory mechanisms that are modulated by IGF-I in promoting sensory cell and
neural survival and differentiation. These data will help us to understand the
molecular bases of human sensorineural deafness associated to deficits in IGF-I.

PMCID: PMC2810322
PMID: 20111592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Physiol Rev. 2010 Jan;90(1):1-22. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00018.2009.

The Fox genes in the liver: from organogenesis to functional integration.

Le Lay J(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104-6145, USA.

Formation and function of the liver are highly controlled, essential processes.
Multiple signaling pathways and transcriptional regulatory networks cooperate in 
this complex system. The evolutionarily conserved FOX, for Forkhead bOX, class of
transcriptional regulators is critical to many aspects of liver development and
function. The FOX proteins are small, mostly monomeric DNA binding factors
containing the so-called winged helix DNA binding motif that distinguishes them
from other classes of transcription factors. We discuss the biochemical and
genetic roles of Foxa, Foxl1, Foxm1, and Foxo, as these have been shown to
regulate many processes throughout the life of the organ, controlling both
formation and function of the liver.

PMID: 20086072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2010 Feb;19(2):235-42. doi:
10.1517/13543780903563364.

A new target for proteasome inhibitors: FoxM1.

Gartel AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, Department of Medicine, 840 S. Wood St.,
Room 1041, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. agartel@uic.edu

IMPORTANCE OF THE FIELD: The proteasome is responsible for ubiquitin- and
ATP-dependent proteolysis of cellular proteins. The latest advances in proteasome
studies led to the development of proteasome inhibitors as drugs against human
cancer. It has been shown that proteasome inhibitors selectively kill cancer, but
not normal cells. However, the exact mechanisms of the anticancer activity of
proteasome inhibitors are not well understood. The oncogenic transcription factor
Forkhead Box M1 (FoxM1) is overexpressed in a majority of human carcinomas, while
its expression is usually low in normal cells. In addition, FoxM1 may also drive 
tumor invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis. For these reasons, FoxM1 is an
attractive target for anticancer drugs.
AREAS COVERED IN THIS REVIEW: My aim is to discuss recent publications that point
out novel mechanism of action of proteasome inhibitors. In addition, I describe
the identification of new types of proteasome inhibitors, called thiazole
antibiotics. Using a cell-based screening system, the thiazole antibiotics
siomycin A and thiostrepton were isolated as inhibitors of FoxM1 transcriptional 
activity and expression. Paradoxically, it has been shown that these drugs also
stabilize the expression of other proteins and act as proteasome inhibitors in
vitro. Moreover, it was found that well-known proteasome inhibitors, such as
MG115, MG132 and bortezomib, inhibit FoxM1 transcriptional activity and FoxM1
expression.
WHAT THE READER WILL GAIN: It has been shown that proteasome inhibitors suppress 
FoxM1 expression and simultaneously induce apoptosis in human tumor cell lines.
This review describes the correlation between negative regulation of FoxM1 by
proteasome inhibitors and apoptosis, and suggests that negative regulation of
FoxM1 is a universal feature of these drugs and may contribute to their
anticancer activity.
TAKE HOME MESSAGE: Oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1 is upregulated in a
majority of human cancers, suggesting that growth of cancer cells may depend on
FoxM1 activity. A short time ago, it has been shown that proteasome inhibitors
simultaneously inhibit FoxM1 expression and induce apoptosis in human cancer
cells. This effect may explain specificity of proteasome inhibitors to induce
apoptosis in cancer, but not in normal cells. Now, it is critical to determine
the role of suppression of FoxM1 in apoptosis induced by proteasome inhibitors
and to establish how significant the inhibition of FoxM1 is for the anticancer
activity of proteasome inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3532816
PMID: 20074015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mol Cancer Res. 2010 Jan;8(1):24-34. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0432. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

FOXM1 confers acquired cisplatin resistance in breast cancer cells.

Kwok JM(1), Peck B, Monteiro LJ, Schwenen HD, Millour J, Coombes RC, Myatt SS,
Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research-UK Laboratories, Department of Oncology, Medical Research
Council Cyclotron Building, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus,
Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom.

The transcription factor Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) is a key regulator of cell
proliferation and is overexpressed in many forms of primary cancers, leading to
uncontrolled cell division and genomic instability. To address the role of FOXM1 
in chemoresistance, we generated a cisplatin-resistant breast cancer cell line
(MCF-7-CIS(R)), which had an elevated level of FOXM1 protein and mRNA expression 
relative to the parental MCF-7 cells. A close correlation was observed between
FOXM1 and the expression of its proposed downstream targets that are involved in 
DNA repair; breast cancer-associated gene 2 (BRCA2) and X-ray cross-complementing
group 1 (XRCC1) were expressed at higher levels in the resistant cell lines
compared with the sensitive MCF-7 cells. Moreover, cisplatin treatment induced
DNA damage repair in MCF-7-CIS(R) and not in MCF-7 cells. Furthermore, the
expression of a constitutively active FOXM1 (DeltaN-FOXM1) in MCF-7 cells alone
was sufficient to confer cisplatin resistance. Crucially, the impairment of DNA
damage repair pathways through the small interfering RNA knockdown inhibition of 
either FOXM1 or BRCA2/XRCC1 showed that only the silencing of FOXM1 could
significantly reduce the rate of proliferation in response to cisplatin treatment
in the resistant cells. This suggests that the targeting of FOXM1 is a viable
strategy in circumventing acquired cisplatin resistance. Consistently, the FOXM1 
inhibitor thiostrepton also showed efficacy in causing cell death and
proliferative arrest in the cisplatin-resistant cells through the downregulation 
of FOXM1 expression. Taken together, we have identified a novel mechanism of
acquired cisplatin resistance in breast cancer cells through the induction of
FOXM1.

PMCID: PMC2809047
PMID: 20068070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Hepatology. 2010 Mar;51(3):922-31. doi: 10.1002/hep.23385.

The c-Rel subunit of nuclear factor-kappaB regulates murine liver inflammation,
wound-healing, and hepatocyte proliferation.

Gieling RG(1), Elsharkawy AM, Caamaño JH, Cowie DE, Wright MC, Ebrahimkhani MR,
Burt AD, Mann J, Raychaudhuri P, Liou HC, Oakley F, Mann DA.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Group, Institute of Cellular Medicine, 4th Floor, Cookson
Building, Medical School, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 4HH,
United Kingdom. roben.gieling@ncl.ac.uk

In this study, we determined the role of the nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB)
subunit c-Rel in liver injury and regeneration. In response to toxic injury of
the liver, c-Rel null (c-rel(-/-)) mice displayed a defect in the neutrophilic
inflammatory response, associated with impaired induction of RANTES (Regulated
upon Activation, Normal T-cell Expressed, and Secreted; also known as CCL5). The 
subsequent fibrogenic/wound-healing response to both chronic carbon tetrachloride
and bile duct ligation induced injury was also impaired and this was associated
with deficiencies in the expression of fibrogenic genes, collagen I and
alpha-smooth muscle actin, by hepatic stellate cells. We additionally report that
c-Rel is required for the normal proliferative regeneration of hepatocytes in
response to toxic injury and partial hepatectomy. Absence of c-Rel was associated
with blunted and delayed induction of forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) and its downstream 
targets cyclin B1 and Cdc25C. Furthermore, isolated c-rel(-/-) hepatocytes
expressed reduced levels of FoxM1 and a reduced rate of basal and epidermal
growth factor-induced DNA synthesis. Chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that 
c-Rel binding to the FoxM1 promoter is induced in the regenerating
liver.CONCLUSION: c-Rel has multiple functions in the control of liver
homeostasis and regeneration and is a transcriptional regulator of FoxM1 and
compensatory hepatocyte proliferation.

PMID: 20058312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Prostate. 2010 Jun 1;70(8):825-33. doi: 10.1002/pros.21116.

New potential anti-cancer agents synergize with bortezomib and ABT-737 against
prostate cancer.

Pandit B(1), Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

BACKGROUND: We previously described the identification of a transcriptional
inhibitor ARC and FoxM1 inhibitors, thiazole antibiotics, Siomycin A and
thiostrepton that were able to induce potent p53-independent apoptosis in cancer 
cell lines of different origin. Here, we report the characterization of these
drugs individually or in combination with ABT-737 and bortezomib on a panel of
prostate cancer cell lines.
METHODS: DU 145, LNCaP and PC-3 prostate cancer cells were treated with ARC,
Siomycin A and thiostrepton to evaluate their activity as single agents or in
combination with ABT-737 and bortezomib to measure their synergistic potential in
anti-proliferative and cell cycle assays. Chou-Talalay method was used to
quantitate the synergistic interaction. Western blot method was used to determine
Mcl-1 and FoxM1 expression and caspase-3 cleavage.
RESULTS: We show that ARC inhibited the viability of prostate cancer cells and
induced apoptosis in low nanomolar concentration. It potently downregulated the
expression of Mcl-1 and showed synergistic combination effect with Bcl-2
inhibitor ABT-737. Thiazole antibiotics, Siomycin A and thiostrepton inhibited
growth, FoxM1 expression and induced cell death in prostate cancer cells in low
micromolar concentrations. In addition, thiostrepton and ARC synergistically
induced apoptosis in prostate cancer cells following combination treatment with
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. Furthermore, we found that all tested drug
combinations were able to induce apoptosis selectively in transformed, but not
normal cells of the same origin.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on their in vitro activity as single or combination agents,
ARC, Siomycin A and thiostrepton represent potential candidates for drug
development against prostate cancer.

PMID: 20058240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Open Endocrinol J. 2010;4. doi: 10.2174/1874216501004010066.

High Fat Diet Regulation of ß-Cell Proliferation and ß-Cell Mass.

Golson ML(1), Misfeldt AA, Kopsombut UG, Petersen CP, Gannon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) is characterized by relative insulin insufficiency, caused 
when peripheral tissues such as liver, muscle, and adipocytes have a decreased
response to insulin. One factor that elevates the risk for insulin resistance and
T2D is obesity. In obese patients without T2D and initially in people who develop
T2D, pancreatic ß-cells are able to compensate for insulin resistance by
increasing ß-cell mass, effected by increased proliferation and hypertrophy, as
well as increased insulin secretion per ß-cell. In patients that go on to develop
T2D, however, this initial period of compensation is followed by ß-cell failure
due to decreased proliferation and increased apoptosis. The forkhead box
transcription factor FoxM1 is required for ß-cell replication in mice after four 
weeks of age, during pregnancy, and after partial pancreatectomy. We investigated
whether it is also required for ß-cell proliferation due to diet-induced obesity.

PMCID: PMC3856766
PMID: 24339840  [PubMed]


99. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 26;285(9):6585-94. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.075788. Epub 2009 
Dec 22.

Reduction of Raf kinase inhibitor protein expression by Bcr-Abl contributes to
chronic myelogenous leukemia proliferation.

Takemura T(1), Nakamura S, Yokota D, Hirano I, Ono T, Shigeno K, Fujisawa S,
Ohnishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan.

Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is characterized by a reciprocal chromosomal
translocation (9;22) that generates the Bcr-Abl fusion gene. The
Ras/Raf-1/MEK/ERK pathway is constitutively activated in Bcr-Abl-transformed
cells, and Ras activity enhances the oncogenic ability of Bcr-Abl. However, the
mechanism by which Bcr-Abl activates the Ras pathway is not completely
understood. Raf kinase inhibitor protein (RKIP) inhibits activation of MEK by
Raf-1 and its downstream signal transduction, resulting in blocking the MAP
kinase pathway. In the present study, we found that RKIP was depleted in CML
cells. We investigated the interaction between RKIP and Bcr-Abl in CML cell lines
and Bcr-Abl(+) progenitor cells from CML patients. The Abl kinase inhibitors and 
depletion of Bcr-Abl induced the expression of RKIP and reduced the pERK1/2
status, resulting in inhibited proliferation of CML cells. Moreover, RKIP
up-regulated cell cycle regulator FoxM1 expression, resulting in G(1) arrest via 
p27(Kip1) and p21(Cip1) accumulation. In colony-forming unit granulocyte,
erythroid, macrophage, megakaryocyte, colony-forming unit-granulocyte macrophage,
and burst-forming unit erythroid, treatment with the Abl kinase inhibitors and
depletion of Bcr-Abl induced RKIP and reduced FoxM1 expressions, and inhibited
colony formation of Bcr-Abl(+) progenitor cells, whereas depletion of RKIP
weakened the inhibition of colony formation activity by the Abl kinase inhibitors
in Bcr-Abl(+) progenitor cells. Thus, Bcr-Abl represses the expression of RKIP,
continuously activates pERK1/2, and suppresses FoxM1 expression, resulting in
proliferation of CML cells.

PMCID: PMC2825454
PMID: 20028985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Oncogene. 2010 Mar 11;29(10):1519-30. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.436. Epub 2009 Dec
21.

Phenotype-assisted transcriptome analysis identifies FOXM1 downstream from
Ras-MKK3-p38 to regulate in vitro cellular invasion.

Behren A(1), Mühlen S, Acuna Sanhueza GA, Schwager C, Plinkert PK, Huber PE,
Abdollahi A, Simon C.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Vaccine, Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd, Melbourne Centre for
Clinical Sciences, Heidelberg, VIC, Australia.

The Ras oncogene is known to activate three major MAPK pathways, ERK, JNK, p38
and exert distinct cellular phenotypes, that is, apoptosis and invasion through
the Ras-MKK3-p38-signaling cascade. We attempted to identify the molecular
targets of this pathway that selectively govern the invasive phenotype. Stable
transfection of NIH3T3 fibroblasts with MKK3(act) cDNA construct revealed similar
p38-dependent in vitro characteristics observed in Ha-Ras(EJ)-transformed NIH3T3 
cells, including enhanced invasiveness and anchorage-independent growth
correlating with p38 phosphorylation status. To identify the consensus downstream
targets of the Ras-MKK3-p38 cascade involved in invasion, in vitro invasion
assays were used to isolate highly invasive cells from both, MKK3 and Ha-Ras(EJ) 
transgenic cell lines. Subsequently a genome-wide transcriptome analysis was
employed to investigate differentially regulated genes in invasive Ha-Ras(EJ)-
and MKK3(act)-transfected NIH3T3 fibroblasts. Using this phenotype-assisted
approach combined with system level protein-interaction network analysis, we
identified FOXM1, PLK1 and CDK1 to be differentially regulated in invasive
Ha-Ras(EJ)-NIH3T3 and MKK3(act)-NIH3T3 cells. Finally, a FOXM1 RNA-knockdown
approach revealed its requirement for both invasion and anchorage-independent
growth of Ha-Ras(EJ)- and MKK3(act)-NIH3T3 cells. Together, we identified FOXM1
as a key downstream target of Ras and MKK3-induced cellular in vitro invasion and
anchorage-independent growth signaling.

PMID: 20023695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cancer Treat Rev. 2010 Apr;36(2):151-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ctrv.2009.11.006. Epub
2009 Dec 22.

Forkhead box M1 transcription factor: a novel target for cancer therapy.

Wang Z(1), Ahmad A, Li Y, Banerjee S, Kong D, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University,
540 E. Canfield, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

FoxM1 signaling has been reported to be associated with carcinogenesis.
Therefore, the FoxM1 may represent a novel therapeutic target, and thus the
development of agents that will target FoxM1 is likely to have significant
therapeutic impact on human cancer. This review describes the mechanisms of
signal transduction associated with FoxM1 and provides emerging evidence in
support of its role in the carcinogenesis. Further, we summarize data on several 
FoxM1 inhibitors especially "chemopreventive agents" and these agents could be
useful for targeted inactivation of FoxM1, which indeed could become a novel
approach for the prevention and/or treatment of human cancer.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2838950
PMID: 20022709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Hepatology. 2010 Mar;51(3):953-62. doi: 10.1002/hep.23390.

Farnesoid X receptor alleviates age-related proliferation defects in regenerating
mouse livers by activating forkhead box m1b transcription.

Chen WD(1), Wang YD, Zhang L, Shiah S, Wang M, Yang F, Yu D, Forman BM, Huang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gene Regulation and Drug Discovery, Beckman Research Institute, 
City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, CA 91010, USA.

Elucidating the mechanism of liver regeneration could lead to life-saving therapy
for a large number of patients, especially elderly patients, after segmental
liver transplantation or resection of liver tumors. The forkhead box m1b (Foxm1b)
transcription factor is required for normal liver regeneration. Here we report
that Foxm1b is the first direct farnesoid X receptor (FXR) target gene known to
be involved in cell cycle regulation and that aging regenerating livers have
delayed activation of FXR, which results in defective induction of Foxm1b and
thereby contributes to defective liver regeneration. An inverted repeat 0 (IR-0) 
FXR response element, acting as an enhancer in intron 3 of the Foxm1b gene, was
identified by a combination of transcriptional reporter, electrophoretic mobility
shift, and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. Diminished FXR binding to the
IR-0 element was found in aging regenerating livers. FXR activation by a novel
ligand in aging livers induced Foxm1b expression and elevated hepatocyte DNA
replication to about 70% of the levels found in young regenerating livers, which 
were specifically suppressed by hepatic expression of anti-Foxm1b short hairpin
RNA.CONCLUSION: Our results have revealed Foxm1b as the first known direct FXR
target gene involved in cell cycle regulation and have demonstrated that
defective activation of FXR could be an intrinsic defect in aging regenerating
livers. Activation of FXR alone is largely able to alleviate age-related liver
regeneration defects. These findings highlight FXR as a potential target of drug 
design for promoting liver regeneration in older subjects.

PMCID: PMC3033699
PMID: 19998409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 30;4(11):e8075. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008075.

Cross species genomic analysis identifies a mouse model as undifferentiated
pleomorphic sarcoma/malignant fibrous histiocytoma.

Mito JK(1), Riedel RF, Dodd L, Lahat G, Lazar AJ, Dodd RD, Stangenberg L, Eward
WC, Hornicek FJ, Yoon SS, Brigman BE, Jacks T, Lev D, Mukherjee S, Kirsch DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina, United States of America.

Undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma/Malignant Fibrous Histiocytoma (MFH) is one 
of the most common subtypes of human soft tissue sarcoma. Using cross species
genomic analysis, we define a geneset from the LSL-Kras(G12D); Trp53(Flox/Flox)
mouse model of soft tissue sarcoma that is highly enriched in human MFH. With
this mouse geneset as a filter, we identify expression of the RAS target FOXM1 in
human MFH. Expression of Foxm1 is elevated in mouse sarcomas that metastasize to 
the lung and tissue microarray analysis of human MFH correlates overexpression of
FOXM1 with metastasis. These results suggest that genomic alterations present in 
human MFH are conserved in the LSL-Kras(G12D); p53(Flox/Flox) mouse model of soft
tissue sarcoma and demonstrate the utility of this pre-clinical model.

PMCID: PMC2779485
PMID: 19956606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Curr Mol Med. 2009 Sep;9(7):873-86.

Hedgehog target genes: mechanisms of carcinogenesis induced by aberrant hedgehog 
signaling activation.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical Bioinformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Hedgehog signaling is aberrantly activated in glioma, medulloblastoma, basal cell
carcinoma, lung cancer, esophageal cancer, gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer,
breast cancer, and other tumors. Hedgehog signals activate GLI family members via
Smoothened. RTK signaling potentiates GLI activity through PI3K-AKT-mediated GSK3
inactivation or RAS-STIL1-mediated SUFU inactivation, while GPCR signaling to Gs 
represses GLI activity through adenylate cyclase-mediated PKA activation. GLI
activators bind to GACCACCCA motif to regulate transcription of GLI1, PTCH1,
PTCH2, HHIP1, MYCN, CCND1, CCND2, BCL2, CFLAR, FOXF1, FOXL1, PRDM1 (BLIMP1),
JAG2, GREM1, and Follistatin. Hedgehog signals are fine-tuned based on positive
feedback loop via GLI1 and negative feedback loop via PTCH1, PTCH2, and HHIP1.
Excessive positive feedback or collapsed negative feedback of Hedgehog signaling 
due to epigenetic or genetic alterations leads to carcinogenesis. Hedgehog
signals induce cellular proliferation through upregulation of N-Myc, Cyclin D/E, 
and FOXM1. Hedgehog signals directly upregulate JAG2, indirectly upregulate
mesenchymal BMP4 via FOXF1 or FOXL1, and also upregulate WNT2B and WNT5A.
Hedgehog signals induce stem cell markers BMI1, LGR5, CD44 and CD133 based on
cross-talk with WNT and/or other signals. Hedgehog signals upregulate BCL2 and
CFLAR to promote cellular survival, SNAI1 (Snail), SNAI2 (Slug), ZEB1, ZEB2
(SIP1), TWIST2, and FOXC2 to promote epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, and
PTHLH (PTHrP) to promote osteolytic bone metastasis. KAAD-cyclopamine,
Mu-SSKYQ-cyclopamine, IPI-269609, SANT1, SANT2, CUR61414 and HhAntag are
small-molecule inhibitors targeted to Smoothened, GANT58, GANT61 to GLI1 and
GLI2, and Robot-nikinin to SHH. Hedgehog signaling inhibitors should be used in
combination with RTK inhibitors, GPCR modulators, and/or irradiation for cancer
therapy.

PMID: 19860666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Biol. 2009 Dec 15;336(2):266-79. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.007. Epub 2009 
Oct 14.

Forkhead box M1 transcriptional factor is required for smooth muscle cells during
embryonic development of blood vessels and esophagus.

Ustiyan V(1), Wang IC, Ren X, Zhang Y, Snyder J, Xu Y, Wert SE, Lessard JL, Kalin
TV, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Pulmonary Biology, Perinatal Institute of the Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Research Foundation, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH 45229, 
USA.

The forkhead box m1 (Foxm1 or Foxm1b) transcription factor (previously called
HFH-11B, Trident, Win, or MPP2) is expressed in a variety of tissues during
embryogenesis, including vascular, airway, and intestinal smooth muscle cells
(SMCs). Although global deletion of Foxm1 in Foxm1(-/-) mice is lethal in the
embryonic period due to multiple abnormalities in the liver, heart, and lung, the
specific role of Foxm1 in SMC remains unknown. In the present study, Foxm1 was
deleted conditionally in the developing SMC (smFoxm1(-/-) mice). The majority of 
smFoxm1(-/-) mice died immediately after birth due to severe pulmonary hemorrhage
and structural defects in arterial wall and esophagus. Although Foxm1 deletion
did not influence SMC differentiation, decreased proliferation of SMC was found
in smFoxm1(-/-) blood vessels and esophagus. Depletion of Foxm1 in cultured SMC
caused G(2) arrest and decreased numbers of cells undergoing mitosis.
Foxm1-deficiency in vitro and in vivo was associated with reduced expression of
cell cycle regulatory genes, including cyclin B1, Cdk1-activator Cdc25b
phosphatase, Polo-like 1 and JNK1 kinases, and cMyc transcription factor. Foxm1
is critical for proliferation of smooth muscle cells and is required for proper
embryonic development of blood vessels and esophagus.

PMCID: PMC2783468
PMID: 19835856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Diabetes. 2010 Jan;59(1):143-52. doi: 10.2337/db09-0050. Epub 2009 Oct 15.

Gestational diabetes mellitus resulting from impaired beta-cell compensation in
the absence of FoxM1, a novel downstream effector of placental lactogen.

Zhang H(1), Zhang J, Pope CF, Crawford LA, Vasavada RC, Jagasia SM, Gannon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Diabetes, Endocrinology, and Metabolism,
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The objectives of the study were to determine whether the cell cycle
transcription factor, FoxM1, is required for glucose homeostasis and beta-cell
mass expansion in maternal islets during pregnancy and whether FoxM1 is essential
for placental lactogen (PL)-induced beta-cell proliferation.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: beta-Cell mass, beta-cell proliferation, and glucose
homeostasis were assessed in virgin, pregnant, and postpartum mice with a
pancreas-wide Foxm1 deletion (FoxM1(Deltapanc)). Wild-type islets were cultured
with or without PL and examined for Foxm1 induction. Transgenic mice
overexpressing PL in beta-cells were bred with FoxM1(Deltapanc) mice, and
beta-cell proliferation was examined.
RESULTS: Foxm1 was upregulated in maternal islets during pregnancy. In contrast
to controls, beta-cell proliferation did not increase in pregnant
FoxM1(Deltapanc) females. Mutant islets showed increased Menin and nuclear p27.
FoxM1(Deltapanc) females developed gestational diabetes mellitus as pregnancy
progressed. After parturition, euglycemia was restored in FoxM1(Deltapanc)
females, but islet size was significantly reduced. Strikingly, beta-cell mass was
normal in postpartum FoxM1(Deltapanc) pancreata due to a combination of increased
beta-cell size and islet neogenesis. Evidence for neogenesis included increased
number of endocrine clusters, increased proportion of smaller islets, and
increased neurogenin 3 or insulin expression in cells adjacent to ducts. PL
induced Foxm1 expression in cultured islets, and FoxM1 was essential for
PL-mediated increases in beta-cell proliferation in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: FoxM1 is essential for beta-cell compensation during pregnancy. In
the absence of increased beta-cell proliferation, neogenesis is induced in
postpartum FoxM1(Deltapanc) pancreata. Our results suggest that FoxM1 functions
downstream of PL to mediate its effects on beta-cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC2797915
PMID: 19833884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2010 Jul;122(2):337-46. doi: 10.1007/s10549-009-0572-1. 
Epub 2009 Oct 8.

FoxM1 down-regulation leads to inhibition of proliferation, migration and
invasion of breast cancer cells through the modulation of extra-cellular matrix
degrading factors.

Ahmad A(1), Wang Z, Kong D, Ali S, Li Y, Banerjee S, Ali R, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Center, Wayne State
University School of Medicine, Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor is known to play important role in
human cancers which, in part, is mediated by its ability to modulate cell cycle
regulatory proteins as well as genes involved in cell proliferation and
differentiation. In breast cancer, FoxM1 down-regulation is increasingly being
recognized as an important mechanism for the targeted activity of anti-cancer
agents. However, the mechanistic insight in support of the role of FoxM1 in
aggressive breast cancer is poorly understood. We have tested the biological
consequence of FoxM1 down-regulation and up-regulation in breast cancer cell
lines and found that the down-regulation of FoxM1 in MDA-MB-231 and SUM149 cells 
by siRNA approach inhibited cell growth, clonogenicity, migration, and invasion. 
We also found decreased expression of CDK2 and E2F1 with concomitant increase in 
p21 and p27 proteins, suggesting an important role of FoxM1 in cell cycle
progression. In contrast, over-expression of FoxM1 by cDNA transfection, in
breast cancer cells (SUM102 and SKBR3) expressing low levels of FoxM1, resulted
in increased cell proliferation, migration, and invasion. Moreover,
down-regulation of FoxM1 inhibited the expression of many factors that are
involved in the degradation of extra cellular matrix and angiogenesis such as
uPA, uPAR, MMP-2, MMP-9, and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) as well as
inhibited the activity of MMP-9 and VEGF. Interestingly, over-expression of uPA
by cDNA transfection abrogated the cellular effects that were observed by the
down-regulation of FoxM1. Taken together, these results suggest the potential
application of FoxM1 down-regulation as a novel approach for the treatment of
aggressive breast cancer.

PMID: 19813088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Cell Cycle. 2009 Oct 15;8(20):3425-7. Epub 2009 Oct 25.

p53 negatively regulates expression of FoxM1.

Pandit B, Halasi M, Gartel AL.

The Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) oncogenic transcription factor is overexpressed in a 
majority of human tumors. p53 is a transcription factor and a major tumor
suppressor that is mutated in 50% of human cancers. In this study, we compared
the levels of FoxM1 in normal BJ human fibroblasts, BJ fibroblasts with p53
knockdown and corresponding BJ immortal/oncogenic cell lines with inactivated
p53. We found that partial deletion or inactivation of p53 in these cells leads
to upregulation of FoxM1 expression. Similarly, p53 knockdown in several human
cancer cell lines with wt-p53 led to upregulation of FoxM1 mRNA and protein
expression, while induction of p53 by DNA-damage led to downregulation of FoxM1. 
These data suggest that p53 negatively regulates FoxM1 expression and therefore
inactivation of p53 in tumors could partially explain the phenomenon of FoxM1
overexpression in human cancers.

PMID: 19806025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Oncogene. 2009 Dec 3;28(48):4295-305. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.282. Epub 2009 Sep
14.

Pro-proliferative FoxM1 is a target of p53-mediated repression.

Barsotti AM(1), Prives C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

The p53 tumor suppressor protein acts as a transcription factor to modulate
cellular responses to a wide variety of stresses. In this study we show that p53 
is required for the downregulation of FoxM1, an essential transcription factor
that regulates many G2/M-specific genes and is overexpressed in a multitude of
solid tumors. After DNA damage, p53 facilitates the repression of FoxM1 mRNA,
which is accompanied by a decrease in FoxM1 protein levels. In cells with reduced
p53 expression, FoxM1 is upregulated after DNA damage. Nutlin, a small-molecule
activator of p53, suppresses FoxM1 levels in two cell lines in which DNA damage
facilitates only mild repression. Mechanistically, p53-mediated inhibition of
FoxM1 is partially p21 and retinoblastoma (Rb) family dependent, although in some
cases p21-independent repression of FoxM1 was also observed. The importance of
FoxM1 to cell fate was indicated by the observation that G2/M arrest follows
FoxM1 ablation. Finally, our results indicate a potential contribution of
p53-mediated repression of FoxM1 for maintenance of a stable G2 arrest.

PMCID: PMC2898139
PMID: 19749794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 30;284(44):30695-707. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.007997. Epub
2009 Sep 8.

A conserved phosphorylation site within the forkhead domain of FoxM1B is required
for its activation by cyclin-CDK1.

Chen YJ(1), Dominguez-Brauer C, Wang Z, Asara JM, Costa RH, Tyner AL, Lau LF,
Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois,
College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

The Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor is critical for expression of
the genes essential for G(1)/S transition and mitotic progression. To explore the
cell cycle regulation of FoxM1, we examined the phosphorylation profile of FoxM1.
Here, we show that the phosphorylated status and the activity of FoxM1 increase
as cells progress from S to G(2)/M phases. Moreover, dephosphorylation of FoxM1
coincides with exit from mitosis. Using mass spectrometry, we have identified a
new conserved phosphorylation site (Ser-251) within the forkhead domain of FoxM1.
Disruption of Ser-251 inhibits phosphorylation of FoxM1 and dramatically
decreases its transcriptional activity. We demonstrate that the Ser-251 residue
is required for CDK1-dependent phosphorylation of FoxM1 as well as its
interaction with the coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP). Interestingly, the
transcriptional activity of the S251A mutant protein remains responsive to
activation by overexpressed Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1). Cells expressing the S251A
mutant exhibit reduced expression of the G(2)/M phase genes and impaired mitotic 
progression. Our results demonstrate that the transcriptional activity of FoxM1
is controlled in a cell cycle-dependent fashion by temporally regulated
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events, and that the phosphorylation at
Ser-251 is critical for the activation of FoxM1.

PMCID: PMC2781623
PMID: 19737929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. EMBO J. 2009 Oct 7;28(19):2908-18. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.239. Epub 2009 Aug 20.

FoxM1, a critical regulator of oxidative stress during oncogenesis.

Park HJ(1), Carr JR, Wang Z, Nogueira V, Hay N, Tyner AL, Lau LF, Costa RH,
Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The transcription factor FoxM1 is over-expressed in most human malignancies.
Although it is evident that FoxM1 has critical functions in tumour development
and progression, the mechanisms by which FoxM1 participates in those processes
are not understood. Here, we describe an essential role of FoxM1 in the
regulation of oxidative stress that contributes to malignant transformation and
tumour cell survival. We identify a negative feedback loop involving FoxM1 that
regulates reactive oxygen species (ROS) in proliferating cells. We show that
induction of FoxM1 by oncogenic Ras requires ROS. Elevated FoxM1, in turn,
downregulates ROS levels by stimulating expression of ROS scavenger genes, such
as MnSOD, catalase and PRDX3. FoxM1 depletion sensitizes cells to oxidative
stress and increases oncogene-induced premature senescence. Moreover, tumour
cells expressing activated AKT1 are 'addicted' to FoxM1, as they require
continuous presence of FoxM1 for survival. Together, our results identify FoxM1
as a key regulator of ROS in dividing cells, and provide insights into the
mechanism how tumour cells use FoxM1 to control oxidative stress to escape
premature senescence and apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC2760115
PMID: 19696738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Int J Cancer. 2010 May 1;126(9):2153-63. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24836.

The forkhead box M1 transcription factor as a candidate of target for anti-cancer
immunotherapy.

Yokomine K(1), Senju S, Nakatsura T, Irie A, Hayashida Y, Ikuta Y, Harao M, Imai 
K, Baba H, Iwase H, Nomori H, Takahashi K, Daigo Y, Tsunoda T, Nakamura Y, Sasaki
Y, Nishimura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunogenetics, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.

The present study attempted to identify a target antigen for immunotherapy for
cholangiocarcinoma. Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1) was selected as a candidate antigen
based on the data of previous cDNA microarray analysis of clinical samples of
cholangiocarcinoma. The level of FOXM1 mRNA was more than 4 times higher in
cancer cells in comparison to adjacent normal epithelial cells, in all of 24
samples of cholangiocarcinoma tissues. An immunohistochemical analysis also
detected FOXM1 protein in the cancer cells but not in the normal cells.
Twenty-three human FOXM1-derived peptides predicted to bind to HLA-A2 were
analyzed to determine their ability to induce HLA-A2-restricted T cells in HLA-A2
transgenic mice. FOXM1(362-370) (YLVPIQFPV), FOXM1(373-382) (SLVLQPSVKV), and
FOXM1(640-649) (GLMDLSTTPL) peptides primed HLA-A2-restricted cytotoxic T
lymphocytes (CTLs) in the HLA-A2 transgenic mice. Human CTL lines reactive to
these 3 peptides could also be established from HLA-A2-positive healthy donors
and cancer patients. Natural processing of the 3 epitopes from FOXM1 protein was 
confirmed by specific killing of HLA-A2-positive FOXM1-transfectants by
peptide-induced CTLs. FOXM1 is expressed in various types of cancers and it is
also functionally involved in oncogenic transformation and the survival of cancer
cells. Therefore, FOXM1 may be a suitable target for immunotherapy against
various cancers including cholangiocarcinoma.

PMID: 19688828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 12;4(8):e6593. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006593.

FoxM1 is a general target for proteasome inhibitors.

Bhat UG(1), Halasi M, Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

Proteasome inhibitors are currently in the clinic or in clinical trials, but the 
mechanism of their anticancer activity is not completely understood. The
oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1 is one of the most overexpressed genes in
human tumors, while its expression is usually halted in normal non-proliferating 
cells. Previously, we established that thiazole antibiotics Siomycin A and
thiostrepton inhibit FoxM1 and induce apoptosis in human cancer cells. Here, we
report that Siomycin A and thiostrepton stabilize the expression of a variety of 
proteins, such as p21, Mcl-1, p53 and hdm-2 and also act as proteasome inhibitors
in vitro. More importantly, we also found that well-known proteasome inhibitors
such as MG115, MG132 and bortezomib inhibit FoxM1 transcriptional activity and
FoxM1 expression. In addition, overexpression of FoxM1 specifically protects
against bortezomib-, but not doxorubicin-induced apoptosis. These data suggest
that negative regulation of FoxM1 by proteasome inhibitors is a general feature
of these drugs and it may contribute to their anticancer properties.

PMCID: PMC2721658
PMID: 19672316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 12;4(8):e6609. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006609.

Deletion of Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor from respiratory epithelial
cells inhibits pulmonary tumorigenesis.

Wang IC(1), Meliton L, Ren X, Zhang Y, Balli D, Snyder J, Whitsett JA,
Kalinichenko VV, Kalin TV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology and the Perinatal Institute, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Research Foundation, Cincinnati, OH, USA.

The Forkhead Box m1 (Foxm1) protein is induced in a majority of human non-small
cell lung cancers and its expression is associated with poor prognosis. However, 
specific requirements for the Foxm1 in each cell type of the cancer lesion remain
unknown. The present study provides the first genetic evidence that the Foxm1
expression in respiratory epithelial cells is essential for lung tumorigenesis.
Using transgenic mice, we demonstrated that conditional deletion of Foxm1 from
lung epithelial cells (epFoxm1(-/-) mice) prior to tumor initiation caused a
striking reduction in the number and size of lung tumors, induced by either
urethane or 3-methylcholanthrene (MCA)/butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT). Decreased 
lung tumorigenesis in epFoxm1(-/-) mice was associated with diminished
proliferation of tumor cells and reduced expression of Topoisomerase-2alpha
(TOPO-2alpha), a critical regulator of tumor cell proliferation. Depletion of
Foxm1 mRNA in cultured lung adenocarcinoma cells significantly decreased
TOPO-2alpha mRNA and protein levels. Moreover, Foxm1 directly bound to and
induced transcription of the mouse TOPO-2alpha promoter region, indicating that
TOPO-2alpha is a direct target of Foxm1 in lung tumor cells. Finally, we
demonstrated that a conditional deletion of Foxm1 in pre-existing lung tumors
dramatically reduced tumor growth in the lung. Expression of Foxm1 in respiratory
epithelial cells is critical for lung cancer formation and TOPO-2alpha expression
in vivo, suggesting that Foxm1 is a promising target for anti-tumor therapy.

PMCID: PMC2720537
PMID: 19672312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Oct 15;315(17):2888-98. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.07.028. Epub
2009 Aug 6.

The PDZ protein MPP2 interacts with c-Src in epithelial cells.

Baumgartner M(1), Weiss A, Fritzius T, Heinrich J, Moelling K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.
Martin.Baumgartner@mopa.unibe.ch

c-Src is a non-receptor tyrosine kinase involved in regulating cell
proliferation, cell migration and cell invasion and is tightly controlled by
reversible phosphorylation on regulatory sites and through protein-protein
interactions. The interaction of c-Src with PDZ proteins was recently identified 
as novel mechanism to restrict c-Src function. The objective of this study was to
identify and characterise PDZ proteins that interact with c-Src to control its
activity. By PDZ domain array screen, we identified the interaction of c-Src with
the PDZ protein Membrane Protein Palmitoylated 2 (MPP2), a member of the
Membrane-Associated Guanylate Kinase (MAGUK) family, to which also the Discs
large (Dlg) tumour suppressor protein belongs. The function of MPP2 has not been 
established and the functional significance of the MPP2 c-Src interaction is not 
known. We found that in non-transformed breast epithelial MCF-10A cells,
endogenous MPP2 associated with the cytoskeleton in filamentous structures, which
partially co-localised with microtubules and c-Src. MPP2 and c-Src interacted in 
cells, where c-Src kinase activity promoted increased interaction of c-Src with
MPP2. We furthermore found that MPP2 was able to negatively regulate c-Src kinase
activity in cells, suggesting that the functional significance of the MPP2-c-Src 
interaction is to restrict Src activity. Consequently, the c-Src-dependent
disorganisation of the cortical actin cytoskeleton of epithelial cells expressing
c-Src was suppressed by MPP2. In conclusion we demonstrate here that MPP2
interacts with c-Src in cells to control c-Src activity and morphological
function.

PMID: 19665017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Nov 1;315(18):3152-62. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.07.009. Epub 
2009 Jul 14.

Skp2 enhances polyubiquitination and degradation of TIS21/BTG2/PC3, tumor
suppressor protein, at the downstream of FoxM1.

Park TJ(1), Kim JY, Park SH, Kim HS, Lim IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Brain Korea 21 Division of
Cell Transformation and Restoration, Ajou University, School of Medicine, Suwon, 
443-721, Republic of Korea.

TIS21(/BTG2/PC3) has been shown to work as a pan-cell cycle inhibitor and a
negative regulator of cyclin B1/cdk1 and forkhead box M1 (FoxM1). Moreover, loss 
of TIS21 expression has been suggested as an early event in carcinogenesis of
thymus, prostate, kidney, and liver. However, there is no report yet what
regulates the in vivo stability of TIS21 protein. Here, TIS21 was found to be a
target of ubiquitin ligase, S phase kinase associated protein 2 (Skp2), the
expression of which was regulated by FoxM1. Leucine rich repeat (LRR) domain of
Skp2 could bind to TIS21 C-terminus and facilitated TIS21 degradation via
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway. Skp2 without LRR and C-terminus deleted TIS21
(TIS21DeltaC) failed to interact with each other, and failure of their
interaction prolonged half-life of TIS21 protein. Furthermore, in vivo function
of TIS21, inhibition of cell growth, was regulated by expressions of Skp2 and
FoxM1; It was significantly enhanced by knock down of Skp2 expression in the
TIS21 adenovirus infected cells, whereas it was significantly ameliorated by
co-expression of FoxM1 with TIS21. These data indicate that TIS21 is a novel
target of SCF-Skp2 ubiquitin ligase, which is regulated by expression of FoxM1.

PMID: 19615363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2009 Sep;234(9):1086-94. doi: 10.3181/0903-RM-98. Epub
2009 Jul 13.

Cell cycle arrest induced by hydrogen peroxide is associated with modulation of
oxidative stress related genes in breast cancer cells.

Chua PJ(1), Yip GW, Bay BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore 117 597, Singapore.

Depending on the amounts present, reactive oxygen species can exert either
beneficial or deleterious effect to cells. In the present study, we observed a
decrease in cell viability concomitant with an increase of malondialdehyde
concentration in hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2))-treated MCF-7 breast cancer cells. 
There was also a concurrent G1/S phase cell cycle arrest with increased apoptosis
in H(2)O(2)-treated cells. Analysis of 84 oxidative stress related genes showed
that five genes were significantly and differentially regulated, namely,
Cytoglobin (CYGB), Forkhead box M1 (FOXM1), NADPH oxidase (NOX5), Nudix
(nucleoside diphosphate linked moiety X)-type motif 1 (NUDT1) and Selenoprotein
P1 (SEPP1) genes with H(2)O(2) treatment. It would seem that oxidative stress
induces cell cycle arrest in the breast cancer by modulation of these genes.
Manipulation of these genes, in particular FOXM1, a proliferation-specific gene
associated with human malignancies, could stifle cancer progression and enhance
the therapeutic efficacy of drugs which exert their effects by oxidative stress.

PMID: 19596828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Cancer Res. 2009 Jul 15;69(14):5664-72. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3820. Epub 
2009 Jul 7.

Computational identification of a p38SAPK-regulated transcription factor network 
required for tumor cell quiescence.

Adam AP(1), George A, Schewe D, Bragado P, Iglesias BV, Ranganathan AC, Kourtidis
A, Conklin DS, Aguirre-Ghiso JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, School of Public Health and Center for
Excellence in Cancer Genomics, SUNY-Albany, Rensselaer, New York, USA.

The stress-activated kinase p38 plays key roles in tumor suppression and
induction of tumor cell dormancy. However, the mechanisms behind these functions 
remain poorly understood. Using computational tools, we identified a
transcription factor (TF) network regulated by p38alpha/beta and required for
human squamous carcinoma cell quiescence in vivo. We found that p38
transcriptionally regulates a core network of 46 genes that includes 16 TFs.
Activation of p38 induced the expression of the TFs p53 and BHLHB3, while
inhibiting c-Jun and FoxM1 expression. Furthermore, induction of p53 by p38 was
dependent on c-Jun down-regulation. Accordingly, RNAi down-regulation of BHLHB3
or p53 interrupted tumor cell quiescence, while down-regulation of c-Jun or FoxM1
or overexpression of BHLHB3 in malignant cells mimicked the onset of quiescence. 
Our results identify components of the regulatory mechanisms driving p38-induced 
cancer cell quiescence. These may regulate dormancy of residual disease that
usually precedes the onset of metastasis in many cancers.

PMCID: PMC2720524
PMID: 19584293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncogene. 2009 Jul 30;28(30):2723-37. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.128. Epub 2009 Jun
15.

Expression of FLJ10540 is correlated with aggressiveness of oral cavity squamous 
cell carcinoma by stimulating cell migration and invasion through increased FOXM1
and MMP-2 activity.

Chen CH(1), Chien CY, Huang CC, Hwang CF, Chuang HC, Fang FM, Huang HY, Chen CM, 
Liu HL, Huang CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical
Center, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.

Matrix metalloproteinase (MMP)-2 plays critical roles in tumor development and in
the metastasis of multiple cancers, including human oral cavity squamous cell
carcinoma (OCSCC). One of the upstream regulators of MMP-2 is FOXM1, which is
overexpressed in a microarray dataset of OCSCC. It is interesting that FLJ10540
exhibits similar gene expression profiles with MMP-2 and FOXM1, raising the
possibility that these molecules might participate in MMP-2-elicited cancer
progression and metastasis of OCSCC. To examine this connection, we first showed 
that FLJ10540 was significantly overexpressed in OCSCC. A strong FLJ10540
expression was significantly correlated with an advanced tumor node metastasis
stage and the cumulative 5-year survival rate. Thus, an elevated FLJ10540
expression is an indicator of poor survival. Functionally, FLJ10540 had the
abilities to stimulate cell migration and invasion in oral cancer cells through
increased FOXM1 and MMP-2 expressions. Conversely, the depletion of the FLJ10540 
expression by small interfering RNAs suppressed the FOXM1 and MMP-2 protein
expressions. The suppression of either FLJ10540 or FOXM1 could cause significant 
inhibition on cell migratory and invasive ability in oral cancer cells. Finally, 
the immunohistochemical and western blotting analyses of human aggressive OCSCC
specimens showed a significant positive correlation among FLJ10540, FOXM1 and
MMP-2 expressions. These findings suggest that FLJ10540 is not only an important 
prognostic factor but also a new therapeutic target in the FLJ10540/FOXM1/MMP-2
pathway for OCSCC treatment.

PMID: 19525975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Int J Oncol. 2009 Jul;35(1):57-68.

FoxM1 is a downstream target and marker of HER2 overexpression in breast cancer.

Francis RE(1), Myatt SS, Krol J, Hartman J, Peck B, McGovern UB, Wang J, Guest
SK, Filipovic A, Gojis O, Palmieri C, Peston D, Shousha S, Yu Q, Sicinski P,
Coombes RC, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research-UK Labs, Department of Oncology, Imperial College London,
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London W12 0NN, UK.

The tyrosine kinase receptor, HER2 is a crucial prognostic marker and therapeutic
target for breast cancer; however, the downstream targets and biological
effectors of HER2 remain unclear. We investigated the relationship between HER2
and the transcription factor FoxM1 in breast cancer. HER2 and FoxM1 expression
levels were compared in breast carcinoma cell lines, paraffin-embedded breast
cancer patient samples and at the mRNA level in purified breast epithelial cells.
To further examine the relationship between HER2 and FoxM1 expression, we either 
overexpressed or siRNA-mediated depleted endogenous HER2 in breast cancer cell
lines. Additionally, a mammary epithelium-targeted HER2 (neu) transgenic mouse
model was also used to assess the effect of HER2 on FoxM1 levels. Furthermore,
the effect of the HER2-tyrosine kinase inhibitor lapatinib on FoxM1 in HER2
positive breast cancer cells was investigated. HER2 protein levels directly
correlated with FoxM1 expression in both breast carcinoma cell lines and
paraffin-embedded breast cancer patient samples. Moreover, in purified breast
epithelial cells, overexpression of HER2 was associated with high levels of FoxM1
mRNA, suggesting that the upregulation of FoxM1 expression is at least partially 
mediated transcriptionally. Furthermore, overexpression or ablation of endogenous
HER2 resulted in parallel changes in FoxM1 expression. Critically, mammary
epithelium-targeted HER2 mouse tumours also resulted in increased FoxM1
expression, suggesting that HER2 directed FoxM1 expression occurs in vivo and may
be a critical downstream effector of HER2-targeting therapies. Indeed, treatment 
of breast cancer cells with lapatinib reduced FoxM1 expression at protein, mRNA
and gene promoter levels. Moreover, analysis of normal and breast cancer patient 
samples revealed that elevated FoxM1 expression at protein and mRNA levels
correlated with breast cancer development, but not significantly with cancer
progression and survival. Our results indicate that the HER2 receptor regulates
the expression of the FoxM1 transcription factor, which has a role in breast
cancer development.

PMCID: PMC3065068
PMID: 19513552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Hepatology. 2009 Jul;50(1):207-15. doi: 10.1002/hep.22979.

p21 is required for dextrose-mediated inhibition of mouse liver regeneration.

Weymann A(1), Hartman E, Gazit V, Wang C, Glauber M, Turmelle Y, Rudnick DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

The inhibitory effect of dextrose supplementation on liver regeneration was first
described more than 4 decades ago. Nevertheless, the molecular mechanisms
responsible for this observation have not been elucidated. We investigated these 
mechanisms using the partial hepatectomy model in mice given standard or 10%
dextrose (D10)-supplemented drinking water. The results showed that D10-treated
mice exhibited significantly reduced hepatic regeneration compared with controls,
as assessed by hepatocellular bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) incorporation and mitotic 
frequency. D10 supplementation did not suppress activation of hepatocyte growth
factor (HGF), induction of transforming growth factor alpha (TGF-alpha)
expression, or tumor necrosis factor alpha-interleukin-6 cytokine signaling,
p42/44 extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activation, immediate early
gene expression, or expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta
(C/EBPbeta), but did augment expression of the mito-inhibitory factors
C/EBPalpha, p21(Waf1/Cip1), and p27(Kip1). In addition, forkhead box M1 (FoxM1)
expression, which is required for normal liver regeneration, was suppressed by
D10 treatment. Finally, D10 did not suppress either FoxM1 expression or
hepatocellular proliferation in p21 null mice subjected to partial hepatectomy,
establishing the functional significance of these events in mediating the effects
of D10 on liver regeneration.CONCLUSION: These data show that the inhibitory
effect of dextrose supplementation on liver regeneration is associated with
increased expression of C/EBPalpha, p21, and p27, and decreased expression of
FoxM1, and that D10-mediated inhibition of liver regeneration is abrogated in
p21-deficient animals. Our observations are consistent with a model in which
hepatic sufficiency is defined by homeostasis between the energy-generating
capacity of the liver and the energy demands of the body mass, with liver
regeneration initiated when the functional liver mass is no longer sufficient to 
meet such demand.

PMCID: PMC2705473
PMID: 19441104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. PLoS One. 2009;4(5):e5592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005592. Epub 2009 May 18.

Thiazole antibiotics target FoxM1 and induce apoptosis in human cancer cells.

Bhat UG(1), Halasi M, Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 
United States of America.

Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) oncogenic transcription factor represents an attractive
therapeutic target in the fight against cancer, because it is overexpressed in a 
majority of human tumors. Recently, using a cell-based assay system we identified
thiazole antibiotic Siomycin A as an inhibitor of FoxM1 transcriptional activity.
Here, we report that structurally similar thiazole antibiotic, thiostrepton also 
inhibits the transcriptional activity of FoxM1. Furthermore, we found that these 
thiopeptides did not inhibit the transcriptional activity of other members of the
Forkhead family or some non-related transcription factors. Further experiments
revealed that thiazole antibiotics also inhibit FoxM1 expression, but not the
expression of other members of the Forkhead box family. In addition, we found
that the thiazole antibiotics efficiently inhibited the growth and induced potent
apoptosis in human cancer cell lines of different origin. Thiopeptide-induced
apoptosis correlated with the suppression of FoxM1 expression, while
overexpression of FoxM1 partially protected cancer cells from the thiazole
antibiotic-mediated cell death. These data suggest that Siomycin A and
thiostrepton may specifically target FoxM1 to induce apoptosis in cancer cells
and FoxM1 inhibitors/thiazole antibiotics could be potentially developed as novel
anticancer drugs against human neoplasia.

PMCID: PMC2680058
PMID: 19440351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Invest New Drugs. 2010 Aug;28(4):381-91. doi: 10.1007/s10637-009-9255-3. Epub
2009 May 14.

Development and pharmacologic characterization of deoxybromophospha sugar
derivatives with antileukemic activity.

Nakamura S(1), Yamashita M, Yokota D, Hirano I, Ono T, Fujie M, Shibata K, Niimi 
T, Suyama T, Maddali K, Asai K, Yamashita J, Iguchi Y, Ohnishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu city, Shizuoka, 431-3192, Japan.
satonaka@hama-med.ac.jp

Here, we synthesized two phospha sugar derivatives,
2,3,4-tribromo-3-methyl-1-phenylphospholane 1-oxide (TMPP) and
2,3-dibromo-3-methyl-1-phenylphospholane 1-oxide (DMPP) by reacting
3-methyl-1-phenyl-2-phospholene 1-oxide with bromine, and investigated their
potential as antileukemic agents in cell lines. Both agents showed inhibitory
effects on leukemia cell proliferation, with mean IC(50) values of 6.25
micromol/L for TMPP and 23.7 micromol/L for DMPP, indicating that inhibition
appeared to be dependent on the number of bromine atoms in the structure.
Further, TMPP at 10 micromol/L and DMPP at 20 micromol/L induced G2/M cell cycle 
block in leukemia cells, and TMPP at 20 micromol/L induced apoptosis in these
cells. TMPP treatment effected a reduction in both cell cycle progression signals
(FoxM1, KIS, Cdc25B, Cyclin D1, Cyclin A, and Aurora-B) and tumor cell survival
(p27(Kip1) and p21(Cip1)), as well as induced the activation of caspase-3 and -9.
Further, treatment with TMPP significantly reduced the viability of AML specimens
derived from AML patients, but only slightly reduced the viability of normal
ALDH(hi) progenitor cells. We also observed that FoxM1 mRNA was overexpressed in 
AML cells, and treatment with TMPP reduced FoxM1 mRNA expression in AML cells.
Here, we report on the synthesis of TMPP and DMPP and demonstrate that these
agents hinder proliferation of leukemia cells by FoxM1 suppression, which leads
to G2/M cell cycle block and subsequent caspase-3-dependent apoptosis in acute
leukemia cells. These agents may facilitate the development of new strategies in 
targeted antileukemic therapy.

PMID: 19436953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Cell Cycle. 2009 Jun 15;8(12):1966-7. Epub 2009 Jun 9.

A novel mode of FoxM1 regulation: positive auto-regulatory loop.

Halasi M(1), Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, 
USA.

Oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1 represents an attractive therapeutic target 
in the fight against cancer, because it is overexpressed in a majority of human
tumors. Previously, we identified the thiazole antibiotics as potent inhibitors
of FoxM1. Surprisingly, investigation of the mechanism of action of FoxM1
inhibitors revealed a novel mode of positive auto-regulation of FoxM1.

PMID: 19411834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Cancer Res. 2009 Apr 15;69(8):3501-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3045. Epub
2009 Apr 7.

Critical role and regulation of transcription factor FoxM1 in human gastric
cancer angiogenesis and progression.

Li Q(1), Zhang N, Jia Z, Le X, Dai B, Wei D, Huang S, Tan D, Xie K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The mammalian forkhead box (Fox) transcription factor FoxM1b is implicated in
tumorigenesis. However, the presence of expression and role of FoxM1b in gastric 
cancer remain unknown. Therefore, we investigated FoxM1b expression in 86 cases
of primary gastric cancer and 57 normal gastric tissue specimens. We further
investigated the underlying mechanisms of altered FoxM1b expression in and the
effect of this altered expression on gastric cancer growth and metastasis using
in vitro and animal models of gastric cancer. We found weak expression of FoxM1b 
protein in the mucous neck region of gastric mucosa, whereas we observed strong
staining for FoxM1b in tumor cell nuclei in various gastric tumors and lymph node
metastases. A Cox proportional hazards model revealed that FoxM1b expression was 
an independent prognostic factor in multivariate analysis (P < 0.001).
Experimentally, overexpression of FoxM1b by gene transfer significantly promoted 
the growth and metastasis of gastric cancer cells in orthotopic mouse models,
whereas knockdown of FoxM1b expression by small interfering RNA did the opposite.
Promotion of gastric tumorigenesis by FoxM1b directly and significantly
correlated with transactivation of vascular endothelial growth factor expression 
and elevation of angiogenesis. Given the importance of FoxM1b to regulation of
the expression of genes key to cancer biology overall, dysregulated expression
and activation of FoxM1b may play important roles in gastric cancer development
and progression.

PMCID: PMC4087044
PMID: 19351851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4849. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004849. Epub 2009 Mar 16.

FOXM1 upregulation is an early event in human squamous cell carcinoma and it is
enhanced by nicotine during malignant transformation.

Gemenetzidis E(1), Bose A, Riaz AM, Chaplin T, Young BD, Ali M, Sugden D, Thurlow
JK, Cheong SC, Teo SH, Wan H, Waseem A, Parkinson EK, Fortune F, Teh MT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Clinical and Diagnostic Oral Sciences, Institute of Dentistry,
Barts & The London School of Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of
London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Cancer associated with smoking and drinking remains a serious health 
problem worldwide. The survival of patients is very poor due to the lack of
effective early biomarkers. FOXM1 overexpression is linked to the majority of
human cancers but its mechanism remains unclear in head and neck squamous cell
carcinoma (HNSCC).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: FOXM1 mRNA and protein expressions were
investigated in four independent cohorts (total 75 patients) consisting of
normal, premalignant and HNSCC tissues and cells using quantitative PCR (qPCR),
expression microarray, immunohistochemistry and immunocytochemistry. Effect of
putative oral carcinogens on FOXM1 transcriptional activity was dose-dependently 
assayed and confirmed using a FOXM1-specific luciferase reporter system, qPCR,
immunoblotting and short-hairpin RNA interference. Genome-wide single nucleotide 
polymorphism (SNP) array was used to 'trace' the genomic instability signature
pattern in 8 clonal lines of FOXM1-induced malignant human oral keratinocytes.
Furthermore, acute FOXM1 upregulation in primary oral keratinocytes directly
induced genomic instability. We have shown for the first time that overexpression
of FOXM1 precedes HNSCC malignancy. Screening putative carcinogens in human oral 
keratinocytes surprisingly showed that nicotine, which is not perceived to be a
human carcinogen, directly induced FOXM1 mRNA, protein stabilisation and
transcriptional activity at concentrations relevant to tobacco chewers.
Importantly, nicotine also augmented FOXM1-induced transformation of human oral
keratinocytes. A centrosomal protein CEP55 and a DNA helicase/putative stem cell 
marker HELLS, both located within a consensus loci (10q23), were found to be
novel targets of FOXM1 and their expression correlated tightly with HNSCC
progression.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study cautions the potential co-carcinogenic
effect of nicotine in tobacco replacement therapies. We hypothesise that aberrant
upregulation of FOXM1 may be inducing genomic instability through a program of
malignant transformation involving the activation of CEP55 and HELLS which may
facilitate aberrant mitosis and epigenetic modifications. Our finding that FOXM1 
is upregulated early during oral cancer progression renders FOXM1 an attractive
diagnostic biomarker for early cancer detection and its candidate mechanistic
targets, CEP55 and HELLS, as indicators of malignant conversion and progression.

PMCID: PMC2654098
PMID: 19287496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Cancer Ther. 2009 Mar;8(3):582-91. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0805. Epub
2009 Mar 10.

Gefitinib (Iressa) represses FOXM1 expression via FOXO3a in breast cancer.

McGovern UB(1), Francis RE, Peck B, Guest SK, Wang J, Myatt SS, Krol J, Kwok JM, 
Polychronis A, Coombes RC, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Labs, Department of Oncology, Imperial College London, MRC 
Cyclotron Building, Imperial College School of Medicine at Hammersmith Hospital, 
Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom.

Gefitinib (Iressa) is a specific and effective epidermal growth factor receptor
inhibitor. An understanding of the downstream cellular targets of gefitinib will 
allow the discovery of biomarkers for predicting outcomes and monitoring
anti-epidermal growth factor receptor therapies and provide information for
overcoming gefitinib resistance. In this study, we investigated the role and
regulation of FOXM1 in response to gefitinib treatment in breast cancer. Using
the gefitinib-sensitive breast carcinoma cell lines BT474 and SKBR3 as well as
the resistant lines MCF-7, MDA-MB-231, and MDA-MB-453, we showed that gefitinib
represses the expression of the transcription factor FOXM1 in sensitive, but not 
resistant, cells. FOXM1 repression by gefitinib is associated with FOXO3a
activation and is mediated at the transcriptional level and gene promoter level. 
These results were verified by immunohistochemical staining of biopsy samples
from primary breast cancer patients obtained from a gefitinib neoadjuvant study. 
We also showed that ectopic expression of an active FOXO3a represses FOXM1
expression, whereas knockdown of FOXO3a expression using small interfering RNA
can up-regulate FOXM1 and its downstream targets polo-like kinase, cyclin B1, and
CDC25B and rescue sensitive BT474 cells from gefitinib-induced cell proliferative
arrest. These results suggest that gefitinib represses FOXM1 expression via
FOXO3a in breast cancer. We further showed that overexpression of a wild-type
FOXM1 or a constitutively active FOXM1, DeltaN-FOXM1, abrogates the cell death
induced by gefitinib, indicating that FOXM1 has a functional role in mediating
the gefitinib-induced proliferative arrest and in determining sensitivity to
gefitinib. In summary, our study defined FOXM1 as a cellular target and marker of
gefitinib activity in breast cancer.

PMID: 19276163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Transplant Proc. 2009 Jan-Feb;41(1):339-42. doi:
10.1016/j.transproceed.2008.10.087.

Hyperglycemia in vitro up-regulates growth-related cell cycle proteins of adult
mouse pancreatic islets.

Hsu S(1), Fu SH, Chen ST, Hsu BR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine,
Chang-Gung Medical Center, Taoyuan Hsien, Taiwan.

To study effects of glucose on growth-related proteins of adult islets, we
cultured mice islets in medium containing either 5.5 mmol/L (LG) or 20 mmol/L
(HG) glucose. Total islet proteins were processed for sodium dodecyl sulfate
polyacrylamide gel and Western blotting using antibodies against beta-actin
(housekeeping), p27kip1 (G1/G0 checkpoint), cyclin D1 (G1/S), cyclin B1 (G2/M),
and FoxM1. At day 1, protein levels p27, B1, D1, and FoxM1 of islets on LG and HG
were 0.48- and 0.63-fold; 7.09- and 11.58-fold; 1.25- and 1.38-fold; and 1.75-
and 1.75-folds, the value of day 0, determinations respectively. At day 3, the
proteins of p27, B1, D1, and FoxM1 of islets in LG and HG were 0.84- and
0.84-fold; 3.08- and 17.17-fold; 1.41- and 1.54-fold; and 0.83- and 1.17-fold of 
those on day 0, respectively. On day 7 the values were 1.19- and 1.09-fold; 3.15-
and 14.81-fold; 0.86- and 1.44-fold; and 2.75- and 3.42-fold that of day 0,
respectively. At day 1, the ratios of protein in islets after HG verse LG were
1.25, 2.38, 0.94, and 1.00 for p27, B1, D1, and FoxM1, respectively. At days 3
and 7, the protein ratios of HG/LG were 0.81 and 0.82, 5.47 and 2.64, 0.81 and
1.51, and 1.11 and 1.24 for p27, B1, D1, and FoxM1, respectively. In conclusion, 
adult mouse islets rapidly respond to cultivation by reducing p27 and increasing 
B1; HG attenuates p27 elevation but enhances B1 and D1 elevations, which favor
islet entry into the cell cycle.

PMID: 19249551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Pathol. 2009 Aug;218(4):419-27. doi: 10.1002/path.2530.

FoxM1 is up-regulated in gastric cancer and its inhibition leads to cellular
senescence, partially dependent on p27 kip1.

Zeng J(1), Wang L, Li Q, Li W, Björkholm M, Jia J, Xu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Haematology, Karolinska University
Hospital, Solna, and Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

The FoxM1 transcription factor, a master regulator of mitotic gene expression,
promotes the pathogenesis of several malignancies. However, little is known about
its expression and function in gastric cancer. In the present study we determined
whether FoxM1 is over-expressed in gastric cancer, and whether it is required to 
maintain an immortal phenotype of gastric cancer cells. The over-expression of
FoxM1 was observed in 37/42 tumour specimens from patients with gastric cancer.
When FoxM1 in gastric cancer cells was knocked-down, impaired clonogenicity and
cellular senescence occurred independently of p53 and p16 status. FoxM1 depletion
led to the down-regulation of its target genes c-MYC and Skp2, coupled with the
accumulation of the CDK inhibitor p27(kip1). Importantly, the FoxM1
inhibition-mediated cellular senescence and clonogenic defect was attenuated by
the abolition of p27(kip1) induction. Telomerase reverse transcriptase, the key
component of telomerase essential for cellular immortalization, was also
inhibited in the FoxM1-depleted cells. Taken together, the FoxM1 gene is
aberrantly activated in gastric cancer and its inhibition triggers p53- and
p16-independent senescence of cancer cells by regulating the expression of
p27(kip1) and other targets. These findings provide mechanistic insights into the
role of FoxM1 in the pathogenesis of gastric cancer, which may have diagnostic
and therapeutic implications in gastric cancer.

(c) 2009 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John
Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 19235838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Am J Pathol. 2009 Mar;174(3):762-70. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2009.080721. Epub 2009
Feb 13.

Identification of potential therapeutic targets in malignant mesothelioma using
cell-cycle gene expression analysis.

Romagnoli S(1), Fasoli E, Vaira V, Falleni M, Pellegrini C, Catania A, Roncalli
M, Marchetti A, Santambrogio L, Coggi G, Bosari S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pathology, Department of Medicine, Surgery, and Dentistry,
University of Milan Medical School, A.O.S. Paolo, Via A. Di Rudinì 8, 20142
Milano, Italy.

Cell-cycle defects are responsible for cancer onset and growth. We studied the
expression profile of 60 genes involved in cell cycle in a series of malignant
mesotheliomas (MMs), normal pleural tissues, and MM cell cultures using a
quantitative polymerase chain reaction-based, low-density array. Nine genes were 
significantly deregulated in MMs compared with normal controls. Seven genes were 
overexpressed in MMs, including the following: CDKN2C, cdc6, cyclin H, cyclin B1,
CDC2, FoxM1, and Chk1, whereas Ube1L and cyclin D2 were underexpressed. Chk1 is a
principal mediator of cell-cycle checkpoints in response to genotoxic stress. We 
confirmed the overexpression of Chk1 in an independent set of 87 MMs by
immunohistochemistry using tissue microarrays. To determine whether Chk1
down-regulation would affect cell-cycle control and cell survival, we transfected
either control or Chk1 siRNA into two mesothelioma cell lines and a
nontumorigenic (Met5a) cell line. Results showed that Chk1 knockdown increased
the apoptotic fraction of MM cells and induced an S phase block in Met5a cells.
Furthermore, Chk1 silencing sensitized p53-null MM cells to both an S phase block
and apoptosis in the presence of doxorubicin. Our results indicate that
cell-cycle gene expression analysis by quantitative polymerase chain reaction can
identify potential targets for novel therapies. Chk1 knockdown could provide a
novel therapeutic approach to arrest cell-cycle progression in MM cells, thus
increasing the rate of cell death.

PMCID: PMC2665738
PMID: 19218339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Lung Cancer. 2009 Oct;66(1):64-74. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.01.007. Epub 2009 
Feb 6.

Overexpression of hedgehog pathway molecules and FOXM1 in non-small cell lung
carcinomas.

Gialmanidis IP(1), Bravou V, Amanetopoulou SG, Varakis J, Kourea H, Papadaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, University of Patras, 26500 Rio
Patras, Greece. gialmanidis nikea@yahoo.com

The hedgehog (HH)-signaling pathway is implicated in developmental processes and 
its aberrant activation in adult tissues has been associated with malignancy. The
aim of this study was to determine the expression pattern of HH-signaling
molecules in non-small cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC), as well as the involvement
of the transcription factor FOXM1, that controls cell proliferation, in this
process. Paraffin-embedded tissue sections of 80 NSCLC cases and adjacent
non-neoplastic lung parenchyma were immunohistochemically analyzed with anti-SHH,
anti-Patched1 (PTCH1), anti-Smoothened (SMO), anti-GLI1, anti-GLI2 and anti-FOXM1
antibodies. Correlations of HH molecules with clinicopathological parameters and 
FOXM1 expression were evaluated. All the HH-signaling molecules examined were
overexpressed in NSCLC compared with the adjacent non-neoplastic lung parenchyma.
HH pathway activity and expression of PTCH1 and SMO were significantly higher in 
squamous cell carcinomas compared to other NSCLC histological types. Activation
of HH pathway and PTCH1 expression were correlated with tumor grade being higher 
in low grade tumors. There was a significant correlation of lymph node metastases
with expression of SMO in all NSCLC histological types and with nuclear GLI1
immunolocalization only in adenocarcinomas. Overexpression of FOXM1 in NSCLC was 
also significantly correlated with PTCH1, SMO and GLI1 expression. In conclusion,
HH-signaling pathway is activated in NSCLC and correlates with histological type,
prognostic parameters of the tumors as well as with the increased expression of
FOXM1.

PMID: 19200615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Int J Cancer. 2009 May 15;124(10):2468-77. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24209.

Inhibition of matrix metalloproteinase-2 enhances radiosensitivity by abrogating 
radiation-induced FoxM1-mediated G2/M arrest in A549 lung cancer cells.

Chetty C(1), Bhoopathi P, Rao JS, Lakka SS.

Author information: 
(1)Program of Cancer Biology, Department of Cancer Biology and Pharmacology,
University of Illinois College of Medicine at Peoria, One Illini Drive, Peoria,
IL 61605, USA.

Matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP-2), is known to degrade the collagen IV, plays a 
role in radiation-induced lung injury. We therefore investigated the antitumor
effects of combining MMP-2 inhibition using an adenovirus expressing siRNA
against MMP-2 (Ad-MMP-2-Si) with radiation therapy (IR) on A549 lung cancer cells
in vitro and in vivo. IR increased MMP-2 mRNA, protein and activity in lung
cancer cells. MMP-2 inhibition along with IR enhanced radiosensitivity as
determined by clonogenic assay, flow cytometry and TUNEL assay. We show that
MMP-2 inhibition prior to irradiation reduced p53 phosphorylation, with a
corresponding reduction in the expression of the p53 downstream target gene
p21(Cip1/Waf1). Irradiated tumor cells induced the FoxM1-mediated DNA repair
gene, XRCC1 and Checkpoint kinases 2/1, which were abrogated with combined
treatment of Ad-MMP-2-Si and IR. Further, the combination of Ad-MMP-2-Si with
radiotherapy significantly increased antitumor efficacy in vivo compared to
either agent alone. Indeed, histological analysis of tumor sections collected
from the combination group revealed more apoptotic cells. These studies suggest
that MMP-2 inhibition in combination with radiotherapy abrogates G2 cell cycle
arrest leading to apoptosis and provide evidence of the antitumor efficacy of
combining MMP-2 inhibition with irradiation as a new therapeutic strategy for the
effective treatment of NSCLC patients.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2663016
PMID: 19165865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Nat Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;10(9):1076-82. doi: 10.1038/ncb1767.

Plk1-dependent phosphorylation of FoxM1 regulates a transcriptional programme
required for mitotic progression.

Fu Z(1), Malureanu L, Huang J, Wang W, Li H, van Deursen JM, Tindall DJ, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota
55905, USA.

Proper control of entry into and progression through mitosis is essential for
normal cell proliferation and the maintenance of genome stability. The mammalian 
mitotic kinase Polo-like kinase 1 (Plk1) is involved in multiple stages of
mitosis5. Here we report that Forkhead Box M1 (FoxM1), a substrate of Plk1,
controls a transcriptional programme that mediates Plk1-dependent regulation of
cell-cycle progression. The carboxy-terminal domain of FoxM1 binds Plk1, and
phosphorylation of two key residues in this domain by Cdk1 is essential for
Plk1-FoxM1 interaction. Formation of the Plk1-FoxM1 complex allows for direct
phosphorylation of FoxM1 by Plk1 at G2/M and the subsequent activation of FoxM1
activity, which is required for expression of key mitotic regulators, including
Plk1 itself. Thus, Plk1-dependent regulation of FoxM1 activity provides a
positive-feedback loop ensuring tight regulation of transcriptional networks
essential for orderly mitotic progression.

PMCID: PMC2882053
PMID: 19160488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Neuro Oncol. 2009 Oct;11(5):477-87. doi: 10.1215/15228517-2008-113. Epub 2009 Jan
12.

Comparative analyses of gene copy number and mRNA expression in glioblastoma
multiforme tumors and xenografts.

Hodgson JG(1), Yeh RF, Ray A, Wang NJ, Smirnov I, Yu M, Hariono S, Silber J,
Feiler HS, Gray JW, Spellman PT, Vandenberg SR, Berger MS, James CD.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA. ghodgson@cc.ucsf.edu

Development of model systems that recapitulate the molecular heterogeneity
observed among glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) tumors will expedite the testing of 
targeted molecular therapeutic strategies for GBM treatment. In this study, we
profiled DNA copy number and mRNA expression in 21 independent GBM tumor lines
maintained as subcutaneous xenografts (GBMX), and compared GBMX molecular
signatures to those observed in GBM clinical specimens derived from the Cancer
Genome Atlas (TCGA). The predominant copy number signature in both tumor groups
was defined by chromosome-7 gain/chromosome-10 loss, a poor-prognosis genetic
signature. We also observed, at frequencies similar to that detected in TCGA GBM 
tumors, genomic amplification and overexpression of known GBM oncogenes, such as 
EGFR, MDM2, CDK6, and MYCN, and novel genes, including NUP107, SLC35E3, MMP1,
MMP13, and DDX1. The transcriptional signature of GBMX tumors, which was stable
over multiple subcutaneous passages, was defined by overexpression of genes
involved in M phase, DNA replication, and chromosome organization (MRC) and was
highly similar to the poor-prognosis mitosis and cell-cycle module (MCM) in GBM. 
Assessment of gene expression in TCGA-derived GBMs revealed overexpression of MRC
cancer genes AURKB, BIRC5, CCNB1, CCNB2, CDC2, CDK2, and FOXM1, which form a
transcriptional network important for G2/M progression and/or checkpoint
activation. Our study supports propagation of GBM tumors as subcutaneous
xenografts as a useful approach for sustaining key molecular characteristics of
patient tumors, and highlights therapeutic opportunities conferred by this GBMX
tumor panel for testing targeted therapeutic strategies for GBM treatment.

PMCID: PMC2765338
PMID: 19139420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Gut. 2009 May;58(5):679-87. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.152652. Epub 2009 Jan 9.

Forkhead box M1B is a determinant of rat susceptibility to hepatocarcinogenesis
and sustains ERK activity in human HCC.

Calvisi DF(1), Pinna F, Ladu S, Pellegrino R, Simile MM, Frau M, De Miglio MR,
Tomasi ML, Sanna V, Muroni MR, Feo F, Pascale RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Division of Experimental Pathology and
Oncology, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Previous studies indicate unrestrained cell cycle
progression in liver lesions from hepatocarcinogenesis-susceptible Fisher 344
(F344) rats and a block of G(1)-S transition in corresponding lesions from
resistant Brown Norway (BN) rats. Here, the role of the Forkhead box M1B (FOXM1) 
gene during hepatocarcinogenesis in both rat models and human hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) was assessed.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Levels of FOXM1 and its targets were determined by
immunoprecipitation and real-time PCR analyses in rat and human samples. FOXM1
function was investigated by either FOXM1 silencing or overexpression in human
HCC cell lines. Activation of FOXM1 and its targets (Aurora Kinose A, Cdc2,
cyclin B1, Nek2) occurred earlier and was most pronounced in liver lesions from
F344 than BN rats, leading to the highest number of Cdc2-cyclin B1 complexes
(implying the highest G(2)-M transition) in F344 rats. In human HCC, the level of
FOXM1 progressively increased from surrounding non-tumorous livers to HCC,
reaching the highest levels in tumours with poorer prognosis (as defined by
patients' length of survival). Furthermore, expression levels of FOXM1 directly
correlated with the proliferation index, genomic instability rate and microvessel
density, and inversely with apoptosis. FOXM1 upregulation was due to
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and glioblastoma-associated oncogene 
1 (GLI1) combined activity, and its overexpression resulted in increased
proliferation and angiogenesis and reduced apoptosis in human HCC cell lines.
Conversely, FOXM1 suppression led to decreased ERK activity, reduced
proliferation and angiogenesis, and massive apoptosis of human HCC cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXM1 upregulation is associated with the acquisition of a
susceptible phenotype in rats and influences human HCC development and prognosis.

PMID: 19136513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Hum Pathol. 2009 Apr;40(4):464-70. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.10.001. Epub 2009 
Jan 3.

Forkhead box M1 expression in pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma: correlation with
clinicopathologic features and its prognostic significance.

Yang DK(1), Son CH, Lee SK, Choi PJ, Lee KE, Roh MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Dong-A University College of Medicine, Busan 
602-715, South Korea.

Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor has been shown to play important
roles in regulating the expression of genes that are involved in cell
proliferation, differentiation, and transformation by promoting both G(1)/S and
G(2)/M transition. Although it has been reported that the FoxM1 signaling network
is frequently deregulated with an up-regulated FoxM1 expression in human
malignancies, the role of FoxM1 in lung cancer remains to be determined. We
performed immunohistochemical detection of FoxM1 protein in 69 tissue samples
from patients with primary pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma using a tissue
microarray, and Western blotting was done to confirm the immunohistochemical
observations. FoxM1 immunoreactivity was observed in 26 (37.7%) of the 69
squamous cell carcinoma cases. Analysis of the FoxM1 expression in 12 squamous
cell carcinoma tissues and 2 normal lung tissues by Western blotting confirmed
the immunohistochemical results. A FoxM1 expression was more frequently detected 
in the moderately or poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinomas than in the
well-differentiated squamous cell carcinomas (P = .008). The tumors with a
positive FoxM1 expression more frequently showed lymph node metastasis (P = .027)
and an advanced American Joint Committee on Cancer stage (P = .049). The
Kaplan-Meier survival curves demonstrated that patients with a positive FoxM1
expression had a significantly shorter survival time than those patients with a
negative FoxM1 expression (P = .003). The multivariate analysis revealed that the
FoxM1 expression was an independent poor prognostic factor (P = .018). A subset
of pulmonary squamous cell carcinoma with a FoxM1 expression was associated with 
progressive pathologic features and an aggressive clinical course.

PMID: 19121844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Feb 1;106(2):247-56. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21996.

Transcriptional up-regulation of FoxM1 in response to hypoxia is mediated by
HIF-1.

Xia LM(1), Huang WJ, Wang B, Liu M, Zhang Q, Yan W, Zhu Q, Luo M, Zhou ZZ, Tian
DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei Province,
China.

The proliferation-specific Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor is
overexpressed in cancer cells and acts as an important regulator of cancer cell
growth and survival. Here, we show the molecular mechanisms by which hypoxia
regulate FoxM1 expression in cancer cells. When cells were subjected to hypoxia
(1% O2), the mRNA and protein levels of FoxM1 had a significant increase in
cancer cells (HepG2, MCF-7, and HeLa). Such increase was due to the direct
binding of hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) to the HIF-1 binding sites in the
FoxM1 promoter. By deletion and mutation assays, we demonstrated that the HIF1-1 
and HIF1-3/4 binding sites on the FoxM1 promoter were essential for
transcriptional activation of FoxM1 by hypoxia. We also demonstrated that
HIF-1alpha directly bound to the promoter of FoxM1 and the binding was specific, 
as revealed by HIF-1 binding/competition assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation 
assay. Consequently, the up-regulation of FoxM1 accelerated the growth of hypoxic
cancer cells by decreasing nuclear levels of p21 and increasing expression of
cyclin B1 and cyclin D1. These findings provide a new insight into how tumor
cells overcome hypoxic stress and survive, and also disclose a new regulatory
mechanism of FoxM1 expression in tumor cells.

PMID: 19097132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. World J Gastroenterol. 2008 Nov 21;14(43):6601-15.

Interaction of major genes predisposing to hepatocellular carcinoma with genes
encoding signal transduction pathways influences tumor phenotype and prognosis.

Feo F, Frau M, Pascale RM.

Studies on rodents and humans demonstrate an inherited predisposition to
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Analysis of the molecular alterations involved in
the acquisition of a phenotype resistant or susceptible to hepatocarcinogenesis
showed a deregulation of G1 and S phases in HCC of genetically susceptible F344
rats and a G1-S block in lesions of resistant Brown norway (BN) rats.
Unrestrained extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activity linked to
proteasomal degradation of dual-specificity phosphatase 1 (DUSP1), a specific ERK
inhibitor, by the CKS1-SKP2 ubiquitin ligase complex occurs in more aggressive
HCC of F344 rats and humans. This mechanism is less active in HCC of BN rats and 
human HCC with better prognosis. Upregulation of iNos cross-talk with
IKK/NF-kappaB and RAS/ERK pathways occurs in rodent liver lesions at higher
levels in the most aggressive models represented by HCC of F344 rats and
c-Myc-TGF-alpha transgenic mice. iNOS, IKK/NF-kappaB, and RAS/ERK upregulation is
highest in human HCC with a poorer prognosis and positively correlates with tumor
proliferation, genomic instability and microvascularization, and negatively with 
apoptosis. Thus, cell cycle regulation and the activity of signal transduction
pathways seem to be modulated by HCC modifier genes, and differences in their
efficiency influence the susceptibility to hepatocarcinogenesis and probably the 
prognosis of human HCC.

PMCID: PMC2773299
PMID: 19034960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Dec 9;105(49):19330-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0806748105. Epub 2008 Nov 25.

Forkhead Box m1 transcription factor is required for perinatal lung function.

Kalin TV(1), Wang IC, Meliton L, Zhang Y, Wert SE, Ren X, Snyder J, Bell SM, Graf
L Jr, Whitsett JA, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. kal4ti@cchmc.org

The Forkhead Box m1 (Foxm1 or Foxm1b) transcription factor (previously called
HFH-11B, Trident, Win, or MPP2) is an important positive regulator of DNA
replication and mitosis in a variety of cell types. Global deletion of Foxm1 in
Foxm1(-/-) mice is lethal in the embryonic period, causing multiple abnormalities
in the liver, heart, lung, and blood vessels. In the present study, Foxm1 was
deleted conditionally in the respiratory epithelium (epFoxm1(-/-)). Surprisingly,
deletion of Foxm1 did not alter lung growth, branching morphogenesis, or
epithelial proliferation but inhibited lung maturation and caused respiratory
failure after birth. Maturation defects in epFoxm1(-/-) lungs were associated
with decreased expression of T1-alpha and aquaporin 5, consistent with a delay of
type I cell differentiation. Expression of surfactant-associated proteins A, B,
C, and D was decreased by deletion of Foxm1. Foxm1 directly bound and induced
transcriptional activity of the mouse surfactant protein B and A (Sftpb and
Sftpa) promoters in vitro, indicating that Foxm1 is a direct transcriptional
activator of these genes. Foxm1 is critical for surfactant homeostasis and lung
maturation before birth and is required for adaptation to air breathing.

PMCID: PMC2587228
PMID: 19033457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Cancer Res. 2008 Nov 1;68(21):8733-42. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-1968.

FoxM1B transcriptionally regulates vascular endothelial growth factor expression 
and promotes the angiogenesis and growth of glioma cells.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang N, Dai B, Liu M, Sawaya R, Xie K, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

We previously found that FoxM1B is overexpressed in human glioblastomas and that 
forced FoxM1B expression in anaplastic astrocytoma cells leads to the formation
of highly angiogenic glioblastoma in nude mice. However, the molecular mechanisms
by which FoxM1B enhances glioma angiogenesis are currently unknown. In this
study, we found that vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is a direct
transcriptional target of FoxM1B. FoxM1B overexpression increased VEGF
expression, whereas blockade of FoxM1 expression suppressed VEGF expression in
glioma cells. Transfection of FoxM1 into glioma cells directly activated the VEGF
promoter, and inhibition of FoxM1 expression by FoxM1 siRNA suppressed VEGF
promoter activation. We identified two FoxM1-binding sites in the VEGF promoter
that specifically bound to the FoxM1 protein. Mutation of these FoxM1-binding
sites significantly attenuated VEGF promoter activity. Furthermore, FoxM1
overexpression increased and inhibition of FoxM1 expression suppressed the
angiogenic ability of glioma cells. Finally, an immunohistochemical analysis of
59 human glioblastoma specimens also showed a significant correlation between
FoxM1 overexpression and elevated VEGF expression. Our findings provide both
clinical and mechanistic evidence that FoxM1 contributes to glioma progression by
enhancing VEGF gene transcription and thus tumor angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2597644
PMID: 18974115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Cell Physiol. 2009 Jan;218(1):215-27. doi: 10.1002/jcp.21596.

Sustained NF-kappaB activation produces a short-term cell proliferation block in 
conjunction with repressing effectors of cell cycle progression controlled by E2F
or FoxM1.

Penzo M(1), Massa PE, Olivotto E, Bianchi F, Borzi RM, Hanidu A, Li X, Li J,
Marcu KB.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Ricerca Biomedica Applicata (CRBA), S. Orsola-Malpighi University
Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

Erratum in
    J Cell Physiol. 2010 Aug;224(2):566.

NF-kappaB transcription factors induce a host of genes involved in
pro-inflammatory/stress-like responses; but the collateral effects and
consequences of sustained NF-kappaB activation on other cellular gene expression 
programming remain less well understood. Here enforced expression of a
constitutively active IKKbeta T-loop mutant (IKKbetaca) drove murine fibroblasts 
into transient growth arrest that subsided within 2-3 weeks of continuous
culture. Proliferation arrest was associated with a G1/S phase block in
immortalized and primary early passage MEFs. Molecular analysis in immortalized
MEFs revealed that inhibition of cell proliferation in the initial 1-2 weeks
after their IKKbetaca retroviral infection was linked to the transient, concerted
repression of essential cell cycle effectors that are known targets of either E2F
or FoxM1. Co-expression of a phosphorylation resistant IkappaBalpha super
repressor and IKKbetaca abrogated growth arrest and cell cycle effector
repression, thereby linking IKKbetaca's effects to canonical NF-kappaB
activation. Transient growth arrest of IKKbetaca cells was associated with
enhanced p21 (cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1A) protein expression, due in
part to transcriptional activation by NF-kappaB and also likely due to strong
repression of Skp2 and Csk1, both of which are FoxM1 direct targets mediating
proteasomal dependent p21 turnover. Ablation of p21 in immortalized MEFs reduced 
their IKKbetaca mediated growth suppression. Moreover, trichostatin A inhibition 
of HDACs alleviated the repression of E2F and FoxM1 targets induced by IKKbetaca,
suggesting chromatin mediated gene silencing in IKKbetaca's short term repressive
effects on E2F and FoxM1 target gene expression.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2581928
PMID: 18803232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Hepatology. 2008 Oct;48(4):1302-11. doi: 10.1002/hep.22475.

C-Myc and its target FoxM1 are critical downstream effectors of constitutive
androstane receptor (CAR) mediated direct liver hyperplasia.

Blanco-Bose WE(1), Murphy MJ, Ehninger A, Offner S, Dubey C, Huang W, Moore DD,
Trumpp A.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics & Stem Cell Laboratory, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
(EPFL), ISREC-Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research, Epalinges,
Switzerland.

In the adult liver, 1,4-bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]benzene (TCPOBOP), an
agonist of the constitutive androstane receptor (CAR, NR1I3), produces rapid
hepatomegaly in the absence of injury. In this study, we identify c-Myc as a gene
induced by CAR and demonstrate that TCPOBOP-induced proliferation of hepatocytes 
depends on c-Myc function. Moreover, the TCPOBOP-induced cell cycle program
(Cdc2, cyclins, MCM proteins, Cdc20, and genes implicated in the spindle assembly
checkpoint) is severely impaired in c-Myc mutant livers. Strikingly, many of
these genes overlap with a program controlled by the forkhead transcription
factor FoxM1, known to control progression through S-phase and mitosis. Indeed,
FoxM1 is also induced by TCPOBOP. Moreover, we show that c-Myc binds to the FoxM1
promoter in a TCPOBOP-dependent manner, suggesting a CAR --> c-Myc --> FoxM1
pathway downstream of TCPOBOP.CONCLUSION: Collectively, this study identifies
c-Myc and FoxM1 mediated proliferative programs as key mediators of TCPOBOP-CAR
induced direct liver hyperplasia.

PMID: 18798339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Cell Cycle. 2008 Sep 1;7(17):2720-6. Epub 2008 Sep 10.

FoxM1 is degraded at mitotic exit in a Cdh1-dependent manner.

Laoukili J(1), Alvarez-Fernandez M, Stahl M, Medema RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
the Netherlands.

The Forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 is required for the timely expression of 
many mitotic regulators, such as Cyclin B, Plk1, Aurora B and Cdc25B.(1-3) For
this, FoxM1 is specifically activated in G(2) phase through Cyclin
A/cdk2-dependent phosphorylation.(4-6) However, it is currently unclear how FoxM1
activity is removed as cells complete mitosis, and need to shut down expression
of the mitotic regulators that are transcriptional targets of FoxM1. Here, we
demonstrate that FoxM1 is actively degraded during exit from mitosis by the
APC/C. We find that FoxM1 degradation requires Cdh1, a known co-factor for APC/C 
that is responsible for degradation of many mitotic regulators from anaphase
until early G(1). FoxM1 binds to Cdh1, and FoxM1 degradation involves both D- and
KEN-boxes present in the N-terminal part of FoxM1. Based on these data we propose
that Cdh1-dependent degradation of FoxM1 is required to shut down transcriptional
activation of mitotic regulators during exit from mitosis.

PMID: 18758239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Diabetes. 2008 Nov;57(11):3069-77. doi: 10.2337/db08-0878. Epub 2008 Aug 26.

Beta-cell proliferation, but not neogenesis, following 60% partial pancreatectomy
is impaired in the absence of FoxM1.

Ackermann Misfeldt A(1), Costa RH, Gannon M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study was designed to determine whether the transcription factor 
FoxM1 was required for regeneration of beta-cell mass via proliferation and/or
neogenesis in the adult after 60% partial pancreatectomy (PPx).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Adult mice with a pancreas-wide deletion of Foxm1
(Foxm1(flox/flox);Pdx1-Cre [FoxM1(Deltapanc)]) and their control littermates
(Foxm1(flox/flox)) were subjected to PPx or a sham operation, after which islet
expression of Foxm1 and several target genes, beta-cell mass, proliferation,
beta-cell size, islet size, islet density, and neurogenin-3 expression were
analyzed.
RESULTS: In control mice, PPx stimulated beta-cell proliferation and neogenesis
and upregulated Foxm1 and several of its known targets (Plk1, Cenp-a,
Birc5/Survivin, and Ccnb1) in islets. Within 1 week post-PPx, control mice
underwent significant regeneration of beta-cell mass, and average islet size
within the regenerating lobe was similar to that after a sham operation. However,
FoxM1(Deltapanc) mice exhibited specific impairments in beta-cell mass
regeneration and islet growth after PPx, with reduced proliferation of alpha- and
beta-cells but no impairments in acinar or ductal cell proliferation.
Interestingly, FoxM1 was not required for proliferation of beta-cells within
small endocrine cell clusters located in the regenerating portion of the pancreas
but was specifically required for proliferation of beta-cells within larger
islets. Additionally, FoxM1 was not required for beta-cell neogenesis following
PPx.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that FoxM1 is partially required for increased 
beta-cell proliferation, but not beta-cell neogenesis, stimulated by PPx.
Furthermore, FoxM1 seems to be dispensable for proliferation of beta-cells
following neogenesis but is required for proliferation of preexisting beta-cells.

PMCID: PMC2570403
PMID: 18728229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. PLoS One. 2008 Aug 20;3(8):e2994. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002994.

Prognostic breast cancer signature identified from 3D culture model accurately
predicts clinical outcome across independent datasets.

Martin KJ(1), Patrick DR, Bissell MJ, Fournier MV.

Author information: 
(1)Bioarray Consulting, Belmont, Massachusetts, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: One of the major tenets in breast cancer research is that early
detection is vital for patient survival by increasing treatment options. To that 
end, we have previously used a novel unsupervised approach to identify a set of
genes whose expression predicts prognosis of breast cancer patients. The
predictive genes were selected in a well-defined three dimensional (3D) cell
culture model of non-malignant human mammary epithelial cell morphogenesis as
down-regulated during breast epithelial cell acinar formation and cell cycle
arrest. Here we examine the ability of this gene signature (3D-signature) to
predict prognosis in three independent breast cancer microarray datasets having
295, 286, and 118 samples, respectively.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Our results show that the 3D-signature accurately predicts 
prognosis in three unrelated patient datasets. At 10 years, the probability of
positive outcome was 52, 51, and 47 percent in the group with a poor-prognosis
signature and 91, 75, and 71 percent in the group with a good-prognosis signature
for the three datasets, respectively (Kaplan-Meier survival analysis, p<0.05).
Hazard ratios for poor outcome were 5.5 (95% CI 3.0 to 12.2, p<0.0001), 2.4 (95% 
CI 1.6 to 3.6, p<0.0001) and 1.9 (95% CI 1.1 to 3.2, p = 0.016) and remained
significant for the two larger datasets when corrected for estrogen receptor (ER)
status. Hence the 3D-signature accurately predicts breast cancer outcome in both 
ER-positive and ER-negative tumors, though individual genes differed in their
prognostic ability in the two subtypes. Genes that were prognostic in ER+
patients are AURKA, CEP55, RRM2, EPHA2, FGFBP1, and VRK1, while genes prognostic 
in ER- patients include ACTB, FOXM1 and SERPINE2 (Kaplan-Meier p<0.05).
Multivariable Cox regression analysis in the largest dataset showed that the
3D-signature was a strong independent factor in predicting breast cancer outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: The 3D-signature accurately predicts breast cancer outcome across
multiple datasets and holds prognostic value for both ER-positive and ER-negative
breast cancer. The signature was selected using a novel biological approach and
hence holds promise to represent the key biological processes of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2500166
PMID: 18714348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Ai Zheng. 2008 Aug;27(8):894-6.

[Significance of Forkhead Box m1b (Foxm1b) gene in cell proliferation and
carcinogenesis].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang SY(1), Jiao Y, Li LQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi, P. R. China. tshy369@sina.com

Forkhead Box m1b (Foxm1b) is a subtype of the Fox transcription factor family. It
is detected in all proliferative cells, but disappears when cells enter into
their terminal differentiation phase. Foxm1b is closely related to hepatocellular
growth, mainly through inhibiting cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitors to
influence cell proliferation. It also participates in growth hormone (GH)
mediated cell multiplication, but does not induce tumors. The expression of
Foxm1b has been observed in many tumor cell lines and malignant tumors,
indicating that it might be an essential proto-oncogene in carcinogenesis.
Furthermore, Foxm1b may take part in liver regeneration after hepatectomy,
hepatic failure and liver transplantation. Foxm1b is a new potential target for
the treatment human hepatic cell carcinoma (HCC).

PMID: 18710629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2008 Nov 6;294(1-2):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2008.07.006.
Epub 2008 Jul 22.

Pancreatic transcription factors and their role in the birth, life and survival
of the pancreatic beta cell.

Bernardo AS(1), Hay CW, Docherty K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Aberdeen, Institute of Medical Sciences, Foresterhill, Aberdeen 
AB25 2ZD, UK.

In recent years major progress has been made in understanding the role of
transcription factors in the development of the endocrine pancreas in the mouse. 
Here we describe how a number of these transcription factors play a role in
maintaining the differentiated phenotype of the beta cell, and in the mechanisms 
that allow the beta cell to adapt to changing metabolic demands that occur
throughout life. Amongst these factors, Pdx1 plays a critical role in defining
the region of the primitive gut that will form the pancreas, Ngn3 expression
drives cells towards an endocrine lineage, and a number of additional proteins
including Pdx1, in a second wave of expression, Pax4, NeuroD1/beta2, and MafA act
as beta cell differentiation factors. In the mature beta cell Pdx1, MafA, beta2, 
and Nkx2.2 play important roles in regulating expression of insulin and to some
extent other genes responsible for maintaining beta cell function. We emphasise
here that data from gene expression studies in rodents seldom map on to the known
structure of the corresponding human promoters. In the adult the beta cell is
particularly susceptible to autoimmune-mediated attack and to the toxic metabolic
milieu associated with over-eating, and utilises a number of these transcription 
factors in its defence. Pdx1 has anti-apoptotic and proliferative activities that
help facilitate the maintenance of beta cell mass, while Ngn3 may be involved in 
the recruitment of progenitor cells, and Pax4 (and possibly HNF1alpha and
Hnf4alpha) in the proliferation of beta cells in the adult pancreas. Other
transcription factors with a more widespread pattern of expression that play a
role in beta cell survival or proliferation include Foxo1, CREB family members,
NFAT, FoxM1, Snail and Asc-2.

PMID: 18687378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Cancer Ther. 2008 Jul;7(7):2022-32. doi: 10.1158/1535-7163.MCT-08-0188.

Thiostrepton selectively targets breast cancer cells through inhibition of
forkhead box M1 expression.

Kwok JM(1), Myatt SS, Marson CM, Coombes RC, Constantinidou D, Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research-UK Labs, Department of Oncology, MRC Cyclotron Building,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12
0NN, United Kingdom.

Elevated expression or activity of the transcription factor forkhead box M1
(FOXM1) is associated with the development and progression of many malignancies, 
including breast cancer. In this study, we show that the thiazole antibiotic
thiostrepton selectively induces cell cycle arrest and cell death in breast
cancer cells through down-regulating FOXM1 expression. Crucially, our data show
that thiostrepton treatment reduced FOXM1 expression in a time- and
dose-dependent manner, independent of de novo protein synthesis and predominantly
at transcriptional and gene promoter levels. Our results indicate that
thiostrepton can induce cell death through caspase-dependent intrinsic and
extrinsic apoptotic pathways as well as through caspase-independent death
mechanisms, as observed in MCF-7 cells, which are deficient of caspase-3 and
caspase-7. Cell cycle analysis showed that thiostrepton induced cell cycle arrest
at G(1) and S phases and cell death, concomitant with FOXM1 repression in breast 
cancer cells. Furthermore, thiostrepton also shows efficacy in repressing breast 
cancer cell migration, metastasis, and transformation, which are all downstream
functional attributes of FOXM1. We also show that overexpression of a
constitutively active FOXM1 mutant, DeltaN-FOXM1, can abrogate the
antiproliferative effects of thiostrepton. Interestingly, thiostrepton has no
affect on FOXM1 expression and proliferation of the untransformed MCF-10A breast 
epithelial cells. Collectively, our data show that FOXM1 is one of the primary
cellular targets of thiostrepton in breast cancer cells and that thiostrepton may
represent a novel lead compound for targeted therapy of breast cancer with
minimal toxicity against noncancer cells.

PMID: 18645012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Ai Zheng. 2008 Jul;27(7):675-6.

[Novel anticancer compounds induce apoptosis in human tumor cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Gartel AL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, 
USA. agartel@uic.edu

PMID: 18606057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Cell Cycle. 2008 Jun 15;7(12):1851-5. Epub 2008 Jun 30.

Novel anticancer compounds induce apoptosis in melanoma cells.

Bhat UG(1), Zipfel PA, Tyler DS, Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
60612, USA.

We previously described the identification of a nucleoside analog transcriptional
inhibitor ARC
(4-amino-6-hydrazino-7-beta-D-ribofuranosyl-7H-Pyrrolo[2,3-d]-pyrimidine-5-carbox
amide) and FoxM1 inhibitor, thiazole antibiotic Siomycin A that were able to
induce apoptosis in cancer cell lines of different origin. Here, we report the
characterization of these drugs on a panel of melanoma cell lines. We found that 
in contrast to the common anti-melanoma drug dacarbazine (DTIC), ARC and thiazole
antibiotics, Siomycin A and thiostrepton, efficiently inhibited growth and
induced cell death in melanoma cell lines in low concentrations. Overexpression
of the antiapoptotic protein Mcl-1 protected melanoma cells from apoptosis
induced by these compounds. Furthermore, we found that ARC and Siomycin A
synergistically induce apoptosis in DM833 melanoma cell line suggesting that they
may antagonize different anti-apoptotic pathways in melanoma cells. In general,
these drugs may represent important candidates for anti-cancer drug development
against melanoma.

PMID: 18583930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Sep;28(17):5162-71. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00387-08. Epub 2008 Jun 
23.

Anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome-CDH1-mediated proteolysis of the forkhead
box M1 transcription factor is critical for regulated entry into S phase.

Park HJ(1), Costa RH, Lau LF, Tyner AL, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics (M/C 669), University of
Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, 900 S. Ashland Ave., MBRB Rm. 2302,
Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

The forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor is overexpressed in many
cancers, and in mouse models it is required for tumor progression. FoxM1
activates expression of the cell cycle genes required for both S and M phase
progression. Here we demonstrate that FoxM1 is degraded in late mitosis and early
G(1) phase by the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) E3 ubiquitin
ligase. FoxM1 interacts with the APC/C complex and its adaptor, Cdh1. Expression 
of Cdh1 stimulated degradation of the FoxM1 protein, and depletion of Cdh1
resulted in stabilization of the FoxM1 protein in late mitosis and in early G(1) 
phase of the cell cycle. Cdh1 has been implicated in regulating S phase entry. We
show that codepletion of FoxM1 inhibits early S phase entry observed in
Cdh1-depleted cells. The N-terminal region of FoxM1 contains both destruction box
(D box) and KEN box sequences that are required for targeting by Cdh1. Mutation
of either the D box sequence or the KEN box sequence stabilized FoxM1 and blocked
Cdh1-induced proteolysis. Cells expressing a nondegradable form of FoxM1 entered 
S phase rapidly following release from M phase arrest. Together, our observations
show that FoxM1 is one of the targets of Cdh1 in late M or early G(1) phase and
that its proteolysis is important for regulated entry into S phase.

PMCID: PMC2519738
PMID: 18573889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jul 25;283(30):20770-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709892200. Epub 2008 
Jun 4.

FoxM1 regulates transcription of JNK1 to promote the G1/S transition and tumor
cell invasiveness.

Wang IC(1), Chen YJ, Hughes DE, Ackerson T, Major ML, Kalinichenko VV, Costa RH, 
Raychaudhuri P, Tyner AL, Lau LF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 900 S. Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) protein is a proliferation-specific transcription
factor that plays a key role in controlling both the G(1)/S and G(2)/M
transitions through the cell cycle and is essential for the development of
various cancers. We show here that FoxM1 directly activates the transcription of 
the c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK1) gene in U2OS osteosarcoma cells. Expression of
JNK1, which regulates the expression of genes important for the G(1)/S
transition, rescues the G(1)/S but not the G(2)/M cell cycle block in
FoxM1-deficient cells. Knockdown of either FoxM1 or JNK1 inhibits tumor cell
migration, invasion, and anchorage-independent growth. However, expression of
JNK1 in FoxM1-depleted cells does not rescue these defects, indicating that JNK1 
is a necessary but insufficient downstream mediator of FoxM1 in these processes. 
Consistent with this interpretation, FoxM1 regulates the expression of the matrix
metalloproteinases MMP-2 and MMP-9, which play a role in tumor cell invasion,
through JNK1-independent and -dependent mechanisms in U2OS cells, respectively.
Taken together, these findings identify JNK1 as a critical transcriptional target
of FoxM1 that contributes to FoxM1-regulated cell cycle progression, tumor cell
migration, invasiveness, and anchorage-independent growth.

PMCID: PMC2475715
PMID: 18524773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2008 Dec;134(12):1337-45. doi:
10.1007/s00432-008-0416-0. Epub 2008 May 20.

MZ3 can induce G2/M-phase arrest and apoptosis in human leukemia cells.

Fang L(1), Shen L, Fang Y, Hu Y, He Q, Yang B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Zhejiang University, #388 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang 310058, China.

PURPOSE:
4-(4-Bromopheny1)-2,3-dihydro-N,3-bis(3,4,5-trimethoxyphenyl)-2-oxoidmi-dazole-1-
carboxamide (MZ3) is one of the novel synthesized Combretastatin A-4 analogs. In 
previous research, we found that MZ3 is a potent and specific compound against
leukemia cell lines both in vitro and in vivo. In this paper, our purpose is to
investigate the mechanisms of MZ3 induced cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in K562
cells.
METHODS: Cytotoxicity was measured by MTT method; apoptosis and cell cycle arrest
were measured by flow cytometry. DNA fragmentation was tested by agarose gel
electrophoresis. Protein expression was analyzed by western blotting. The
polymerization of microtubules in cell was detected through immunofluorescence.
RESULTS: MZ3 increases cyclin B1 levels and decreases the expression of cdc2,
cdc25C and activation of Wee1. The changes in cdc2, cdc25C and Wee1 coincide with
the appearance of phosphoepitopes recognized by a marker of mitosis, MPM-2. MZ3
induces apoptosis in K562 cells, proved by condensed DNA (DAPI stain) and DNA
ladder. This apoptosis is related with the activation of caspase-9, caspase-3 and
PARP cleavage, both of which are at the downstream of mitochondria. The changes
of protein expression of Bcl-2 and Bax confirm the causal relationship between
MZ3 and mitochondrial pathway, and the downregulation of AKT, p-AKT and XIAP
indicate that the AKT pathway may participate in regulating this apoptosis.
Moreover, MZ3 can reduce the soluble tubulin in K562 cells and inhibit
microtubule assembly.
CONCLUSIONS: MZ3 is a promising antileukemia compound with antimitotic and
apoptotic activity that has potential for management of various leukemias.

PMID: 18491135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2008 Jun;12(6):663-5. doi: 10.1517/14728222.12.6.663 .

FoxM1 inhibitors as potential anticancer drugs.

Gartel AL.

BACKGROUND: The oncogenic transcription factor forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is
upregulated in a wide range of different carcinomas, while its expression is
turned off in terminally differentiated cells. In addition, FoxM1 is involved in 
tumor invasion, angiogenesis and metastasis. For these reasons, FoxM1 is an
appealing target for anticancer therapeutics.
OBJECTIVE/METHODS: In the quest to develop novel anticancer drugs we decided to
target oncogenic transcription factor FoxM1 in tumor cells. Using a cell-based
screening system we isolated the thiazole antibiotic siomycin A as inhibitor of
FoxM1 transcriptional activity. In addition, we found that because of FoxM1
positive-autoregulation loop siomycin A and another thiazole antibiotic
thiostrepton inhibit not only FoxM1 transcriptional activity but also its
expression. However, the thiazole antibiotics did not affect the transcriptional 
activity of other transcription factors studied, suggesting that they may
specifically target FoxM1.
RESULTS/CONCLUSION: Treatment of human cancer cell lines of different origins
with thiazole antibiotics led to apoptosis and downregulation of FoxM1. Our data 
suggest that thiazole antibiotics that inhibit FoxM1 may be promising drugs
against human neoplasia.

PMID: 18479213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Development. 2008 Jun;135(11):2023-30. doi: 10.1242/dev.019893.

FoxM1-driven cell division is required for neuronal differentiation in early
Xenopus embryos.

Ueno H(1), Nakajo N, Watanabe M, Isoda M, Sagata N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Graduate School of Sciences, Kyushu University,
Hakozaki 6-10-1, Fukuoka 812-8581, Japan.

In vertebrate embryogenesis, neural induction is the earliest step through which 
the fate of embryonic ectoderm to neuroectoderm becomes determined. Cells in the 
neuroectoderm or neural precursors actively proliferate before they exit from the
cell cycle and differentiate into neural cells. However, little is known about
the relationship between cell division and neural differentiation, although, in
Xenopus, cell division after the onset of gastrulation has been suggested to be
nonessential for neural differentiation. Here, we show that the Forkhead
transcription factor FoxM1 is required for both proliferation and differentiation
of neuronal precursors in early Xenopus embryos. FoxM1 is expressed in the
neuroectoderm and is required for cell proliferation in this region.
Specifically, inhibition of BMP signaling, an important step for neural
induction, induces the expression of FoxM1 and its target G2-M cell-cycle
regulators, such as Cdc25B and cyclin B3, thereby promoting cell division in the 
neuroectoderm. Furthermore, G2-M cell-cycle progression or cell division mediated
by FoxM1 or its target G2-M regulators is essential for neuronal differentiation 
but not for specification of the neuroectoderm. These results suggest that FoxM1 
functions to link cell division and neuronal differentiation in early Xenopus
embryos.

PMID: 18469223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Pathol. 2008 Jul;215(3):245-52. doi: 10.1002/path.2355.

Over-expression of FOXM1 transcription factor is associated with cervical cancer 
progression and pathogenesis.

Chan DW(1), Yu SY, Chiu PM, Yao KM, Liu VW, Cheung AN, Ngan HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China.

The Forkhead Box M1 (FOXM1) transcription factor plays a crucial role in
regulating expression of cell cycle genes which are essentially involved in cell 
proliferation, differentiation and transformation. Recent studies have reported
that aberrant expression of FOXM1 in a variety of human cancers is associated
with their aggressive behaviour. However, the functional significance of FOXM1 in
human cervical cancer is not known. We have shown that FOXM1 was significantly
over-expressed in cervical squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) compared to normal
cervical epithelium immunohistochemically (p < 0.001). In addition, intratumoural
FOXM1 positivity was increased in cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) and
carcinoma, compared with that in normal epithelium, indicating that FOXM1 is
involved in tumour progression. Indeed, this is supported by clinicopathological 
analysis that the over-expression of FOXM1 was significantly associated with
tumour late stage (p = 0.012) and cell proliferation marker, Ki67 (p < 0.001).
Functionally, enforced expression of FOXM1c in FOXM1-deficient cervical cancer
cells (C33A) remarkably enhanced cell proliferation and anchorage-independent
growth ability. Conversely, depletion of FOXM1 by RNA interference in
FOXM1-over-expressing cervical cancer cells (SiHa) caused significant inhibition 
on cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth ability on soft agar. This
inhibitory phenomenon was associated with the reduced expressions of cyclin B1,
cyclinD1 and cdc25B but increased expression of p27(Kip1) and p21(Cip1). Our
findings suggest a role for FOXM1 in the development and pathogenesis of human
cervical SCC.

Copyright (c) 2008 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMID: 18464245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 13;283(24):16545-53. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M709604200. Epub 2008
Apr 11.

FoxM1c counteracts oxidative stress-induced senescence and stimulates Bmi-1
expression.

Li SK(1), Smith DK, Leung WY, Cheung AM, Lam EW, Dimri GP, Yao KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine, University of
Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China.

The Forkhead box transcription factor FoxM1 is expressed in proliferating cells. 
When it was depleted in mice and cell lines, cell cycle defects and chromosomal
instability resulted. Premature senescence was observed in embryonic fibroblasts 
derived from FoxM1 knock-out mice, but the underlying cause has remained unclear.
To investigate whether FoxM1 can protect cells against stress-induced premature
senescence, we established NIH3T3 lines with doxycycline-inducible overexpression
of FoxM1c. Treatment of these lines with sublethal doses (20 and 100 microm) of
H(2)O(2) induced senescence with senescence-associated beta-galactosidase
expression and elevated levels of p53 and p21. Induction of FoxM1c expression
markedly suppressed senescence and expression of p53 and p21. Consistent with
down-regulation of the p19(Arf)-p53 pathway, p19(Arf) levels decreased while
expression of the Polycomb group protein Bmi-1 was induced. That Bmi-1 is a
downstream target of FoxM1c was further supported by the dose-dependent induction
of Bmi-1 by FoxM1c at both the protein and mRNA levels, and FoxM1 and Bmi-1
reached maximal levels in cells at the G(2)/M phase. Depletion of FoxM1 by RNA
interference decreased Bmi-1 expression. Using Bmi-1 promoter reporters with
wild-type and mutated c-Myc binding sites and short hairpin RNAs targeting c-Myc,
we further demonstrated that FoxM1c activated Bmi-1 expression via c-Myc, which
was recently reported to be regulated by FoxM1c. Our results reveal a functional 
link between FoxM1c, c-Myc, and Bmi-1, which are major regulators of
tumorigenesis. This link has important implications for the regulation of cell
proliferation and senescence by FoxM1 and Bmi-1.

PMCID: PMC2423239
PMID: 18408007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Hepatology. 2008 May;47(5):1533-43. doi: 10.1002/hep.22212.

TIS21 negatively regulates hepatocarcinogenesis by disruption of cyclin
B1-Forkhead box M1 regulation loop.

Park TJ(1), Kim JY, Oh SP, Kang SY, Kim BW, Wang HJ, Song KY, Kim HC, Lim IK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ajou University, School of
Medicine, Suwon, Republic of Korea.

A functional and biochemical interaction of TIS21(/BTG2/PC3) with Forkhead box M1
(FoxM1), essential transcription factor for hepatocyte regeneration and a master 
regulator of mitotic gene expression, was explored. Growth of hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), developed by a single injection of diethylnitrosamine (DEN), was
the same in both the TIS21(+/+) and TIS21(-/-) mice until 6 months, whereas it
was significantly higher in the TIS21(-/-) mice at 9 months. Expression of TIS21 
was significantly lower in both human and murine HCCs than in the surrounding
tissues. Forced expression of TIS21 impaired growth, proliferation, and
tumorigenic potential of Huh7 cells. At the mechanistic level, TIS21 inhibited
FoxM1 phosphorylation, a required modification for its activation, by reducing
cyclin B1-cdk1 activity, examined by in vitro kinase assay and FoxM1 mutant
analyses. These observations were further confirmed in vivo by the reciprocal
control of TIS21 expression and FoxM1 phosphorylation in the
diethylnitrosamine-induced HCCs and TIS21(-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblast (MEF), 
in addition to increased expression of cyclin B1 and cdk1 activity.CONCLUSION:
TIS21 negatively regulated hepatocarcinogenesis in part by disruption of the
FoxM1-cyclin B1 regulatory loop, thereby inhibiting proliferation of transformed 
cells developed in mouse and human livers.

PMID: 18393292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Oncogene. 2008 Jul 10;27(30):4137-49. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.60. Epub 2008 Mar 17.

Transgenic expression of the forkhead box M1 transcription factor induces
formation of lung tumors.

Wang IC(1), Meliton L, Tretiakova M, Costa RH, Kalinichenko VV, Kalin TV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The forkhead box m1 (Foxm1 or Foxm1b) protein (previously called HFH-11B,
Trident, Win or MPP2) is abundantly expressed in human non-small cell lung
cancers where it transcriptionally induces expression of genes essential for
proliferation of tumor cells. In this study, we used Rosa26-Foxm1 transgenic
mice, in which the Rosa26 promoter drives ubiquitous expression of Foxm1
transgene, to identify new signaling pathways regulated by Foxm1. Lung tumors
were induced in Rosa26-Foxm1 mice using the 3-methylcholanthrene (MCA)/butylated 
hydroxytoluene (BHT) lung tumor initiation/promotion protocol. Tumors from
MCA/BHT-treated Rosa26-Foxm1 mice displayed a significant increase in the number,
size and DNA replication compared to wild-type mice. Elevated tumor formation in 
Rosa26-Foxm1 transgenic lungs was associated with persistent pulmonary
inflammation, macrophage infiltration and increased expression of
cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2), Cdc25C phosphatase, cyclin E2, chemokine ligands CXCL5,
CXCL1 and CCL3, cathepsins and matrix metalloprotease-12. Cell culture
experiments with A549 human lung adenocarcinoma cells demonstrated that depletion
of Foxm1 by either short interfering RNA transfection or treatment with
Foxm1-inhibiting ARF 26-44 peptide significantly reduced Cox-2 expression. In
co-transfection experiments, Foxm1 protein-induced Cox-2 promoter activity and
directly bound to the -2566/-2580 bp region of human Cox-2 promoter.

PMID: 18345025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Breast Cancer Res. 2008;10(1):R21. doi: 10.1186/bcr1872. Epub 2008 Feb 29.

Forkhead box transcription factor FOXO3a suppresses estrogen-dependent breast
cancer cell proliferation and tumorigenesis.

Zou Y(1), Tsai WB, Cheng CJ, Hsu C, Chung YM, Li PC, Lin SH, Hu MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, East 210th
Street, Bronx, New York, New York 10467, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Estrogen receptors (ERs) play key roles in breast cancer
development and influence treatment outcome in breast cancer patients.
Identification of molecules that regulate ER function may facilitate development 
of breast cancer treatment strategies. The forkhead box class O (FOXO)
transcription factor FOXO3a has been suggested to function as a tumor suppressor 
in breast cancer. Using protein-protein interaction screening, we found that
FOXO3a interacted with ER-alpha and ER-beta proteins in the human breast
carcinoma cell line MCF-7, suggesting that there exists a crosstalk between the
FOXO3a and ER signaling pathways in estrogen-dependent breast cancer cells.
METHODS: The interaction between FOXO3a and ER was investigated by using
co-immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting assays. Inhibition of ER-alpha and
ER-beta transactivation activity by FOXO was determined by luciferase reporter
assays. Cell proliferation in culture was evaluated by counting cell numbers.
Tumorigenesis was assessed in athymic mice that were injected with MCF-7 cell
lines over-expressing FOXO3a. Protein expression levels of cyclin-dependent
kinase inhibitors, cyclins, ERs, FOXM1, and the proteins encoded by ER-regulated 
genes in MCF-7 cell lines and breast tumors were examined by immunoblotting
analysis and immunohistochemical staining.
RESULTS: We found that FOXO3a interacted with ER-alpha and ER-beta proteins and
inhibited 17beta-estradiol (E2)-dependent, ER-regulated transcriptional
activities. Consistent with these observations, expression of FOXO3a in the
ER-positive MCF-7 cells decreased the expression of several ER-regulated genes,
some of which play important roles in cell proliferation. Moreover, we found that
FOXO3a upregulated the expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors
p21Cip1, p27Kip1, and p57Kip2. These findings suggest that FOXO3a induces cell
growth arrest to effect tumor suppression. FOXO3a repressed the growth and
survival of MCF-7 cells in cell culture. In an orthotopic breast cancer xenograft
model in athymic mice, over-expression of FOXO3a in MCF-7 cells suppressed their 
E2-induced tumorigenesis, whereas knockdown of FOXO3a in MCF-7 resulted in the
E2-independent growth.
CONCLUSION: Functional interaction between FOXO3a and ER plays a critical role in
suppressing estrogen-dependent breast cancer cell growth and tumorigenesis in
vivo. This suggests that agents that activate FOXO3a may be novel therapeutic
agents that can inhibit and prevent tumor proliferation and development in breast
cancer.

PMCID: PMC2374977
PMID: 18312651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008 Mar;8(3):c1; author reply c2. doi: 10.1038/nrc2223-c1.

FOXM1: the Achilles' heel of cancer?

Radhakrishnan SK, Gartel AL.

Comment on
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2007 Nov;7(11):847-59.

PMID: 18297053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Nat Rev Cancer. 2008 Mar;8(3):242.

Targeting FOXM1.

Myatt SS(1), Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Laboratories, Department of Oncology, MRC Cyclotron
Building, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road,
London, W12 0NN, UK.

PMID: 18297052  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


163. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 May;28(9):3076-87. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01710-07. Epub 2008 Feb
19.

Activation of FoxM1 during G2 requires cyclin A/Cdk-dependent relief of
autorepression by the FoxM1 N-terminal domain.

Laoukili J(1), Alvarez M, Meijer LA, Stahl M, Mohammed S, Kleij L, Heck AJ,
Medema RH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology,
University Medical Center, Stratenum 2.118, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG
Utrecht, The Netherlands. j.laoukili@amc.uva.nl

The Forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 is an important regulator of gene
expression during the G(2) phase. Here, we show that FoxM1 transcriptional
activity is kept low during G(1)/S through the action of its N-terminal
autoinhibitory domain. We found that cyclin A/cdk complexes are required to
phosphorylate and activate FoxM1 during G(2) phase. Deletion of the N-terminal
autoinhibitory region of FoxM1 generates a mutant of FoxM1 (DeltaN-FoxM1) that is
active throughout the cell cycle and no longer depends on cyclin A for its
activation. Mutation of two cyclin A/cdk sites in the C-terminal transactivation 
domain leads to inactivation of full-length FoxM1 but does not affect the
transcriptional activity of the DeltaN-FoxM1 mutant. We show that the
intramolecular interaction of the N- and C-terminal domains depends on two
RXL/LXL motifs in the C terminus of FoxM1. Mutation of these domains leads to a
similar gain of function as deletion of the N-terminal repressor domain. Based on
these observations we propose a model in which FoxM1 is kept inactive during the 
G(1)/S transition through the action of the N-terminal autorepressor domain,
while phosphorylation by cyclin A/cdk complexes during G(2) results in relief of 
inhibition by the N terminus, allowing activation of FoxM1-mediated gene
transcription.

PMCID: PMC2293089
PMID: 18285455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. BMC Cancer. 2008 Feb 6;8:42. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-8-42.

Tight correlation between expression of the Forkhead transcription factor FOXM1
and HER2 in human breast cancer.

Bektas N(1), Haaf At, Veeck J, Wild PJ, Lüscher-Firzlaff J, Hartmann A, Knüchel
R, Dahl E.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of the RWTH Aachen, Aachen,
Germany. nbektas@ukaachen.de

BACKGROUND: FOXM1 regulates expression of cell cycle related genes that are
essential for progression into DNA replication and mitosis. Consistent with its
role in proliferation, elevated expression of FOXM1 has been reported in a
variety of human tumour entities. FOXM1 is a gene of interest because recently
chemical inhibitors of FOXM1 were described to limit proliferation and induce
apoptosis in cancer cells in vitro, indicating that FOXM1 inhibitors could
represent useful anticancer therapeutics.
METHODS: Using immunohistochemistry (IHC) we systematically analysed FOXM1
expression in human invasive breast carcinomas (n = 204) and normal breast
tissues (n = 46) on a tissue microarray. Additionally, using semiquantitative
realtime PCR, a collection of paraffin embedded normal (n = 12) and cancerous (n 
= 25) breast tissue specimens as well as benign (n = 3) and malignant mammary
cell lines (n = 8) were investigated for FOXM1 expression. SPSS version 14.0 was 
used for statistical analysis.
RESULTS: FOXM1 was found to be overexpressed in breast cancer in comparison to
normal breast tissue both on the RNA and protein level (e.g. 8.7 fold as measured
by realtime PCR). We found a significant correlation between FOXM1 expression and
the HER2 status determined by HER2 immunohistochemistry (P < 0.05). Univariate
survival analysis showed a tendency between FOXM1 protein expression and
unfavourable prognosis (P = 0.110).
CONCLUSION: FOXM1 may represent a novel breast tumour marker with prognostic
significance that could be included into multi-marker panels for breast cancer.
Interestingly, we found a positive correlation between FOXM1 expression and HER2 
status, pointing to a potential role of FOXM1 as a new drug target in HER2
resistant breast tumour, as FOXM1 inhibitors for cancer treatment were described 
recently. Further studies are underway to analyse the potential interaction
between FOXM1 and HER2, especially whether FOXM1 directly activates the HER2
promoter.

PMCID: PMC2265720
PMID: 18254960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Mar 28;368(1):107-15. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.01.039. Epub 2008 Jan 17.

Cyclin E/Cdk2, P/CAF, and E1A regulate the transactivation of the c-myc promoter 
by FOXM1.

Wierstra I(1), Alves J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Medical School Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Street
1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany.

FOXM1c transactivates the c-myc promoter by binding directly to its TATA-boxes.
The present study demonstrates that the transactivation of the c-myc promoter by 
FOXM1c is enhanced by the key proliferation signal cyclin E/Cdk2, but repressed
by P/CAF and the adenoviral oncoprotein E1A. Furthermore, FOXM1c interacts with
the coactivator and histone acetyltransferase P/CAF. This study shows that, on
the c-myc-P1 TATA-box, FOXM1c does not function simply as normal transcription
factor just binding to an unusual site. Moreover, the inhibitory N-terminus of
FOXM1c does not inhibit its transrepression domain or its EDA. Others reported
that a cyclin/Cdk-binding LXL-motif of the splice variant FoxM1b is required for 
its interaction with Cdk2, Cdk1, and p27, its phosphorylation by Cdk1 and its
activation by Cdc25B. In contrast, we now demonstrate that this LXL-motif is not 
required for the activation of FOXM1c by cyclin D1/Cdk4, cyclin E/Cdk and cyclin 
A/Cdk2 or for the repression of FOXM1c by p27.

PMID: 18206647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biol Chem. 2007 Dec;388(12):1257-74.

FOXM1, a typical proliferation-associated transcription factor.

Wierstra I(1), Alves J.

Author information: 
(1)Wissmannstr. 17, D-30173 Hannover, Germany. iwiwiwi@web.de

FOXM1 is a typical proliferation-associated transcription factor: it stimulates
proliferation by promoting S-phase entry as well as M-phase entry and is involved
in proper execution of mitosis. Accordingly, FOXM1 regulates genes that control
G1/S-transition, S-phase progression, G2/M-transition and M-phase progression.
Consistently, its expression and its activity are antagonistically regulated by
many important proliferation and anti-proliferation signals. Furthermore, FOXM1
is implicated in tumorigenesis and contributes to both tumor initiation and
progression. In addition to its function as a conventional transcription factor, 
FOXM1 transactivates the human c-myc P1 and P2 promoters directly via their
TATA-boxes by a new transactivation mechanism, which it also employs for
transactivation of the human c-fos, hsp70 and histone H2B/a promoters. This
review summarizes the current knowledge on FOXM1, in particular its two different
transactivation mechanisms, the regulation of its transcriptional activity by
proliferation versus anti-proliferation signals and its function in normal cell
cycle progression and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 18020943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jan 4;283(1):453-60. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

FoxM1 regulates growth factor-induced expression of kinase-interacting stathmin
(KIS) to promote cell cycle progression.

Petrovic V(1), Costa RH, Lau LF, Raychaudhuri P, Tyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois
College of Medicine, 900 S. Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor is essential for cell cycle
progression and mitosis. FoxM1 regulates expression of Skp2 and Cks1, subunits of
the SCF ubiquitin ligase complex, which ubiquitinates p27(Kip1) and targets it
for degradation. Kinase-interacting stathmin (KIS) is a growth factor-dependent
nuclear kinase that regulates cell cycle progression by phosphorylating p27(Kip1)
to promote its nuclear export. Here we present an additional mechanism of
FoxM1-mediated regulation of p27(Kip1) and provide evidence that FoxM1 regulates 
growth factor-induced expression of KIS. In cells harboring FoxM1 deletion or
expressing FoxM1-short interfering RNA, the expression of KIS is impaired,
leading to an accumulation of p27(Kip1) in the nucleus. Furthermore, we show that
KIS is a direct transcriptional target of FoxM1. Thus FoxM1 promotes cell cycle
progression by down-regulating p27(Kip1) through multiple mechanisms.

PMID: 17984092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(23):8259-70. Epub 2007 Sep 24.

Forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 regulates mitotic entry and prevents spindle 
defects in cerebellar granule neuron precursors.

Schüller U(1), Zhao Q, Godinho SA, Heine VM, Medema RH, Pellman D, Rowitch DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA..

The forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 has been reported to regulate, variously,
proliferation and/or spindle formation during the G2/M transition of the cell
cycle. Here we define specific functions of FoxM1 during brain development by the
investigation of FoxM1 loss-of-function mutations in the context of Sonic
hedgehog (Shh)-induced neuroproliferation in cerebellar granule neuron precursors
(CGNP). We show that FoxM1 is expressed in the cerebellar anlagen as well as in
postnatal proliferating CGNP and that it is upregulated in response to activated 
Shh signaling. To determine the requirements for FoxM1 function, we used
transgenic mice carrying conventional null alleles or conditionally targeted
alleles in conjunction with specific Cre recombinase expression in CGNP or early 
neural precursors driven by Math1 or Nestin enhancers. Although the overall
cerebellar morphology was grossly normal, we observed that the entry into mitosis
was postponed both in vivo and in Shh-treated CGNP cultures. Cell cycle analysis 
and immunohistochemistry with antibodies against phosphorylated histone H3
indicated a significant delay in the G2/M transition. Consistent with this,
FoxM1-deficient CGNP showed decreased levels of the cyclin B1 and Cdc25b
proteins. Furthermore, the loss of FoxM1 resulted in spindle defects and
centrosome amplification. These findings indicate that the functions of FoxM1 in 
Shh-induced neuroproliferation are restricted to the regulation of the G2/M
transition in CGNP, most probably through transcriptional effects on target genes
such as those coding for B-type cyclins.

PMCID: PMC2169184
PMID: 17893320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 13;27(12):1696-704. Epub 2007 Sep 24.

An N-terminal inhibitory domain modulates activity of FoxM1 during cell cycle.

Park HJ(1), Wang Z, Costa RH, Tyner A, Lau LF, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics (M/C 669), College of
Medicine, University of Illinois, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The FoxM1 transcription factor plays critical roles in the expression of genes
that are essential for cell proliferation. FoxM1 null or depleted cells fail to
progress through mitosis, as expression of several mitotic genes depends upon
FoxM1. The transcriptional activity of FoxM1 is stimulated by cyclin-cdk-mediated
phosphorylation at a site within the transcriptional activation domain. Here, we 
characterize the role of an N-terminal inhibitory domain in the transcriptional
activity of FoxM1. Deletion of the N-terminal 232 amino-acid residues increases
the transcriptional and transforming activities of FoxM1. Moreover, while the
activity of the full-length FoxM1 is stimulated by growth factors, the activity
of the N-terminal deletion mutant is constitutively high in all phases of the
cell cycle. The N-terminal deletion also eliminates the requirement for
cyclin-cdk to activate FoxM1. We provide evidence that the N-terminal domain
interacts with the C-terminal half of the transcription factor to attenuate its
transcriptional activity. Moreover, the N-terminal fragment inhibits the
transcriptional activity of FoxM1 in G1/S cells, but not in G2/M cells. Our
results suggest that cyclin-cdk phosphorylates FoxM1 to counteract the inhibition
by the N-terminal domain to fully activate FoxM1 in G2/M phase.

PMCID: PMC2894537
PMID: 17891172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 15;67(18):8439-43.

TFAP2C controls hormone response in breast cancer cells through multiple pathways
of estrogen signaling.

Woodfield GW(1), Horan AD, Chen Y, Weigel RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa
City, Iowa 52242-1086, USA.

Breast cancers expressing estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha) are associated with a
favorable biology and are more likely to respond to hormonal therapy. In addition
to ERalpha, other pathways of estrogen response have been identified including
ERbeta and GPR30, a membrane receptor for estrogen, and the key mechanisms
regulating expression of ERs and hormone response remain controversial. Herein,
we show that TFAP2C is the key regulator of hormone responsiveness in breast
carcinoma cells through the control of multiple pathways of estrogen signaling.
TFAP2C regulates the expression of ERalpha directly by binding to the ERalpha
promoter and indirectly via regulation of FoxM1. In so doing, TFAP2C controls the
expression of ERalpha target genes, including pS2, MYB, and RERG. Furthermore,
TFAP2C controlled the expression of GPR30. In distinct contrast, TFAP2A, a
related factor expressed in breast cancer, was not involved in estrogen-mediated 
pathways but regulated expression of genes controlling cell cycle arrest and
apoptosis including p21(CIP1) and IGFBP-3. Knockdown of TFAP2C abrogated the
mitogenic response to estrogen exposure and decreased hormone-responsive tumor
growth of breast cancer xenografts. We conclude that TFAP2C is a central control 
gene of hormone response and is a novel therapeutic target in the design of new
drug treatments for breast cancer.

PMID: 17875680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 1;67(17):8293-300.

Down-regulation of Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor leads to the inhibition
of invasion and angiogenesis of pancreatic cancer cells.

Wang Z(1), Banerjee S, Kong D, Li Y, Sarkar FH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University,
Detroit, MI 48201, USA.

The Forkhead Box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor has been shown to play important
roles in regulating the expression of genes involved in cell proliferation,
differentiation, and transformation. Overexpression of FoxM1 has been found in a 
variety of aggressive human carcinomas including pancreatic cancer. However, the 
precise role and the molecular mechanism of action of FoxM1 in pancreatic cancer 
remain unclear. To elucidate the cellular and molecular function of FoxM1, we
tested the consequences of down-regulation and up-regulation of FoxM1 in
pancreatic cancer cells, respectively. Using multiple cellular and molecular
approaches such as 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide
assay, gene transfection, flow cytometry, real-time reverse transcription-PCR,
Western blotting, migration, invasion, and angiogenesis assays, we found that
down-regulation of FoxM1 inhibited cell growth, decreased cell migration, and
decreased invasion of pancreatic cancer cells. FoxM1 down-regulation also
decreased cell population in the S phase. Compared with control, FoxM1 small
interfering RNA-transfected cells showed decreased expression of cyclin B, cyclin
D1, and Cdk2, whereas p21 and p27 expression was increased. We also found that
down-regulation of FoxM1 reduced the expression of matrix metalloproteinase-2
(MMP-2), MMP-9 and vascular endothelial growth factor, resulting in the
inhibition of migration, invasion, and angiogenesis. These findings suggest that 
FoxM1 down-regulation could be a novel approach for the inhibition of pancreatic 
tumor progression.

PMID: 17804744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Biol Chem. 2007 Aug;388(8):805-18.

The central domain of transcription factor FOXM1c directly interacts with itself 
in vivo and switches from an essential to an inhibitory domain depending on the
FOXM1c binding site.

Wierstra I(1), Alves J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Medical School Hannover, Germany.
iwiwiwi@web.de

We have previously shown that FOXM1c can transactivate its target genes by two
different mechanisms, depending on the FOXM1c binding site. In the present study,
by introducing a small 46-aa deletion, we confirm that the central domain of
FOXM1c is essential for transactivation of the minimal c-myc P1 and P2 promoters 
via their TATA boxes, but functions as an inhibitory domain on conventional
FOXM1c binding sites. Thus, distinct FOXM1c binding sites determine opposite
functions of the central domain, suggesting allosteric control of its
conformation by the DNA binding site. This is strongly supported by the
identification of a direct in vivo interaction of the central domain with itself 
in the present study. In contrast, the DNA binding domain binds neither to itself
nor to any other domain of FOXM1c. Transrepression by the central domain is
unlikely to be achieved by recruitment of co-repressors, but instead seems to be 
mediated by direct interference with the basal transcription complex. Direct
binding of the central domain to itself should be involved in transrepression.
Finally, FOXM1c transactivates the chicken mim-1 promoter, whose TATA box
represents a conventional FOXM1c binding site, so that transactivation follows
neither of the above two mechanisms, but shows intermediate behavior.

PMID: 17655499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Mol Ther. 2007 Sep;15(9):1710-5. Epub 2007 Jun 12.

Transplanted hepatocytes over-expressing FoxM1B efficiently repopulate
chronically injured mouse liver independent of donor age.

Brezillon N(1), Lambert-Blot M, Morosan S, Couton D, Mitchell C, Kremsdorf D,
Costa RH, Gilgenkrantz H, Guidotti JE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Université Paris Descartes, CNRS (UMR 8104), Paris, France.

Orthotopic liver transplantation is limited by the shortage of liver donors,
leading to elderly patients being enrolled as donors with increasing frequency.
Alternative strategies such as cell therapy are therefore needed. Because
transplanted hepatocytes do not proliferate into a recipient liver, repopulation 
strategies have been developed. We have previously published a proof of concept
that hepatocytes harboring a survival selective advantage can efficiently
repopulate a mouse liver. We develop here an alternative approach by conferring a
selective proliferative advantage on transplanted hepatocytes over resident ones.
FoxM1B is a transcription factor that, when over-expressed into hepatocytes,
accelerates the cell cycle and maintains the hepatocyte in vivo proliferative
capacity of aged livers. We now demonstrate that transplanted hepatocytes
over-expressing FoxM1B repopulate the liver of mice subjected to continuous
injury far more efficiently than control hepatocytes. We show that old
hepatocytes that over-express FoxM1B retain their cell division capacity and
repopulate liver as well as young ones, in contrast with old non-modified
hepatocytes, which lose their proliferative capacity. In conclusion, our results 
point to the potential use of FoxM1B expression in hepatocyte-based therapy
protocols in diseases where host hepatocytes are chronically injured, especially 
if donor hepatocytes come from old livers.

PMID: 17565348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 3;282(31):22786-92. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

Constitutive phosphorylation mutation in Fas-associated death domain (FADD)
results in early cell cycle defects.

Osborn SL(1), Sohn SJ, Winoto A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Laboratory and Department of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of California Berkeley, Berkeley, California 94720-3200, USA.

Fas-associated death domain (FADD) is an adaptor molecule for the death receptor 
subfamily of the tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily, but it is also
required for cell proliferation. Cell cycle-specific regulation of FADD
phosphorylation plays an important role in FADD proliferative function since mice
with a mutant form of FADD mimicking constitutive phosphorylation at serine 191
(FADD-D) exhibit defective T cell proliferation. Here we characterized these mice
in detail and found that T cell development in 2-4-week-old mice is relatively
normal, although mature FADD-D T cells manifest defective G(0) and G(1) to S
transition with abnormalities in regulation of p130, p27 degradation,
retinoblastoma protein phosphorylation, and CDK2 kinase activity. These
downstream defects are further associated with the failure to up-regulate the
forkhead box M1 cell cycle transcription factor, FoxM1. FADD-D protein is also
mislocalized during cell cycle progression. Thus, regulation of FADD
phosphorylation is crucial for proper cell cycle entry.

PMID: 17553783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(13):4917-30. Epub 2007 Apr 23.

Induction of Mxi1-SR alpha by FOXO3a contributes to repression of Myc-dependent
gene expression.

Delpuech O(1), Griffiths B, East P, Essafi A, Lam EW, Burgering B, Downward J,
Schulze A.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression Analysis Laboratory, Cancer Research UK London Research
Institute, 44 Lincoln's Inn Fields, London WC2A 3PX, United Kingdom.

Forkhead transcription factors of the O class (FOXOs) are important targets of
the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase)/Akt pathway. FOXOs have been
implicated in the regulation of cell cycle progression, oxidative stress
resistance, and apoptosis. Using DNA microarrays, we analyzed the transcriptional
response to FOXO3a activation by gene expression analysis in DLD-1 colon cancer
cells stably expressing a FOXO3a.A3-ER fusion protein. We found that activation
of FOXO3a resulted in repression of a number of previously identified Myc target 
genes. Furthermore, FOXO3a activation induced expression of several members of
the Mad/Mxd family of transcriptional repressors, most notably Mxi1. The
induction of Mxi1 by FOXO3a was specific to the Mxi1-SR alpha isoform and was
mediated by three highly conserved FOXO binding sites within the first intron of 
the gene. Activation of FOXO3a in response to inhibition of Akt also resulted in 
activation of Mxi1-SR alpha expression. Silencing of Mxi1 by small interfering
RNA (siRNA) reduced FOXO3a-mediated repression of a number of Myc target genes.
We also observed that FOXO3a activation induced a switch in promoter occupancy
from Myc to Mxi1 on the E-box containing promoter regions of two Myc target
genes, APEX and FOXM1. siRNA-mediated transient silencing of Mxi1 or all Mad/Mxd 
proteins reduced exit from S phase in response to FOXO3a activation, and stable
silencing of Mxi1 or Mad1 reduced the growth inhibitory effect of FOXO3a. We
conclude that induction of Mad/Mxd proteins contributes to the inhibition of
proliferation in response to FOXO3a activation. Our results provide evidence of
direct regulation of Mxi1 by FOXO3a and imply an additional mechanism through
which the PI3-kinase/Akt/FOXO pathway can modulate Myc function.

PMCID: PMC1951505
PMID: 17452451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. BMC Cancer. 2007 Apr 12;7:64.

Gene expression profiles of prostate cancer reveal involvement of multiple
molecular pathways in the metastatic process.

Chandran UR(1), Ma C, Dhir R, Bisceglia M, Lyons-Weiler M, Liang W, Michalopoulos
G, Becich M, Monzon FA.

Author information: 
(1)Departmental of Biomedical Informatics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15260, USA. chandran@pitt.edu

BACKGROUND: Prostate cancer is characterized by heterogeneity in the clinical
course that often does not correlate with morphologic features of the tumor.
Metastasis reflects the most adverse outcome of prostate cancer, and to date
there are no reliable morphologic features or serum biomarkers that can reliably 
predict which patients are at higher risk of developing metastatic disease.
Understanding the differences in the biology of metastatic and organ confined
primary tumors is essential for developing new prognostic markers and therapeutic
targets.
METHODS: Using Affymetrix oligonucleotide arrays, we analyzed gene expression
profiles of 24 androgen-ablation resistant metastatic samples obtained from 4
patients and a previously published dataset of 64 primary prostate tumor samples.
Differential gene expression was analyzed after removing potentially
uninformative stromal genes, addressing the differences in cellular content
between primary and metastatic tumors.
RESULTS: The metastatic samples are highly heterogenous in expression; however,
differential expression analysis shows that 415 genes are upregulated and 364
genes are downregulated at least 2 fold in every patient with metastasis. The
expression profile of metastatic samples reveals changes in expression of a
unique set of genes representing both the androgen ablation related pathways and 
other metastasis related gene networks such as cell adhesion, bone remodelling
and cell cycle. The differentially expressed genes include metabolic enzymes,
transcription factors such as Forkhead Box M1 (FoxM1) and cell adhesion molecules
such as Osteopontin (SPP1).
CONCLUSION: We hypothesize that these genes have a role in the biology of
metastatic disease and that they represent potential therapeutic targets for
prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC1865555
PMID: 17430594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Gastroenterology. 2007 Apr;132(4):1420-31. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

The forkhead box M1 transcription factor contributes to the development and
growth of mouse colorectal cancer.

Yoshida Y(1), Wang IC, Yoder HM, Davidson NO, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
yyoshida@gh.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In this study, we used Forkhead Box m1b (Foxm1b) transgenic
mice and conditional Foxm1 knock-out mice to examine the role of Foxm1 in colon
cancer development and proliferation.
METHODS: To induce mouse colorectal cancer, we used a single intraperitoneal
injection of azoxymethane (AOM) followed by three 1-week cycles of 2.5% dextran
sodium sulfate (DSS) water, each cycle separated by 2 weeks. For these colon
tumor studies, we used either Rosa26-Foxm1b transgenic mice that ubiquitously
expressed the human Foxm1b complementary DNA or mice in which the Foxm1 fl/fl
targeted allele was deleted in colonic epithelial cells using the gut-specific
Villin-Cre recombinase transgene (Villin-Cre). Colorectal tumor number and
bromodeoxyuridine labeling were determined in Rosa26-Foxm1b mice, Villin-Cre
Foxm1-/-, mice and wild-type mice after 12 weeks of AOM/DDS exposure. We also
used Foxm1 small interfering RNA-depleted human DLD1 and mouse CT26 colon cancer 
cell lines to examine DNA replication and anchorage-independent growth.
RESULTS: After 12 weeks of treatment with AOM/DSS, Rosa26 Foxm1b transgenic mice 
showed an increase in the number and size of colorectal tumors compared with
wild-type mice. Likewise, a significant reduction in the development and growth
of colorectal tumors was found in Villin-Cre Foxm1-/- mice compared with Foxm1
fl/fl mice after AOM/DSS treatment, which was associated with decreased
expression of cyclin A2, cyclin B1, survivin, and T-cell factor 4 genes.
Moreover, Foxm1-depleted colon cancer cell lines showed reduced DNA replication
and anchorage-independent growth.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies suggest that Foxm1 is critical for the proliferation
and growth of colorectal cancer.

PMID: 17408638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Oncogene. 2007 Sep 13;26(42):6212-9. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Aberrant FoxM1B expression increases matrix metalloproteinase-2 transcription and
enhances the invasion of glioma cells.

Dai B(1), Kang SH, Gong W, Liu M, Aldape KD, Sawaya R, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

We recently showed that FoxM1 is overexpressed in human glioblastomas and that
forced FoxM1B expression in anaplastic astrocytoma cells leads to the formation
of highly invasive glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) in nude mice. However, the
molecular mechanisms by which FoxM1 enhances glioma invasion are unknown. In this
study, we found that FoxM1 overexpression increased matrix metalloproteinase
(MMP)-2 expression in glioma cells, whereas blockade of FoxM1 expression
suppressed MMP-2 expression. Transfection of FoxM1 into glioma cells directly
activated the MMP-2 promoter, whereas inhibition of FoxM1 expression by
FoxM1-siRNA suppressed its activation. We identified a FoxM1-binding site in the 
MMP-2 promoter and demonstrated that FoxM1 protein bound directly to it. Mutation
of this FoxM1-binding site significantly attenuated MMP-2 promoter activity.
Furthermore, FoxM1 overexpression increased the invasiveness of glioma cells,
whereas inhibition of FoxM1 expression suppressed the invasiveness of GBM cells. 
Inhibition of MMP-2 by a specific MMP-2 inhibitor reversed the invasive phenotype
of glioma cells overexpressing FoxM1. Finally, immunohistochemical analysis of 45
human GBM specimens showed a significant correlation between FoxM1 overexpression
and elevated MMP-2 expression. Collectively, these findings provide evidence that
FoxM1 contributes to glioma progression by enhancing MMP-2 gene transcription and
thus tumor-cell invasion.

PMID: 17404569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Dev Dyn. 2007 Apr;236(4):1000-13.

Myocardium defects and ventricular hypoplasia in mice homozygous null for the
Forkhead Box M1 transcription factor.

Ramakrishna S(1), Kim IM, Petrovic V, Malin D, Wang IC, Kalin TV, Meliton L, Zhao
YY, Ackerson T, Qin Y, Malik AB, Costa RH, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.

The Forkhead Box m1 (Foxm1) transcription factor is expressed in cardiomyocytes
and cardiac endothelial cells during heart development. In this study, we used a 
novel Foxm1 -/- mouse line to demonstrate that Foxm1-deletion causes ventricular 
hypoplasia and diminished DNA replication and mitosis in developing
cardiomyocytes. Proliferation defects in Foxm1 -/- hearts were associated with a 
reduced expression of Cdk1-activator Cdc25B phosphatase and NFATc3 transcription 
factor, and with abnormal nuclear accumulation of the Cdk-inhibitor p21(Cip1)
protein. Depletion of Foxm1 levels by siRNA caused altered expression of these
genes in cultured HL-1 cardiomyocytes. Endothelial-specific deletion of the Foxm1
fl/fl allele in Tie2-Cre Foxm1 fl/fl embryos did not influence heart development 
and cardiomyocyte proliferation. Foxm1 protein binds to the -9,259/-9,288-bp
region of the endogenous mouse NFATc3 promoter, indicating that Foxm1 is a
transcriptional activator of the NFATc3 gene. Foxm1 regulates expression of genes
essential for the proliferation of cardiomyocytes during heart development.

PMID: 17366632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Future Oncol. 2007 Feb;3(1):1-3.

Future roles for FoxM1 inhibitors in cancer treatments.

Adami GR, Ye H.

PMID: 17280494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Clin Invest. 2007 Jan;117(1):99-111. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

A cell-penetrating ARF peptide inhibitor of FoxM1 in mouse hepatocellular
carcinoma treatment.

Gusarova GA(1), Wang IC, Major ML, Kalinichenko VV, Ackerson T, Petrovic V, Costa
RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60607-7170, USA. gusarova@uic.edu

The forkhead box m1 (Foxm1) transcription factor is essential for initiation of
carcinogen-induced liver tumors; however, whether FoxM1 constitutes a therapeutic
target for liver cancer treatment remains unknown. In this study, we used
diethylnitrosamine/phenobarbital treatment to induce hepatocellular carcinomas
(HCCs) in either WT mice or Arf(-/-)Rosa26-FoxM1b Tg mice, in which forkhead box 
M1b (FoxM1b) is overexpressed and alternative reading frame (ARF) inhibition of
FoxM1 transcriptional activity is eliminated. To pharmacologically reduce FoxM1
activity in HCCs, we subjected these HCC-bearing mice to daily injections of a
cell-penetrating ARF(26-44) peptide inhibitor of FoxM1 function. After 4 weeks of
this treatment, HCC regions displayed reduced tumor cell proliferation and
angiogenesis and a significant increase in apoptosis within the HCC region but
not in the adjacent normal liver tissue. ARF peptide treatment also induced
apoptosis of several distinct human hepatoma cell lines, which correlated with
reduced protein levels of the mitotic regulatory genes encoding polo-like kinase 
1, aurora B kinase, and survivin, all of which are transcriptional targets of
FoxM1 that are highly expressed in cancer cells and function to prevent
apoptosis. These studies indicate that ARF peptide treatment is an effective
therapeutic approach to limit proliferation and induce apoptosis of liver cancer 
cells in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1697798
PMID: 17173139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jan 5;352(1):61-8. Epub 2006 Nov 3.

FOXM1c and Sp1 transactivate the P1 and P2 promoters of human c-myc
synergistically.

Wierstra I(1), Alves J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Medical School Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 
D-30625 Hannover, Germany. iwiwiwi@web.de

We have previously shown that FOXM1c transactivates the c-myc P1 and P2 promoters
via their TATA-boxes by a new transactivation mechanism, namely by directly
binding to the P1 and P2 TATA-boxes and to TBP, TFIIA, and TFIIB. We now confirm 
this surprising mechanism by demonstrating that FOXM1c transactivates the human
c-myc P1 and P2 promoters synergistically with Sp1, a transcription factor known 
to bind and transactivate these two promoters. This synergism requires the P1 or 
P2 TATA-boxes as well as the respective Sp1-binding sites. Moreover FOXM1c binds 
directly to Sp1. Cooperative DNA binding, if it should occur, is not sufficient
for synergism of Sp1 and FOXM1c at P1, but their contacts to multiple components 
of the basal transcription complex (TFIID, TFIIA, TFIIB) seem to be essential.
However, FOXM1c does not synergize with Sp1 if it transactivates via its
conventional binding site.

PMID: 17141659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 12;282(2):1468-78. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Growth hormone corrects proliferation and transcription of phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase in livers of old mice via elimination of CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein alpha-Brm complex.

Wang GL(1), Shi X, Salisbury E, Sun Y, Albrecht JH, Smith RG, Timchenko NA.

Author information: 
(1)Huffington Center on Aging and Department of Pathology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Growth hormone (GH), which is reduced with age, corrects the impaired
proliferative capacity of livers of old animals. In this paper, we present a
mechanism by which GH eliminates age-dependent negative control of proliferation 
and increases transcription of liver-specific genes in livers of old mice. The
reduced proliferative capacities of the liver of old animals are associated with 
the CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha)-Brm complex, which inhibits
E2F-dependent promoters. We found that a sequestration of C/EBPalpha into
complexes with Brm leads to a weak interaction of C/EBPalpha with promoters of
liver-specific genes, expression of which is reduced in old animals. Injection of
either GH or the regulator of the amplitude of endogenous GH release, ghrelin,
reduces the C/EBPalpha-Brm complex in livers of old mice, leading to a
derepression of E2F targets, to increased interactions of C/EBPalpha with
promoters of liver-specific genes, and to correction of their expression.
GH-dependent elimination of the complex is mediated by the inhibition of cyclin
D3-CDK4 activity and by elevation of a phosphatase, protein phosphatase 2A, which
dephosphorylates C/EBPalpha and dissociates the complex.

PMID: 17107955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;27(3):1007-16. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Chk2 mediates stabilization of the FoxM1 transcription factor to stimulate
expression of DNA repair genes.

Tan Y(1), Raychaudhuri P, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA. ytan1231@yahoo.com.

The forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor regulates expression of cell
cycle genes essential for DNA replication and mitosis during organ repair and
cancer progression. Here, we demonstrate that FoxM1-deficient (-/-) mouse
embryonic fibroblasts and osteosarcoma U2OS cells depleted in FoxM1 levels by
small interfering RNA transfection display increased DNA breaks, as evidenced by 
immunofluorescence focus staining for phosphospecific histone H2AX.
FoxM1-deficient cells also exhibit stimulation of p53 transcriptional activity,
as evidenced by increased expression of the p21(cip1) gene. FoxM1-deficient cells
display reduced expression of the base excision repair factor X-ray
cross-complementing group 1 (XRCC1) and breast cancer-associated gene 2 (BRCA2), 
the latter of which is involved in homologous recombination repair of DNA
double-strand breaks. Furthermore, FoxM1 protein is phosphorylated by checkpoint 
kinase 2 (Chk2) in response to DNA damage. This phosphorylation of FoxM1 on
serine residue 361 caused increased stability of the FoxM1 protein with
corresponding increased transcription of XRCC1 and BRCA2 genes, both of which are
required for repair of DNA damage. These results identify a novel role for FoxM1 
in the transcriptional response during DNA damage/checkpoint signaling and show a
novel mechanism by which Chk2 protein regulates expression of DNA repair enzymes.

PMCID: PMC1800696
PMID: 17101782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Hepatology. 2006 Nov;44(5):1364.

Robert H. Costa: 1957-2006.

Raychaudhuri P, Lau LF, Grayson D, Kaplan J.

PMID: 17058235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Cancer Res. 2006 Oct 1;66(19):9731-5.

Identification of a chemical inhibitor of the oncogenic transcription factor
forkhead box M1.

Radhakrishnan SK(1), Bhat UG, Hughes DE, Wang IC, Costa RH, Gartel AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, 
USA.

The oncogenic transcription factor forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is overexpressed in a 
number of different carcinomas, whereas its expression is turned off in
terminally differentiated cells. For this reason, FoxM1 is an attractive target
for therapeutic intervention in cancer treatment. As a first step toward
realizing this goal, in this study, using a high-throughput, cell-based assay
system, we screened for and isolated the antibiotic thiazole compound Siomycin A 
as an inhibitor of FoxM1. Interestingly, we observed that Siomycin A was able to 
down-regulate the transcriptional activity as well as the protein and mRNA
abundance of FoxM1. Consequently, we found that the downstream target genes of
FoxM1, such as Cdc25B, Survivin, and CENPB, were repressed. Also, we observed
that consistent with earlier reports of FoxM1 inhibition, Siomycin A was able to 
reduce anchorage-independent growth of cells in soft agar. Furthermore, we found 
that Siomycin A was able to induce apoptosis selectively in transformed but not
normal cells of the same origin. Taken together, our data suggest that FoxM1
inhibitor Siomycin A could represent a useful starting point for the development 
of anticancer therapeutics.

PMID: 17018632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2007 Jan;1775(1):92-102. Epub 2006 Aug 30.

FoxM1: at the crossroads of ageing and cancer.

Laoukili J(1), Stahl M, Medema RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Laboratory of Experimental Oncology,
University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, Utrecht, The
Netherlands.

Forkhead transcription factors are intimately involved in the regulation of
organismal development, cell differentiation and proliferation. Here we review
the current knowledge of the role played by FoxM1 in these various processes.
This particular member of the Forkhead family is broadly expressed in actively
dividing cells and is crucial for cell cycle-dependent gene expression in the G2 
phase of the cell cycle. FoxM1 plays a crucial role in insuring the fidelity of
the cell division process, as inhibition of FoxM1 activity results in serious
aberrancies during mitosis, such as frequent chromosome missegregation, defects
in cytokinesis and overt aneuploidy. FoxM1 expression also appears to be tightly 
correlated with the proliferative rate of a cell. For example, FoxM1 is one of
the most significantly down-regulated genes in prematurely aged human fibroblasts
(Progeria syndrome), while elevated expression of FoxM1 is seen in most human
carcinomas. These observations suggest that interference with FoxM1 activity may 
contribute to the increase in mitotic errors seen in human diseases such as
cancer and early onset of ageing diseases. In this review, several aspects of
FoxM1 function will be discussed, as well as their implication in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 17014965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. FEBS J. 2006 Oct;273(20):4645-67. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

FOXM1c transactivates the human c-myc promoter directly via the two TATA boxes P1
and P2.

Wierstra I(1), Alves J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Medical School Hannover, Germany.
iwiwiwi@web.de

FOXM1c transactivates the c-myc promoter via the P1 and P2 TATA boxes using a new
mechanism. Whereas the P1 TATA box TATAATGC requires its sequence context to be
FOXM1c responsive, the P2 TATA box TATAAAAG alone is sufficient to confer FOXM1c 
responsiveness to any minimal promoter. FOXM1c transactivates by binding to the
TATA box as well as directly to TATA-binding protein, transcription factor IIB
and transcription factor IIA. This new transactivation mechanism is clearly
distinguished from the function of FOXM1c as a conventional transcription factor.
The central domain of FOXM1c functions as an essential domain for activation via 
the TATA box, but as an inhibitory domain (retinoblastoma protein-independent
transrepression domain and retinoblastoma protein-recruiting negative regulatory 
domain) for transactivation via conventional FOXM1c-binding sites. Each promoter 
with the P2 TATA box TATAAAAG is postulated to be transactivated by FOXM1c. This 
was demonstrated for the promoters of c-fos, hsp70 and histone H2B/a. A database 
search revealed almost 300 probable FOXM1c target genes, many of which function
in proliferation and tumorigenesis. Accordingly, dominant-negative FOXM1c
proteins reduced cell growth approximately threefold, demonstrating a
proliferation-stimulating function for wild-type FOXM1c.

PMID: 16965535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Clin Invest. 2006 Sep;116(9):2333-43.

Endothelial cell-restricted disruption of FoxM1 impairs endothelial repair
following LPS-induced vascular injury.

Zhao YY(1), Gao XP, Zhao YD, Mirza MK, Frey RS, Kalinichenko VV, Wang IC, Costa
RH, Malik AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Illinois College of Medicine,
Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA. yyzhao@uic.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2006 Sep;116(9):2316-9.

Recovery of endothelial integrity after vascular injury is vital for endothelial 
barrier function and vascular homeostasis. However, little is known about the
molecular mechanisms of endothelial barrier repair following injury. To
investigate the functional role of forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) in the mechanism of
endothelial repair, we generated endothelial cell-restricted FoxM1-deficient mice
(FoxM1 CKO mice). These mutant mice were viable and exhibited no overt phenotype.
However, in response to the inflammatory mediator LPS, FoxM1 CKO mice displayed
significantly protracted increase in lung vascular permeability and markedly
increased mortality. Following LPS-induced vascular injury, FoxM1 CKO lungs
demonstrated impaired cell proliferation in association with sustained expression
of p27(Kip1) and decreased expression of cyclin B1 and Cdc25C. Endothelial cells 
isolated from FoxM1 CKO lungs failed to proliferate, and siRNA-mediated
suppression of FoxM1 expression in human endothelial cells resulted in defective 
cell cycle progression. Deletion of FoxM1 in endothelial cells induced decreased 
expression of cyclins, Cdc2, and Cdc25C, increased p27(Kip1) expression, and
decreased Cdk activities. Thus, FoxM1 plays a critical role in the mechanism of
the restoration of endothelial barrier function following vascular injury. These 
data suggest that impairment in FoxM1 activation may be an important determinant 
of the persistent vascular barrier leakiness and edema formation associated with 
inflammatory diseases.

PMCID: PMC1555637
PMID: 16955137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Clin Invest. 2006 Sep;116(9):2316-9.

Regeneration of the endothelium as a novel therapeutic strategy for acute lung
injury.

Minamino T(1), Komuro I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Science and Medicine, Chiba University Graduate
School of Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2006 Sep;116(9):2333-43.

Acute lung injury (ALI) is characterized by the influx of protein-rich edematous 
fluid into the airspaces due to increased permeability of the alveolar-capillary 
barrier. Inflammatory mediators are thought to play a critical role in the
pathogenesis of this disorder. In this issue of the JCI, Zhao et al. report that 
the forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) transcription factor induces endothelial regeneration
and thereby restores endothelial barrier function after ALI (see the related
article beginning on page 2333). Their findings raise the intriguing possibility 
that the promotion of endothelial regeneration may be a novel therapeutic
strategy for ALI.

PMCID: PMC1555652
PMID: 16955131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Biol Chem. 2006 Jul;387(7):963-76.

Despite its strong transactivation domain, transcription factor FOXM1c is kept
almost inactive by two different inhibitory domains.

Wierstra I(1), Alves J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Medical School Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 
D-30625 Hannover, Germany. iwiwiwi@web.de

FOXM1c (MPP2) is an activating transcription factor with several nuclear
localization signals, a forkhead domain for DNA binding, and a very strong acidic
transactivation domain. Despite its very strong transactivation domain, FOXM1c is
kept almost inactive by two different independent inhibitory domains, the
N-terminus and the central domain. The N-terminus as a specific
negative-regulatory domain directly binds to and thus inhibits the
transactivation domain completely. However, it lacks any transrepression
potential. In contrast, the central domain functions as a strong RB-independent
transrepression domain and as an RB-recruiting negative-regulatory domain. The
N-terminus alone is sufficient to eliminate transactivation, while the central
domain alone represses the transactivation domain only partially. This hierarchy 
of the two inhibitory domains offers the possibility to activate the almost
inactive wild type in two steps in vitro: deletion of the N-terminus results in a
strong transactivator, while additional deletion of the central domain in a very 
strong transactivator. We suggest that the very high potential of the
transactivation domain has to be tightly controlled by these two inhibitory
domains because FOXM1 stimulates proliferation by promoting G1/S transition, as
well as G2/M transition, and because deregulation of such potent activators of
proliferation can result in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 16913846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Biol Chem. 2006 Jul;387(7):949-62.

Transcription factor FOXM1c is repressed by RB and activated by cyclin D1/Cdk4.

Wierstra I(1), Alves J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Medical School Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 
D-30625 Hannover, Germany. iwiwiwi@web.de

The proliferation-stimulating transactivator FOXM1c (MPP2) is repressed by RB and
activated by cyclin D1/Cdk4 and therefore behaves like E2F. Despite its strong
transactivation domain, FOXM1c is kept almost inactive by two different
inhibitory domains, the N-terminus and the central domain. The tumor suppressor
RB binds directly to the central domain of FOXM1c and thereby indirectly
represses the transactivation domain, so that the central domain of FOXM1c
functions as an RB-recruiting negative-regulatory domain. Cyclin D1/Cdk4 releases
FOXM1c from this repression by RB and from the repression by its own inhibitory
N-terminus, thereby strongly activating FOXM1c. However, cyclin D1/Cdk4 does not 
directly affect the transactivation domain or the DNA-binding domain. By
phosphorylation of RB, but not FOXM1c, cyclin D1/Cdk4 interrupts their direct
interaction and thus abrogates the repression of FOXM1c by RB. Cyclin D1/Cdk4
also eliminates the inhibition of the transactivation domain by the N-terminus of
FOXM1c, probably by interruption of their direct interaction. Consequently, the
G1-phase proliferation signal cyclin D1/Cdk4 converts FOXM1c from an almost
inactive form into a strong transactivator in G1-phase, i.e., just at the time
point at which the transcriptional activity of FOXM1 is required for stimulation 
of the G1/S-transition.

PMID: 16913845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Sep 15;348(1):99-108. Epub 2006 Jul 12.

FOXM1c is activated by cyclin E/Cdk2, cyclin A/Cdk2, and cyclin A/Cdk1, but
repressed by GSK-3alpha.

Wierstra I(1), Alves J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Medical School Hannover, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 
1, D-30625 Hannover, Germany. iwiwiwi@web.de

Two different inhibitory domains, N-terminus and central domain, keep FOXM1c
almost inactive despite its strong transactivation domain. Here, we demonstrate
that cyclin E/Cdk2, cyclin A/Cdk2, and cyclin A/Cdk1 activate FOXM1c. Cyclin
E/Cdk2 does not target its transactivation domain or its DNA-binding domain.
Instead, its activating effect strictly depends on the presence of either the
central domain or the N-terminus of FOXM1c and thus is completely lost if both
inhibitory domains are deleted. Cyclin E/Cdk2 activates FOXM1c by releasing its
transactivation domain from the repression by these two inhibitory domains.
However, it does not directly increase the transactivation potential of the TAD. 
The DNA-binding is not affected by cyclin E/Cdk2, neither directly nor
indirectly. These two activating effects of cyclin E/Cdk2 via central domain and 
N-terminus are additive. Cyclin A/Cdk2 and cyclin A/Cdk1 show similar
characteristics. GSK-3alpha, another proliferation-associated kinase, represses
FOXM1c.

PMID: 16875671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 1;281(35):25167-76. Epub 2006 Jun 28.

The Forkhead box M1 protein regulates the transcription of the estrogen receptor 
alpha in breast cancer cells.

Madureira PA(1), Varshochi R, Constantinidou D, Francis RE, Coombes RC, Yao KM,
Lam EW.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research-United Kingdom Laboratories, Department of Oncology, MRC
Cyclotron Building, Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, 
London W12 0NN, United Kingdom.

In this study, we have identified the Forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 as a
physiological regulator of estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) expression in breast
carcinoma cells. Our survey of a panel of 16 different breast cell lines showed a
good correlation (13/16) between FoxM1 expression and expression of ERalpha at
both protein and mRNA levels. We have also demonstrated that ectopic expression
of FoxM1 in two different estrogen receptor-positive breast cancer cell lines,
MCF-7 and ZR-75-30, led to up-regulation of ERalpha expression at protein and
transcript levels. Furthermore, treatment of MCF-7 cells with the MEK inhibitor
U0126, which blocks ERK1/2-dependent activation of FoxM1, also repressed ERalpha 
expression. Consistent with this, silencing of FoxM1 expression in MCF-7 cells
using small interfering RNA resulted in the almost complete abrogation of ERalpha
expression. We also went on to show that FoxM1 can activate the transcriptional
activity of human ERalpha promoter primarily through two closely located Forkhead
response elements located at the proximal region of the ERalpha promoter.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and biotinylated oligonucleotide pulldown assays
have allowed us to confirm these Forkhead response elements as important for
FoxM1 binding. Further co-immunoprecipitation experiments showed that FoxO3a and 
FoxM1 interact in vivo. Together with the chromatin immunoprecipitation and
biotinylated oligonucleotide pulldown data, the co-immunoprecipitation results
also suggest the possibility that FoxM1 and FoxO3a cooperate to regulate ERalpha 
gene transcription.

PMID: 16809346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Hippokratia. 2006 Jul;10(3):128-32.

Regulation of the FOXM1 transcription factor by the estrogen receptor alpha at
the protein level, in breast cancer.

Karadedou CT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Medicine, Division of Surgery, Oncology,
Reproductive Biology and Anaesthetics, Imperial College London.
christina.karadedou@ic.ac.uk

Breast cancer is the most frequent type of cancer of women in the western world. 
Antiestrogens, including Tamoxifen (OHT) and Faslodex (ICI), are widely used in
the endocrine treatment of breast cancer. However, the majority of breast cancers
are either resistant to endocrine therapy or eventually become unresponsive to
antiestrogen therapy. Better understanding of the molecular mechanisms that
govern tumour proliferation, is therefore needed to develop new therapies for the
disease. The Forkhead family of transcription factors plays an important role in 
regulating cell proliferation, cell death and differentiation.The estrogen
receptor (ER) a positive breast carcinoma cell line MCF-7 and the ERa negative
line MDA-MB-231 was used to study the potential regulation of the Forkhead member
FOXM1 by ER. It was indicated that estrogen and ER regulate the expression of
FOXM1 at the protein level. Since Forkhead proteins play an important role in
regulating cell proliferation, cell death and differentiation, this study helps
to explain some of the functions of ER in tumourigenesis, and the way these
Forkhead proteins could be crucial targets for therapeutic strategies and/or
markers for diagnosis and prognosis.

PMCID: PMC2808396
PMID: 20351808  [PubMed]


196. Surgery. 2006 May;139(5):665-70.

Sonic Hedgehog-dependent proliferation in a series of patients with colorectal
cancer.

Douard R(1), Moutereau S, Pernet P, Chimingqi M, Allory Y, Manivet P, Conti M,
Vaubourdolle M, Cugnenc PH, Loric S.

Author information: 
(1)General Surgery Department, APHP Georges Pompidou University Hospital, Paris. 
richard.douard@hop.egp.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: The Hedgehog (Hh) gene family is known to regulate development of
stem cells. In addition, activation is responsible for the induction of GLI1
proto-oncogene and subsequent cellular proliferation. Sonic Hedgehog (SHh), one
of the Hh family members promotes carcinogenesis in airway and pancreatic
epithelia, is expressed in colonic stem cells. As differentiated colonic cells
arise from constant renewal of Hedgehog-expressing colonic stem cells, SHh could 
be involved in human colonic carcinogenesis.
METHODS: Tissue samples of colorectal adenocarcinoma (T) and adjacent normal
colon tissue (NT) were sampled from each of 44 consecutive patients with
colorectal cancer. Specific transcription of SHh, GLI1, and the GLI1 downstream
target FOXM1 were evaluated using semiquantitative reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction. Similar in vitro measurements of mRNA of GLI1 and
FOXM1 transcription levels after specific induction by SHh-Np were performed in
the HT-29 colorectal tumor cell line to confirm the in vivo results.
RESULTS: SHh mRNA was overexpressed in colorectal adenocarcinomas in 38 of 44
(86%) patients. Expression of transcription levels of GLI1 and FOXM1 correlated
with SHh expression (SHh vs GLI1, r = 0.77, P < .0001; GLI1 vs FOXM1, r = 0.68, P
< .0001; SHh vs FOXM1, r = 0.79, P < .0001). SHh overexpression did not appear to
correlate with the patient characteristics evaluated. Similarly, when studied in 
the HT-29 colorectal cell line, exogenous SHh promoted cell proliferation, while 
inhibition of SHh expression decreased proliferation. Expression of GLI1 and
FOXM1 mRNA increased with exogenous exposure to SHh.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated increased expression of SHh mRNA in human colonic
adenocarcinomas and in a colorectal cell line with downstream increased
expression of GLI1 and FOXM1 mRNA known to promote cell proliferation. This
upregulation within human colorectal adenocarcinoma tissue confirms the potential
role of the Hh pathway in colorectal carcinogenesis and suggests a potential
therapeutic target of Hh blockade in colorectal cancer.

PMID: 16701100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Gastroenterology. 2006 Apr;130(4):1283-300.

Increased expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 stimulates hepatocyte
proliferation during mouse liver regeneration.

Tan Y(1), Yoshida Y, Hughes DE, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60607-7170, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF6 or ONECUT-1) protein is 
a cell-type specific transcription factor that regulates expression of
hepatocyte-specific genes. Using hepatocytes for chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays, the HNF6 protein was shown to associate with cell cycle regulatory
promoters. Here, we examined whether increased levels of HNF6 stimulate
hepatocyte proliferation during mouse liver regeneration.
METHODS: Tail vein injection of adenovirus expressing the HNF6 complementary DNA 
was used to increase hepatic HNF6 levels during mouse liver regeneration induced 
by partial hepatectomy, and DNA replication was determined by bromodeoxyuridine
incorporation. Cotransfection and ChIP assays were used to determine
transcriptional target promoters.
RESULTS: Elevated expression of HNF6 during mouse liver regeneration causes a
significant increase in the number of hepatocytes entering DNA replication (S
phase), and mouse hepatoma Hepa1-6 cells diminished for HNF6 levels by small
interfering RNA transfection exhibit a 50% reduction in S phase following serum
stimulation. This stimulation in hepatocyte S-phase progression was associated
with increased expression of the hepatocyte mitogen tumor growth factor alpha and
the cell cycle regulators cyclin D1 and Forkhead box m1 (Foxm1) transcription
factor. Cotransfection and ChIP assays show that tumor growth factor alpha,
cyclin D1, and HNF6 promoter regions are direct transcriptional targets of the
HNF6 protein. Coimmunoprecipitation assays with regenerating mouse liver extracts
reveal an association between HNF6 and FoxM1 proteins, and cotransfection assays 
show that HNF6 stimulates Foxm1 transcriptional activity.
CONCLUSIONS: These mouse liver regeneration studies show that increased HNF6
levels stimulate hepatocyte proliferation through transcriptional induction of
cell cycle regulatory genes.

PMCID: PMC1440887
PMID: 16618419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Science. 2006 Apr 14;312(5771):233-6.

Nuclear receptor-dependent bile acid signaling is required for normal liver
regeneration.

Huang W(1), Ma K, Zhang J, Qatanani M, Cuvillier J, Liu J, Dong B, Huang X, Moore
DD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, One 
Baylor Plaza, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2006 Apr 14;312(5771):178.
    J Hepatol. 2007 Mar;46(3):539-40.
    Hepatology. 2007 Jan;45(1):251-3.

Liver mass depends on one or more unidentified humoral signals that drive
regeneration when liver functional capacity is diminished. Bile acids are
important liver products, and their levels are tightly regulated. Here, we
identify a role for nuclear receptor-dependent bile acid signaling in normal
liver regeneration. Elevated bile acid levels accelerate regeneration, and
decreased levels inhibit liver regrowth, as does the absence of the primary
nuclear bile acid receptor FXR. We propose that FXR activation by increased bile 
acid flux is a signal of decreased functional capacity of the liver. FXR, and
possibly other nuclear receptors, may promote homeostasis not only by regulating 
expression of appropriate metabolic target genes but also by driving homeotrophic
liver growth.

PMID: 16614213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Cancer Res. 2006 Apr 1;66(7):3593-602.

FoxM1B is overexpressed in human glioblastomas and critically regulates the
tumorigenicity of glioma cells.

Liu M(1), Dai B, Kang SH, Ban K, Huang FJ, Lang FF, Aldape KD, Xie TX, Pelloski
CE, Xie K, Sawaya R, Huang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The transcription factor Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1) is overexpressed in malignant
glioma. However, the functional importance of this factor in human glioma is not 
known. In the present study, we found that FoxM1B was the predominant FoxM1
isoform expressed in human glioma but not in normal brain tissue. The level of
FoxM1 protein expression in human glioma tissues was directly correlated with the
glioma grade. The level of FoxM1 protein expression in human glioblastoma tissues
was inversely correlated with patient survival. Enforced FoxM1B expression caused
SW1783 and Hs683 glioma cells, which do not form tumor xenografts, to regain
tumorigenicity in nude mouse model systems. Moreover, gliomas that arose from
FoxM1B-transfected anaplastic astrocytoma SW1783 cells displayed glioblastoma
multiforme phenotypes. Inhibition of FoxM1 expression in glioblastoma U-87MG
cells suppressed their anchorage-independent growth in vitro and tumorigenicity
in vivo. Furthermore, we found that FoxM1 regulates the expression of Skp2
protein, which is known to promote degradation of the cell cycle regulator
p27(Kip1). These results showed that FoxM1 is overexpressed in human
glioblastomas and contributes to glioma tumorigenicity. Therefore, FoxM1 might be
a new potential target of therapy for human malignant gliomas.

PMID: 16585184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Aug;20(8):1853-66. Epub 2006 Mar 23.

The FoxM1 transcription factor is required to maintain pancreatic beta-cell mass.

Zhang H(1), Ackermann AM, Gusarova GA, Lowe D, Feng X, Kopsombut UG, Costa RH,
Gannon M.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232, USA.

The FoxM1 transcription factor is highly expressed in proliferating cells and
activates several cell cycle genes, although its requirement appears to be
limited to certain tissue types. Embryonic hepatoblast-specific inactivation of
Foxm1 results in a dramatic reduction in liver outgrowth and subsequent late
gestation lethality, whereas inactivation of Foxm1 in adult liver impairs
regeneration after partial hepatectomy. These results prompted us to examine
whether FoxM1 functions similarly in embryonic outgrowth of the pancreas and
beta-cell proliferation in the adult. We found that FoxM1 is highly expressed in 
embryonic and neonatal endocrine cells, when many of these cells are
proliferating. Using a Cre-lox strategy, we generated mice in which Foxm1 was
inactivated throughout the developing pancreatic endoderm by embryonic d 15.5
(Foxm1(Deltapanc)). Mice lacking Foxm1 in their entire pancreas were born with
normal pancreatic and beta-cell mass; however, they displayed a gradual decline
in beta-cell mass with age. Failure of postnatal beta-cell mass expansion
resulted in impaired islet function by 6 wk of age and overt diabetes by 9 wk.
The decline in beta-cell mass in Foxm1(Deltapanc) animals is due to a dramatic
decrease in postnatal beta-cell replication and a corresponding increase in
nuclear localization of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p27(Kip1), a known
target of FoxM1 inhibition. We conclude that Foxm1 is essential to maintain
normal beta-cell mass and regulate postnatal beta-cell turnover. These results
suggest that mechanisms regulating embryonic beta-cell proliferation differ from 
those used postnatally to maintain the differentiated cell population.

PMID: 16556734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. FEBS Lett. 2006 Mar 20;580(7):1716-22. Epub 2006 Feb 20.

Regulation of the transcription factor FOXM1c by Cyclin E/CDK2.

Lüscher-Firzlaff JM(1), Lilischkis R, Lüscher B.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Institut für Biochemie,
Universitätsklinikum der RWTH, Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52057 Aachen, Germany.

The FOXM1 forkhead proteins, originally identified as M-phase phosphoproteins,
are proliferation-associated transcriptional regulators involved in cell cycle
progression, genetic stability and tumorigenesis. Here we demonstrate that
Cyclin-dependent kinases regulate the transcriptional activity of FOXM1c. This is
independent of an N-terminal negative regulatory domain and of the forkhead DNA
binding domain. Instead we mapped the responsive sites in the transactivation
domain. A combination of three phosphorylation sites mediates the Cyclin E and
Cyclin A/CDK2 effects. Our findings provide evidence for a novel Cyclin E/CDK2
substrate that functions in cell cycle control.

PMID: 16504183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 15;66(4):2153-61.

The Forkhead Box m1 transcription factor stimulates the proliferation of tumor
cells during development of lung cancer.

Kim IM(1), Ackerson T, Ramakrishna S, Tretiakova M, Wang IC, Kalin TV, Major ML, 
Gusarova GA, Yoder HM, Costa RH, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

The proliferation-specific Forkhead Box m1 (Foxm1 or Foxm1b) transcription factor
(previously called HFH-11B, Trident, Win, or MPP2) regulates expression of cell
cycle genes essential for progression into DNA replication and mitosis.
Expression of Foxm1 is found in a variety of distinct human cancers including
hepatocellular carcinomas, intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas, basal cell
carcinomas, ductal breast carcinomas, and anaplastic astrocytomas and
glioblastomas. In this study, we show that human Foxm1 protein is abundantly
expressed in highly proliferative human non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) as
well as in mouse lung tumors induced by urethane. To determine the role of Foxm1 
during the development of mouse lung tumors, we used IFN-inducible Mx-Cre
recombinase transgene to delete mouse Foxm1 fl/fl-targeted allele before inducing
lung tumors with urethane. We show that Mx-Cre Foxm1-/- mice exhibit diminished
proliferation of lung tumor cells causing a significant reduction in number and
size of lung adenomas. Transient transfection experiments with A549 lung
adenocarcinoma cells show that depletion of Foxm1 levels by short interfering RNA
caused diminished DNA replication and mitosis and reduced anchorage-independent
growth of cell colonies on soft agar. Foxm1-depleted A549 cells exhibit reduced
expression of cell cycle-promoting cyclin A2 and cyclin B1 genes. These data show
that Foxm1 stimulates the proliferation of tumor cells during progression of
NSCLC.

PMID: 16489016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 1;66(3):1712-20.

Increased levels of the FoxM1 transcription factor accelerate development and
progression of prostate carcinomas in both TRAMP and LADY transgenic mice.

Kalin TV(1), Wang IC, Ackerson TJ, Major ML, Detrisac CJ, Kalinichenko VV,
Lyubimov A, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics and Toxicology Research
Laboratory, Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, 900 South Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The proliferation-specific Forkhead Box M1 (FoxM1 or FoxM1b) transcription factor
is overexpressed in a number of aggressive human carcinomas. Mouse hepatocytes
deficient in FoxM1 fail to proliferate and are highly resistant to developing
carcinogen-induced liver tumors. We previously developed a transgenic (TG) mouse 
line in which the ubiquitous Rosa26 promoter was used to drive expression of the 
human FoxM1b cDNA transgene in all mouse cell types. To investigate the role of
FoxM1b in prostate cancer progression, we bred Rosa26-FoxM1b mice with both TRAMP
and LADY TG mouse models of prostate cancer. We show that increased expression of
FoxM1b accelerated development, proliferation, and growth of prostatic tumors in 
both TRAMP and LADY double TG mice. Furthermore, development of prostate
carcinomas in TRAMP/Rosa26-FoxM1b double TG mice required high levels of FoxM1
protein to overcome sustained expression of the alternative reading frame tumor
suppressor, a potent inhibitor of FoxM1 transcriptional activity. Depletion of
FoxM1 levels in prostate cancer cell lines PC-3, LNCaP, or DU-145 by small
interfering RNA transfection caused significant reduction in proliferation and
anchorage-independent growth on soft agar. This phenotype was associated with
increased nuclear levels of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor protein
p27(Kip1) and diminished expression of S-phase promoting cyclin A2 and M-phase
promoting cyclin B1 proteins. Finally, we show that elevated levels of FoxM1
protein correlate with high proliferation rates in human prostate
adenocarcinomas. Our results suggest that the FoxM1 transcription factor
regulates development and proliferation of prostate tumors, and that FoxM1 is a
novel target for prostate cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC1363687
PMID: 16452231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Sep 28;85(37):2623-8.

[Identification of stage Ib specific related genes in lung squamous cell cancer
by oligonucleotide array].

[Article in Chinese]

Li A(1), Yan WS, Liang QW, Liu JH, Wang JX, Zhao S, Fang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Institute, Cancer Center, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510060,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish gene expression profile of stage Ib and IIIa primary lung
squamous cell cancer (SCC) within whole genome and identify genes specifically
expressed in stage Ib of SCC.
METHODS: Total RNA was extracted from the normal, stage Ib and IIIa lung SCC
tissue. cRNA probes prepared from total RNA were hybridized with pretreatment
oligonucleotide chip containing 22215 genes. The resultant data were treated with
MSV 5.0 software and looked up on the affymetrix website. RT-PCR examination were
used to validated the results from chip analysis.
RESULTS: Comparing with the normal lung, difference genes expressed in Ib SCC are
totally 1764, among which 571 were upregulated and 1193 were downregulated, and
in stage IIIa, they are 554, 128 and 426 genes respectively. Genes specifically
expressed in stage Ib were totally 1329, including 482 upregulation genes and 847
downregulation genes, which were classified into different category which
included 480 metabolism related genes, 227 signal transduction genes, 136 cell
proliferation genes, 136 immune related genes, 94 cell adhere genes, 88
transcription regulation genes, 86 cell cycle genes, 73 cytoskeleton genes, 45
differentiation genes, 42 apoptosis and 31 extracellular matrix genes. RT-PCR
examination of FOXM1 and TNXB genes was consistent with the analysis of gene
chip.
CONCLUSION: Stage Ib and IIIa Gene expression profile of primary SCC within the
whole genome were set up and genes specifically expressed in stage Ib of SCC were
identified, which lay a foundation for further research on carcinogenesis
mechanism and identifying new markers of early diagnosis.

PMID: 16321323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Dec;25(24):10875-94.

Forkhead box M1 regulates the transcriptional network of genes essential for
mitotic progression and genes encoding the SCF (Skp2-Cks1) ubiquitin ligase.

Wang IC(1), Chen YJ, Hughes D, Petrovic V, Major ML, Park HJ, Tan Y, Ackerson T, 
Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, 60607-7170, USA.

The Forkhead box m1 (Foxm1) gene is critical for G(1)/S transition and essential 
for mitotic progression. However, the transcriptional mechanisms downstream of
FoxM1 that control these cell cycle events remain to be determined. Here, we show
that both early-passage Foxm1(-)(/)(-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and
human osteosarcoma U2OS cells depleted of FoxM1 protein by small interfering RNA 
fail to grow in culture due to a mitotic block and accumulate nuclear levels of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor (CDKI) proteins p21(Cip1) and p27(Kip1). Using 
quantitative chromatin immunoprecipitation and expression assays, we show that
FoxM1 is essential for transcription of the mitotic regulatory genes Cdc25B,
Aurora B kinase, survivin, centromere protein A (CENPA), and CENPB. We also
identify the mechanism by which FoxM1 deficiency causes elevated nuclear levels
of the CDKI proteins p21(Cip1) and p27(Kip1). We provide evidence that FoxM1 is
essential for transcription of Skp2 and Cks1, which are specificity subunits of
the Skp1-Cullin 1-F-box (SCF) ubiquitin ligase complex that targets these CDKI
proteins for degradation during the G(1)/S transition. Moreover, early-passage
Foxm1(-)(/)(-) MEFs display premature senescence as evidenced by high expression 
of the senescence-associated beta-galactosidase, p19(ARF), and p16(INK4A)
proteins. Taken together, these results demonstrate that FoxM1 regulates
transcription of cell cycle genes critical for progression into S-phase and
mitosis.

PMCID: PMC1316960
PMID: 16314512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Cancer Biol Ther. 2005 Oct;4(10):1050-4. Epub 2005 Oct 18.

Hedgehog signaling pathway and gastric cancer.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M & M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo, Japan.

Hedgehog, WNT, FGF and BMP signaling pathways network together during
embryogenesis, tissue regeneration, and carcinogenesis. Aberrant activation of
Hedgehog signaling pathway leads to pathological consequences in a variety of
human tumors, such as gastric cancer and pancreatic cancer. Endoscopic mucosal
resection (EMR), endoscopic submucosal dissection (ESD), surgical gastrectomy and
chemotherapy are therapeutic options for gastric cancer; however, prognosis of
advanced gastric cancer patient is still poor. Here, Hedgehog signaling pathway
in human gastric cancer and its clinical applications will be reviewed. Human
SHH, IHH, DHH (Hedgehog homologs), HHAT (Hedgehog acyltransferase), HHIP
(Hedgehog-interacting protein), DISP1, DISP2, DISP3 (Dispatched homologs), PTCH1,
PTCH2 (Patched homologs), SMO (Smoothened homolog), KIF27, KIF7 (Costal-2
homologs), STK36 (Fused homolog), SUFU (SuFu homolog), DZIP1 (Iguana homolog),
GLI1, GLI2 and GLI3 (Cubitus interruptus homologs) are implicated in the Hedgehog
signaling. PTCH1, FOXM1 and CCND2 are direct transcriptional targets of Hedgehog 
signaling. Hedgehog signaling activation leads to cell proliferation through cell
cycle regulation. SHH regulates growth and differentiation within gastric mucosa 
through autocrine loop and FOXL1-mediated epithelial-mesenchymal interaction. SHH
is implicated in stem/progenitor cell restitution of damaged gastric mucosa
during chronic infection with Helicobacter pylori. SHH up-regulation, IHH
upregulation and HHIP down-regulation lead to aberrant activation of Hedgehog
signaling through PTCH1 to GLI1 in gastric cancer. Small molecule compounds
targeted to SMO (KADD-cyclopamine, SANT1-4, Cur61414) as well as humanized
anti-SHH antibodies are potent anti-cancer drugs for gastric cancer. Cocktail of 
Hedgehog inhibitors would be developed as novel therapeutics for gastric cancer. 
Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and copy number polymorphism (CNP) of
Hedgehog signaling genes would be utilized for genetic screening of gastric
cancer, while cDNA-PCR, microarray and ELISA detecting aberrant Hedgehog
signaling activation would be utilized for therapeutic optional choice. Genetic
screening and precise selection of therapeutic options would contribute to the
realization of personalized medicine.

PMID: 16258256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Cancer Res. 2005 Jun 15;65(12):5181-9.

Loss of the forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 causes centrosome amplification
and mitotic catastrophe.

Wonsey DR(1), Follettie MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Discovery Medicine, Wyeth Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA. Diane_Wonsey@dfci.harvard.edu

Expression of the forkhead transcription factor FoxM1 correlates with
proliferative status in a variety of normal and transformed cell types. Elevated 
expression of FoxM1 has been noted in both hepatocellular carcinoma and basal
cell carcinoma. However, whether FoxM1 expression is essential for the viability 
of transformed cells is unknown. We report here that the expression of FoxM1 is
significantly elevated in primary breast cancer. Microarray analysis shows that
FoxM1 regulates genes that are essential for faithful chromosome segregation and 
mitosis, including Nek2, KIF20A, and CENP-A. Loss of FoxM1 expression generates
mitotic spindle defects, delays cells in mitosis, and induces mitotic
catastrophe. Time-lapse microscopy indicates that depletion of FoxM1 generates
cells that enter mitosis but are unable to complete cell division, resulting in
either mitotic catastrophe or endoreduplication. These findings indicate that
FoxM1 depletion causes cell death due to mitotic catastrophe and that inhibiting 
FoxM1 represents a therapeutic strategy to target breast cancer.

PMID: 15958562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Jun;16(3):335-42.

A roller coaster ride with the mitotic cyclins.

Fung TK(1), Poon RY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong.

Cyclins are discovered as proteins that accumulate progressively through
interphase and disappear abruptly at mitosis during each cell cycle. In mammalian
cells, cyclin A accumulates from late G1 phase and is destroyed before metaphase,
and cyclin B is destroyed slightly later at anaphase. The abundance of the
mitotic cyclins is mainly regulated at the levels of transcription and
proteolysis. Transcription is stimulated and repressed by several transcription
factors, including B-MYB, E2F, FOXM1, and NF-Y. Elements in the promoter,
including CCRE/CDE and CHR, are in part responsible for the cell cycle
oscillation of transcription. Destruction of the mitotic cyclins is carried out
by the ubiquitin ligases APC/C(CDC20) and APC/C(CDH1). Central to our knowledge
is the understanding of how APC/C is turned on from anaphase to early G1 phase,
and turned off from late G1 till the spindle-assembly checkpoint is deactivated
in metaphase. Reciprocal actions of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) on APC/C, as 
well as on the SCF complexes ensure that the mitotic cyclins are destroyed only
at the proper time.

PMID: 15840442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 10;280(23):22278-86. Epub 2005 Apr 6.

The forkhead box m1 transcription factor is essential for embryonic development
of pulmonary vasculature.

Kim IM(1), Ramakrishna S, Gusarova GA, Yoder HM, Costa RH, Kalinichenko VV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Committee on Developmental Biology, The University 
of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Transgenic and gene knock-out studies demonstrated that the mouse Forkhead Box m1
(Foxm1 or Foxm1b) transcription factor (previously called HFH-11B, Trident, Win, 
or MPP2) is essential for hepatocyte entry into mitosis during liver development,
regeneration, and liver cancer. Targeted deletion of Foxm1 gene in mice produces 
an embryonic lethal phenotype due to severe abnormalities in the development of
liver and heart. In this study, we show for the first time that Foxm1(-/-) lungs 
exhibit severe hypertrophy of arteriolar smooth muscle cells and defects in the
formation of peripheral pulmonary capillaries as evidenced by significant
reduction in platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 staining of the distal
lung. Consistent with these findings, significant reduction in proliferation of
the embryonic Foxm1(-/-) lung mesenchyme was found, yet proliferation levels were
normal in the Foxm1-deficient epithelial cells. Severe abnormalities of the lung 
vasculature in Foxm1(-/-) embryos were associated with diminished expression of
the transforming growth factor beta receptor II, a disintegrin and
metalloprotease domain 17 (ADAM-17), vascular endothelial growth factor
receptors, Polo-like kinase 1, Aurora B kinase, laminin alpha4 (Lama4), and the
Forkhead Box f1 transcription factor. Cotransfection studies demonstrated that
Foxm1 stimulates transcription of the Lama4 promoter, and this stimulation
requires the Foxm1 binding sites located between -1174 and -1145 bp of the mouse 
Lama4 promoter. In summary, development of mouse lungs depends on the Foxm1
transcription factor, which regulates expression of genes essential for
mesenchyme proliferation, extracellular matrix remodeling, and vasculogenesis.

PMID: 15817462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(1):53-8.

The Fox gene family in Xenopus laevis:FoxI2, FoxM1 and FoxP1 in early
development.

Pohl BS(1), Rössner A, Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Abt. Biochemie, Universität Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

We here describe the sequences and expression patterns of three new Fox (fork
head box) transcription factors in Xenopus laevis embryos. xlFoxI2, another
member of subclass I, is maternally transcribed. Zygotic transcripts are first
detected during neurulation and become localised to the dorsal part of
epibranchial placodes. xlFoxM1 like xlFoxP1 are the first members of subclasses M
and P described in Xenopus. Both genes are maternally expressed and transcripts
are found during early cleavage stages in the animal blastomeres. xlFoxM1 is
strongly upregulated during neurula stages and transcripts are localised in the
neuroectoderm. Later, expression is found in the spinal cord, the
rhombencephalon, the retina and in the branchial arches. xlFoxP1 is activated
during organogenesis and is mainly expressed in the brain, head mesenchyme and in
the splanchnic layer of the lateral plate mesoderm.

PMID: 15744668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Neoplasia. 2004 Nov-Dec;6(6):744-50.

Identification and validation of commonly overexpressed genes in solid tumors by 
comparison of microarray data.

Pilarsky C(1), Wenzig M, Specht T, Saeger HD, Grützmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Visceral, Thoracic, and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital
Carl Gustav Carus, Dresden, Germany.

Cancers originating from epithelial cells are the most common malignancies. No
common expression profile of solid tumors compared to normal tissues has been
described so far. Therefore we were interested if genes differentially expressed 
in the majority of carcinomas could be identified using bioinformatic methods.
Complete data sets were downloaded for carcinomas of the prostate, breast, lung, 
ovary, colon, pancreas, stomach, bladder, liver, and kidney, and were subjected
to an expression analysis using SAM. In each experiment, a gene was scored as
differentially expressed if the q value was below 25%. Probe identifiers were
unified by comparing the respective probe sequences to the Unigene build 155
using BlastN. To obtain differentially expressed genes within the set of analyzed
carcinomas, the number of experiments in which differential expression was
observed was counted. Differential expression was assigned to genes if they were 
differentially expressed in at least eight experiments of tumors from different
origin. The identified candidate genes ADRM1, EBNA1BP2, FDPS, FOXM1, H2AFX,
HDAC3, IRAK1, and YY1 were subjected to further validation. Using this
comparative approach, 100 genes were identified as upregulated and 21 genes as
downregulated in the carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC1531678
PMID: 15720800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;7(2):108-10.

FoxM1 dances with mitosis.

Costa RH.

Comment on
    Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;7(2):126-36.

PMID: 15689977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Cell Sci. 2005 Feb 15;118(Pt 4):795-806. Epub 2005 Jan 25.

Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling stimulates the nuclear translocation and transactivating
activity of FOXM1c.

Ma RY(1), Tong TH, Cheung AM, Tsang AC, Leung WY, Yao KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, 
3/F Laboratory Block, The Faculty of Medicine Building, 21 Sassoon Road,
Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

The forkhead box (FOX) transcription factor FOXM1 is ubiquitously expressed in
proliferating cells. FOXM1 expression peaks at the G2/M phase of the cell cycle
and its functional deficiency in mice leads to defects in mitosis. To investigate
the role of FOXM1 in the cell cycle, we used synchronized hTERT-BJ1 fibroblasts
to examine the cell cycle-dependent regulation of FOXM1 function. We observed
that FOXM1 is localized mainly in the cytoplasm in cells at late-G1 and S phases.
Nuclear translocation occurs just before entry into the G2/M phase and is
associated with phosphorylation of FOXM1. Consistent with the dependency of FOXM1
function on mitogenic signals, nuclear translocation of FOXM1 requires activity
of the Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling pathway and is enhanced by the MAPK activator
aurintricarboxylic acid. This activating effect was suppressed by the MEK1/2
inhibitor U0126. In transient reporter assays, constitutively active MEK1
enhances the transactivating effect of FOXM1c, but not FOXM1b, on the cyclin B1
promoter. RT-PCR analysis confirmed that different cell lines and tissues
predominantly express the FOXM1c transcript. Mutations of two ERK1/2 target
sequences within FOXM1c completely abolish the MEK1 enhancing effect, suggesting 
a direct link between Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling and FOXM1 function. Importantly,
inhibition of Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling by U0126 led to suppression of FOXM1 target 
gene expression and delayed progression through G2/M, verifying the functional
relevance of FOXM1 activation by MEK1. In summary, we provide the first evidence 
that Raf/MEK/MAPK signaling exerts its G2/M regulatory effect via FOXM1c.

PMID: 15671063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 2005 Feb;15(1):42-8.

New and unexpected: forkhead meets ARF.

Costa RH(1), Kalinichenko VV, Major ML, Raychaudhuri P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA. robcosta@uic.edu

Recent genetic studies demonstrate that mice deficient in the forkhead box m1b
(Foxm1b) transcription factor are highly resistant to developing hepatocellular
carcinoma, which is among the most lethal cancers worldwide. In addition, the
Foxm1b transcription factor was identified as a novel inhibitory target of the
p19ARF tumor suppressor during early stages of liver tumorigenesis, but p19ARF
expression is extinguished in hepatic tumors that develop at later stages.
Structure-function studies demonstrate that amino acids 26-46 of the p19ARF
protein are sufficient to bind Foxm1b and reduce Foxm1b transcriptional activity 
by targeting it to the nucleolus. A peptide containing amino acids 24-46 of
p19ARF, which was modified to enhance cellular uptake, is an effective inhibitor 
of Foxm1b transcriptional activity and prevents Foxm1b stimulation of
anchorage-independent growth of cells on soft agar. Thus, the p19ARF peptide is
an effective inhibitor of Foxm1b and represents a potential therapy for
hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMID: 15661532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;7(2):126-36. Epub 2005 Jan 16.

FoxM1 is required for execution of the mitotic programme and chromosome
stability.

Laoukili J(1), Kooistra MR, Brás A, Kauw J, Kerkhoven RM, Morrison A, Clevers H, 
Medema RH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 
1066 CX Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;7(2):108-10.

Transcriptional induction of cell-cycle regulatory proteins ensures proper timing
of subsequent cell-cycle events. Here we show that the Forkhead transcription
factor FoxM1 regulates expression of many G2-specific genes and is essential for 
chromosome stability. Loss of FoxM1 leads to pleiotropic cell-cycle defects,
including a delay in G2, chromosome mis-segregation and frequent failure of
cytokinesis. We show that transcriptional activation of cyclin B by FoxM1 is
essential for timely mitotic entry, whereas CENP-F, another direct target of
FoxM1 identified here, is essential for precise functioning of the mitotic
spindle checkpoint. Thus, our data uncover a transcriptional cluster regulated by
FoxM1 that is essential for proper mitotic progression.

PMID: 15654331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Int J Oncol. 2005 Feb;26(2):545-9.

Identification and characterization of rat Desert hedgehog and Indian hedgehog
genes in silico.

Katoh Y(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M and M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

Sonic hedgehog (SHH), Desert hedgehog (DHH) and Indian hedgehog (IHH) bind to
Patched family receptors (PTCH1 and PTCH2) to transduce signals to GLI1, GLI2 and
GLI3. GLI family transcription factors then activate transcription of Hedgehog
target genes, such as FOXE1 and FOXM1 encoding Forkhead-box transcription
factors. Hedgehog signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in a variety of human
tumors, such as gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, colorectal cancer, breast
cancer, prostate cancer, basal cell carcinoma and brain tumors. Rat orthologs for
human DHH and IHH remain to be identified. Here, we identified and characterized 
rat Dhh and Ihh genes by using bioinformatics. Rat Dhh complete coding sequence
(CDS) was determined by assembling nucleotide positions 426397-426963,
429715-429976 and 430244-430898 of the AC114446.3 genome sequence. Rat Ihh
complete CDS was determined by assembling nucleotide positions 63433-64033,
66432-66693 and 68242-69169 of AC095777.6 genome sequence. Rat Dhh mRNA was
expressed in prostate, duodenum and dorsal root ganglia, while rat Ihh mRNA was
expressed in cartilage. Rat Dhh showed 99.7% total-amino-acid identity with mouse
Dhh, and 96.5% total-amino-acid identity with human DHH. Rat Ihh and human IHH
were shorter than mouse Ihh by 38 amino acids. Rat Ihh showed 97.6%
total-amino-acid identity with mouse Ihh and 94.4% total-amino-acid identity with
human IHH. Hedgehog family proteins consist of signal peptide, Hedgehog ligand
peptide and C-terminal peptide. Hedgehog ligand peptides derived from mammalian
Hedgehog family proteins were conserved well, while C-terminal peptides were
relatively divergent. The HPLGMXXXXS motif in the C-terminus was conserved in Shh
orthologs and Ihh orthologs, but not in Dhh orthologs.

PMID: 15645142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mech Ageing Dev. 2005 Jan;126(1):59-69.

Profiling molecular targets of TGF-beta1 in prostate fibroblast-to-myofibroblast 
transdifferentiation.

Untergasser G(1), Gander R, Lilg C, Lepperdinger G, Plas E, Berger P.

Author information: 
(1)Austrian Academy of Sciences, Institute for Biomedical Aging Research, Rennweg
10, Innsbruck A-6020, Austria.

The development of age-related proliferative disorders of the prostate gland is
supported by transdifferentiation and cellular senescence processes in the
stroma. Both processes are involved in remodeling of stromal tissue, as observed 
in benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH), and in "reactive stroma" adjacent to
prostate cancer (PCa). It has been assumed that TGF-beta1 plays a key role in the
aging prostate by inducing premature senescence and favoring myofibroblast
differentiation. Therefore, we evaluated the stromal cell phenotypes of human
primary adult prostatic fibroblasts (n=3) and the molecular and cellular
mechanisms of growth arrest after treatment with TGF-beta1 and of in vitro
cellular senescence. Microarray analysis, quantitative PCR, immunofluorescence
and western blot revealed that cellular senescence and transdifferentiation of
fibroblasts have distinct underlying mechanisms, pathways and gene and protein
expression profiles in human PrSCs. In clear contrast to senescent cells,
TGF-beta1-treated cells morphologically transdifferentiated into myofibroblasts
with dense cytoskeletal fibers and increased expression of smooth muscle cell
alpha-actin, calponin and tenascin. TGF-beta1 induced neither expression of
senescence-associated markers nor genes involved in terminal growth arrest, such 
as senescence-associated beta-galactosidase and cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk)
inhibitors p16(Ink4A) and p21(Cip1) but increased p15(Ink4B) protein expression. 
Differentiation inhibitor (Id-1) protein level down-regulation was observed under
both conditions. Genes specifically up-regulated by transdifferentiation but not 
by cellular senescence of PrSCs were metalloproteinase 1 tissue inhibitor
(Timp1), transgelin (Tagln), gamma 2 actin (Actg2), plasminogen activator
inhibitor 1 (Serpinel), insulin-like growth factor binding protein 3 (Igfbp3),
parathyroid hormone-like hormone (Pthlp), Tgfb-1, four and a half LIM domains 2
(Fhl-2), hydrogen peroxide-inducible clone 5 (Hic5) and cartilage oligomeric
matrix protein (Comp). Other genes, such as Cdc28 protein kinase 1 (Cks1b), v-myb
myeloblastosis viral oncogene homolog (MybL2), pyruvate kinase, muscle 2 (Pkm2)
and Forkhead box M1 (FoxM1), were down-regulated only upon TGF-beta1 treatment
but not by cellular senescence. Pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase 3 (Pdk3) and
connective tissue growth factor (Ctgf) were up-regulated and hyaluronan synthase 
3 (Has3) down-regulated under both conditions. Moreover, GageC1, a
prostate/testis-specific protein overexpressed in symptomatic BPH and PCa was
induced in transdifferentiated stromal cells. Genes such as GageC1 could be
promising targets for therapeutic inhibitors of stromal tissue remodeling and
progression of BPH and PCa.

PMID: 15610763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Methods Mol Biol. 2005;296:247-62.

Forkhead (FOX) transcription factors and the cell cycle: measurement of DNA
binding by FoxO and FoxM transcription factors.

Bicknell KA(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Reading, Reading, UK.

Certain forkhead (FOX) transcription factors have been shown to play an intrinsic
role in controlling cell cycle progression. In particular, the FoxO subclass has 
been shown to regulate cell cycle entry and exit, whereas the expression and
activity of FoxM1 is important for the correct coupling of DNA synthesis to
mitosis. In this chapter, I describe a method for measuring FoxO and FoxM1
transcription factor DNA binding in nuclear extracts from mammalian cells.

PMID: 15576937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Dev Biol. 2004 Dec 1;276(1):74-88.

The mouse Forkhead Box m1 transcription factor is essential for hepatoblast
mitosis and development of intrahepatic bile ducts and vessels during liver
morphogenesis.

Krupczak-Hollis K(1), Wang X, Kalinichenko VV, Gusarova GA, Wang IC, Dennewitz
MB, Yoder HM, Kiyokawa H, Kaestner KH, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

Conditional deletion of the mouse Forkhead Box (Fox) m1b targeted allele in adult
hepatocytes (Foxm1, previously called HFH-11B, Trident, Win, or MPP2)
demonstrated that the Foxm1b transcription factor is essential for hepatocyte
mitosis during liver regeneration. To determine the role of Foxm1b in liver
development, we have generated Foxm1b -/- mice that deleted the Foxm1b exons
encoding the winged helix DNA binding and transcriptional activation domains.
Here, we show that all of the Foxm1b -/- embryos died in utero by 18.5 days
postcoitum (dpc). Embryonic Foxm1b -/- livers displayed a 75% reduction in the
number of hepatoblasts, resulting from diminished DNA replication and a failure
to enter mitosis causing a polyploid phenotype. Reduced hepatoblast mitosis was
associated with decreased protein levels of the Polo-like kinase 1 and Aurora B
kinase, which phosphorylate regulatory proteins essential for orchestrating
mitosis and cytokinesis. Diminished proliferation of Foxm1b -/- hepatoblasts
contributed to abnormal liver development with significant reduction in the
number of large hepatic veins compared to embryonic wild-type (WT) liver.
Furthermore, embryonic Foxm1b -/- livers did not develop intrahepatic bile ducts,
and these presumptive biliary hepatoblasts failed to express either biliary
cytokeratins or nuclear levels of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta. These results 
suggest that Foxm1b is critical for hepatoblast precursor cells to differentiate 
toward biliary epithelial cell lineage. Finally, we used a hepatoblast-specific
Cre recombinase transgene to mediate deletion of the Foxm1b fl/fl allele in the
developing liver, and these embryos died in utero and exhibited diminished
hepatoblast proliferation with similar abnormalities in liver morphogenesis,
suggesting that the defect in liver development contributed to embryonic
lethality.

PMID: 15531365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Hepatology. 2004 Oct;40(4):981-8.

Aging does not reduce the hepatocyte proliferative response of mice to the
primary mitogen TCPOBOP.

Ledda-Columbano GM(1), Pibiri M, Cossu C, Molotzu F, Locker J, Columbano A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology and the Oncology and Molecular Pathology Unit,
University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.

It has been shown that the magnitude of DNA synthesis and the time at which
maximal DNA synthesis occurs after two-thirds partial hepatectomy (PH) is greatly
reduced in the liver of aged rodents compared to young animals. This reduction
could represent an intrinsic defect in proliferation or a more specialized change
in the response to PH. We therefore evaluated the proliferative capacity of
hepatocytes in aged animals, following treatment with primary liver mitogens. We 
show that treatment of 12-month-old CD-1 mice with the hepatomitogen
1,4-bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)]benzene (TCPOBOP) caused an increase in
hepatocyte proliferation similar to that seen in young (8-week-old) mice. The
labeling index was 82% in the livers of aged mice versus 76% in young animals.
Histological observation demonstrated that the number of hepatocytes entering
mitoses was similar in both groups; the mitotic indices were 2.5 per thousand and
2.7 per thousand, respectively. Additional experiments showed that the timing of 
DNA synthesis and M phase were nearly identical in both aged and young mice.
Stimulation of hepatocyte DNA synthesis was associated with increased expression 
of several cell cycle-associated proteins (cyclin D1, cyclin A, cyclin B1, E2F,
pRb, and p107); all were comparable in aged mice and young mice. TCPOBOP
treatment also increased expression of the Forkhead Box transcription factor m1b 
(Foxm1b) to a similar degree in both groups. In conclusion, hepatocytes retain
their proliferative capacity in old age despite impaired liver regeneration.
These findings suggest that therapeutic use of mitogens would alleviate the
reduction in hepatocyte proliferation observed in the elderly.

PMID: 15382178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Cell Biochem. 2004 Oct 15;93(3):563-78.

Temporal expression changes during differentiation of neural stem cells derived
from mouse embryonic stem cell.

Ahn JI(1), Lee KH, Shin DM, Shim JW, Kim CM, Kim H, Lee SH, Lee YS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Hanyang University, Seoul
133-791, South Korea.

Temporal analysis in gene expression during differentiation of neural stem cells 
(NSCs) was performed by using in-house microarrays composed of 10,368 genes. The 
changes in mRNA level were measured during differentiation day 1, 2, 3, 6, 12,
and 15. Out of 10,368 genes analyzed, 259 genes were up-regulated or
down-regulated by 2-fold or more at least at one time-point during
differentiation, and were classified into six clusters based on their expression 
patterns by K-means clustering. Clusters characterized by gradual increase have
large numbers of genes involved in transport and cell adhesion; those which
showed gradual decrease have much of genes in nucleic acid metabolism, cell
cycle, transcription factor, and RNA processing. In situ hybridization (ISH)
validated microarray data and it also showed that Fox M1, cyclin D2, and CDK4
were highly expressed in CNS germinal zones and ectonucleotide
pyrophosphatase/phosphodiesterase 2 (Enpp2) was highly expressed in choroid
plexus where stem/progenitor cells are possibly located. Together, this
clustering analysis of expression patterns of functionally classified genes may
give insight into understanding of CNS development and mechanisms of NSCs
proliferation and differentiation.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15378605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Genes Dev. 2004 Apr 1;18(7):830-50.

Foxm1b transcription factor is essential for development of hepatocellular
carcinomas and is negatively regulated by the p19ARF tumor suppressor.

Kalinichenko VV(1), Major ML, Wang X, Petrovic V, Kuechle J, Yoder HM, Dennewitz 
MB, Shin B, Datta A, Raychaudhuri P, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a leading cause of cancer-related deaths
worldwide. Here, we provide evidence that the Forkhead Box (Fox) m1b (Foxm1b or
Foxm1) transcription factor is essential for the development of HCC.
Conditionally deleted Foxm1b mouse hepatocytes fail to proliferate and are highly
resistant to developing HCC in response to a Diethylnitrosamine
(DEN)/Phenobarbital (PB) liver tumor-induction protocol. The mechanism of
resistance to HCC development is associated with nuclear accumulation of the cell
cycle inhibitor p27(Kip1) protein and reduced expression of the Cdk1-activator
Cdc25B phosphatase. We showed that the Foxm1b transcription factor is a novel
inhibitory target of the p19(ARF) tumor suppressor. Furthermore, we demonstrated 
that conditional overexpression of Foxm1b protein in osteosarcoma U2OS cells
greatly enhances anchorage-independent growth of cell colonies on soft agar. A
p19(ARF) 26-44 peptide containing nine D-Arg to enhance cellular uptake of the
peptide was sufficient to significantly reduce both Foxm1b transcriptional
activity and Foxm1b-induced growth of U2OS cell colonies on soft agar. These
results suggest that this (D-Arg)(9)-p19(ARF) 26-44 peptide is a potential
therapeutic inhibitor of Foxm1b function during cellular transformation. Our
studies demonstrate that the Foxm1b transcription factor is required for
proliferative expansion during tumor progression and constitutes a potential new 
target for therapy of human HCC tumors.

PMCID: PMC387422
PMID: 15082532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biotechnol Bioeng. 2004 Apr 20;86(2):174-87.

New-generation multicistronic expression platform: pTRIDENT vectors containing
size-optimized IRES elements enable homing endonuclease-based cistron swapping
into lentiviral expression vectors.

Fux C(1), Langer D, Kelm JM, Weber W, Fussenegger M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, ETH
Hoenggerberg, HPT D74, CH-8093 Zurich, Switzerland.

Erratum in
    Biotechnol Bioeng. 2004 Jun 5;86(5):600.

Capitalizing on a proven multicistronic expression vector platform we have
designed novel pTRIDENT vectors which (1). enable coordinated expression of three
desired transgenes, (2). are size-optimized, (3). take advantage of small highly 
efficient internal ribosome entry sites of the GTX or Rbm3 type, (4). harbor
various sites specific for homing endonucleases facilitating
promoter/multicistronic expression unit/polyadenylation site swapping as well as 
(5). straightforward integration into human HIV-l-based lentiviral expression
vectors tailored to contain compatible homing endonucleases. Multicistronic
expression profiles of novel pTRIDENT vectors engineered for different
tricistronic expression configurations encoding human low-molecular-weight
urokinase-type plasminogen activator (u-PA(LMW)) or Bacillus
stearothermophilus-derived alpha-amylase (SAMY), human vascular endothelial
growth factor (hVEGF), and human placental secreted alkaline phosphatase (SEAP)
have been quantified in Chinese hamster ovary cells (CHO-K1), mouse fibroblasts
(NIH/3T3), and/or human fibrosarcoma (HT-1080) cells. In addition, a
pTRIDENT-derived SAMY-VEGF-SEAP expression cassette transferred into a compatible
lentiviral expression vector enabled simultaneous high-level transgene expression
following transduction of transgenic lentiviral particles into primary human
chondrocytes.

Copyright 2004 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 15052637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Apr;24(7):2649-61.

Forkhead box M1B transcriptional activity requires binding of Cdk-cyclin
complexes for phosphorylation-dependent recruitment of p300/CBP coactivators.

Major ML(1), Lepe R, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

Previous liver regeneration studies demonstrated that the mouse forkhead box M1B 
(FoxM1B) transcription factor regulates hepatocyte proliferation through
expression of cell cycle genes that stimulate cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (Cdk2)
and Cdk1 activity. In this study, we demonstrated that disruption of the FoxM1B
Cdk1/2 phosphorylation site at Thr residue 596 significantly reduced both FoxM1B 
transcriptional activity and Cdk phosphorylation of the FoxM1B T596A mutant
protein in vivo. Retention of this FoxM1B 596 Cdk phosphorylation site was found 
to be essential for recruiting the histone acetyltransferase CREB binding protein
(CBP) to the FoxM1B transcriptional activation domain. Consistent with these
findings, dominant negative Cdk1 protein significantly reduced FoxM1B
transcriptional activity and inhibited FoxM1B recruitment of the CBP coactivator 
protein. Likewise, Cdc25B-mediated stimulation of Cdk activity together with
elevated levels of the CBP coactivator protein provided a 6.2-fold synergistic
increase in FoxM1B transcriptional activity. Furthermore, mutation of the FoxM1B 
Leu 641 residue within an LXL motif (residues 639 to 641) inhibited recruitment
of Cdk-cyclin complexes and caused significant reduction in both FoxM1B
transcriptional activity and in vivo Cdk phosphorylation of the FoxM1B Thr 596
residue. We demonstrated that FoxM1B transcriptional activity requires binding of
either S-phase or M-phase Cdk-cyclin complexes to mediate efficient Cdk
phosphorylation of the FoxM1B Thr 596 residue, which is essential for recruitment
of p300/CBP coactivator proteins.

PMCID: PMC371108
PMID: 15024056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Gene Expr. 2003;11(3-4):149-62.

Rapid hepatocyte nuclear translocation of the Forkhead Box M1B (FoxM1B)
transcription factor caused a transient increase in size of regenerating
transgenic hepatocytes.

Wang X(1), Bhattacharyya D, Dennewitz MB, Kalinichenko VV, Zhou Y, Lepe R, Costa 
RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, 900 South Ashland Ave, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

The Forkhead Box (Fox) proteins are an extensive family of transcription factors 
that shares homology in the winged helix DNA binding domain. Liver regeneration
studies with the -3 kb transthyretin (TTR) promoter-driven FoxM1B transgenic (TG)
mice demonstrated that premature hepatocyte nuclear localization of the FoxM1B
transgene protein at 16 h following partial hepatectomy (PHx) caused an 8-h
acceleration in the onset of hepatocyte DNA replication (S-phase) and mitosis by 
stimulating earlier expression of cell cycle genes. Whether the FoxM1B transgene 
protein participates in immediate early events during liver regeneration remains 
to be determined. Here, we found that the FoxM1B transgene protein translocated
to hepatocyte nuclei immediately following PHx, that its nuclear staining
persisted for the first 6 h after surgery, and that this translocation was
associated with an increase in size of regenerating TG hepatocytes. However,
regenerating TTR-FoxM1B liver did not exhibit altered expression of proteins that
have been implicated in mediating increased cell size, including
serum-and-gucocorticoid-inducible protein kinase (SGK), protein kinase-B/Akt, the
tumor suppresser gene PTEN (negative regulator of the PI3K/Akt pathway), c-Myc,
or peroxisome proliferation. Moreover, we demonstrated that hepatocyte nuclear
translocation of the FoxM1B transgene protein was rapidly induced during the
hepatic acute phase response, which occurs during the immediate early stages of
liver regeneration. Analysis of cDNA expression arrays identified a number of
genes such as immediate early transcription factors (ID-3, Stat3, Nur77), matrix 
metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9), and several glutathione S-transferase (GST) isoforms
and stress response genes, whose expression is elevated in regenerating
TTR-FoxM1B TG livers compared with regenerating wild-type (WT) liver. These liver
regeneration studies demonstrate that hepatocyte nuclear translocation of the
FoxM1B transgene protein was sustained for the first 6 h after PHx, and was
associated with transient hypertrophy of regenerating TG hepatocytes and
increased expression of genes that may enhance hepatocyte proliferation.

PMID: 14686788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Hepatology. 2003 Dec;38(6):1552-62.

Growth hormone stimulates proliferation of old-aged regenerating liver through
forkhead box m1b.

Krupczak-Hollis K(1), Wang X, Dennewitz MB, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at Chicago College of
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2003 Dec;38(6):1349-52.

The Forkhead Box (Fox) proteins are an extensive family of transcription factors 
that shares homology in the winged helix DNA-binding domain and the members of
which play essential roles in cellular proliferation, differentiation, and
longevity. Reduced cellular proliferation during aging is associated with a
progressive decline in both growth hormone (GH) secretion and Foxm1b expression. 
Liver regeneration studies with 12-month-old (old-aged) transgenic mice indicated
that increased hepatocyte expression of Foxm1b alone is sufficient to restore
hepatocyte proliferation to levels found in 2-month-old (young) regenerating
liver. GH therapy in older people has been shown to cause an increase in cellular
proliferation, but the transcription factors that mediated this stimulation in
proliferation remain uncharacterized. In this study, we showed that human GH
administration to old-aged Balb/c mice dramatically increased both expression of 
Foxm1b and regenerating hepatocyte proliferation. This increase in old-aged
regenerating hepatocyte proliferation was associated with elevated protein
expression of Cdc25A, Cdc25B, and cyclin B1, with reduced protein levels of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p27(Kip1) (p27). GH treatment also was found to
stimulate hepatocyte proliferation and expression of Foxm1b protein without
partial hepatectomy (PHx). Furthermore, GH treatment of young Foxm1b -/- mice
failed to restore regenerating hepatocyte DNA replication and mitosis caused by
Foxm1b deficiency. These genetic studies provided strong evidence that the
presence of Foxm1b is essential for GH to stimulate regenerating hepatocyte
proliferation. In conclusion, our old-aged liver regeneration studies show that
increased Foxm1b levels are essential for GH to stimulate hepatocyte
proliferation, thus providing a mechanism for GH action in the elderly.

PMID: 14647066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Hepatology. 2003 Dec;38(6):1349-52.

Making the liver young again.

Mackey S, Singh P, Darlington GJ.

Comment on
    Hepatology. 2003 Dec;38(6):1552-62.

PMID: 14647042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Hepatology. 2003 Dec;38(6):1331-47.

Transcription factors in liver development, differentiation, and regeneration.

Costa RH(1), Kalinichenko VV, Holterman AX, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA. Robcosta@uic.edu

PMID: 14647040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Oncogene. 2003 Sep 18;22(40):6266-76.

Sustained hepatic expression of FoxM1B in transgenic mice has minimal effects on 
hepatocellular carcinoma development but increases cell proliferation rates in
preneoplastic and early neoplastic lesions.

Kalinina OA(1), Kalinin SA, Polack EW, Mikaelian I, Panda S, Costa RH, Adami GR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Medicine and Diagnostic Sciences and the Center for
Molecular Biology of Oral Diseases, College of Dentistry, University of Illinois 
at Chicago, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Increased hepatic expression of the Forkhead transcription factor FoxM1B in adult
mice accelerates hepatocyte proliferation after partial hepatectomy, while in
hepatocytes in intact liver the transgenic (Tg) protein is inactive and has no
effect on proliferation. To investigate the influence of FoxM1B on liver tumor
formation, we examined the effect of sustained enrichment of FoxM1B in the
hepatocytes of mice treated with a diethylnitrosamine (DEN)/phenobarbital tumor
induction protocol. Tg enrichment of FoxM1B in hepatocytes did not increase the
proliferation rate in normal liver tissue even when the protein was localized to 
the nucleus. However, it did cause an increase in the proliferation rate and size
of preneoplastic and early neoplastic lesions, although having no effects on the 
total numbers of these lesions. As tumors progressed to hepatocellular
carcinomas, the additional Tg FoxM1B protein had no effect on cell proliferation,
and there was no increase in tumor burden compared to wild-type animals. This
suggests that the artificial enrichment of FoxM1B in the liver, which has been
suggested as a gene therapy protocol for liver dysfunction with aging, may not be
tumorigenic in that organ.

PMID: 13679865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Dev Biol. 2003 Sep 1;261(1):165-82.

Global analysis of gene expression in neural progenitors reveals specific
cell-cycle, signaling, and metabolic networks.

Karsten SL(1), Kudo LC, Jackson R, Sabatti C, Kornblum HI, Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, UCLA School of Medicine, 710 Westwood Plaza, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-1769, USA.

The genetic programs underlying neural stem cell (NSC) proliferation and
pluripotentiality have only been partially elucidated. We compared the gene
expression profile of proliferating neural stem cell cultures (NS) with cultures 
differentiated for 24 h (DC) to identify functionally coordinated alterations in 
gene expression associated with neural progenitor proliferation. The majority of 
differentially expressed genes (65%) were upregulated in NS relative to DC.
Microarray analysis of this in vitro system was followed by high throughput
screening in situ hybridization to identify genes enriched in the germinal
neuroepithelium, so as to distinguish those expressed in neural progenitors from 
those expressed in more differentiated cells in vivo. NS cultures were
characterized by the coordinate upregulation of genes involved in cell cycle
progression, DNA synthesis, and metabolism, not simply related to general
features of cell proliferation, since many of the genes identified were highly
enriched in the CNS ventricular zones and not widely expressed in other
proliferating tissues. Components of specific metabolic and signal transduction
pathways, and several transcription factors, including Sox3, FoxM1, and PTTG1,
were also enriched in neural progenitor cultures. We propose a putative network
of gene expression linking cell cycle control to cell fate pathways, providing a 
framework for further investigations of neural stem cell proliferation and
differentiation.

PMID: 12941627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Am J Pathol. 2003 Sep;163(3):1033-43.

Characterization of gene expression profiles associated with glioma progression
using oligonucleotide-based microarray analysis and real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction.

van den Boom J(1), Wolter M, Kuick R, Misek DE, Youkilis AS, Wechsler DS, Sommer 
C, Reifenberger G, Hanash SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Moorenstrasse 5,
D-40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.

Diffuse astrocytoma of World Health Organization (WHO) grade II has an inherent
tendency to spontaneously progress to anaplastic astrocytoma (WHO grade III)
and/or glioblastoma (WHO grade IV). The molecular basis of astrocytoma
progression is still poorly understood, in particular with respect to the
progression-associated changes at the mRNA level. Therefore, we compared the
transcriptional profile of approximately 6800 genes in primary WHO grade II
gliomas and corresponding recurrent high-grade (WHO grade III or IV) gliomas from
eight patients using oligonucleotide-based microarray analysis. We identified 66 
genes whose mRNA levels differed significantly (P < 0.01, > or =2-fold change)
between the primary and recurrent tumors. The microarray data were corroborated
by real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis of 12
selected genes, including 7 genes with increased expression and 5 genes with
reduced expression on progression. In addition, the expression of these 12 genes 
was determined in an independent series of 43 astrocytic gliomas (9 diffuse
astrocytomas, 10 anaplastic astrocytomas, 17 primary, and 7 secondary
glioblastomas). These analyses confirmed that the transcript levels of nine of
the selected genes (COL4A2, FOXM1, MGP, TOP2A, CENPF, IGFBP4, VEGFA, ADD3, and
CAMK2G) differed significantly in WHO grade II astrocytomas as compared to
anaplastic astrocytomas and/or glioblastomas. Thus, we identified and validated a
set of interesting candidate genes whose differential expression likely plays a
role in astrocytoma progression.

PMCID: PMC1868272
PMID: 12937144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 26;278(39):37888-94. Epub 2003 Jul 16.

Ubiquitous expression of the forkhead box M1B transgene accelerates proliferation
of distinct pulmonary cell types following lung injury.

Kalinichenko VV(1), Gusarova GA, Tan Y, Wang IC, Major ML, Wang X, Yoder HM,
Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at Chicago, College
of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60607-7170, USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):48506. Costal, RH [corrected to Costa, RH].

The delayed early transcription factor Forkhead Box M1B (FoxM1B) is expressed in 
proliferating cells, but its expression is extinguished in cells undergoing
terminal differentiation. Liver regeneration studies with genetically altered
mice that either prematurely expressed FoxM1B in hepatocytes or contained a
hepatocyte-specific deletion of the Foxm1b allele demonstrated that FoxM1B is
critical for regulating the expression of cell cycle genes required for
hepatocyte proliferation. Furthermore, preventing the decline in hepatocyte
FoxM1B levels during aging was sufficient to increase regenerating hepatocyte
proliferation and expression of cell cycle genes to levels found in young
regenerating mouse liver. Although these liver regeneration studies demonstrated 
that FoxM1B is required for hepatocyte proliferation, whether FoxM1B regulates
proliferation of cell types other than hepatocytes remains to be determined.
Here, we developed a new TG mouse line in which the -800-base pair Rosa26
promoter was used to drive expression of the FoxM1B transgene in all mouse
tissues and found that Rosa26-FoxM1B TG mice were healthy, displaying no
developmental defects. We used butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) lung injury to
demonstrate that premature expression of the FoxM1B transgene protein accelerated
proliferation of different lung cell types, including alveolar type II epithelial
cells, bronchial epithelial and smooth muscle cells, and endothelial cells of
pulmonary capillaries and arteries. This was associated with the earlier
expression of the cell cycle promoting cyclin A2, cyclin E, cyclin B1, cyclin F, 
and cyclin dependent kinase-1 (Cdk1) genes and diminished protein levels of Cdk
inhibitor p21Cip1. Taken together, these results suggest that increasing FoxM1B
levels is an effective means to stimulate cellular proliferation during aging and
in lung diseases such as emphysema.

PMID: 12867420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Hum Reprod. 2003 Jun;18(6):1185-93.

Immunocytochemical assessment of mitotic activity with an antibody to
phosphorylated histone H3 in the macaque and human endometrium.

Brenner RM(1), Slayden OD, Rodgers WH, Critchley HO, Carroll R, Nie XJ, Mah K.

Author information: 
(1)Oregon National Primate Research Center, 505 NW 185th Ave., Beaverton 97006,
USA. brennerr@ohsu.edu

BACKGROUND: Determination of the mitotic index in sections of endometrium stained
with haematoxylin and eosin (H&E) is difficult and time-consuming. We assessed
the value of two mitotic markers as immunocytochemical reagents for measuring
mitotic rates in endometrium.
METHODS: Mitotic protein monoclonal antibody 2 (MPM-2) and anti-phosphorylated
histone H3 (Phospho H3) were applied to paraffin sections of rhesus macaque and
human endometrium.
RESULTS: In estrogen-treated macaque endometrium the mean +/- SEM mitotic indices
were: H&E 1.5 +/- 0.25%, Phospho H3 antibody 1.02 +/- 0.23% and MPM-2 antibody
0.69 +/- 0.17%; these were not statistically significantly different, but the
Phospho H3 antibody gave a stronger and cleaner signal than the MPM-2 antibody.
Comparisons were made between a computer-determined Phospho H3 index, the
H&E-determined mitotic index and the Ki-67 index in samples of human endometrium 
across the cycle. All revealed that the highest proliferative rate occurred
during the follicular phase, but the Phospho H3 and the mitotic indices were more
highly correlated (R(2) = 0.89, P < 0.001) than the Ki-67 and mitotic indices
(R(2) = 0.74, P < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: The exceptionally high contrast staining and the excellent
correlation between the Phospho H3 and mitotic indices validates the specificity 
of the Phospho H3 antibody as a new tool for the assessment of endometrial
mitotic activity.

PMID: 12773444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Dec 24;99(26):16881-6. Epub 2002 Dec 13.

The Forkhead Box m1b transcription factor is essential for hepatocyte DNA
replication and mitosis during mouse liver regeneration.

Wang X(1), Kiyokawa H, Dennewitz MB, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois College of Medicine, 
900 South Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607, USA.

The Forkhead Box (Fox) proteins are an extensive family of transcription factors 
that shares homology in the winged helix DNA-binding domain and whose members
play essential roles in cellular proliferation, differentiation, transformation, 
longevity, and metabolic homeostasis. Liver regeneration studies with transgenic 
mice demonstrated that FoxM1B regulates the onset of hepatocyte DNA replication
and mitosis by stimulating expression of cell cycle genes. Here, we demonstrate
that albumin-promoter-driven Cre recombinase-mediated hepatocyte-specific
deletion of the Foxm1b Floxed (fl) targeted allele resulted in significant
reduction in hepatocyte DNA replication and inhibition of mitosis after partial
hepatectomy. Reduced DNA replication in regenerating Foxm1b(-/-) hepatocytes was 
associated with sustained increase in nuclear staining of the cyclin-dependent
kinase (Cdk) inhibitor p21(Cip1) (p21) protein between 24 and 40 h after partial 
hepatectomy. Furthermore, increased nuclear p21 levels and reduced expression of 
Cdc25A phosphatase coincided with decreases in Cdk2 activation and hepatocyte
progression into S-phase. Moreover, the significant reduction in hepatocyte
mitosis was associated with diminished mRNA levels and nuclear expression of
Cdc25B phosphatase and delayed accumulation of cyclin B1 protein, which is
required for Cdk1 activation and entry into mitosis. Cotransfection studies
demonstrate that FoxM1B protein directly activated transcription of the Cdc25B
promoter region. Our present study shows that the mammalian Foxm1b transcription 
factor regulates expression of cell cycle proteins essential for hepatocyte entry
into DNA replication and mitosis.

PMCID: PMC139238
PMID: 12482952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Biol Chem. 2002 Nov 15;277(46):44310-6. Epub 2002 Sep 6.

Increased hepatic Forkhead Box M1B (FoxM1B) levels in old-aged mice stimulated
liver regeneration through diminished p27Kip1 protein levels and increased Cdc25B
expression.

Wang X(1), Krupczak-Hollis K, Tan Y, Dennewitz MB, Adami GR, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at Chicago, College
of Medicine and Dentistry, 60607, USA.

Recent liver regeneration studies indicate that maintaining hepatic Forkhead Box 
M1B (FoxM1B) expression in 12-month-old (old-aged) Transthyretin-FoxM1B
transgenic mice increases hepatocyte proliferation and expression of cell cycle
regulatory genes. Because these transgenic CD-1 mice maintain FoxM1B levels
during the aging process, we conducted the current study to determine whether
adenovirus delivery of the FoxM1B gene (AdFoxM1B) is sufficient to stimulate
liver regeneration in old-aged Balb/c mice. Here we show that AdFoxM1B infection 
of old-aged mice caused a significant increase in FoxM1B expression, hepatocyte
DNA replication, and mitosis following partial hepatectomy. This stimulation in
hepatocyte S-phase progression was associated with diminished protein expression 
and perinuclear localization of cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibitor p27(Kip1)
(p27) protein following partial hepatectomy. In contrast, old-aged mice infected 
with control virus displayed high hepatocyte levels of p27 protein, which had
been localized to the nucleus prior to S-phase. Furthermore, we found that
restoring FoxM1B expression did not influence p27 mRNA levels, and this new
finding implicates FoxM1B in regulation of p27 protein levels. Likewise,
AdFoxM1B-infected regenerating livers displayed elevated S-phase levels of Cdk2
kinase activity compared with old-aged mice infected with control virus.
Furthermore, restoring FoxM1B expression in old-aged mice caused elevated levels 
of Cyclin B1, Cyclin B2, Cdc25B, Cdk1, and p55CDC mRNA as well as stimulating
Cdc25B nuclear localization during liver regeneration, all of which are required 
for mitosis. These studies indicated that an acute delivery of the FoxM1B gene in
old-aged mice is sufficient to re-establish proliferation of regenerating
hepatocytes, suggesting that FoxM1B can be used for therapeutic intervention to
alleviate the reduction in cellular proliferation observed in the elderly.

PMID: 12221098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Cancer Res. 2002 Aug 15;62(16):4773-80.

FOXM1 is a downstream target of Gli1 in basal cell carcinomas.

Teh MT(1), Wong ST, Neill GW, Ghali LR, Philpott MP, Quinn AG.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cutaneous Research, Barts & The London School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Queen Mary, University of London, London E1 2AT, United Kingdom.
m.t.teh@qmul.ac.uk

Forkhead box (FOX) proteins have been shown to play important roles in regulating
the expression of genes involved in cell growth, proliferation, differentiation, 
longevity, and transformation. The functional importance of this gene family in
normal human skin physiology and disease processes is not well understood.
Activation of Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signaling plays a key role in the development 
of basal cell carcinomas (BCCs) of the skin in humans. Recent studies have
established that some FOX genes are downstream targets of Shh signaling. We have 
investigated the role of FOX proteins in transducing Shh effects in human skin by
using degenerate PCR to identify FOX genes differentially expressed in BCCs. All 
three known FOXM1 isoforms (a, b, and c) were detected in human skin and cultured
keratinocytes, and the transcriptionally active FOXM1b isoform was found to be
up-regulated in BCCs. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR showed that the increase in
FOXM1 mRNA levels was specific for BCCs and not a reflection of increased cell
proliferation in that no up-regulation was seen in squamous cell carcinomas or
proliferating primary human keratinocyte cultures. Immunostaining studies showed 
intense nuclear and cytoplasmic staining throughout BCC tumor islands and not
confined to the periphery regions of the tumor where proliferating
Ki-67-immunopositive cells are predominantly localized. Expression of the Shh
target glioma transcription factor-1 (Gli1) in primary keratinocytes and other
cell lines caused a significant elevation of FOXM1 mRNA level and transcriptional
activity, indicating that FOXM1 is a downstream target of Gli1. Our data provide 
the first evidence that activation of Shh signaling via Gli1 is an important
determinant of FOXM1 expression in mammalian cells. Given the role of FOXM1 in
cell proliferation, the up-regulation of FOXM1 in BCCs may be one of the
mechanisms whereby Shh signaling exerts its mitogenic effect on basal
keratinocytes, leading to the development of this common human cancer.

PMID: 12183437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. FEBS Lett. 2001 Oct 19;507(1):59-66.

Over-expression of FoxM1 stimulates cyclin B1 expression.

Leung TW(1), Lin SS, Tsang AC, Tong CS, Ching JC, Leung WY, Gimlich R, Wong GG,
Yao KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong Kong,
China.

FoxM1 (previously named WIN, HFH-11 or Trident) is a Forkhead box (Fox)
transcription factor widely expressed in proliferating cells. Various findings,
including a recent analysis of FoxM1 knockout mice, suggest that FoxM1 is
required for normal S-M coupling during cell cycle progression. To study the
regulatory role of FoxM1 and its downstream regulatory targets, three stably
transfected HeLa lines that display doxycycline (dox)-inducible FoxM1 expression 
were established. Over-expression of FoxM1 by dox induction facilitates growth
recovery from serum starvation. Quantitation of cyclin B1 and D1 levels using
flow cytometric, Western and Northern analyses reveals that elevated FoxM1 levels
lead to stimulation of cyclin B1 but not cyclin D1 expression. Transient reporter
assays in the dox-inducible lines and upon co-transfection with a constitutive
FoxM1 expression plasmid suggest that FoxM1 can activate the cyclin B1 promoter.

PMID: 11682060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Sep 25;98(20):11468-73.

Increased levels of forkhead box M1B transcription factor in transgenic mouse
hepatocytes prevent age-related proliferation defects in regenerating liver.

Wang X(1), Quail E, Hung NJ, Tan Y, Ye H, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois, College of Medicine,
900 South Ashland Avenue, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

The forkhead box (Fox) family of transcription factors share homology in the
winged helix/forkhead DNA-binding domain and play important roles in regulating
cellular proliferation, differentiation, longevity, and cellular transformation. 
Forkhead box M1B (FoxM1B) is a ubiquitously expressed member of the Fox
transcription factor family whose expression is restricted to proliferating cells
and that mediates hepatocyte entry into DNA synthesis and mitosis during liver
regeneration. Recent cDNA microarray studies indicated that age-related defects
in cellular proliferation are associated with diminished expression of the FoxM1B
transcription factor. Here, we show that increased levels of FoxM1B in
regenerating liver of old transgenic mice restore the sharp peaks in hepatocyte
DNA replication and mitosis that are the hallmarks of young regenerating mouse
liver. Restoration of the young regenerating liver phenotype is associated with
increased expression of numerous cell cycle regulatory genes that include cyclin 
D1, cyclin A2, cyclin F, cyclin B1, cyclin B2, Cdc25B, and p55cdc. Cotransfection
assays in the human hepatoma HepG2 cell line demonstrated that FoxM1B protein
stimulated expression of both the cyclin B1 and cyclin D1 promoters, suggesting
that these cyclin genes are a direct FoxM1B transcriptional target. These results
suggest that FoxM1B controls the transcriptional network of genes that are
essential for cell division and exit from mitosis. Our results indicate that
reduced expression of the FoxM1B transcription factor contributes to the decline 
in cellular proliferation observed in the aging process.

PMCID: PMC58753
PMID: 11572993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Hepatology. 2001 Jun;33(6):1404-14.

Earlier expression of the transcription factor HFH-11B diminishes induction of
p21(CIP1/WAF1) levels and accelerates mouse hepatocyte entry into S-phase
following carbon tetrachloride liver injury.

Wang X(1), Hung NJ, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Medicine, Department of
Molecular Genetics, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.

Partial hepatectomy (PH) or toxic liver injury induces the proliferation of
terminally differentiated hepatic cells to regenerate the original size of the
adult liver. Previous PH liver regeneration studies showed that premature
transgenic expression of the Forkhead Box M1b (FoxM1b, HFH-11B) transcription
factor accelerated hepatocyte entry into DNA replication (S-phase). In this
study, we used carbon tetrachloride (CCl(4)) liver injury to induce a different
type of mouse liver regeneration and show that premature hepatic HFH-11B levels
also accelerate the onset of hepatocyte S-phase in this injury model. Unlike PH
liver regeneration, earlier hepatocyte proliferation after CCl(4) liver injury is
correlated with diminished transgenic hepatic levels of p21(CIP1/WAF1) at the
G1/S transition of the cell cycle. Differential hybridization of cDNA arrays and 
RNase protection studies determined that CCl(4) regenerating liver of transgenic 
mice displayed early stimulated expression of the S-phase promoting cyclin D1 and
cyclin E and sustained levels of Cdc25a phosphatase genes. Compared with previous
PH liver regeneration studies, our data suggest that premature expression of
HFH-11B activates distinct S-phase promotion pathways in the CCl(4) liver injury 
model. Although proliferating transgenic hepatocytes induced by either PH or
CCl(4) liver injury displayed early expression of identical M-phase cyclin genes 
(cyclin B1, B2, A2, and F), only CCl(4) regenerating transgenic liver exhibited
earlier expression of the M-phase promoting Cdc25b. These studies suggest that
CCl(4) injury of transgenic liver not only uses the same mechanisms as PH to
mediate accelerated hepatocyte entry into mitosis, but also promotes M-phase
entry by stimulating Cdc25b expression.

PMID: 11391529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2001 Apr;280(4):L695-704.

Differential expression of forkhead box transcription factors following butylated
hydroxytoluene lung injury.

Kalinichenko VV(1), Lim L, Shin B, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at Chicago, College
of Medicine, 900 S. Ashland Ave., Rm. 2220 MBRB, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA.
vkalin@uic.edu

The forkhead box (Fox) proteins are a growing family of transcription factors
that have important roles in cellular proliferation and differentiation and in
organ morphogenesis. The Fox family members hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3beta
(Foxa2) and HNF-3/forkhead homolog (HFH)-8 (FREAC-1, Foxf1) are expressed in
adult pulmonary epithelial and mesenchymal cells, respectively, but these cells
display only low expression levels of the proliferation-specific HFH-11B gene
(Trident, Foxm1b). The regulation of these Fox transcription factors in response 
to acute lung injury, however, has yet to be determined. We report here on the
use of butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT)-mediated lung injury to demonstrate that
HFH-11 protein and RNA levels were markedly increased throughout the period of
lung repair. The maximum levels of HFH-11 were observed by day 2 following BHT
injury when both bronchiolar and alveolar epithelial cells were undergoing
extensive proliferation. Although BHT lung injury did not alter epithelial cell
expression of HNF-3beta, a 65% reduction in HFH-8 mRNA levels was observed during
the period of mesenchymal cell proliferation. HFH-8-expressing cells were
colocalized with platelet endothelial cell adhesion molecule-1-positive alveolar 
endothelial cells and with alpha-smooth muscle actin-positive peribronchiolar
smooth muscle cells.

PMID: 11238010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Ryoikibetsu Shokogun Shirizu. 2000;(32):318-20.

[Hutchinson-Gilford progeria syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Fukuo K(1), Ogihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Medical School.

PMID: 11212729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Endocrinology. 2000 Aug;141(8):2758-66.

Role of winged helix transcription factor (WIN) in the regulation of Sertoli cell
differentiated functions: WIN acts as an early event gene for
follicle-stimulating hormone.

Chaudhary J(1), Mosher R, Kim G, Skinner MK.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Biology, Washington State University School of
Molecular Biosciences, Pullman 99164-4231, USA.

Members of the winged helix transcription factor family are known to regulate
epithelial cell differentiation by regulating cell-specific gene expression. rWIN
is a newly discovered member of the winged helix family shown to be present in
the adult rat testis. In the testis the human homolog of rWIN, HFH-11, was
localized to the germ cells (i.e. spermatocytes and spermatids) undergoing
spermatogenesis. In the present study we show that rWIN is also expressed in
testicular Sertoli cells. Sertoli cells are the epithelial component of the
seminiferous tubule and provide both the cytoarchitectural support and the
microenvironment for developing germ cells. The presence of rWIN in Sertoli cells
was confirmed by Northern blot and RT-PCR analysis. The rWIN transcript size in
the Sertoli cells was different from the germ cell transcript that is probably
due to alternative splicing or modifications of the 3'-untranslated region. At
least two spliced variants of rWIN were observed in the Sertoli cells
corresponding to the deletion of an exon in the DNA-binding region. Long term
stimulation of cultured Sertoli cells with the gonadotropin FSH down-regulated
rWIN expression. In contrast, short-term stimulation (2 h) transiently
up-regulated rWIN expression. The FSH-induced transient stimulation of rWIN
precedes expression of the transferrin gene that is a marker of Sertoli cell
differentiation. FSH-induced transferrin promoter activity was inhibited when
cultured Sertoli cells were treated with an antisense oligonucleotide to rWIN.
Interestingly, the constitutive overexpression of the DNA-binding domain of rWIN 
also down-regulated transferrin promoter activity. Analysis of the transferrin
promoter with various deletion mutations suggested that rWIN acts at an upstream 
gene of the transferrin promoter. The results indicate that a transient
up-regulation of rWIN in part mediates the ability of FSH to activate the
transferrin promoter, which can be inhibited with a rWIN antisense
oligonucleotide or constitutive expression of the rWIN DNA-binding domain. The
current study demonstrates that rWIN acts as an early event gene for FSH actions 
on Sertoli cells and that rWIN appears to have a role in the regulation of
Sertoli cell differentiated functions.

PMID: 10919260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Cell Struct Funct. 1999 Dec;24(6):457-63.

Both low and high concentrations of staurosporine induce G1 arrest through
down-regulation of cyclin E and cdk2 expression.

Zong ZP(1), Fujikawa-Yamamoto K, Li AL, Yamaguchi N, Chang YG, Murakami M,
Odashima S, Ishikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Science, Medical Research Institute, Kanazawa Medical
University, Ishikawa, Japan. zong3961@kanazawa-med.ac.jp

Staurosporine has been reported to cause arrest of cells in G1 phase at low
concentration and in G2 phase at high concentration. This raises the question of 
why the effects of staurosporine on the cell cycle depend on the applied
concentration. In order to verify these multiple functions of staurosporine in
Meth-A cells, we used cyclin E as a landmark of G1/S transition, cyclin B as a
landmark of G2/M transition and MPM2 as a hallmark of M phase. We found that
staurosporine arrested cells in G1 phase at a low concentration (20 nM) and in
G2/M phase at a high concentration (200 nM). However, 200 nM staurosporine
increased the expression of cyclin B and cdc2 proteins, suggesting that the cells
progressed through the G2/M transition, and increased the expression of MPM2
protein, indicating that the cells entered M phase. Moreover, 200 nM
staurosporine increased the expression of p53 and p21 proteins and inhibited the 
expression of cyclin E and cdk2 proteins, suggesting that the cells were arrested
in the G1 phase of the next cycle. Morphological observation showed similar
results as well. These data suggest that the G2/M accumulation induced by 200 nM 
staurosporine does not reflect G2 arrest, but rather results from M phase arrest,
followed by progression from M phase to the G1 phase of the next cycle without
cytokinesis, and finally arrest of the cells in G1 phase.

PMID: 10698260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Dec;19(12):8570-80.

Premature expression of the winged helix transcription factor HFH-11B in
regenerating mouse liver accelerates hepatocyte entry into S phase.

Ye H(1), Holterman AX, Yoo KW, Franks RR, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at Chicago College of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60607-7170, USA.

Two-thirds partial hepatectomy (PH) induces differentiated cells in the liver
remnant to proliferate and regenerate to its original size. The
proliferation-specific HNF-3/fork head homolog-11B protein (HFH-11B; also known
as Trident and Win) is a family member of the winged helix/fork head
transcription factors and in regenerating liver its expression is reactivated
prior to hepatocyte entry into DNA replication (S phase). To examine whether
HFH-11B regulates hepatocyte proliferation during liver regeneration, we used the
-3-kb transthyretin (TTR) promoter to create transgenic mice that displayed
ectopic hepatocyte expression of HFH-11B. Liver regeneration studies with the
TTR-HFH-11B mice demonstrate that its premature expression resulted in an 8-h
acceleration in the onset of hepatocyte DNA replication and mitosis. This liver
regeneration phenotype is associated with protracted expression of cyclin D1 and 
C/EBPbeta, which are involved in stimulating DNA replication and premature
expression of M phase promoting cyclin B1 and cdc2. Consistent with the early
hepatocyte entry into S phase, regenerating transgenic livers exhibited earlier
expression of DNA repair genes (XRCC1, mHR21spA, and mHR23B). Furthermore, in
nonregenerating transgenic livers, ectopic HFH-11B expression did not elicit
abnormal hepatocyte proliferation, a finding consistent with the retention of the
HFH-11B transgene protein in the cytoplasm. We found that nuclear translocation
of the HFH-11B transgene protein requires mitogenic signalling induced by PH and 
that its premature availability in regenerating transgenic liver allowed nuclear 
translocation to occur 8 h earlier than in wild type.

PMCID: PMC84981
PMID: 10567581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Oncogene. 1999 Oct 7;18(41):5620-30.

Interaction of the fork head domain transcription factor MPP2 with the human
papilloma virus 16 E7 protein: enhancement of transformation and transactivation.

Lüscher-Firzlaff JM(1), Westendorf JM, Zwicker J, Burkhardt H, Henriksson M,
Müller R, Pirollet F, Lüscher B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

The high risk human papillomavirus (HPV) type 16 E7 protein affects cell growth
control and promotes transformation by interfering with functions of cellular
proteins. A key target of E7 is the tumor suppressor protein p105RB. Although
this interaction is required for E7-dependent transformation, other cellular
molecules must also be involved, because some E7 mutants that have reduced
transforming abilities still bind to p105RB. In order to identify additional
proteins that interact with E7 and that may be responsible to mediate its
transforming function, we have used the C-terminal half of E7 in a yeast
two-hybrid screen. We identified the fork head domain transcription factor M
phase phosphoprotein 2 (MPP2) as an interaction partner of E7. Specific
interaction of the two proteins both in vitro and in vivo in mammalian cells was 
detected. The interaction of MPP2 with E7 is functionally relevant since MPP2
enhances the E7/Ha-Ras co-transformation of rat embryo fibroblasts. In addition
HPV16 E7, but neither non-transforming mutants of HPV16 E7 nor low risk HPV6 E7, 
was able to stimulate MPP2-specific transcriptional activity. Thus, MPP2 is a
potentially important target for E7-mediated transformation.

PMID: 10523841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Cell. 1999 Jul 23;98(2):261-71.

Spo76p is a conserved chromosome morphogenesis protein that links the mitotic and
meiotic programs.

van Heemst D(1), James F, Pöggeler S, Berteaux-Lecellier V, Zickler D.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et Microbiologie, UMR 8621, Université Paris-Sud, Orsay,
France.

Spo76p is conserved and related to the fungal proteins Pds5p and BIMD and the
human AS3 prostate proliferative shutoff-associated protein. Spo76p localizes to 
mitotic and meiotic chromosomes, except at metaphase(s) and anaphase(s). During
meiotic prophase, Spo76p assembles into strong lines in correlation with axial
element formation. As inferred from spo76-1 mutant phenotypes, Spo76p is required
for sister chromatid cohesiveness, chromosome axis morphogenesis, and chromatin
condensation during critical transitions at mitotic prometaphase and meiotic
midprophase. Spo76p is also required for meiotic interhomolog recombination,
likely at postinitiation stage(s). We propose that a disruptive force
coordinately promotes chromosomal axial compaction and destabilization of sister 
connections and that Spo76p restrains and channels the effects of this force into
appropriate morphogenetic mitotic and meiotic outcomes.

PMID: 10428037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Cell Sci. 1999 Aug;112 ( Pt 15):2493-500.

A hyperphosphorylated form of RNA polymerase II is the major interphase antigen
of the phosphoprotein antibody MPM-2 and interacts with the peptidyl-prolyl
isomerase Pin1.

Albert A(1), Lavoie S, Vincent M.

Author information: 
(1)Département de médecine and CREFSIP, Pavillon C.-E.-Marchand, Université
Laval, Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada, G1K 7P4.

The monoclonal antibody MPM-2 recognizes a subset of M phase phosphoproteins in a
phosphorylation-dependent manner. It is believed that phosphorylation at MPM-2
antigenic sites could regulate mitotic events since most of the MPM-2 antigens
identified to date have M phase functions. In addition, many of these proteins
are substrates of the mitotic regulator Pin1, a peptidyl-prolyl isomerase which
is present throughout the cell cycle and which is thought to alter its mitotic
targets by changing their conformation. In interphase cells, most MPM-2
reactivity is confined to nuclear speckles. We report here that a
hyperphosphorylated form of the RNA polymerase II largest subunit is the major
MPM-2 interphase antigen. These findings were made possible by the availability
of another monoclonal antibody, CC-3, that was previously used to identify a 255 
kDa nuclear matrix protein associated with spliceosomal components as a
hyperphosphorylated form of the RNA polymerase II largest subunit. MPM-2
recognizes a phosphoepitope of the large subunit that becomes hyperphosphorylated
upon heat shock in contrast to the phosphoepitope defined by CC-3, whose
reactivity is diminished by the heat treatment. Therefore, these two antibodies
may discriminate between distinct functional forms of RNA polymerase II. We also 
show that RNA polymerase II large subunit interacts with Pin1 in HeLa cells. Pin1
may thus regulate transcriptional and post-transcriptional events by catalyzing
phosphorylation-dependent conformational changes of the large RNA polymerase II
subunit.

PMID: 10393805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Dev Biol. 1999 Apr 15;208(2):362-74.

Association between mouse nude gene expression and the initiation of epithelial
terminal differentiation.

Lee D(1), Prowse DM, Brissette JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown,
Massachusetts, 02129, USA.

Loss-of-function mutations in Whn (Hfh 11), a winged-helix/forkhead transcription
factor, result in the nude mouse phenotype. To determine the whn expression
pattern during development, we utilized mice in which a beta-galactosidase
reporter gene was placed under the control of the wild-type whn promoter by
homologous recombination (M. Nehls et al., 1996, Science 272, 886-889). Sites of 
reporter expression were confirmed by immunohistochemical staining for Whn
protein or by in situ hybridization for whn mRNA. At all developmental stages,
whn expression is restricted to epithelial cells. In addition to the skin and
thymus, whn is expressed in the developing nails, nasal passages, tongue, palate,
and teeth. In embryonic epidermis, suprabasal cells induce whn expression at the 
same time that terminal differentiation markers first appear. As the epidermis
matures, whn promoter activity is found primarily in the first suprabasal layer, 
which contains keratinocytes in the early stages of terminal differentiation. In 
developing and mature anagen hair follicles, whn is expressed at high levels in
the postmitotic precursor cells of the hair shaft and inner root sheath. Though
principally associated with terminal differentiation, whn expression is also
detected in progenitor cell compartments; in the hair bulb matrix and basal
epidermal layer, a small subclass of cells expresses whn, while in the outer root
sheath, whn promoter activity is induced as the follicle completes its
elongation. Within these compartments, rare cells exhibit both whn expression and
the nuclear proliferation marker Ki-67. The results suggest that whn expression
encompasses the transition from a proliferative to a postmitotic state and that
whn regulates the initiation of terminal differentiation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10191051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. DNA Cell Biol. 1999 Feb;18(2):157-64.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (winged helix domain) activates trefoil factor gene
TFF1 through a binding motif adjacent to the TATAA box.

Beck S(1), Sommer P, dos Santos Silva E, Blin N, Gött P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Anthropology and Human Genetics, 
University of Tübingen, Germany.

The winged helix transcription factors HNF-3/FKH (forkhead homologs) activate
endodermal-derived and acute-phase gene expression and control gut development in
Drosophila. Trefoil factor family (TFFs) peptides are vertebrate products
secreted by mucin-producing epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract
involved in restitution and repair of the mucosa. They are positively regulated
in ulcerative and neoplastic conditions. We describe a consensus sequence in
human and rodent TFF promoters close to the TATAA box showing striking similarity
to the binding site of the HNF-3/FKH family. In gel retardation assays, HNF-3
alpha and beta bound predominantly to the site in TFF1 (formerly pS2) and, to a
lesser extent, to the sites in TFF2 or TFF3. Mutations generated in this motif
severely impaired transcription of TFF1 reporter genes. Cotransfection with
expression vectors of HNF-3alpha and beta, but not the related HFH 11A and B,
specifically activated the wild-type TFF1 reporter genes. Activation of
endogenous expression of TFF1 by HNF-3 alpha and beta gene products was more than
1000 fold in the pancreatic cell line Capan-2 and fivefold in the gastric cell
line MKN-45, whereas the intestinal cell lines HUTU 80 and HT-29 displayed no
effect. Thus, HNF-3/FKH factors contribute causally to cell-specific regulation
of TFF genes and may explain the acute-phase response of TFF peptides.

PMID: 10073575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Curr Biol. 1998 Dec 3;8(24):1327-30.

Uncoupling of S phase and mitosis in cardiomyocytes and hepatocytes lacking the
winged-helix transcription factor Trident.

Korver W(1), Schilham MW, Moerer P, van den Hoff MJ, Dam K, Lamers WH, Medema RH,
Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology University Hospital Utrecht P.O. Box 85500 3508 GA
Utrecht The Netherlands DNAX Research Institute 901 California Avenue Palo Alto
California 94304 USA.

In order to maintain a stable karyotype, the eukaryotic cell cycle is coordinated
such that only one round of S phase precedes each mitosis, and mitosis is not
initiated until DNA replication is completed. Several checkpoints and regulatory 
proteins have been defined in lower eukaryotes that govern this coordination, but
little is known about the proteins that are involved in mammalian cells.
Previously, we have shown that the winged-helix transcription factor Trident -
also known as HFH-11, FKL16 and WIN [1] [2] [3] - is exclusively expressed in
cycling cells and is phosphorylated during mitosis [1] [4]. The cellular function
of Trident has yet to be described, however. Here, we have shown that disruption 
of the Trident gene in mice resulted in postnatal death, most probably because of
circulatory failure. Histological analysis of Trident -/- embryos from embryonic 
day 10 (E10) onwards revealed a specific, characteristic defect in the developing
myocardium. The orientation of the myocytes was highly irregular and the nuclei
of these disorganized cardiomyocytes were clearly polyploid with up to a 50-fold 
increase in DNA content. Polyploidy was also observed in embryonic hepatocytes.
Our results indicate that expression of Trident is required to prevent multiple
rounds of S phase in the heart and the liver. Trident therefore appears to have a
role in preventing DNA re-replication during the G2 and M phases.

PMID: 9843684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Biol Chem. 1998 Jul 17;273(29):18499-508.

Gene-specific transcriptional activity of the insulin cAMP-responsive element is 
conferred by NF-Y in combination with cAMP response element-binding protein.

Eggers A(1), Siemann G, Blume R, Knepel W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology, University of Göttingen, D-37070
Göttingen, Germany.

Cyclic AMP stimulates insulin gene transcription through a cAMP response element 
(CRE). In the present study the insulin CRE-binding proteins and their functions 
were investigated. A mutational analysis of nuclear protein binding in
electrophoretic mobility shift assays in combination with specific antisera
showed that in the CRE of the rat insulin I gene the imperfect CRE octamer-like
sequence TGACGTCC interacts weakly with CREB and overlaps with two sequence
motifs (TTGTTGAC and CCAAT) that bind winged helix-like proteins and the
transcription factor NF-Y, respectively. Transient transfection of wild-type and 
mutant insulin CRE-reporter fusion genes and the inactivation of cellular CREB or
NF-Y by overexpression of the dominant negative mutants KCREB or NF-YA29,
respectively, indicate that cAMP inducibility of the insulin CRE is mediated by
CREB or closely related proteins; however, NF-Y binding to the insulin CRE
confers constitutive, basal activity and decreases the ability of CREB to mediate
cAMP-stimulated transcription and calcium responsiveness. Results from these
studies demonstrate that NF-Y binds to the insulin CRE and modulates the function
of CREB. Together with the nonpalindromic sequence of the CRE octamer motif, the 
interaction of NF-Y with CREB may be responsible for the gene-specific
transcriptional activity of the insulin CRE and explain why it has considerable
basal activity but is less responsive to cAMP stimulation than others.

PMID: 9660819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Biochemistry. 1998 Apr 28;37(17):6179-87.

Sequence specific collective motions in a winged helix DNA binding domain
detected by 15N relaxation NMR.

Jin C(1), Marsden I, Chen X, Liao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago 60612-4316, USA.

The recognition between transcription factors and their DNA binding sites is a
highly dynamic process. During transcriptional regulation, transcription factors 
must bind to or dissociate from their cognate DNA binding sites. The winged helix
DNA binding motif is one of many highly conserved DNA binding motifs identified
in transcription factors. Backbone dynamics has been studied on the 15N- and
2H-enriched winged helix family member Genesis. Our data show that the overall
motions of the single domain Genesis are better described by more than two
autocorrelation times (taum). Our data also demonstrate that Genesis shows
structure specific conformation exchange characterized by Rex. Therefore, our
results indicate that the structure of Genesis is highly dynamic and that
secondary structure elements in Genesis have collective motions in the nanosecond
to millisecond time scale. Since the winged helix DNA binding motif is highly
conserved, this unique dynamic property observed in Genesis is also likely to be 
conserved in other winged helix family members and important in DNA binding.

PMID: 9558357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Immunobiology. 1997 Dec;198(1-3):157-61.

The winged-helix transcription factor Trident is expressed in actively dividing
lymphocytes.

Korver W(1), Roose J, Wilson A, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Utrecht, The Netherlands.
w.korver@lab.azu.nl

We recently identified the winged-helix transcription factor Trident and
described its expression pattern in synchronized fibroblasts. We have now studied
Trident expression in cell lines, differentiating thymocytes and in lymphocytes
derived from peripheral blood. During T cell differentiation, expression peaked
in the actively dividing immature single positive cells. In peripheral blood
lymphocytes, expression of Trident mRNA was absent, but could be induced upon
stimulation with mitogens in vitro. These observations imply a function for
Trident in dividing lymphocytes.

PMID: 9442387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Genomics. 1997 Dec 15;46(3):435-42.

The human TRIDENT/HFH-11/FKHL16 gene: structure, localization, and promoter
characterization.

Korver W(1), Roose J, Heinen K, Weghuis DO, de Bruijn D, van Kessel AG, Clevers
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Utrecht, The Netherlands.
w.korver@lab.azu.nl

We recently identified the winged-helix/fork head transcription factor Trident in
mouse and described its expression in cycling cells. Here we report the isolation
and characterization of the human TRIDENT (HGMW-approved symbol FKHL16) cDNA and 
gene. Homology between the human and the mouse Trident proteins was 79%. The gene
consists of 10 exons and is located on chromosome 12 band p13. The winged-helix
DNA-binding domain is encoded on three exons. Analysis of the promoter in
synchronized Rat-1 fibroblasts revealed a fragment of 300 bases responsible for
the cell cycle-specific expression of the TRIDENT gene.

PMID: 9441747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Virology. 1997 Nov 10;238(1):1-7.

Revelations of a captive: retroviral Qin and the oncogenicity of winged helix
proteins.

Vogt PK(1), Li J, Freyaldenhoven BS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, California 92037, USA. pkvogt@scripps.edu

PMID: 9375002  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 1997 Aug 8;272(32):19827-36.

Molecular analysis of a novel winged helix protein, WIN. Expression pattern, DNA 
binding property, and alternative splicing within the DNA binding domain.

Yao KM(1), Sha M, Lu Z, Wong GG.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Institute, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02140, USA.
kmyao@hkusua.hku.hk

We have cloned a novel winged helix factor, WIN, from the rat insulinoma cell
line, INS-1. Northern blot analysis demonstrated that WIN is highly expressed in 
a variety of insulinoma cell lines and rat embryonic pancreas and liver. In
adults, WIN expression was detected in thymus, testis, lung, and several
intestinal regions. We determined the DNA sequences bound in vitro by
baculovirus-expressed WIN protein in a polymerase chain reaction-based selection 
procedure. WIN was found to bind with high affinity to the selected sequence
5'-AGATTGAGTA-3', which is similar to the recently identified HNF-6 binding
sequence 5'-DHWATTGAYTWWD-3' (where W = A or T, Y = T or C, H is not G, and D is 
not C). We have isolated human WIN cDNAs by library screening and 5'-rapid
amplification of cDNA ends. Sequence analysis indicates that the carboxyl
terminus of human WIN has been previously isolated as a putative phosphorylation 
substrate, MPM2-reactive phosphoprotein 2 (MPP2); WIN may be regulated by
phosphorylation. Alignment of the rat and human WIN cDNAs and their comparison
with mouse genomic sequence revealed that the WIN DNA binding domain is encoded
by four exons, two of which (exons 4 and 6) are alternatively spliced to generate
at least three classes of mRNA transcripts. These transcripts were shown by RNase
protection assay to be differentially expressed in different tissues. Alternative
splicing within the winged helix DNA binding domain might result in modulation of
DNA binding specificity.

PMID: 9242644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 May 1;25(9):1715-9.

The winged-helix transcription factor Trident is expressed in cycling cells.

Korver W(1), Roose J, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Utrecht, PO Box 85500, 3508 GA, 
Utrecht, The Netherlands. w.korver@lab.azu.nl

We describe the cloning and characterization of Trident , a novel member of the
fork head/winged-helix family, from murine thymus. In the mouse embryo, the gene 
was expressed in all tissues, whereas in adult mice expression was only detected 
in the thymus. Further analysis revealed that Trident expression strictly
correlated with cell cycling, independent of cell type. Timing of [3H]thymidine
incorporation showed that mRNA and protein expression were strongly upregulated
upon entry into the S phase of the cell cycle. Moreover, the protein was
phosphorylated in M phase. PCR-mediated selection of optimal binding sites
yielded a consensus motif resembling that of other family members. These results 
identify Trident as a transcription factor, which is likely involved in cell
cycle-specific gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC146663
PMID: 9108152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Mar;17(3):1626-41.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3/fork head homolog 11 is expressed in proliferating
epithelial and mesenchymal cells of embryonic and adult tissues.

Ye H(1), Kelly TF, Samadani U, Lim L, Rubio S, Overdier DG, Roebuck KA, Costa RH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Illinois at Chicago, 60612-7334,
USA.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 3alpha (HNF-3alpha) and 3beta proteins have
homology in the winged helix/fork head DNA binding domain and regulate
cell-specific transcription in hepatocytes and in respiratory and intestinal
epithelia. In this study, we describe two novel isoforms of the winged helix
transcription factor family, HNF-3/fork head homolog 11A (HFH-11A) and HFH-11B,
isolated from the human colon carcinoma HT-29 cell line. We show that these
isoforms arise via differential splicing and are expressed in a number of
epithelial cell lines derived from tumors (HT-29, Caco-2, HepG2, HeLa, A549, and 
H441). We demonstrate that differentiation of Caco-2 cells toward the enterocyte 
lineage results in decreased HFH-11 expression and reciprocal increases in
HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta mRNA levels. In situ hybridization of 16 day postcoitus 
mouse embryos demonstrates that HFH-11 expression is found in the mesenchymal and
epithelial cells of the liver, lung, intestine, renal cortex, and urinary tract. 
Although HFH-11 exhibits a wide cellular expression pattern in the embryo, its
adult expression pattern is restricted to epithelial cells of Lieberkühn's crypts
of the intestine, the spermatocytes and spermatids of the testis, and the thymus 
and colon. HFH-11 expression is absent in adult hepatocytes, but its expression
is reactivated in proliferating hepatocytes at 4, 24, and 48 h after partial
hepatectomy. Consistent with these findings, we demonstrate that HFH-11 mRNA
levels are stimulated by intratracheal administration of keratinocyte growth
factor in adult lung and its expression in an adult endothelial cell line is
reactivated in response to oxidative stress. These experiments show that the
HFH-11 transcription factor is expressed in embryonic mesenchymal and epithelial 
cells and its expression is reactivated in these adult cell types by
proliferative signals or oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC231888
PMID: 9032290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jan 18;91(2):714-8.

Cloning of cDNAs for M-phase phosphoproteins recognized by the MPM2 monoclonal
antibody and determination of the phosphorylated epitope.

Westendorf JM(1), Rao PN, Gerace L.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell and Molecular Biology, Scripps Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037.

The MPM2 monoclonal antibody binds to a phospho amino acid-containing epitope
present on more than 40 proteins of M-phase eukaryotic cells. We have developed a
technique for cloning cDNAs encoding MPM2-reactive phosphoproteins from
bacteriophage lambda expression libraries. Proteins from phage plaques were
absorbed to nitrocellulose filters, phosphorylated by M-phase kinases, and
screened for MPM2 binding. Partial-length cDNAs encoding two MPM2-reactive
proteins termed MPM2-reactive phosphoproteins 1 and 2 (MPP1 and MPP2) were
isolated. The deduced MPP1 and MPP2 amino acid sequences are not closely related 
to any previously described proteins. To determine which amino acid stretches
contained the MPM2 epitope, sequences from a 15 amino acid peptide expression
library were selected for binding to MPM2 after phosphorylation by M-phase
kinases. A string of five amino acids was similar among all selected peptides,
and the sequence reflecting the most frequent amino acid at each position was
Leu-Thr-Pro-Leu-Lys (LTPLK). MPP1 and MPP2 proteins, respectively, contained five
and nine sites closely related to LTPLK, including two that were common to both
proteins, (F/T)TPLQ and SSP(I/S)D. Peptides containing LTPLK and FTPLQ were
strongly phosphorylated by M-phase, but not interphase, cytosolic kinases, and
the phosphorylated peptides were bound by MPM2. Thus, we have identified
M-phase-specific phosphorylation sites bound by MPM2 and two putative M-phase
phosphoproteins containing these sites.

PMCID: PMC43019
PMID: 8290587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


