
1. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2016 Mar 28. pii: ocw007. doi: 10.1093/jamia/ocw007. [Epub
ahead of print]

A network-based drug repositioning infrastructure for precision cancer medicine
through targeting significantly mutated genes in the human cancer genomes.

Cheng F(1), Zhao J(1), Fooksa M(2), Zhao Z(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School of
Medicine, Nashville, TN 37203, USA. (2)Department of Biomedical Informatics,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37203, USA Chemical and
Physical Biology Program, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN
37232, USA. (3)Department of Biomedical Informatics, Vanderbilt University School
of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37203, USA Department of Cancer Biology, Vanderbilt
University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37232, USA Department of Psychiatry,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN 37212, USA Center for
Precision Health, School of Biomedical Informatics, The University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA
zhongming.zhao@uth.tmc.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Development of computational approaches and tools to effectively
integrate multidomain data is urgently needed for the development of newly
targeted cancer therapeutics.
METHODS: We proposed an integrative network-based infrastructure to identify new 
druggable targets and anticancer indications for existing drugs through targeting
significantly mutated genes (SMGs) discovered in the human cancer genomes. The
underlying assumption is that a drug would have a high potential for anticancer
indication if its up-/down-regulated genes from the Connectivity Map tended to be
SMGs or their neighbors in the human protein interaction network.
RESULTS: We assembled and curated 693 SMGs in 29 cancer types and found 121
proteins currently targeted by known anticancer or noncancer (repurposed) drugs. 
We found that the approved or experimental cancer drugs could potentially target 
these SMGs in 33.3% of the mutated cancer samples, and this number increased to
68.0% by drug repositioning through surveying exome-sequencing data in
approximately 5000 normal-tumor pairs from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Furthermore, 
we identified 284 potential new indications connecting 28 cancer types and 48
existing drugs (adjustedP<U+2009><<U+2009>.05), with a 66.7% success rate validated by
literature data. Several existing drugs (e.g., niclosamide, valproic acid,
captopril, and resveratrol) were predicted to have potential indications for
multiple cancer types. Finally, we used integrative analysis to showcase a
potential mechanism-of-action for resveratrol in breast and lung cancer treatment
whereby it targets several SMGs (ARNTL,ASPM, CTTN, EIF4G1, FOXP1,andSTIP1).
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, we demonstrated that our integrative network-based
infrastructure is a promising strategy to identify potential druggable targets
and uncover new indications for existing drugs to speed up molecularly targeted
cancer therapeutics.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the American
Medical Informatics Association. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please
email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 27026610  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. J Immunol. 2016 Mar 21. pii: 1501896. [Epub ahead of print]

Cutting Edge: Foxp1 Controls Naive CD8+ T Cell Quiescence by Simultaneously
Repressing Key Pathways in Cellular Metabolism and Cell Cycle Progression.

Wei H(1), Geng J(1), Shi B(1), Liu Z(1), Wang YH(1), Stevens AC(1), Sprout SL(1),
Yao M(2), Wang H(3), Hu H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35205; and. (2)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology
and Immunology, Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai 200031, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Molecular Virology and Immunology,
Institut Pasteur of Shanghai, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China
hkwang@ips.ac.cn huihu@uab.edu. (4)Department of Microbiology, School of
Medicine, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35205; and
hkwang@ips.ac.cn huihu@uab.edu.

Previously we have shown that transcription factor Foxp1 plays an essential role 
in maintaining naive T cell quiescence; in the absence of Foxp1, mature naive
CD8(+) T cells proliferate in direct response to homeostatic cytokine IL-7. In
this study, we report that the deletion of Foxp1 in naive CD8(+) T cells leads to
enhanced activation of the PI3K/Akt/mammalian target of rapamycin signaling
pathway and its downstream cell growth and metabolism targets in response to
IL-7. We found that Foxp1 directly regulates PI3K interacting protein 1, a
negative regulator of PI3K. Additionally, we found that deletion of Foxp1 in
naive CD8(+) T cells results in increased expression levels of E2fs, the critical
components for cell cycle progression and proliferation, in a manner that is not 
associated with increased phosphorylation of retinoblastoma protein. Taken
together, our studies suggest that Foxp1 enforces naive CD8(+) T cell quiescence 
by simultaneously repressing key pathways in both cellular metabolism and cell
cycle progression.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 27001958  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Gene Expr Patterns. 2016 Mar 9. pii: S1567-133X(16)30005-9. doi:
10.1016/j.gep.2016.03.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Expression of forkhead box transcription factor genes Foxp1 and Foxp2 during jaw 
development.

Cesario JM(1), Almaidhan AA(2), Jeong J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science and Craniofacial Biology, New York University
College of Dentistry, 345 East 24th Street, New York, NY 10010 United States.
(2)Department of Orthodontics, New York University College of Dentistry, 345 East
24th Street, New York, NY 10010 United States. (3)Department of Basic Science and
Craniofacial Biology, New York University College of Dentistry, 345 East 24th
Street, New York, NY 10010 United States. Electronic address: jj78@nyu.edu.

Development of the face is regulated by a large number of genes that are
expressed in temporally and spatially specific patterns. While significant
progress has been made on characterizing the genes that operate in the oral
region of the face, those regulating development of the aboral (lateral) region
remain largely unknown. Recently, we discovered that transcription factors LIM
homeobox (LHX) 6 and LHX8, which are key regulators of oral development,
repressed the expression of the genes encoding forkhead box transcription
factors, Foxp1 and Foxp2, in the oral region. To gain insights into the potential
role of the Foxp genes in region-specific development of the face, we examined
their expression patterns in the first pharyngeal arch (primordium for the jaw)
of mouse embryos at a high spatial and temporal resolution. Foxp1 and Foxp2 were 
preferentially expressed in the aboral and posterior parts of the first
pharyngeal arch, including the developing temporomandibular joint. Through double
immunofluorescence and double fluorescent RNA in situ hybridization, we found
that Foxp1 was expressed in the progenitor cells for the muscle, bone, and
connective tissue. Foxp2 was expressed in subsets of bone and connective tissue
progenitors but not in the myoblasts. Neither gene was expressed in the dental
mesenchyme nor in the oral half of the palatal shelf undergoing extensive growth 
and morphogenesis. Together, we demonstrated for the first time that Foxp1 and
Foxp2 are expressed during craniofacial development. Our data suggest that the
Foxp genes may regulate development of the aboral and posterior regions of the
jaw.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26969076  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2016 Feb;156(1):45-55. doi: 10.1007/s10549-016-3739-6.
Epub 2016 Mar 4.

Intratumoral estrogen production and actions in luminal A type invasive lobular
and ductal carcinomas.

Takagi M(1,)(2), Miki Y(3), Miyashita M(1), Hata S(2), Yoda T(2), Hirakawa H(4), 
Sagara Y(5), Rai Y(5), Ohi Y(6), Tamaki K(1,)(2), Ishida T(1), Suzuki T(2), Ouchi
N(1), Sasano H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, Japan. (2)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University Graduate
School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan. (3)Department of
Pathology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-1 Seiryo-machi
Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan. miki@patholo2.med.tohoku.ac.jp. (4)Department of Breast
Surgery, Tohoku Kosai Hospital, Sendai, Japan. (5)Department of Breast Surgical
Oncology, Sagara Hospital, Social Medical Corporation Hakuaikai, Kagoshima,
Japan. (6)Department of Pathology, Sagara Hospital, Social Medical Corporation
Hakuaikai, Kagoshima, Japan.

The great majority of invasive lobular carcinoma (ILC) is estrogen-dependent
luminal A type carcinoma but the details of estrogen actions and its intratumoral
metabolism have not been well studied compared to invasive ductal carcinoma
(IDC). We first immunolocalized estrogen-related enzymes including estrogen
sulfotransferase (EST), estrogen sulfatase (STS), 17ß-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase (HSD) 1/2, and aromatase. We then evaluated the tissue
concentrations of estrogens in ILC and IDC and subsequently estrogen-responsive
gene profiles in these tumors in order to explore the possible differences and/or
similarity of intratumoral estrogen environment of these two breast cancer
subtypes. The status of STS and 17ßHSD1 was significantly lower in ILCs than IDCs
(p = 0.022 and p < 0.0001), but that of EST and 17ßHSD2 vice versa (p < 0.0001
and p = 0.0106). In ILCs, tissue concentrations of estrone and estradiol were
lower than those in IDCs (p = 0.0709 and 0.069). In addition, the great majority 
of estrogen response genes tended to be lower in ILCs. Among those genes above,
FOXP1 was significantly higher in ILCs than in IDCs (p = 0.002). FOXP1 expression
was reported to be significantly higher in relapse-free IDC patients treated with
tamoxifen. Therefore, tamoxifen may be considered an option of endocrine therapy 
for luminal A type ILC patients. This is the first study to demonstrate the
detailed and comprehensive status of intratumoral production and metabolism of
estrogens and the status of estrogen response genes in luminal A-like ILC with
comparison to those in luminal A-like IDCs.

PMID: 26943913  [PubMed - in process]


5. Dev Neurobiol. 2016 Feb 23. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22388. [Epub ahead of print]

En1 is necessary for survival of neurons in the ventral nuclei of the lateral
lemniscus.

Altieri SC(1), Zhao T(1), Jalabi W(2), Romito-DiGiacomo RR(2), Maricich
SM(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Richard King Mellon Institute for Pediatric Research, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA, 15224.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Case, Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio,
USA, 44106. (3)Childrens' Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania, USA, 15224.

The ventral nuclei of the lateral lemniscus (VNLL) are part of the central
auditory system thought to participate in temporal sound processing. While the
timing and location of VNLL neurogenesis have been determined, the genetic
factors that regulate VNLL neuron development are unknown. Here, we use genetic
fate-mapping techniques to demonstrate that all glycinergic and
glycinergic/GABAergic VNLL neurons derive from a cellular lineage that expresses 
the homeobox transcription factor Engrailed 1 (En1). We also show that En1
deletion does not affect migration or adoption of a neuronal cell fate but does
lead to VNLL neuron death during development. Furthermore, En1 deletion blocks
expression of the transcription factor FoxP1 in a subset of VNLL neurons.
Together, these data identify En1 as a gene important for VNLL neuron development
and survival. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26914477  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 17. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7465. [Epub ahead of print]

Patient-derived ovarian cancer xenografts re-growing after a cisplatinum
treatment are less responsive to a second drug re-challenge: a new experimental
setting to study response to therapy.

Ricci F(1), Fratelli M(2), Guffanti F(1), Porcu L(3), Spriano F(1), Dell'Anna
T(4), Fruscio R(4), Damia G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacology, IRCCS-Istituto
di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milan, Italy. (2)Department of
Biochemistry, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milan,
Italy. (3)Department of Oncology, Laboratory of Methodology for Biomedical
Research, IRCCS-Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milan, Italy.
(4)Obstetrics and Gynecology Clinic, San Gerardo Hospital, Monza, Italy.

Even if ovarian cancer patients are very responsive to a cisplatinum-based
therapy, most will relapse with a resistant disease. New experimental animal
models are needed to explore the mechanisms of resistance, to better tailor
treatment and improve patient prognosis. To address these aims, seven
patient-derived high-grade serous/endometrioid ovarian cancer xenografts were
characterized for the antitumor response after one and two cycles of cisplatinum 
and classified as Very Responsive, Responsive, and Low Responsive to drug
treatment. Xenografts re-growing after the first drug cycle were much less
responsive to the second one. The expression of epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) and cancer stem cells (CSCs) genes was investigated in cisplatinum-treated 
and not-treated tumors. We found that different EMT (TCF3, CAMK2N1, EGFR, and
IGFBP4) and CSCs (SMO, DLL1, STAT3, and ITGA6) genes were expressed at higher
levels in Low Responsive than in Responsive and Very Responsive xenografts. The
expression of STAT3 was found to be associated with lower survival (HR = 13.7; p 
= 0.013) in the TCGA patient data set. MMP9, CD44, DLL4, FOXP1, MERTK, and PTPRC 
genes were found more expressed in tumors re-growing after cisplatinum treatment 
than in untreated tumors. We here describe a new in vivo ovarian carcinoma
experimental setting that will be instrumental for specific trials of combination
therapy to counteract cisplatinum resistance in order to improve the prognosis of
ovarian patients.

PMID: 26910918  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Coll Antropol. 2015 Sep;39(3):755-9.

FOXP1 Expression in Normal and Neoplastic Erythroid and Myeloid Cells.

Lovric E, Pavlov KH, Korac P, Dominis M.

FOXP1 protein was firstly analyzed in normal tissues, and afterwards in different
tumor tissues, mainly carcinoma and lymphoma. In B-cell malignancies, its role
was well explored; its expression was shown to be connected with disease
prognosis in certain B-non Hodgkin lymphomas. In this study, 16 bone marrow
trephine samples from patients with no hematopoietic malignancies and 10 samples 
from peripheral blood of healthy individuals were immunostained with anti-FOXP1
antibody. Positive cells in bone marrows were not only lymphocytes, but also
cells that are immunohistochemically positive for glycophorin C or
myeloperoxidase. Peripheral blood samples showed no other positive cells, but
small round lymphocytes. Additionally 60 samples from patients with myeloid
lineage neoplasms were analyzed. 25 samples from patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) and 35 patients with myeloproliferative disease (MPD) were double 
immunostained with anti-FOXP1/anti-glycophorin C and
anti-FOXP1/anti-myeloperoxidase antibodies. FOXP1 was found to be expressed in 22
cases of MDS and in none of MPD cases. Its expression in MDS was observed mostly 
in myeloperoxidase positive cells in contrast to gylcophorin C positive cells.
Only two cases revealed both myeloperoxidase positive cells and gylcophorin C
positive cells expressing FOXP1 transcription factor. Our results show that FOXP1
is present in normal cells of erythroid and myeloid linages and thus suggest its 
possible role in development of all hematopoetic cells as well as possible
involvement in neoplasm development of myeloid disorders.

PMID: 26898077  [PubMed - in process]


8. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2016 Jan 30;34(2):287-95. doi: 10.3233/RNN-150583.

Ultrasonic vocalization in murine experimental stroke: A mechanistic model of
aphasia.

Palmateer J(1), Pan J(1,)(2), Pandya A(3), Martin L(3), Kumar S(3), Ofomata A(3),
Jones TA(3), Gore AC(4), Schallert T(3), Hurn PD(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
(2)Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, PR, China. (3)Departments of
Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. (4)School of
Pharmacy, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. (5)University of Texas 
System, Austin, TX, USA.

PURPOSE: Approximately one-fourth of stroke survivors are aphasic. Speech therapy
is the main treatment approach but leaves most patients with chronic disability. 
Attempts to improve this situation are hampered by a lack of mechanistic
understanding of the disability and treatments, reflecting the neglect of this
impairment modality in pre-clinical research. Accordingly, we devised a novel
murine model of speech-related impairment after stroke to investigate the role of
language- and plasticity-associated molecules. Rodents communicate socially with 
ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs), conveying semantic and semiotic information with
complex frequency modulated "songs" and alarm calls.
METHODS: Transient focal cerebral ischemia was induced in male C57BL6 mice via
either 30 or 45 minutes of reversible right MCAO using the intraluminal filament 
technique. Nine days post-operatively brains are stained with TTC and analyzed
for infarct volume. For behavioral measures health scores are taken (days 1-4),
cylinder tests and USV recordings performed at days 3 and 7 post operatively.
Real time PCR was performed at 24 and 48 hour and 7 day time points to quantify
mRNA expression of communication-related genes (Foxp2, Foxp1, Srpx2, Cntnap2 and 
Gapdh). Immunohistochemistry was performed to localize FOXP2 protein.
RESULTS: After middle cerebral artery occlusion of either 30 or 45 minutes
duration, mice demonstrate profoundly impaired socially evoked USVs. In addition,
there is suppression of the language-associated transcription factor, Forkhead
box protein 2 (Foxp2), and its downstream binding partner, contactin-associated
protein 2 (Cntnap2).
CONCLUSION: These findings set a foundation for further studies of mechanisms and
novel treatment strategies for post-stroke vocalization impairments.

PMID: 26889967  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Cancer Res Ther. 2015 Oct-Dec;11(4):852-6. doi: 10.4103/0973-1482.144357.

Immunological subtypes analysis of Uygur diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in
Xinjiang and their prognostic significance.

Jia CD, Liang LP, Yang LL, Yue N, Zhao F, Bai JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bone Oncology, Affiliated Tumor Hospital, Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi 830011, China.

OBJECTIVE: This study aims to explore the application of Choi's typing method in 
the immunological typing of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) in Xinjiang
Autonomous Region and its prognostic significance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Seventy-eight cases of DLBCL tumor tissues from Xinjiang
were collected to detect the expression of germinal center B (GCB) cell-expressed
transcript-1, FOXP1, CD10, bcl-6, and MUM1 using an immunohistochemical method.
Then, immunological typing was carried out using Choi's typing method, and the
survival analysis was performed using Kaplan-Meier method. Cox proportional
hazard model was used to analyze the prognostic factors.
RESULTS: GCB-cell-like-DLBCL and non-GCB-DLBCL accounting for 29.5% (23/78) and
70.5% (55/78), respectively. The 3-year overall survival of GCB-DLBCL was 58%,
significantly higher than that of non-GCB-DLBCL (39%, P < 0.05). Multivariate
analysis showed that International Prognostic Index and immunological typing were
two independent prognostic factors for Uygur patients with DLBCL.
CONCLUSION: Non-GCB-DLBCL is the main type of DLBCL in Xinjiang and Choi's typing
method can be a helpful indicator to determine the prognosis of the Uygur DLBCL
in Xinjiang.

PMID: 26881530  [PubMed - in process]


10. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 16;6:21198. doi: 10.1038/srep21198.

Detecting signatures of positive selection associated with musical aptitude in
the human genome.

Liu X(1,)(2), Kanduri C(3), Oikkonen J(3), Karma K(4), Raijas P(5), Ukkola-Vuoti 
L(3), Teo YY(1,)(2), Järvelä I(3).

Author information: 
(1)NUS Graduate School for Integrative Science and Engineering, National
University of Singapore, Singapore 117456, Singapore. (2)Saw Swee Hock School of 
Public Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117597, Singapore.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 63, 00014
University of Helsinki, Finland. (4)DocMus Department, University of the Arts
Helsinki, P.O. Box 86, 00251 Helsinki, Finland. (5)Joensuu Conservatory,
Rantakatu 31, 80100 Joensuu, Finland.

Abilities related to musical aptitude appear to have a long history in human
evolution. To elucidate the molecular and evolutionary background of musical
aptitude, we compared genome-wide genotyping data (641<U+2009>K SNPs) of 148 Finnish
individuals characterized for musical aptitude. We assigned signatures of
positive selection in a case-control setting using three selection methods:
haploPS, XP-EHH and FST. Gene ontology classification revealed that the positive 
selection regions contained genes affecting inner-ear development. Additionally, 
literature survey has shown that several of the identified genes were known to be
involved in auditory perception (e.g. GPR98, USH2A), cognition and memory (e.g.
GRIN2B, IL1A, IL1B, RAPGEF5), reward mechanisms (RGS9), and song perception and
production of songbirds (e.g. FOXP1, RGS9, GPR98, GRIN2B). Interestingly, genes
related to inner-ear development and cognition were also detected in a previous
genome-wide association study of musical aptitude. However, the candidate genes
detected in this study were not reported earlier in studies of musical abilities.
Identification of genes related to language development (FOXP1 and VLDLR) support
the popular hypothesis that music and language share a common genetic and
evolutionary background. The findings are consistent with the evolutionary
conservation of genes related to auditory processes in other species and provide 
first empirical evidence for signatures of positive selection for abilities that 
contribute to musical aptitude.

PMCID: PMC4754774
PMID: 26879527  [PubMed - in process]


11. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 12;6:20911. doi: 10.1038/srep20911.

The language-related transcription factor FOXP2 is post-translationally modified 
with small ubiquitin-like modifiers.

Estruch SB(1), Graham SA(1), Deriziotis P(1), Fisher SE(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (2)Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 6525 EN, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Mutations affecting the transcription factor FOXP2 cause a rare form of severe
speech and language disorder. Although it is clear that sufficient FOXP2
expression is crucial for normal brain development, little is known about how
this transcription factor is regulated. To investigate post-translational
mechanisms for FOXP2 regulation, we searched for protein interaction partners of 
FOXP2, and identified members of the PIAS family as novel FOXP2 interactors. PIAS
proteins mediate post-translational modification of a range of target proteins
with small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs). We found that FOXP2 can be modified 
with all three human SUMO proteins and that PIAS1 promotes this process. An
aetiological FOXP2 mutation found in a family with speech and language disorder
markedly reduced FOXP2 SUMOylation. We demonstrate that FOXP2 is SUMOylated at a 
single major site, which is conserved in all FOXP2 vertebrate orthologues and in 
the paralogues FOXP1 and FOXP4. Abolishing this site did not lead to detectable
changes in FOXP2 subcellular localization, stability, dimerization or
transcriptional repression in cellular assays, but the conservation of this site 
suggests a potential role for SUMOylation in regulating FOXP2 activity in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4751435
PMID: 26867680  [PubMed - in process]


12. Cancer Lett. 2016 Apr 28;374(1):1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.01.051. Epub
2016 Feb 10.

A tumor-suppressive microRNA, miR-504, inhibits cell proliferation and promotes
apoptosis by targeting FOXP1 in human glioma.

Cui R(1), Guan Y(1), Sun C(2), Chen L(3), Bao Y(1), Li G(1), Qiu B(1), Meng X(4),
Pang C(1), Wang Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, China. (2)Department of Medical Photonics 
Research Center, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka,
431-3192, Japan. (3)Department of Geriatric Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital
of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, China. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, Department of Geriatric Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of
China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, China. (5)Department of
Neurosurgery, First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang,
Liaoning 110001, China. Electronic address: wangyunjie_024@sina.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been proposed as useful prognostic cancer biomarkers and 
as potential molecular targets for treating various cancers. Previous findings
have indicated that miR-504 is dysregulated and involved in tumorigenesis of
several types of cancer. However, the biological role of miR-504 in glioma
remains unclear. In this study, we showed that miR-504 expression was markedly
decreased in both glioma tissues and cell lines and that miR-504 downregulation
significantly correlated with aggressive clinicopathological features and poor
prognosis for glioma patients. In addition, miR-504 overexpression inhibited cell
proliferation, induced cell cycle arrest, and promoted apoptosis in glioma cell
lines. Furthermore, we identified forkhead box protein P1 (FOXP1) as a direct
target of miR-504 using microarray analysis and a luciferase assay. Moreover, we 
demonstrated that miR-504 regulated glioma tumorigenesis by downregulating FOXP1 
expression. Our results suggest that miR-504 might function as an important
suppressor of glioma tumorigenesis and could serve as a promising candidate for
therapeutic applications in glioma treatment.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26854715  [PubMed - in process]


13. Exp Hematol. 2016 Apr;44(4):238-246.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.12.007. Epub
2016 Feb 17.

High miR-34a expression improves response to doxorubicin in diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma.

Marques SC(1), Ranjbar B(2), Laursen MB(3), Falgreen S(3), Bilgrau AE(4), Bødker 
JS(3), Jørgensen LK(3), Primo MN(2), Schmitz A(3), Ettrup MS(5), Johnsen HE(6),
Bøgsted M(7), Mikkelsen JG(2), Dybkær K(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark;
Department of Clinical Medicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.
(2)Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark. (3)Department
of Haematology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. (4)Department of
Haematology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark; Department of
Mathematical Sciences, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. (5)Department of
Haematology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark; Department of
Hematopathology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. (6)Department of 
Haematology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark; Department of
Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark; Clinical Cancer Research
Center, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. (7)Department of
Haematology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark; Department of
Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. (8)Department of
Haematology, Aalborg University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark; Department of
Clinical Medicine, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark. Electronic address:
k.dybkaer@rn.dk.

The standard treatment for patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is
the immunochemotherapy-based R-CHOP regimen (rituximab, cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisolone). Resistance to treatment, intrinsic
or acquired, is observed in approximately 40% of patients with DLBCL, who thus
require novel interventions to survive. To identify biomarkers for cytotoxic
response assessment, microRNAs (miRNAs) associated with doxorubicin sensitivity
were determined by combining global miRNA expression profiling with systematic
dose-response screens in 15 human DLBCL cell lines. One candidate, miR-34a, was
tested in functional in vitro studies and in vivo in a retrospective clinical
cohort. High expression of miR-34a was observed in cell lines sensitive to
doxorubicin, and upregulation of miR-34a is documented here to increase
doxorubicin sensitivity in in vitro lentiviral transduction assays. High
expression of miR-34a had a prognostic impact using overall survival as outcome. 
With risk stratification of DLBCL samples based on resistance gene signatures
(REGS), doxorubicin-responsive samples had statistically significant upregulated 
miR-34a expression. Classification of the DLBCL samples into subset-specific
B cell-associated gene signatures (BAGS) revealed differentiation-specific
expression of miR-34a. Our data further support FOXP1 as a target of miR-34a,
suggesting that downregulation of FOXP1 may sensitize DLBCL cells to doxorubicin.
We conclude that miRNAs, in particular miR-34a, may have clinical utility in
DLBCL patients as both predictive and prognostic biomarkers.

Copyright © 2016 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26854484  [PubMed - in process]


14. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2016 Apr;22(4):306-15. doi: 10.1111/cns.12501. Epub 2016 Feb
4.

A Nuclear Attack on Traumatic Brain Injury: Sequestration of Cell Death in the
Nucleus.

Tajiri N(1), De La Peña I(1), Acosta SA(1), Kaneko Y(1), Tamir S(2), Landesman
Y(2), Carlson R(2), Shacham S(2), Borlongan CV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery and Brain Repair, University of South Florida
Morsani College of Medicine, Tampa, FL, USA. (2)Karyopharm Therapeutics Inc,
Newton, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Exportin 1 (XPO1/CRM1) plays prominent roles in the regulation of
nuclear protein export. Selective inhibitors of nuclear export (SINE) are small
orally bioavailable molecules that serve as drug-like inhibitors of XPO1, with
potent anti-cancer properties. Traumatic brain injury (TBI) presents with a
secondary cell death characterized by neuroinflammation that is putatively
regulated by nuclear receptors.
AIMS AND RESULTS: Here, we report that the SINE compounds (KPT-350 or KPT-335)
sequestered TBI-induced neuroinflammation-related proteins (NF-k B, AKT, FOXP1)
within the nucleus of cultured primary rat cortical neurons, which coincided with
protection against TNF-a (20 ng/mL)-induced neurotoxicity as shown by at least
50% and 100% increments in preservation of cell viability and cellular enzymatic 
activity, respectively, compared to non-treated neuronal cells (P's < 0.05). In
parallel, using an in vivo controlled cortical impact (CCI) model of TBI, we
demonstrate that adult Sprague-Dawley rats treated post-injury with SINE
compounds exhibited significant reductions in TBI-induced behavioral and
histological deficits. Animals that received KPT-350 orally starting at 2 h
post-TBI and once a day thereafter over the next 4 days exhibited significantly
better motor coordination, and balance in the rotorod test and motor asymmetry
test by 100-200% improvements, as early as 4 h after initial SINE compound
injection that was sustained during subsequent KPT-350 dosing, and throughout the
18-day post-TBI study period compared to vehicle treatment (P's < 0.05).
Moreover, KPT-350 reduced cortical core impact area and peri-impact cell death
compared to vehicle treatment (P's < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Both in vitro and in vivo experiments revealed that KPT-350
increased XPO1, AKT, and FOXP1 nuclear expression and relegated NF-k B expression
within the neuronal nuclei. Altogether, these findings advance the utility of
SINE compounds to stop trafficking of cell death proteins within the nucleus as
an efficacious treatment for TBI.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26842647  [PubMed - in process]


15. J Invest Dermatol. 2016 Jan 29. pii: S0022-202X(16)00363-8. doi:
10.1016/j.jid.2016.01.013. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of Susceptibility Loci for Cutaneous Squamous Cell Carcinoma.

Asgari MM(1), Wang W(2), Ioannidis NM(3), Itnyre J(2), Hoffmann T(4), Jorgenson
E(5), Whittemore AS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA; Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, 
Oakland, California, USA. (2)Department of Health Research and Policy, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. (3)Department of Health
Research and Policy, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, USA; Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, California, USA. (4)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics and
Institute for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco,
California, USA. (5)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente Northern California, 
Oakland, California, USA. (6)Department of Health Research and Policy, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA. Electronic address:
alicesw@stanford.edu.

We report a genome-wide association study of cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma
conducted among non-Hispanic white members of the Kaiser Permanente Northern
California health care system. The study includes a genome-wide screen of 61,457 
members (6,891 cases and 54,566 controls) genotyped on the Affymetrix Axiom
European array and a replication phase involving an independent set of 6,410
additional members (810 cases and 5,600 controls). Combined analysis of screening
and replication phases identified 10 loci containing single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) with P-values < 5 × 10(-8). Six loci contain genes in the
pigmentation pathway; SNPs at these loci appear to modulate squamous cell
carcinoma risk independently of the pigmentation phenotypes. Another locus
contains HLA class II genes studied in relation to elevated squamous cell
carcinoma risk following immunosuppression. SNPs at the remaining three loci
include an intronic SNP in FOXP1 at locus 3p13, an intergenic SNP at 3q28 near
TP63, and an intergenic SNP at 9p22 near BNC2. These findings provide insights
into the genetic factors accounting for inherited squamous cell carcinoma
susceptibility.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26829030  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Hematol Oncol. 2016 Jan 22. doi: 10.1002/hon.2280. [Epub ahead of print]

Comprehensive phenotypic characterization of PTLD reveals potential reliance on
EBV or NF-<U+03BA>B signalling instead of B-cell receptor signalling.

Menter T(1), Dickenmann M(2), Juskevicius D(1), Steiger J(2), Dirnhofer S(1),
Tzankov A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Clinic for Transplantation Immunology and Nephrology, University Hospital
Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

Post-transplant lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD) are a major problem in
transplant medicine. So far, the insights into pathogenesis and potentially
druggable pathways in PTLD remain scarce. We investigated a cohort of PTLD
patients, consisting of both polymorphic (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>3) and monomorphic (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>19) B-cell 
lymphoproliferations. Several signalling pathways, cell of origin of PTLD and
their relation to viruses were analysed by immunohistochemistry and in situ
hybridization. Most PTLD were of activated B-cell origin. Two-thirds of cases
showed an Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection of the neoplastic cells. NF-<U+03BA>B
signalling components were present in the majority of cases, except for
EBV-infected cases with latency type III lacking CD19 and upstream B-cell
signalling constituents. Proteins involved in B-cell receptor signalling like
Bruton tyrosine kinase were only present in a minority of cases. Phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K) was expressed in 94% of cases and the druggable PI3K class 1
catalytic subunit p110 in 76%, while proteins of other signalling transduction
pathways were expressed only in single cases. Unsupervised cluster analysis
revealed three distinct subgroups: (i) related to EBV infection, mainly latency
type III and mostly lacking CD19, upstream B-cell signalling and NF-<U+03BA>B
constituents; (ii) mostly related to EBV infection with expression of the
alternative NF-<U+03BA>B pathway compound RelB, CD10, and FOXP1 or MUM1; and finally,
(iii) mostly unrelated to virus infection with expression of the classic NF-<U+03BA>B
pathway compound p65. EBV and NF-<U+03BA>B are important drivers in PTLD in contrast to 
B-cell receptor signalling. The main signal transduction pathway is related to
PI3K. This links PTLD to other subgroups of EBV-related lymphomas, highlighting
also new potential treatment approaches. Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Copyright © 2016 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 26799990  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


17. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2016 Feb 2;113(5):E577-86. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1524677113. Epub 2016 Jan 19.

Subtype-specific addiction of the activated B-cell subset of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma to FOXP1.

Dekker JD(1), Park D(2), Shaffer AL 3rd(3), Kohlhammer H(3), Deng W(1), Lee
BK(1), Ippolito GC(2), Georgiou G(2), Iyer VR(1), Staudt LM(4), Tucker HO(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712; (2)Department of
Molecular Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712; Department of Chemical
Engineering, Cockrell School of Engineering, The University of Texas at Austin,
Austin, TX 78712; (3)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.
(4)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892
haleytucker@austin.utexas.edu lstaudt@mail.nih.gov. (5)Department of Molecular
Biosciences, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of
Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712; haleytucker@austin.utexas.edu
lstaudt@mail.nih.gov.

High expression of the forkhead box P1 (FOXP1) transcription factor distinguishes
the aggressive activated B cell (ABC) diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL)
subtype from the better prognosis germinal center B-cell (GCB)-DLBCL subtype and 
is highly correlated with poor outcomes. A genetic or functional role for FOXP1
in lymphomagenesis, however, remains unknown. Here, we report that sustained
FOXP1 expression is vital for ABC-DLBCL cell-line survival. Genome-wide analyses 
revealed direct and indirect FOXP1 transcriptional enforcement of ABC-DLBCL
hallmarks, including the classical NF-<U+03BA>B and MYD88 (myeloid differentiation
primary response gene 88) pathways. FOXP1 promoted gene expression underlying
transition of the GCB cell to the plasmablast-the transient B-cell stage targeted
in ABC-DLBCL transformation-by antagonizing pathways distinctive of GCB-DLBCL,
including that of the GCB "master regulator," BCL6 (B-cell lymphoma 6). Cell-line
derived FOXP1 target genes that were highly correlated with FOXP1 expression in
primary DLBCL accurately segregated the corresponding clinical subtypes of a
large cohort of primary DLBCL isolates and identified conserved pathways
associated with ABC-DLBCL pathology.

PMCID: PMC4747717 [Available on 2016-08-02]
PMID: 26787899  [PubMed - in process]


18. Am J Transplant. 2016 Feb;16(2):414-25. doi: 10.1111/ajt.13558. Epub 2016 Jan 18.

EBV-Positive and EBV-Negative Posttransplant Diffuse Large B Cell Lymphomas Have 
Distinct Genomic and Transcriptomic Features.

Finalet Ferreiro J(1), Morscio J(2), Dierickx D(3), Vandenberghe P(1), Gheysens
O(4), Verhoef G(3), Zamani M(1), Tousseyn T(2), Wlodarska I(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (2)Translational Cell
and Tissue Research KU Leuven, Department of Pathology UZ Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium. (3)Department of Hematology, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (4)Department
of Molecular Medicine, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

The molecular pathogenesis of posttransplant diffuse large B cell lymphoma
(PT-DLBCL) is largely unknown. We have recently shown that Epstein-Barr
virus-positive (EBV(+) ) and -negative (EBV(-) ) PT-DLBCL have distinct gene
expression profiles, and the transcriptomic profile of EBV(-) PT-DLBCL is similar
to that of DLBCL in immunocompetent individuals (IC-DLBCL). To validate these
observations at the genomic level, we performed array-comparative genome
hybridization (aCGH) analysis of 21 EBV(+) PT-DLBCL, 6 EBV(-) PT-DLBCL, and 11
control IC-DLBCL, and subsequently combined genomic and transcriptomic data. The 
analysis showed that EBV(+) and EBV(-) PT-DLBCL have distinct aCGH profiles and
shared only one recurrent imbalance. EBV(-) PT-DLBCL, however, displayed at least
10 aberrations recurrent in IC-DLBCL, among which characteristic gain of 3/3q and
18q, and loss of 6q23/TNFAIP3 as well as 9p21/CDKN2A. The most prevalent
aberration in EBV(+) PT-DLBCL was gain/amplification of 9p24.1 targeting
PDCD1LG2/PDL2. Our data indicate that the FOXP1 oncogene and the tumor suppressor
CDKNA2 implicated in EBV(-) DLBCL, do not play a critical role in the
pathogenesis of EBV(+) PT-DLBCL. Altogether, genomic profiling of PT-/IC-DLBCL
confirms that EBV(-) and EBV(+) PT-DLBCL are distinct entities, while EBV(-)
PT-DLBCL has features in common with IC-DLBCL. These findings support the
hypothesis that EBV(-) PT-DLBCL are de novo lymphomas in transplant recipients.

© Copyright 2015 The American Society of Transplantation and the American Society
of Transplant Surgeons.

PMID: 26780579  [PubMed - in process]


19. BMC Genomics. 2016 Jan 14;17(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2370-6.

Identification of genomic aberrations in hemangioblastoma by droplet digital PCR 
and SNP microarray highlights novel candidate genes and pathways for
pathogenesis.

Mehrian-Shai R(1), Yalon M(2), Moshe I(3), Barshack I(4,)(5), Nass D(6), Jacob
J(7), Dor C(8), Reichardt JK(9), Constantini S(10,)(11), Toren A(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and
Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the
Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
ruty.shai@sheba.health.gov.il. (2)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. michal@droren.co.il. (3)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. itaimoshe@gmail.com. (4)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Iris.Barshack@sheba.health.gov.il. (5)Institute of 
Pathology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
Iris.Barshack@sheba.health.gov.il. (6)Institute of Pathology, Sheba Medical
Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel. Dvora.Nass@sheba.health.gov.il. (7)Pediatric
Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research
Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Jasmine.Jacob@sheba.health.gov.il. (8)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. Chen.Gefen@sheba.health.gov.il. (9)Division of Tropical Health and 
Medicine, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, Australia.
Juergen.reichardt@jcu.edu.au. (10)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. sconsts@netvision.net.il. (11)Department of
Pediatric Neurosurgery, Dana Children's Hospital, Tel-Aviv-Sourasky Medical
Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel. sconsts@netvision.net.il. (12)Pediatric
Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research
Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. amost@post.tau.ac.il.
(13)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
amost@post.tau.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: The genetic mechanisms underlying hemangioblastoma development are
still largely unknown. We used high-resolution single nucleotide polymorphism
microarrays and droplet digital PCR analysis to detect copy number variations
(CNVs) in total of 45 hemangioblastoma tumors.
RESULTS: We identified 94 CNVs with a median of 18 CNVs per sample. The most
frequently gained regions were on chromosomes 1 (p36.32) and 7 (p11.2). These
regions contain the EGFR and PRDM16 genes. Recurrent losses were located at
chromosome 12 (q24.13), which includes the gene PTPN11.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide the first high-resolution genome-wide view of
chromosomal changes in hemangioblastoma and identify 23 candidate genes: EGFR,
PRDM16, PTPN11, HOXD11, HOXD13, FLT3, PTCH, FGFR1, FOXP1, GPC3, HOXC13, HOXC11,
MKL1, CHEK2, IRF4, GPHN, IKZF1, RB1, HOXA9, and micro RNA, such as hsa-mir-196a-2
for hemangioblastoma pathogenesis. Furthermore, our data implicate that cell
proliferation and angiogenesis promoting pathways may be involved in the
molecular pathogenesis of hemangioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4712606
PMID: 26768750  [PubMed - in process]


20. Hum Genet. 2016 Mar;135(3):299-307. doi: 10.1007/s00439-016-1633-2. Epub 2016 Jan
14.

A genome-wide association study of pulmonary tuberculosis in Morocco.

Grant AV(1,)(2), Sabri A(3,)(4), Abid A(5), Abderrahmani Rhorfi I(5), Benkirane
M(6), Souhi H(5), Naji Amrani H(5), Alaoui-Tahiri K(5), Gharbaoui Y(5), Lazrak
F(7), Sentissi I(7), Manessouri M(7), Belkheiri S(7), Zaid S(7), Bouraqadi A(7), 
El Amraoui N(8), Hakam M(8), Belkadi A(1,)(2), Orlova M(9), Boland A(10),
Deswarte C(1,)(2), Amar L(1,)(2), Bustamante J(1,)(2,)(11), Boisson-Dupuis
S(1,)(2,)(12), Casanova JL(1,)(2,)(12,)(13,)(14), Schurr E(9), El Baghdadi J(15),
Abel L(16,)(17,)(18,)(19).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U1163, 75015, Paris, France, EU.
(2)Paris Descartes University, Imagine Institute, 75015, Paris, France, EU.
(3)Genetics Unit, Military Hospital Mohammed V, Hay Riad, 10100, Rabat, Morocco. 
(4)Faculty of Sciences-Kenitra, Ibn Tofail University, Kenitra, Morocco.
(5)Department of Pneumology, Military Hospital Mohammed V, Hay Riad, 10100,
Rabat, Morocco. (6)Blood Transfusion Center, Military Hospital Mohammed V, Hay
Riad, 10100, Rabat, Morocco. (7)Centre de Diagnostic de la tuberculose et des
Maladies Respiratoires [CDTMR], Salé, Morocco. (8)National Blood Transfusion
Center, Rabat, Morocco. (9)McGill Centre for the Study of Host Resistance, The
Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre, Montreal, PQ H3G 1A4, 
Canada. (10)CEA, Institut de Génomique, Centre National de Génotypage, 91000,
Evry, France, EU. (11)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious
Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, 10065, New York, NY,
USA. (12)Center for the Study of Primary Immunodeficiencies, AP-HP, Necker
hospital, 75015, Paris, France, EU. (13)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New
York, NY, USA. (14)Pediatric Hematology-Immunology Unit, AP-HP, Necker Hospital, 
75015, Paris, France, EU. (15)Genetics Unit, Military Hospital Mohammed V, Hay
Riad, 10100, Rabat, Morocco. baghdadijamila@yahoo.fr. (16)Laboratory of Human
Genetics of Infectious Diseases, Necker Branch, Institut National de la Santé et 
de la Recherche Médicale U1163, 75015, Paris, France, EU. laurent.abel@inserm.fr.
(17)Paris Descartes University, Imagine Institute, 75015, Paris, France, EU.
laurent.abel@inserm.fr. (18)St. Giles Laboratory of Human Genetics of Infectious 
Diseases, Rockefeller Branch, The Rockefeller University, 10065, New York, NY,
USA. laurent.abel@inserm.fr. (19)Human Genetics of Infectious Diseases, INSERM,
Université Paris Descartes, Unit 1163, Imagine Institute, 24 Bd du Montparnasse, 
75105, Paris, France. laurent.abel@inserm.fr.

Although epidemiological evidence suggests a human genetic basis of pulmonary
tuberculosis (PTB) susceptibility, the identification of specific genes and
alleles influencing PTB risk has proven to be difficult. Previous genome-wide
association (GWA) studies have identified only three novel loci with modest
effect sizes in sub-Saharan African and Russian populations. We performed a GWA
study of 550,352 autosomal SNPs in a family-based discovery Moroccan sample (on
the full population and on the subset with PTB diagnosis at <25 years), which
identified 143 SNPs with p < 1 × 10(-4). The replication study in an independent 
case/control sample identified four SNPs displaying a p < 0.01 implicating the
same risk allele. In the combined sample including 556 PTB subjects and 650
controls these four SNPs showed suggestive association (2 × 10(-6) < p < 4
 × 10(-5)): rs358793 and rs17590261 were intergenic, while rs6786408 and rs916943
were located in introns of FOXP1 and AGMO, respectively. Both genes are involved 
in the function of macrophages, which are the site of latency and reactivation of
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The most significant finding (p = 2 × 10(-6)) was
obtained for the AGMO SNP in an early (<25 years) age-at-onset subset, confirming
the importance of considering age-at-onset to decipher the genetic basis of PTB. 
Although only suggestive, these findings highlight several avenues for future
research in the human genetics of PTB.

PMID: 26767831  [PubMed - in process]


21. Virchows Arch. 2016 Jan 13. [Epub ahead of print]

Intrafollicular Epstein-Barr virus-positive large B cell lymphoma. A variant of
"germinotropic" lymphoproliferative disorder.

Lorenzi L(1), Lonardi S(1), Essatari MH(1), Pellegrini V(1), Fisogni S(1),
Gazzola A(2), Agostinelli C(2), Vermi W(1), Rossi G(3), Massarelli G(4), Pileri
SA(5,)(6), Facchetti F(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Medicine; Section of Pathology,
University of Brescia, Spedali Civili, 25123, Brescia, Italy. (2)Department of
Experimental Hematopathology and Hematology Sections, Diagnostic and Specialty
Medicine, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
(3)Department of Hematology, Spedali Civili di Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Departments of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy. (5)European Institute of Oncology, Milano,
Italy. (6)School of Medicine, Bologna University, Bologna, Italy. (7)Department
of Molecular and Translational Medicine; Section of Pathology, University of
Brescia, Spedali Civili, 25123, Brescia, Italy. fabio.facchetti@unibs.it.

Germinotropic lymphoproliferative disorders were previously described as
localized disorders associated with coinfection by human herpes virus 8 and
Epstein-Barr virus and characterized by good clinical outcome. We report the
clinical, morphological, phenotypical, and molecular features of three cases of a
hitherto unreported variant of Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive, human herpes
virus 8 (HHV8)-negative large B cell lymphoma with exclusive intrafollicular
localization. All cases occurred in elderly individuals (63, 77, and 65 years
old; one male, two females) without obvious immunedeficiency, who presented with 
high stage disease. Lymph nodes showed an effaced nodular architecture with
abnormal B follicles colonized by EBV+ large, pleomorphic atypical cells,
including Reed-Sternberg-like cells, showing an activated B cell phenotype
(CD10-FOXP1-Bcl6-IRF4+ or CD10-FOXP1+Bcl6+IRF4+) and intense expression of CD30. 
No monoclonal light-chain restriction was detected by immunohistochemistry or in 
situ hybridization, and IGH rearrangement was polyclonal; notably, EBV clonality 
was detectable in one case. Lymphoma cells in all cases showed diffuse expression
of the c-Myc protein, while Bcl2 was dim or negative; moreover, the strong
expression of phosphorylated-STAT3 in tumor cell nuclei suggested activation of
the JAK-STAT pathway. FISH analysis was performed in two cases and showed no
translocations of BCL2, BCL6, MYC, and PAX5 genes. Response to treatment was poor
in 2/3 patients: one died after 18 months, one is alive with disease after
12 months. The intrafollicular EBV-positive large B cell lymphoma expands the
spectrum of EBV-associated lymphoproliferative disorders in immunocompetent
individuals.

PMID: 26762526  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


22. Blood. 2016 Mar 17;127(11):1438-48. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-08-662635. Epub 2016 
Jan 4.

The hematopoietic oncoprotein FOXP1 promotes tumor cell survival in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma by repressing S1PR2 signaling.

Flori M(1), Schmid CA(1), Sumrall ET(1), Tzankov A(2), Law CW(3), Robinson MD(3),
Müller A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland; (2)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Basel,
Switzerland; and. (3)Institute of Molecular Life Sciences and SIB Swiss Institute
of Bioinformatics, University of Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland.

Aberrant expression of the oncogenic transcription factor forkhead box protein 1 
(FOXP1) is a common feature of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). We have
combined chromatin immunoprecipitation and gene expression profiling after FOXP1 
depletion with functional screening to identify targets of FOXP1 contributing to 
tumor cell survival. We find that the sphingosine-1-phosphate receptor 2 (S1PR2) 
is repressed by FOXP1 in activated B-cell (ABC) and germinal center B-cell (GCB) 
DLBCL cell lines with aberrantly high FOXP1 levels; S1PR2 expression is further
inversely correlated with FOXP1 expression in 3 patient cohorts. Ectopic
expression of wild-type S1PR2, but not a point mutant incapable of activating
downstream signaling pathways, induces apoptosis in DLBCL cells and restricts
tumor growth in subcutaneous and orthotopic models of the disease. The
proapoptotic effects of S1PR2 are phenocopied by ectopic expression of the small 
G protein Ga13 but are independent of AKT signaling. We further show that low
S1PR2 expression is a strong negative prognosticator of patient survival, alone
and especially in combination with high FOXP1 expression. The S1PR2 locus has
previously been demonstrated to be recurrently mutated in GCB DLBCL; the
transcriptional silencing of S1PR2 by FOXP1 represents an alternative mechanism
leading to inactivation of this important hematopoietic tumor suppressor.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26729899  [PubMed - in process]


23. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2015 Dec;37(6):662-73. doi:
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2015.06.006.

[Whole Genome Expression Profiling Analysis of Metastasis and
Drug-resistance-related Genes in Epithelial Ovarian Cancer Cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhu LC(1), Hu ZH(2), Liu JJ(1), Gao J(1), Lin B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to China
Medical University,Shenyang 110004,China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology,Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to China Medical University,Shenyang
110004,China;Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,the First Affiliated
Hospital of Zhengzhou University,Zhengzhou 450052,China;

Objective To investigate the genes associated with higher ability of metastasis
and chemotherapic resistance in epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) by using
Agilent whole genome oligonucleotide gene chip,with an attempt to further
investigate the molecular mechanism of metastasis and chemotherapic resistance of
EOC. Methods Oligonucleotide microarrays were used to determine whether gene
expression profile might differentiate EOC cell lines (RMG-1-C,COC1 and HO8910)
from their sub-lines (RMG-1-H,COC1/DDP and HO8910/PM) with higher ability of
metastasis and chemotherapic resistance. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain 
reaction and immunohistochemical staining validated the microarray results.
Results Gene expression profile identified 49 differentially expressed genes that
showed=2.0 fold change. All these differentially expressed genes were involved
mainly in gene expression and biopolymer biosynthesis. Interaction network
analysis predicted 21 genes participating in the regulatory connection. Highly
differential expression of GCET2,CFTR,FOXP1 and GARS genes was validated by
quantitative realtime polymerase chain reaction in all cell line samples,and the 
Results were consistent with microarray findings. Conclusion The change in the
metastasis and chemotherapic resistance-associated gene expression profiles may
provide a theoretical basis for studies on the molecular mechanisms of metastasis
and chemotherapic resistance in EOC.

PMID: 26725389  [PubMed - in process]


24. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 Dec 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Transcriptional regulation of mouse hypoglossal motor neuron somatotopic map
formation.

Chen X(1,)(2,)(3), Wang JW(1), Salin-Cantegrel A(1), Dali R(1,)(4), Stifani S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute,
McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada. (2)Tianjin Neurological Institute,
Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin, China. (3)Department of
Neurosurgery, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin Medical University General 
Hospital, Tianjin, China. (4)McGill Center for Bioinformatics, McGill University,
Montreal, QC, Canada. (5)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal
Neurological Institute, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
stefano.stifani@mcgill.ca.

Somatic motor neurons in the hypoglossal nucleus innervate tongue muscles
controlling vital functions such as chewing, swallowing and respiration.
Formation of functional hypoglossal nerve circuits depends on the establishment
of precise hypoglossal motor neuron maps correlating with specific tongue muscle 
innervations. Little is known about the molecular mechanisms controlling
mammalian hypoglossal motor neuron topographic map formation. Here we show that
combinatorial expression of transcription factors Runx1, SCIP and FoxP1 defines
separate mouse hypoglossal motor neuron groups with different topological,
neurotransmitter and calcium-buffering phenotypes. Runx1 and SCIP are coexpressed
in ventromedial hypoglossal motor neurons involved in control of tongue
protrusion whereas FoxP1 is expressed in dorsomedial motor neurons associated
with tongue retraction. Establishment of separate hypoglossal motor neuron maps
depends in part on Runx1-mediated suppression of ventrolateral and dorsomedial
motor neuron phenotypes and regulation of FoxP1 expression pattern. These
findings suggest that combinatorial actions of Runx1, SCIP and FoxP1 are
important for mouse hypoglossal nucleus somatotopic map formation.

PMID: 26687503  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Sci Rep. 2015 Dec 11;5:17957. doi: 10.1038/srep17957.

Uncovering MicroRNA Regulatory Hubs that Modulate Plasma Cell Differentiation.

Tsai DY(1,)(2), Hung KH(1,)(3), Lin IY(1), Su ST(1), Wu SY(4), Chung CH(1), Wang 
TC(1,)(5), Li WH(1,)(5), Shih AC(4), Lin KI(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. (2)Institute of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 112,
Taiwan. (3)Institute of Microbiology and Immunology, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 112, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Information Science, Academia
Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. (5)Biodiversity Research Center, Academia Sinica,
Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Using genome-wide approaches, we studied the microRNA (miRNA) expression profile 
during human plasma cell (PC) differentiation induced by stimulation of human
blood B cells with T follicular helper cell-dependent signals. Combining the
profiles of differentially expressed genes in PC differentiation with gene
ontology (GO) analysis revealed that a significant group of genes involved in the
transcription factor (TF) activity was preferentially changed. We thus focused on
studying the effects of differentially expressed miRNAs on several key TFs in PC 
differentiation. Cohorts of differentially expressed miRNAs cooperating as miRNA 
hubs were predicted and validated to modulate key TFs, including a down-regulated
miRNA hub containing miR-101-3p, -125b-5p, and -223-3p contributing to induction 
of PRDM1 as well as an up-regulated miRNA hub containing miR-34a-5p, -148a-3p,
and -183-5p suppressing BCL6, BACH2, and FOXP1. Induced expression of NF-<U+03BA>B and
PRDM1 during PC differentiation controlled the expression of up- and
down-regulated miRNA hubs, respectively. Co-expression of miR-101-3p, -125b-5p,
and -223-3p in stimulated B cells showed synergistic effects on inhibition of PC 
formation, which can be rescued by re-introduction of PRDM1. Together, we
catalogue the complex roadmap of miRNAs and their functional interplay in
collaboratively directing PC differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4675970
PMID: 26655851  [PubMed - in process]


26. Oncotarget. 2016 Jan 19;7(3):3506-19. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6510.

FOXP1 functions as an oncogene in promoting cancer stem cell-like characteristics
in ovarian cancer cells.

Choi EJ(1), Seo EJ(1), Kim DK(1), Lee SI(1), Kwon YW(1), Jang IH(1), Kim KH(2),
Suh DS(2), Kim JH(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Pusan National University,
Yangsan 626-870, Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Obstetrics
and Gynecology, School of Medicine, Pusan National University, Yangsan 626-870,
Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea. (3)Research Institute of Convergence
Biomedical Science and Technology, Pusan National University Yangsan Hospital,
Yangsan 626-770, Gyeongsangnam-do, Republic of Korea.

Ovarian cancer has the highest mortality rate of all gynecological cancers with a
high recurrence rate. It is important to understand the nature of recurring
cancer cells to terminally eliminate ovarian cancer. The winged helix
transcription factor Forkhead box P1 (FOXP1) has been reported to function as
either oncogene or tumor-suppressor in various cancers. In the current study, we 
show that FOXP1 promotes cancer stem cell-like characteristics in ovarian cancer 
cells. Knockdown of FOXP1 expression in A2780 or SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells
decreased spheroid formation, expression of stemness-related genes and epithelial
to mesenchymal transition-related genes, cell migration, and resistance to
Paclitaxel or Cisplatin treatment, whereas overexpression of FOXP1 in A2780 or
SKOV3 ovarian cancer cells increased spheroid formation, expression of
stemness-related genes and epithelial to mesenchymal transition-related genes,
cell migration, and resistance to Paclitaxel or Cisplatin treatment. In addition,
overexpression of FOXP1 increased promoter activity of ABCG2, OCT4, NANOG, and
SOX2, among which the increases in ABCG2, OCT4, and SOX2 promoter activity were
dependent on the presence of FOXP1-binding site. In xenotransplantation of A2780 
ovarian cancer cells into nude mice, knockdown of FOXP1 expression significantly 
decreased tumor size. These results strongly suggest FOXP1 functions as an
oncogene by promoting cancer stem cell-like characteristics in ovarian cancer
cells. Targeting FOXP1 may provide a novel therapeutic opportunity for developing
a relapse-free treatment for ovarian cancer patients.

PMID: 26654944  [PubMed - in process]


27. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Feb 1;25(3):546-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv495. Epub 2015 Dec 8.

Identification and functional characterization of de novo FOXP1 variants provides
novel insights into the etiology of neurodevelopmental disorder.

Sollis E(1), Graham SA(1), Vino A(1), Froehlich H(2), Vreeburg M(3),
Dimitropoulou D(1), Gilissen C(4), Pfundt R(4), Rappold GA(5), Brunner HG(6),
Deriziotis P(7), Fisher SE(8).

Author information: 
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen 6525 XD, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Human Molecular Genetics,
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (3)Department of Clinical
Genetics and School for Oncology & Developmental Biology (GROW), Maastricht UMC, 
Maastricht 6202 AZ, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg
69120, Germany, Interdisciplinary Center of Neurosciences (IZN), Heidelberg
University, Heidelberg 69120, Germany and. (6)Department of Clinical Genetics and
School for Oncology & Developmental Biology (GROW), Maastricht UMC, Maastricht
6202 AZ, The Netherlands, Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands. (7)Language and
Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen 6525
XD, The Netherlands, pelagia.derizioti@mpi.nl simon.fisher@mpi.nl. (8)Language
and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen
6525 XD, The Netherlands, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Nijmegen 6525 EN, The Netherlands pelagia.derizioti@mpi.nl simon.fisher@mpi.nl.

De novo disruptions of the neural transcription factor FOXP1 are a recently
discovered, rare cause of sporadic intellectual disability (ID). We report three 
new cases of FOXP1-related disorder identified through clinical whole-exome
sequencing. Detailed phenotypic assessment confirmed that global developmental
delay, autistic features, speech/language deficits, hypotonia and mild dysmorphic
features are core features of the disorder. We expand the phenotypic spectrum to 
include sensory integration disorder and hypertelorism. Notably, the etiological 
variants in these cases include two missense variants within the DNA-binding
domain of FOXP1. Only one such variant has been reported previously. The third
patient carries a stop-gain variant. We performed functional characterization of 
the three missense variants alongside our stop-gain and two previously described 
truncating/frameshift variants. All variants severely disrupted multiple aspects 
of protein function. Strikingly, the missense variants had similarly severe
effects on protein function as the truncating/frameshift variants. Our findings
indicate that a loss of transcriptional repression activity of FOXP1 underlies
the neurodevelopmental phenotype in FOXP1-related disorder. Interestingly, the
three novel variants retained the ability to interact with wild-type FOXP1,
suggesting these variants could exert a dominant-negative effect by interfering
with the normal FOXP1 protein. These variants also retained the ability to
interact with FOXP2, a paralogous transcription factor disrupted in rare cases of
speech and language disorder. Thus, speech/language deficits in these individuals
might be worsened through deleterious effects on FOXP2 function. Our findings
highlight that de novo FOXP1 variants are a cause of sporadic ID and emphasize
the importance of this transcription factor in neurodevelopment.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26647308  [PubMed - in process]


28. Dev Biol. 2015 Dec 1;408(1):99-108. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.10.008. Epub 2015
Nov 2.

En1 directs superior olivary complex neuron positioning, survival, and expression
of FoxP1.

Altieri SC(1), Jalabi W(2), Zhao T(1), Romito-DiGiacomo RR(2), Maricich SM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Richard King Mellon Institute for Pediatric Research, Department of
Pediatrics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15224, USA. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. (3)Richard
King Mellon Institute for Pediatric Research, Department of Pediatrics,
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15224, USA; Children's Hospital of
Pittsburgh of UPMC, Pittsburgh, PA 15224, USA. Electronic address:
stephen.maricich@chp.edu.

Little is known about the genetic pathways and transcription factors that control
development and maturation of central auditory neurons. En1, a gene expressed by 
a subset of developing and mature superior olivary complex (SOC) cells, encodes a
homeodomain transcription factor important for neuronal development in the
midbrain, cerebellum, hindbrain and spinal cord. Using genetic fate-mapping
techniques, we show that all En1-lineal cells in the SOC are neurons and that
these neurons are glycinergic, cholinergic and GABAergic in neurotransmitter
phenotype. En1 deletion does not interfere with specification or neural fate of
these cells, but does cause aberrant positioning and subsequent death of all
En1-lineal SOC neurons by early postnatal ages. En1-null cells also fail to
express the transcription factor FoxP1, suggesting that FoxP1 lies downstream of 
En1. Our data define important roles for En1 in the development and maturation of
a diverse group of brainstem auditory neurons.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4688081 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26542008  [PubMed - in process]


29. Blood. 2015 Oct 29;126(18):2076-7. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-09-666529.

FOXP1 inhibits plasma cell differentiation.

Toellner KM(1).

Author information: 
(1)UNIVERSITY OF BIRMINGHAM.

Comment on
    Blood. 2015 Oct 29;126(18):2098-109.

PMID: 26516214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2015 Dec 18;290(51):30607-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.681627. Epub
2015 Oct 26.

Forkhead Box P1 (FOXP1) Transcription Factor Regulates Hepatic Glucose
Homeostasis.

Zou Y(1), Gong N(1), Cui Y(1), Wang X(1), Cui A(1), Chen Q(1), Jiao T(1), Dong
X(1), Yang H(1), Zhang S(2), Fang F(1), Chang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic 
Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing, China and. (2)the Beijing Friendship Hospital Affiliated to the
Capital Medical University, Beijing Key Laboratory for Precancerous Lesion of
Digestive Diseases, Beijing Digestive Disease Center, Beijing, China. (3)From the
National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China and changy@ibms.pumc.edu.cn.

Dysregulation of hepatic gluconeogenesis contributes to the pathogenesis of
diabetes, yet the detailed molecular mechanisms remain to be fully elucidated.
Here we show that FOXP1, a transcriptional repressor, plays a key role in the
regulation of systemic glucose homeostasis. Hepatic expression levels of FOXP1
are decreased in diabetic mice. Modest hepatic overexpression of FOXP1 in mice
inhibited the expression of gluconeogenic genes, such as peroxisome
proliferators-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase (PEPCK), and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6PC), leading to a decrease in
hepatic glucose production and fasting blood glucose levels in normal mice and
different mouse models of diabetes, including db/db diabetic and high-fat
diet-induced obese mice. FOXP1 physically interacted with FOXO1 in vivo and
competed with FOXO1 for binding to the insulin response element in the promoter
region of gluconeogenic genes, thereby interfering expression of these genes.
These results identify a previously unrecognized role for FOXP1 in the
transcriptional control of hepatic glucose homeostasis.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4683280 [Available on 2016-12-18]
PMID: 26504089  [PubMed - in process]


31. Leukemia. 2016 Mar;30(3):605-16. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.299. Epub 2015 Oct 26.

FOXP1 suppresses immune response signatures and MHC class II expression in
activated B-cell-like diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Brown PJ(1), Wong KK(2), Felce SL(1), Lyne L(1), Spearman H(1), Soilleux EJ(1),
Pedersen LM(3), Møller MB(4), Green TM(4), Gascoyne DM(1), Banham AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)NDCLS, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, John Radcliffe 
Hospital, Oxford, UK. (2)Department of Immunology, School of Medical Sciences,
Health Campus, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia. (3)Department of
Haematology, Roskilde Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark. (4)Department of Pathology,
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.

The FOXP1 (forkhead box P1) transcription factor is a marker of poor prognosis in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Here microarray analysis of FOXP1-silenced
DLBCL cell lines identified differential regulation of immune response signatures
and major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC II) genes as some of the most 
significant differences between germinal center B-cell (GCB)-like DLBCL with
full-length FOXP1 protein expression versus activated B-cell (ABC)-like DLBCL
expressing predominantly short FOXP1 isoforms. In an independent primary DLBCL
microarray data set, multiple MHC II genes, including human leukocyte antigen DR 
alpha chain (HLA-DRA), were inversely correlated with FOXP1 transcript expression
(P<0.05). FOXP1 knockdown in ABC-DLBCL cells led to increased cell-surface
expression of HLA-DRA and CD74. In R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone)-treated DLBCL patients (n=150), reduced 
HLA-DRA (<90% frequency) expression correlated with inferior overall survival
(P=0.0003) and progression-free survival (P=0.0012) and with non-GCB subtype
stratified by the Hans, Choi or Visco-Young algorithms (all P<0.01). In non-GCB
DLBCL cases with <90% HLA-DRA, there was an inverse correlation with the
frequency (P=0.0456) and intensity (P=0.0349) of FOXP1 expression. We propose
that FOXP1 represents a novel regulator of genes targeted by the class II MHC
transactivator CIITA (MHC II and CD74) and therapeutically targeting the FOXP1
pathway may improve antigen presentation and immune surveillance in high-risk
DLBCL patients.

PMCID: PMC4777777
PMID: 26500140  [PubMed - in process]


32. Genes Dev. 2015 Oct 15;29(20):2081-96. doi: 10.1101/gad.267989.115.

FoxP1 orchestration of ASD-relevant signaling pathways in the striatum.

Araujo DJ(1), Anderson AG(1), Berto S(1), Runnels W(1), Harper M(1), Ammanuel
S(1), Rieger MA(2), Huang HC(3), Rajkovich K(1), Loerwald KW(1), Dekker JD(4),
Tucker HO(4), Dougherty JD(2), Gibson JR(1), Konopka G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA; (2)Department of Genetics, Washington University School
of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA; Department of Psychiatry, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA; (3)Department of
Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
75390, USA; Department of Biology, Jackson State University, Jackson, Mississippi
39217, USA; (4)University of Texas at Austin, Section of Molecular Genetics and
Microbiology, Austin, Texas 78712, USA.

Mutations in the transcription factor Forkhead box p1 (FOXP1) are causative for
neurodevelopmental disorders such as autism. However, the function of FOXP1
within the brain remains largely uncharacterized. Here, we identify the gene
expression program regulated by FoxP1 in both human neural cells and
patient-relevant heterozygous Foxp1 mouse brains. We demonstrate a role for FoxP1
in the transcriptional regulation of autism-related pathways as well as genes
involved in neuronal activity. We show that Foxp1 regulates the excitability of
striatal medium spiny neurons and that reduction of Foxp1 correlates with defects
in ultrasonic vocalizations. Finally, we demonstrate that FoxP1 has an
evolutionarily conserved role in regulating pathways involved in striatal neuron 
identity through gene expression studies in human neural progenitors with altered
FOXP1 levels. These data support an integral role for FoxP1 in regulating
signaling pathways vulnerable in autism and the specific regulation of striatal
pathways important for vocal communication.

© 2015 Araujo et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4617974 [Available on 2016-04-15]
PMID: 26494785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Dis Markers. 2015;2015:241301. doi: 10.1155/2015/241301. Epub 2015 Sep 28.

Identification of Novel Epigenetic Markers of Prostate Cancer by NotI-Microarray 
Analysis.

Dmitriev AA(1), Rosenberg EE(2), Krasnov GS(3), Gerashchenko GV(2), Gordiyuk
VV(2), Pavlova TV(4), Kudryavtseva AV(3), Beniaminov AD(3), Belova AA(3),
Bondarenko YN(5), Danilets RO(5), Glukhov AI(6), Kondratov AG(2), Alexeyenko
A(7), Alekseev BY(8), Klein G(4), Senchenko VN(3), Kashuba VI(9).

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow
119991, Russia ; P.A. Herzen Moscow Cancer Research Institute, Ministry of
Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow 125284, Russia. (2)Institute of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev
03680, Ukraine. (3)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Moscow 119991, Russia. (4)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell
Biology, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden. (5)Institute of Urology, 
National Academy of Medical Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev 04053, Ukraine.
(6)Department of Molecular Biology, Kurchatov NBIC Centre NRC "Kurchatov
Institute", Moscow 123182, Russia. (7)Bioinformatics Infrastructure for Life
Sciences, Science for Life Laboratory, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm,
Sweden. (8)P.A. Herzen Moscow Cancer Research Institute, Ministry of Healthcare
of the Russian Federation, Moscow 125284, Russia. (9)Institute of Molecular
Biology and Genetics, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Kiev 03680,
Ukraine ; Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska
Institute, 17177 Stockholm, Sweden.

A significant need for reliable and accurate cancer diagnostics and prognosis
compels the search for novel biomarkers that would be able to discriminate
between indolent and aggressive tumors at the early stages of disease. The aim of
this work was identification of potential diagnostic biomarkers for
characterization of different types of prostate tumors. NotI-microarrays with 180
clones associated with chromosome 3 genes/loci were applied to determine genetic 
and epigenetic alterations in 33 prostate tumors. For 88 clones, aberrations were
detected in more than 10% of tumors. The major types of alterations were DNA
methylation and/or deletions. Frequent methylation of the discovered loci was
confirmed by bisulfite sequencing on selective sampling of genes: FGF12, GATA2,
and LMCD1. Three genes (BHLHE40, BCL6, and ITGA9) were tested for expression
level alterations using qPCR, and downregulation associated with hypermethylation
was shown in the majority of tumors. Based on these data, we proposed the set of 
potential biomarkers for detection of prostate cancer and discrimination between 
prostate tumors with different malignancy and aggressiveness: BHLHE40, FOXP1,
LOC285205, ITGA9, CTDSPL, FGF12, LOC440944/SETD5, VHL, CLCN2, OSBPL10/ZNF860,
LMCD1, FAM19A4, CAND2, MAP4, KY, and LRRC58. Moreover, we probabilistically
estimated putative functional relations between the genes within each set using
the network enrichment analysis.

PMCID: PMC4602334
PMID: 26491211  [PubMed - in process]


34. Lab Med. 2015 Fall;46(4):299-311. doi: 10.1309/LM7IHV2NJI1PHMXC.

Expression of FOXP1 and Colorectal Cancer Prognosis.

De Smedt L(1), Palmans S(1), Govaere O(1), Moisse M(2), Boeckx B(2), De Hertogh
G(2), Prenen H(3), Van Cutsem E(3), Tejpar S(3), Tousseyn T(1), Sagaert X(4).

Author information: 
(1)Translational Cell and Tissue Research Unit, Department of Imaging and
Pathologie, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (2)Vesalius Research Center, Vlaams
instituut voor Biotechnologie (VIB), Leuven, Belgium Laboratory for Translational
Genetics, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven Belgium. (3)Digestive Oncology Unit, 
Department of Oncology, University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium, Department of
Pathology, University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium. (4)Translational Cell and Tissue
Research Unit, Department of Imaging and Pathologie, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium
xavier.sagaert@uzleuven.be.

BACKGROUND: Forkhead box gene P1 (FOXP1) has proven to be a valuable prognostic
biomarker in lymphomas, but little is known about this gene in colorectal cancer 
(CRC).
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the expression of FOXP1 in CRC and its potential
associations with outcome in CRC.
METHODS: We studied the expression pattern of FOXP1 retrospectively via
immunohistochemistry in a series of 165 - CRC cases. Fluorescent in situ
hybridization and RNA sequencing on FOXP1 knockdown cell lines were performed to 
investigate the mechanism of action and target genes of FOXP1.
RESULTS: Complete loss of nuclear FOXP1 expression was observed in 11.5% of the
subjects. A total of 70.9% of subjects showed a heterogeneous FOXP1 expression
pattern, and 17.6% of them had high FOXP1 expression. Impaired expression of
FOXP1 was significantly correlated with reduced survival rates by multivariate
analysis (P = .004). We found no chromosomal aberrations involving FOXP1 in
individuals with FOXP1 negativity via immunohistochemical testing. RNA sequencing
revealed that genes involved in inflammation and cell proliferation were
differentially expressed after FOXP1 knockdown.
CONCLUSIONS: In our case series, loss of FOXP1 was associated with reduced
survival rates in CRC tissue. Also, FOXP1 affects proliferation and inflammatory 
reaction in colorectal neoplasia.

Copyright© by the American Society for Clinical Pathology (ASCP).

PMID: 26489674  [PubMed - in process]


35. Transl Psychiatry. 2015 Oct 13;5:e656. doi: 10.1038/tp.2015.151.

Expression analysis in a rat psychosis model identifies novel candidate genes
validated in a large case-control sample of schizophrenia.

Ingason A(1), Giegling I(1), Hartmann AM(1), Genius J(2), Konte B(1), Friedl
M(1); Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium (PGC),
Ripke S(3), Sullivan PF(4), St Clair D(5), Collier DA(6), O'Donovan MC(7),
Mirnics K(8), Rujescu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.
(3)Analytical and Translational Genetics Unit, Department of Medicine,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. (4)Department of Genetics,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. (5)Department 
of Mental Health, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK. (6)King's College London,
Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre, Institute of Psychiatry,
London, UK. (7)Institute of Psychological Medicine and Clinical Neurosciences,
MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, UK. (8)Department of Psychiatry, Kennedy Center for Research on Human
Development, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA.

Antagonists of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-type glutamate receptor induce
psychosis in healthy individuals and exacerbate schizophrenia symptoms in
patients. In this study we have produced an animal model of NMDA receptor
hypofunction by chronically treating rats with low doses of the NMDA receptor
antagonist MK-801. Subsequently, we performed an expression study and identified 
20 genes showing altered expression in the brain of these rats compared with
untreated animals. We then explored whether the human orthologs of these genes
are associated with schizophrenia in the largest schizophrenia genome-wide
association study published to date, and found evidence for association for 4 out
of the 20 genes: SF3B1, FOXP1, DLG2 and VGLL4. Interestingly, three of these
genes, FOXP1, SF3B1 and DLG2, have previously been implicated in
neurodevelopmental disorders.

PMID: 26460480  [PubMed - in process]


36. Cancer Med. 2015 Nov;4(11):1700-4. doi: 10.1002/cam4.500. Epub 2015 Aug 15.

Supportive evidence for FOXP1, BARX1, and FOXF1 as genetic risk loci for the
development of esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Becker J(1,)(2), May A(3), Gerges C(4), Anders M(5,)(6), Veits L(7), Weise
K(1,)(2), Czamara D(8), Lyros O(9), Manner H(10), Terheggen G(4), Venerito M(11),
Noder T(5), Mayershofer R(12), Hofer JH(13), Karch HW(14), Ahlbrand CJ(15), Arras
M(15), Hofer S(15), Mangold E(1,)(2), Heilmann-Heimbach S(1,)(2), Heinrichs
SK(1,)(2), Hess T(1,)(2), Kiesslich R(10), Izbicki JR(16), Hölscher AH(17),
Bollschweiler E(17), Malfertheiner P(11), Lang H(15), Moehler M(18), Lorenz
D(19), Müller-Myhsok B(8), Ott K(20,)(21), Schmidt T(21), Whiteman DC(22),
Vaughan TL(23,)(24), Nöthen MM(1,)(2), Hackelsberger A(25), Schumacher B(4,)(26),
Pech O(27), Vashist Y(16), Vieth M(7), Weismüller J(28), Neuhaus H(4), Rösch
T(5), Ell C(3), Gockel I(9,)(15), Schumacher J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (2)Department 
of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine II, Sana Klinikum, Offenbach, Germany. (4)Department of
Internal Medicine II, Evangelisches Krankenhaus, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Department of Interdisciplinary Endoscopy, University Hospital
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (6)Department of Gastroenterology and
Interdisciplinary Endoscopy, Vivantes Wenckebach-Kinikum, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany. (8)Statistical
Genetics, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. (9)Department of
Visceral, Transplant, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital of
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (10)Department of Internal Medicine II, HSK Hospital, 
Wiesbaden, Germany. (11)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious
Diseases, Otto-von-Guericke University Hospital, Magdeburg, Germany.
(12)Gastroenterologie am Burgweiher, Bonn, Germany. (13)Magen Darm Zentrum Wiener
Platz, Cologne, Germany. (14)Gastroenterologische Schwerpunktpraxis, Baumholder, 
Germany. (15)Department of General, Visceral and Transplant Surgery, University
Medical Center, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany. (16)Department of General,
Visceral and Thoracic Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. (17)Department of General, Visceral and 
Cancer Surgery, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (18)First Department of 
Internal Medicine, University Medical Center, University of Mainz, Mainz,
Germany. (19)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, Sana Klinikum,
Offenbach, Germany. (20)Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation
Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (21)Department of
General, Visceral and Thorax Surgery, RoMed Klinikum Rosenheim, Rosenheim,
Germany. (22)Cancer Control, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane,
Australia. (23)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, School of
Public Health, Seattle, Washington. (24)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred 
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington. (25)Gastropraxis,
Wiesbaden, Germany. (26)Department of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology,
Elisabeth Hospital, Essen, Germany. (27)Department of Gastroenterology and
Interventional Endoscopy, St. John of God Hospital, Regensburg, Germany.
(28)Gastroenterologische Gemeinschaftspraxis, Koblenz, Germany.

The Barrett's and Esophageal Adenocarcinoma Consortium (BEACON) recently
performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) on esophageal adenocarcinoma
(EAC) and Barrett's esophagus. They identified genome-wide significant
association for variants at three genes, namely CRTC1, FOXP1, and BARX1.
Furthermore, they replicated an association at the FOXF1 gene that has been
previously found in a GWAS on Barrett's esophagus. We aimed at further
replicating the association at these and other loci that showed suggestive
association with P < 10(-4) in the BEACON sample. In total, we tested 88 SNPs in 
an independent sample consisting of 1065 EAC cases and 1019 controls of German
descent. We could replicate the association at FOXP1, BARX1, and FOXF1 with
nominal significance and thereby confirm that genetic variants at these genes
confer EAC risk. In addition, we found association of variants near the genes
XRCC2 and GATA6 that were strongly (P < 10(-5) ) although not genome-wide
significantly associated with the BEACON GWAS. Therefore, both variants and
corresponding genes represent promising candidates for future EAC association
studies on independent samples.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4673997
PMID: 26383589  [PubMed - in process]


37. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2015 Nov;24(11):1739-47. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-15-0507. Epub 2015 Sep 16.

A newly identified susceptibility locus near FOXP1 modifies the association of
gastroesophageal reflux with Barrett's esophagus.

Dai JY(1), de Dieu Tapsoba J(2), Buas MF(2), Onstad LE(2), Levine DM(3), Risch
HA(4), Chow WH(5), Bernstein L(6), Ye W(7), Lagergren J(8), Bird NC(9), Corley
DA(10), Shaheen NJ(11), Wu AH(12), Reid BJ(2), Hardie LJ(13), Whiteman DC(14),
Vaughan TL(15).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington. Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington,
School of Public Health, Seattle, Washington. jdai@fredhutch.org
tvaughan@u.washington.edu. (2)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington. (3)Department of Biostatistics,
University of Washington, School of Public Health, Seattle, Washington.
(4)Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Yale School of Public Health, New 
Haven, Connecticut. (5)Department of Epidemiology, MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas. (6)Department of Population Sciences, Beckman Research Institute 
and City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, California. (7)Department
of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. (8)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Karolinska Institutet,
Stockholm, Sweden. Division of Cancer Studies, King's College London, London,
United Kingdom. (9)Department of Oncology, Medical School, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, United Kingdom. (10)Division of Research, Kaiser Permanente
Northern California, Oakland, California. San Francisco Medical Center, Kaiser
Permanente Northern California, San Francisco, California. (11)Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine,
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (12)Department of
Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California/Norris Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Los Angeles, California. (13)Division of Epidemiology, University 
of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom. (14)Cancer Control, QIMR Berghofer Medical
Research Institute, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. (15)Division of Public
Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington.
Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, School of Public Health,
Seattle, Washington. jdai@fredhutch.org tvaughan@u.washington.edu.

BACKGROUND: Important risk factors for esophageal adenocarcinoma and its
precursor, Barrett's esophagus, include gastroesophageal reflux disease, obesity,
and cigarette smoking. Recently, genome-wide association studies have identified 
seven germline single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) that are associated with
risk of Barrett's esophagus and esophageal adenocarcinoma. Whether these genetic 
susceptibility loci modify previously identified exposure-disease associations is
unclear.
METHODS: We analyzed exposure and genotype data from the BEACON Consortium
discovery phase GWAS, which included 1,516 esophageal adenocarcinoma case
patients, 2,416 Barrett's esophagus case patients, and 2,187 control
participants. We examined the seven newly identified susceptibility SNPs for
interactions with body mass index, smoking status, and report of weekly heartburn
or reflux. Logistic regression models were used to estimate ORs for these risk
factors stratified by SNP genotype, separately for Barrett's esophagus and
esophageal adenocarcinoma.
RESULTS: The odds ratio for Barrett's esophagus associated with at least weekly
heartburn or reflux varied significantly with the presence of at least one minor 
allele of rs2687201 (nominal P = 0.0005, FDR = 0.042). ORs (95% CIs) for weekly
heartburn or reflux among participants with 0, 1, or 2 minor alleles of rs2687201
were 6.17 (4.91-7.56), 3.56 (2.85-4.44), and 3.97 (2.47-6.37), respectively. No
statistically significant interactions were observed for smoking status and body 
mass index.
CONCLUSION: Reflux symptoms are more strongly associated with Barrett's esophagus
risk among persons homozygous for the major allele of rs2687201, which lies
approximately 75 kb downstream of the transcription factor gene FOXP1.
IMPACT: The novel gene-exposure interaction discovered in this study provides new
insights into the etiology of esophageal adenocarcinoma.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4816532 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26377193  [PubMed - in process]


38. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 14;10(9):e0137887. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137887.
eCollection 2015.

Uncovering Direct Targets of MiR-19a Involved in Lung Cancer Progression.

Yamamoto K(1), Ito S(1), Hanafusa H(1), Shimizu K(1), Ouchida M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama University, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama,
Japan.

Micro RNAs (miRNAs) regulate the expression of target genes posttranscriptionally
by pairing incompletely with mRNA in a sequence-specific manner. About 30% of
human genes are regulated by miRNAs, and a single miRNA is capable of reducing
the production of hundreds of proteins by means of incomplete pairing upon
miRNA-mRNA binding. Lately, evidence implicating miRNAs in the development of
lung cancers has been emerging. In particular, miR-19a, which is highly expressed
in malignant lung cancer cells, is considered the key miRNA for tumorigenesis.
However, its direct targets remain underreported. In the present study, we
focused on six potential miR-19a target genes selected by miRNA target prediction
software. To evaluate these genes as direct miR-19a target genes, we performed
luciferase, pull-down, and western blot assays. The luciferase activity of
plasmids with each miR-19a-binding site was observed to decrease, while increased
luciferase activity was observed in the presence of anti-miR-19a locked nucleic
acid (LNA). The pull-down assay showed biotinylated miR-19a to bind to AGO2
protein and to four of six potential target mRNAs. Western blot analysis showed
that the expression levels of the four genes changed depending on treatment with 
miR-19a mimic or anti-miR-19a-LNA. Finally, FOXP1, TP53INP1, TNFAIP3, and TUSC2
were identified as miR-19a targets. To examine the function of these four target 
genes in lung cancer cells, LK79 (which has high miR-19a expression) and A549
(which has low miR-19a expression) were used. The expression of the four target
proteins was higher in A549 than in LK79 cells. The four miR-19a target cDNA
expression vectors suppressed cell viability, colony formation, migration, and
invasion of A549 and LK79 cells, but LK79 cells transfected with FOXP1 and
TP53INP1 cDNAs showed no difference compared to the control cells in the invasion
assay.

PMCID: PMC4569347
PMID: 26367773  [PubMed - in process]


39. Hum Pathol. 2015 Nov;46(11):1662-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.07.007. Epub 2015
Jul 21.

Androgen receptor, androgen-producing enzymes and their transcription factors in 
extramammary Paget disease.

Azmahani A(1), Nakamura Y(2), Ozawa Y(3), McNamara KM(4), Fujimura T(5), Haga
T(5), Hashimoto A(5), Aiba S(5), Sasano H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, 980-8575 Japan; Faculty of Health Sciences, University Sultan Zainal
Abidin, 21300 Kuala Terengganu, Terengganu, Malaysia. (2)Department of Pathology,
Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, 980-8575 Japan. Electronic
address: yasu-naka@patholo2.med.tohoku.ac.jp. (3)Department of Pathology, Tohoku 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, 980-8575 Japan; Division of
Advanced Surgical Science and Technology, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai, 980-8574 Japan. (4)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University
Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, 980-8575 Japan. (5)Department of
Dermatology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai, 980-8574
Japan.

Extramammary Paget disease (EMPD) has been known to frequently express androgen
receptor (AR). Therefore, androgens could play roles in the biological behavior
of Paget cells. 5a-Reductase (5a-red) types 1 and 2 and 17ß-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase type 5 (17ß-HSD5) are pivotal in situ regulators of androgen
production in androgen-responsive tissues including androgen-dependent neoplasms.
Therefore, in this study, we immunolocalized AR, androgen-producing enzymes, and 
their transcription factors to assess the state of in situ androgen production
and actions and its correlation of invasiveness in EMPD. We studied 51 cases of
EMPD with known clinicopathological status. AR, 5a-red1, 17ß-HSD5, and ß-catenin 
immunoreactivity was evaluated by using the modified H-score method while cyclin 
D1, p53, forkhead box protein P1, and a proliferation marker, Ki-67, were
quantified using labeling index. The mean scores of AR, 5a-red1, and 17ß-HSD5 in 
invasive EMPD were all significantly higher than noninvasive EMPD (P < .0001).
Ki-67 labeling index as well as the cyclin D1 score was also significantly higher
in invasive than noninvasive lesions of EMPD. These results demonstrated that
androgen receptor and androgen-producing enzymes were both associated with cell
cycle regulation and subsequently the invasiveness of EMPD lesions and could also
indicate those above as potential markers of invasive potentials in EMPD.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26359540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Mol Immunol. 2015 Dec;68(2 Pt A):223-33. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.08.012. Epub 
2015 Sep 5.

The artificial loss of Runx1 reduces the expression of quiescence-associated
transcription factors in CD4(+) T lymphocytes.

Wong WF(1), Kohu K(2), Nagashima T(3), Funayama R(3), Matsumoto M(4), Movahed
E(5), Tan GM(5), Yeow TC(5), Looi CY(6), Kurokawa M(7), Osato M(8), Igarashi
K(4), Nakayama K(3), Satake M(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia; Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of
Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. Electronic
address: wonfen@um.edu.my. (2)Department of Molecular Immunology, Institute of
Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan; Cancer Science
Institute, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117599, Singapore.
(3)Division of Cell Proliferation, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku
University, Sendai, Japan. (4)Division of Biochemistry, Graduate School of
Medicine, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. (5)Department of Medical
Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. 
(6)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala
Lumpur, Malaysia. (7)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of
Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (8)Cancer Science Institute,
National University of Singapore, Singapore 117599, Singapore. (9)Department of
Molecular Immunology, Institute of Development, Aging and Cancer, Tohoku
University, Sendai, Japan.

The Runx1 transcription factor cooperates with or antagonizes other transcription
factors and plays essential roles in the differentiation and function of T
lymphocytes. Previous works showed that Runx1 is expressed in peripheral CD4(+) T
cells which level declines after T cell receptor (TCR) activation, and artificial
deletion of Runx1 causes autoimmune lung disease in mice. The present study
addresses the mechanisms by which Runx1 contributes to the maintenance of
peripheral CD4(+) T cell quiescence. Microarray and quantitative RT-PCR analyses 
were employed to compare the transcriptome of Runx1 -/- CD4(+) T cells to those
of unstimulated and TCR-stimulated Runx1 +/- cells. The results identified genes 
whose expression was modulated similarly by Runx1 deletion and TCR activation.
Among them, genes encoding cytokines, chemokines, and Jak/STAT signaling
molecules were substantially induced. In Runx1-deleted T cells, simultaneous
increases in Il-17A and Ror<U+03B3>c, a known master gene in TH17 differentiation, were 
observed. In addition, we observed that the loss of Runx1 reduced the
transcription of genes encoding quiescence-associated transcription factors,
including Foxp1, Foxo1, and Klf2. Interestingly, we identified consensus Runx1
binding sites at the promoter regions of Foxp1, Foxo1, and Klf2 genes, which can 
be enriched by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay with an anti-Runx1 antibody.
Therefore, we suggest that Runx1 may activate, directly or indirectly, the
expression of quiescence-associated molecules and thereby contribute to the
maintenance of quiescence in CD4(+) T cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26350416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Dec;99(3):537-45. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.08.019. Epub
2015 Sep 2.

Low HIP1R mRNA and protein expression are associated with worse survival in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients treated with R-CHOP.

Wong KK(1), Ch'ng ES(2), Loo SK(3), Husin A(4), Muruzabal MA(5), Møller MB(6),
Pedersen LM(7), Pomposo MP(8), Gaafar A(9), Banham AH(10), Green TM(6), Lawrie
CH(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains
Malaysia, 16150 Kelantan, Malaysia. Electronic address: kahkeng@usm.my.
(2)Department of Pathology, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains
Malaysia, 16150 Kelantan, Malaysia; Advanced Medical and Dental Institute,
Universiti Sains Malaysia, Bertam, 13200 Kepala Batas, Pulau Pinang, Malaysia.
(3)Department of Immunology, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains
Malaysia, 16150 Kelantan, Malaysia. (4)Department of Medicine, School of Medical 
Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, 16150 Kelantan, Malaysia. (5)Oncology
Department, Biodonostia Research Institute, San Sebastian 20014, Spain.
(6)Department of Pathology, Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark.
(7)Department of Haematology, Roskilde Hospital, Roskilde, Denmark. (8)Department
of Hematology, Hospital Universitario Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain. (9)Department of 
Pathology, Hospital Universitario Cruces, Barakaldo, Spain. (10)Nuffield Division
of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of 
Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom. (11)Oncology
Department, Biodonostia Research Institute, San Sebastian 20014, Spain; Nuffield 
Division of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Radcliffe Department of Medicine,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom;
IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain.

Huntingtin-interacting protein 1-related (HIP1R) is an endocytic protein involved
in receptor trafficking, including regulating cell surface expression of receptor
tyrosine kinases. We have previously shown that low HIP1R protein expression was 
associated with poorer survival in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) patients
from Denmark treated with R-CHOP (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine, prednisone). In this multicenter study, we extend these findings and
validate the prognostic and subtyping utility of HIP1R expression at both
transcript and protein level. Using data mining on three independent
transcriptomic datasets of DLBCL, HIP1R transcript was preferentially expressed
in germinal center B-cell (GCB)-like DLBCL subtype (P<0.01 in all three
datasets), and lower expression was correlated with worse overall survival (OS;
P<0.01) and progression-free survival (PFS; P<0.05) in a microarray-profiled
DLBCL dataset. At the protein level examined by immunohistochemistry, HIP1R
expression at 30% cut-off was associated with GCB-DLBCL molecular subtype
(P=0.0004; n=42), and predictive of OS (P=0.0006) and PFS (P=0.0230) in de novo
DLBCL patients treated with R-CHOP (n=73). Cases with high FOXP1 and low HIP1R
expression frequency (FOXP1(hi)/HIP1R(lo) phenotype) exhibited poorer OS
(P=0.0038) and PFS (P=0.0134). Multivariate analysis showed that HIP1R<30% or
FOXP1(hi)/HIP1R(lo) subgroup of patients exhibited inferior OS and PFS (P<0.05)
independently of the International Prognostic Index. We conclude that HIP1R
expression is strongly indicative of survival when utilized on its own or in
combination with FOXP1, and the molecule is potentially applicable for subtyping 
of DLBCL cases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26341140  [PubMed - in process]


42. Circ Res. 2015 Oct 23;117(10):891-904. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.306624. Epub
2015 Sep 2.

miR-206 Mediates YAP-Induced Cardiac Hypertrophy and Survival.

Yang Y(1), Del Re DP(1), Nakano N(1), Sciarretta S(1), Zhai P(1), Park J(1),
Sayed D(1), Shirakabe A(1), Matsushima S(1), Park Y(1), Tian B(1), Abdellatif
M(1), Sadoshima J(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Cardiovascular Research Institute and the Department of Cell Biology 
and Molecular Medicine (Y.Y., D.P.D.R., N.N., P.Z., D.S., A.S., S.M., Y.P., M.A.,
J.S.), and Department of Biochemistry (J.P., B.T.), Rutgers, New Jersey Medical
School, Newark; and the Department of Medical-Surgical Sciences and
Biotechnologies, University of Rome "Sapienza", Latina and IRCCS Neuromed,
Pozzilli (IS), Italy (S.S.).

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2015 Oct 23;117(10):832-4.

RATIONALE: In Drosophila, the Hippo signaling pathway negatively regulates organ 
size by suppressing cell proliferation and survival through the inhibition of
Yorkie, a transcriptional cofactor. Yes-associated protein (YAP), the mammalian
homolog of Yorkie, promotes cardiomyocyte growth and survival in postnatal
hearts. However, the underlying mechanism responsible for the beneficial effect
of YAP in cardiomyocytes remains unclear.
OBJECTIVES: We investigated whether miR-206, a microRNA known to promote
hypertrophy in skeletal muscle, mediates the effect of YAP on promotion of
survival and hypertrophy in cardiomyocytes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Microarray analysis indicated that YAP increased miR-206
expression in cardiomyocytes. Increased miR-206 expression induced cardiac
hypertrophy and inhibited cell death in cultured cardiomyocytes, similar to that 
of YAP. Downregulation of endogenous miR-206 in cardiomyocytes attenuated
YAP-induced cardiac hypertrophy and survival, suggesting that miR-206 plays a
critical role in mediating YAP function. Cardiac-specific overexpression of
miR-206 in mice induced hypertrophy and protected the heart from
ischemia/reperfusion injury, whereas suppression of miR-206 exacerbated
ischemia/reperfusion injury and prevented pressure overload-induced cardiac
hypertrophy. miR-206 negatively regulates Forkhead box protein P1 expression in
cardiomyocytes and overexpression of Forkhead box protein P1 attenuated
miR-206-induced cardiac hypertrophy and survival, suggesting that Forkhead box
protein P1 is a functional target of miR-206.
CONCLUSIONS: YAP increases the abundance of miR-206, which in turn plays an
essential role in mediating hypertrophy and survival by silencing Forkhead box
protein P1 in cardiomyocytes.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4747867 [Available on 2016-10-23]
PMID: 26333362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Histopathology. 2015 Sep 1. doi: 10.1111/his.12854. [Epub ahead of print]

IgG4-positive extranodal marginal zone lymphoma arising in Hashimoto's
thyroiditis: clinicopathological and cytogenetic features of a hitherto
undescribed condition.

Tan CL(1), Ong YK(2), Tan SY(3), Ng SB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, National University Health System, Singapore.
(2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head & Neck Surgery, National University Health
System, Singapore. (3)Department of Pathology, Singapore General Hospital,
Singapore. (4)Department of Pathology, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.

AIMS: Hashimoto's thyroiditis was recently divided into IgG4-plasma cell-rich and
IgG4-plasma cell-poor subtypes. The former, also known as IgG4 thyroiditis, is
associated with clinical, serological, sonographic and morphological features
that are distinctive from those of the non-IgG4 subgroup. We describe an
interesting case of IgG4-positive mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
lymphoma arising in a background of IgG4 thyroiditis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The thyroid gland showed typical features of IgG4
thyroiditis, including characteristic patterns of fibrosis. A dense
lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate diffusely involved the entire gland without
formation of a destructive tumour mass. Lymphoepithelial lesions were prominent. 
There were abundant IgG4-positive plasma cells, with the IgG4/IgG ratio exceeding
40%. The IgG4-positive plasma cells were monotypic for kappa light chain, and
there was monoclonal IGH rearrangement. Fluorescence in-situ hybridization
revealed IGH translocation without translocation of MALT1, bcl-10, or FOXP1.
CONCLUSIONS: This represents the first case of IgG4-producing MALT lymphoma
associated with IgG4 thyroiditis. IGH translocation with an unknown partner gene 
was identified. We suggest the performance of serum and immunohistochemical
investigations for IgG and IgG4 in all cases of Hashimoto's thyroiditis to
diagnose IgG4 thyroiditis. In addition, clonality assays and light chain studies 
are useful to exclude a low-grade lymphoma arising in this context.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26332259  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


44. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(14):6129-33.

Epigenetic Regulation of miR-129-2 Leads to Overexpression of PDGFRa and FoxP1 in
Glioma Cells.

Tian XY(1), Zhang L, Sun LG, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Xinxiang Central Hospital, Xinxiang, Henan
Province, China E-mail : m2liva@hotmail.com; 13837314850@126.com.

miR-129-2 is frequently downregulated in multiple cancers. However, how it is
silenced in cancers remains unclear. Here we investigated the expression profile 
and potential biological function of miR-129-2 in glioblastoma (GBM), the most
common and lethal form of brain tumors in adults. We showed that miR-129-2 is
lost in GBM patient specimens and cultured cell lines. miR-129-2 expression could
be restored upon treatment with a histone deadetylase inhibitor (trichostatin A) 
but not a DNA methylation inhibitor (5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine), and more profound
effect was observed with the treatment of these two drugs in combination.
Furthermore, forced expression of miR-129-2 repressed the expression of major
oncogenic genes such as PDGFRa and Foxp1 in GBMs. Consistently, expression of
miR-129-2 significantly inhibits GBM cell proliferation in vitro. These results
reveal that miR-129-2 is epigenetically regulated and functions as a tumor
suppressor gene in GBMs, suggesting it may serve as a potential therapeutic
target for GBM treatment.

PMID: 26320507  [PubMed - in process]


45. Cancer Genet. 2015 Oct;208(10):508-12. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2015.07.001. Epub
2015 Jul 14.

A novel FOXP1-PDGFRA fusion gene in myeloproliferative neoplasm with
eosinophilia.

Sugimoto Y(1), Sada A(2), Shimokariya Y(3), Monma F(4), Ohishi K(5), Masuya M(4),
Nobori T(3), Matsui T(6), Katayama N(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Mie University Graduate School of
Medicine, Tsu, Japan. Electronic address: yuka2@clin.medic.mie-u.ac.jp.
(2)Hematology, Department of Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kobe, Japan. (3)Central Clinical Laboratories, Mie University Hospital,
Tsu, Japan. (4)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Mie University Graduate
School of Medicine, Tsu, Japan. (5)Blood Transfusion Service, Mie University
Hospital, Tsu, Japan. (6)Department of Hematology, Nishiwaki Municipal Hospital, 
Nishiwaki, Japan. (7)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Mie University
Graduate School of Medicine, Tsu, Japan. Electronic address:
n-kata@clin.medic.mie-u.ac.jp.

We identified a novel fusion gene, FOXP1-PDGFRA, in a patient with
myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) with eosinophilia, harboring the chromosome
abnormality t(3;4)(p13;q12). The patient responded well to imatinib and has
remained in molecular remission for 3 years. This is the seventh fusion gene
involving PDGFRA in MPN with eosinophilia. PDGFRA was truncated in its
autoinhibitory domain, as in other PDGFRA-related MPNs, and was fused to FOXP1 at
its functional forkhead domain. Comparing genomic DNA with mRNA sequences
provides the possibility that the splicing process near the breakpoint junction
in the FOXP1-PDGFRA fusion gene may use the normal splice donor site for intron
23a of FOXP1 and the cryptic splice acceptor site in exon 12 of PDGFRA. This is
the first report to describe the FOXP1-PDGFRA fusion gene in MPN.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26319757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Leukemia. 2016 Feb;30(2):361-72. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.237. Epub 2013 Aug 26.

Primary testicular diffuse large B-cell lymphoma displays distinct clinical and
biological features for treatment failure in rituximab era: a report from the
International PTL Consortium.

Deng L(1), Xu-Monette ZY(1), Loghavi S(1), Manyam GC(2), Xia Y(1), Visco C(3),
Huh J(4), Zhang L(2), Zhai Q(5), Wang Y(5), Qiu L(5), Dybkær K(6), Chiu A(7),
Perry AM(8), Zhang S(9), Tzankov A(10), Rao H(11), Abramson J(12), Sohani AR(12),
Xu M(13), Hsi ED(14), Zhu J(15), Ponzoni M(16), Wang S(17), Li L(18), Zhang
M(18), Ferreri AJ(16), Parsons BM(19), Li Y(14), Piris MA(20), Medeiros LJ(1),
Young KH(1,)(21).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA. (2)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational
Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
(3)San Bortolo Hospital, Vicenza, Italy. (4)Asan Medical Center, Ulsan University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (5)Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute
and Hospital, Institute of Hematology, CAMS & PUMC, Tianjin, China. (6)Aalborg
University Hospital, Aalborg, Denmark. (7)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center,
New York, NY, USA. (8)University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada. (9)Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA. (10)University Hospital,
Basel, Switzerland. (11)Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, China.
(12)Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(13)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (14)Cleveland Clinic,
Cleveland, OH, USA. (15)Peking University Cancer Hospital and Institute, Beijing,
China. (16)San Raffaele H Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy. (17)National
University Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. (18)The First Affiliated Hospital of
Zhengzhou University, Henan, China. (19)Gundersen Medical Foundation, La Crosse, 
WI, USA. (20)Hospital Universitario Marques de Valdecilla, Santander, Spain.
(21)The University of Texas School of Medicine, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Houston, TX, USA.

Primary testicular diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (PT-DLBCL) is a unique subtype
of DLBCL. The impact of rituximab on survival and patterns of treatment failure
in PT-DLBCL patient remain controversial. We analyzed the clinical and biological
feature of 280 PT-DLBCL cases, 64% of which were treated with
rituximab-containing regimens. Although most (95%) patients achieved complete
remission, a continuous risk of relapse was observed. Rituximab significantly
reduced the cumulative risk of relapse (P=0.022) and improved both
progression-free survival (PFS, P=0.012) and overall survival (OS, P=0.027) of
PT-DLBCL patients (5-year PFS, 56% vs 36%; 5-year OS, 68% vs 48%). Central
nervous system and contralateral testis were the most common sites of relapse,
but other extranodal and nodal sites of relapse were also observed. Most cases of
PT-DLBCL had a non-germinal center B-cell like (84%) immunophenotype and an
activated B-cell like (86%) gene expression profile (GEP) subtype. The
distinctive GEP signature of primary testicular lymphoma was relevant to tumor
cell proliferation, dysregulated expression of adhesion molecules and immune
response, likely accounting for the poor outcome. Accordingly, forkhead box P1
transcription factor (FOXP1) and T-cell leukemia/lymphoma 1 (TCL1) oncogenic
activation were confirmed and predicted a significant trend of poor survival.
This study provides valuable observations for better understanding of both
clinical and biological features in PT-DLBCL patients.

PMID: 26308769  [PubMed - in process]


47. Blood. 2015 Oct 29;126(18):2098-109. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-02-626176. Epub 2015
Aug 19.

The forkhead transcription factor FOXP1 represses human plasma cell
differentiation.

van Keimpema M(1), Grüneberg LJ(1), Mokry M(2), van Boxtel R(3), van Zelm MC(4), 
Coffer P(5), Pals ST(1), Spaargaren M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Lymphoma and Myeloma Center Amsterdam (LYMMCARE),
Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; (2)Department of Pediatric
Gastroenterology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands;
(3)Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and Stem Cell Research, and
University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; (4)Department of
Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;
and. (5)Department of Cell Biology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Blood. 2015 Oct 29;126(18):2076-7.

Expression of the forkhead transcription factor FOXP1 is essential for early
B-cell development, whereas downregulation of FOXP1 at the germinal center (GC)
stage is required for GC B-cell function. Aberrantly high FOXP1 expression is
frequently observed in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue lymphoma, being associated with poor prognosis. Here, by gene
expression analysis upon ectopic overexpression of FOXP1 in primary human memory 
B cells (MBCs) and B-cell lines, combined with chromatin immunoprecipitation and 
sequencing, we established that FOXP1 directly represses expression of PRDM1,
IRF4, and XBP1, transcriptional master regulators of plasma cell (PC)
differentiation. In accordance, FOXP1 is prominently expressed in primary human
naive and MBCs, but expression strongly decreases during PC differentiation.
Moreover, as compared with immunoglobulin (Ig) M(+) MBCs, IgG(+) MBCs combine
lower expression of FOXP1 with an enhanced intrinsic PC differentiation
propensity, and constitutive (over)expression of FOXP1 in B-cell lines and
primary human MBCs represses their ability to differentiate into PCs. Taken
together, our data indicate that proper control of FOXP1 expression plays a
critical role in PC differentiation, whereas aberrant expression of FOXP1 might
contribute to lymphomagenesis by blocking this terminal B-cell differentiation.

© 2015 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4626252
PMID: 26289642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Clin Oncol. 2015 Sep 1;33(25):2789-96. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2014.59.8912. Epub 2015
Jul 20.

Novel Biomarker Signature That May Predict Aggressive Disease in African American
Men With Prostate Cancer.

Yamoah K(1), Johnson MH(2), Choeurng V(2), Faisal FA(2), Yousefi K(2), Haddad
Z(2), Ross AE(2), Alshalafa M(2), Den R(2), Lal P(2), Feldman M(2), Dicker AP(2),
Klein EA(2), Davicioni E(2), Rebbeck TR(2), Schaeffer EM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Kosj Yamoah, Robert Den, and Adam P. Dicker, Thomas Jefferson University
Hospital; Priti Lal, Michael Feldman, and Timothy R. Rebbeck, University of
Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA; Kosj Yamoah, H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL; Michael H. Johnson,
Farzana A. Faisal, Ashley E. Ross, and Edward M. Schaeffer, Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, MD; Voleak Choeurng, Kasra Yousefi, Zaid Haddad, Mohammed 
Alshalafa, and Elai Davicioni, GenomeDx Biosciences, Vancouver, British Columbia,
Canada; and Eric A. Klein, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, OH.
Kosj.Yamoah@moffitt.org. (2)Kosj Yamoah, Robert Den, and Adam P. Dicker, Thomas
Jefferson University Hospital; Priti Lal, Michael Feldman, and Timothy R.
Rebbeck, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
PA; Kosj Yamoah, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center & Research Institute, Tampa, FL;
Michael H. Johnson, Farzana A. Faisal, Ashley E. Ross, and Edward M. Schaeffer,
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD; Voleak Choeurng, Kasra Yousefi, Zaid
Haddad, Mohammed Alshalafa, and Elai Davicioni, GenomeDx Biosciences, Vancouver, 
British Columbia, Canada; and Eric A. Klein, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation,
Cleveland, OH.

PURPOSE: We studied the ethnicity-specific expression of prostate cancer (PC)
-associated biomarkers to evaluate whether genetic/biologic factors affect ethnic
disparities in PC pathogenesis and disease progression.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 154 African American (AA) and 243 European
American (EA) patients from four medical centers were matched according to the
Cancer of the Prostate Risk Assessment postsurgical score within each
institution. The distribution of mRNA expression levels of 20 validated
biomarkers reported to be associated with PC initiation and progression was
compared with ethnicity using false discovery rate, adjusted
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney, and logistic regression models. A conditional logistic
regression model was used to evaluate the interaction between ethnicity and
biomarkers for predicting clinicopathologic outcomes.
RESULTS: Of the 20 biomarkers examined, six showed statistically significant
differential expression in AA compared with EA men in one or more statistical
models. These include ERG (P < .001), AMACR (P < .001), SPINK1 (P = .001), NKX3-1
(P = .03), GOLM1 (P = .03), and androgen receptor (P = .04). Dysregulation of
AMACR (P = .036), ERG (P = .036), FOXP1 (P = .041), and GSTP1 (P = .049) as well 
as loss-of-function mutations for tumor suppressors NKX3-1 (P = .025) and RB1 (P 
= .037) predicted risk of pathologic T3 disease in an ethnicity-dependent manner.
Dysregulation of GOLM1 (P = .037), SRD5A2 (P = .023), and MKi67 (P = .023)
predicted clinical outcomes, including 3-year biochemical recurrence and
metastasis at 5 years. A greater proportion of AA men than EA men had
triple-negative (ERG-negative/ETS-negative/SPINK1-negative) disease (51% v 35%; P
= .002).
CONCLUSION: We have identified a subset of PC biomarkers that predict the risk of
clinicopathologic outcomes in an ethnicity-dependent manner. These biomarkers may
explain in part the biologic contribution to ethnic disparity in PC outcomes
between EA and AA men.

© 2015 by American Society of Clinical Oncology.

PMCID: PMC4550692 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26195723  [PubMed - in process]


49. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 14;10(7):e0131674. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131674.
eCollection 2015.

Foxp1 Regulates the Proliferation of Hair Follicle Stem Cells in Response to
Oxidative Stress during Hair Cycling.

Zhao J(1), Li H(1), Zhou R(1), Ma G(1), Dekker JD(2), Tucker HO(2), Yao Z(1), Guo
X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, 200240, China. (2)Institute for Cellular and Molecular
Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas, United States of America.

Hair follicle stem cells (HFSCs) in the bugle circularly generate outer root
sheath (ORS) through linear proliferation within limited cycles during anagen
phases. However, the mechanisms controlling the pace of HFSC proliferation remain
unclear. Here we revealed that Foxp1, a transcriptional factor, was dynamically
relocated from the nucleus to the cytoplasm of HFSCs in phase transitions from
anagen to catagen, coupled with the rise of oxidative stress. Mass spectrum
analyses revealed that the S468 phosphorylation of Foxp1 protein was responsive
to oxidative stress and affected its nucleocytoplasmic translocation. Foxp1
deficiency in hair follicles led to compromised ROS accrual and increased HFSC
proliferation. And more, NAC treatment profoundly elongated the anagen duration
and HFSC proliferation in Foxp1-deficient background. Molecularly, Foxp1
augmented ROS levels through suppression of Trx1-mediated reductive function,
thereafter imposing the cell cycle arrest by modulating the activity of p19/p53
pathway. Our findings identify a novel role for Foxp1 in controlling HFSC
proliferation with cellular dynamic location in response to oxidative stress
during hair cycling.

PMCID: PMC4501748
PMID: 26171970  [PubMed - in process]


50. BMC Cancer. 2015 Jul 8;15:506. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1522-4.

Comparative microRNA profiling of sporadic and BRCA1 associated basal-like breast
cancers.

Yan M(1), Shield-Artin K(2), Byrne D(3), Deb S(4), Waddell N(5); kConFab
Investigators, kConFab, Haviv I(6), Fox SB(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomical Pathology, Prince of Wales Hospital, School of
Medical Sciences, University of New South Wales, Randwick, 2031, Australia.
max.yan@sesiahs.health.nsw.gov.au. (2)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute,
Prahran, 3004, Australia. kristy.shield@bakeridi.edu.au. (3)Department of
Pathology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne, 3002, Australia.
david.byrne@petermac.org. (4)Department of Pathology, Peter MacCallum Cancer
Centre, East Melbourne, 3002, Australia. siddhartha.deb@petermac.org.
(5)Queensland Centre for Medical Genomics, Institute for Molecular Bioscience,
University of Queensland, St Lucia, Australia. nick.waddell@imb.uq.edu.au.
(6)Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, Prahran, 3004, Australia.
izhak.haviv@bakeridi.edu.au. (7)Department of Pathology, Peter MacCallum Cancer
Centre, East Melbourne, 3002, Australia. stephen.fox@petermac.org.

BACKGROUND: While a number of studies have examined miRNA profiles across the
molecular subtypes of breast cancer, it is unclear whether BRCA1 basal-like
cancers have a specific miRNA profile. This study aims to compare grade
independent miRNA expression in luminal cancers, sporadic and BRCA1 basal-type
breast cancers. It also aims to ascertain an immunohistochemical profile
regulated by BRCA1 specific miRNAs for potential diagnostic use.
METHODS: miRNA expression was assessed in 11 BRCA1 basal, 16 sporadic basal, 17
luminal grade 3 cancers via microarrays. The expression of Cyclin D1, FOXP1,
FIH-1, pan-ERß, NRP1 and CD99, predicted to be regulated by BRCA1 specific miRNAs
by computer prediction algorithms, was assessed via immunohistochemistry in a
cohort of 35 BRCA1 and 52 sporadic basal-like cancers. Assessment of cyclin D1,
FOXP1, NRP1 and CD99 expression was repeated on a validation cohort of 82 BRCA1
and 65 sporadic basal-like breast cancers.
RESULTS: Unsupervised clustering of basal cancers resulted in a "sporadic"
cluster of 11 cancers, and a "BRCA1" cluster of 16 cancers, including a subgroup 
composed entirely of 10 BRCA1 cancers. Compared with sporadic basal cancers,
BRCA1 cancers showed reduced positivity for proteins predicted to be regulated by
miRNAs: FOXP1 (6/20[30 %] vs. 37/49[76 %], p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001), cyclin D1 (8/22[36 %] vs. 
30/46[65 %], p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025), NRP1 (2/20[10 %] vs. 23/46[50 %], p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002). This was
confirmed in the validation cohort (all p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). Negative staining for 2 or
more out of FOXP1, cyclin D1 and NRP1 predicts germline BRCA1 mutation with a
sensitivity of 92 %, specificity of 44 %, positive predictive value of 38 % and a
negative predictive value of 94 %.
CONCLUSION: Sporadic and BRCA1 basal-like cancers have grade independent miRNA
expression profiles. Furthermore miRNA driven differences in the expression of
proteins in BRCA1 basal cancers may be detected via immunohistochemistry. These
findings may have important diagnostic implications, as immunohistochemical
assessment of basal cancers, in addition to the patient's family and clinical
history, may potentially identify patients who may benefit from BRCA1 gene
testing.

PMCID: PMC4494690
PMID: 26152113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Carcinog. 2015 May 21;14:5. doi: 10.4103/1477-3163.157441. eCollection 2015.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in CRTC1 and BARX1 are associated with esophageal
adenocarcinoma.

van Nistelrooij AM(1), van der Korput HA(2), Broer L(3), van Marion R(2), van
Berge Henegouwen MI(4), van Noesel CJ(5), Biermann K(2), Spaander MC(6), Tilanus 
HW(7), van Lanschot JJ(7), Hofman A(8), Uitterlinden AG(9), Wijnhoven BP(7),
Dinjens WN(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, University Medical
Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands ; Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC Cancer
Institute, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (2)Department
of Pathology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute,
University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Surgery, 
Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Pathology, 
Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (6)Department of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, University Medical 
Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (7)Department of Surgery, Erasmus MC Cancer
Institute, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (8)Department
of Epidemiology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, University Medical Centre,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (9)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC Cancer
Institute, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands ; Department of 
Epidemiology, Erasmus MC Cancer Institute, University Medical Centre, Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Recently, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with
esophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) and Barrett's esophagus (BE) were identified;
rs10419226 (CRTC1), rs11789015 (BARX1), rs2687201 (FOXP1), rs2178146 (FOXF1),
rs3111601 (FOXF1), and rs9936833 (FOXF1). These findings indicate that genetic
susceptibility could play a role in the initiation of EAC in BE patients. The aim
of this study was to validate the association between these previously identified
SNPs and the risk of EAC in an independent and large case-control study.
DESIGN: Six SNPs found to be associated with EAC and BE were genotyped by a
multiplex SNaPshot analysis in 1071 EAC patients diagnosed and treated in the
Netherlands. Allele frequencies were compared to a control group derived from the
Rotterdam Study, a population-based prospective cohort study (n = 6206). Logistic
regression analysis and meta-analysis were performed to calculate odds ratios
(OR).
RESULTS: Rs10419226 (CRTC1) showed a significantly increased EAC risk for the
minor allele (OR = 1.17, P = 0.001), and rs11789015 (BARX1) showed a
significantly decreased risk for the minor allele (OR = 0.85, P = 0.004) in the
logistic regression analysis. The meta-analysis of the original GWAS and the
current study revealed an improved level of significance for rs10419226 (CRTC1)
(OR = 1.18, P = 6.66 × 10(-10)) and rs11789015 (BARX1) (OR = 0.83, P = 1.13 ×
10(-8)).
CONCLUSIONS: This independent and large Dutch case-control study confirms the
association of rs10419226 (CRTC1) and rs11789015 (BARX1) with the risk of EAC.
These findings suggest a contribution of the patient genetic make-up to the
development of EAC and might contribute to gain more insight in the etiology of
this cancer.

PMCID: PMC4453126
PMID: 26085818  [PubMed]


52. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 Jun 14;8:70. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0168-7.

Multiparameter analysis of homogeneously R-CHOP-treated diffuse large B cell
lymphomas identifies CD5 and FOXP1 as relevant prognostic biomarkers: report of
the prospective SAKK 38/07 study.

Tzankov A(1), Leu N(2), Muenst S(3), Juskevicius D(4), Klingbiel D(5), Mamot
C(6), Dirnhofer S(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Schoenbeinstrasse 40,
CH-4031, Basel, Switzerland. alexandar.tzankov@usb.ch. (2)Institute of Pathology,
University Hospital Basel, Schoenbeinstrasse 40, CH-4031, Basel, Switzerland.
nora.leu@ukbb.ch. (3)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel,
Schoenbeinstrasse 40, CH-4031, Basel, Switzerland. simone.muents@usb.ch.
(4)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Schoenbeinstrasse 40,
CH-4031, Basel, Switzerland. darius.juskevicius@usb.ch. (5)Swiss Group for
Clinical Cancer Research (SAKK), Effingerstrasse 40, CD-3008, Bern, Switzerland. 
dirk.klingbiel@sakk.ch. (6)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Cantonal Hospital
Aarau, Tellstrasse house Nr. 40, CH-5001, Aarau, Switzerland.
christoph.mamot@ksa.ch. (7)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Basel,
Schoenbeinstrasse 40, CH-4031, Basel, Switzerland. stephan.dirnhofer@usb.ch.

BACKGROUND: The prognostic role of tumor-related parameters in diffuse large B
cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a matter of controversy.
METHODS: We investigated the prognostic value of phenotypic and genotypic
profiles in DLBCL in clinical trial (NCT00544219) patients homogenously treated
with six cycles of rituximab, cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, vincristine,
prednisone (R-CHOP), followed by two cycles of R (R-CHOP-14). The primary
endpoint was event-free survival at 2 years (EFS). Secondary endpoints were
progression-free (PFS) and overall survival (OS). Immunohistochemical (bcl2,
bcl6, CD5, CD10, CD20, CD95, CD168, cyclin E, FOXP1, GCET, Ki-67, LMO2, MUM1p,
pSTAT3) and in situ hybridization analyses (BCL2 break apart probe, C-MYC break
apart probe and C-MYC/IGH double-fusion probe, and Epstein-Barr virus probe) were
performed and correlated with the endpoints.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-three patients (median age 58 years) were evaluable. 
Immunohistochemical assessment succeeded in all cases. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization was successful in 82 instances. According to the Tally algorithm,
81 cases (66%) were classified as non-germinal center (GC) DLBCL, while 42 cases 
(34%) were GC DLBCL. BCL2 gene breaks were observed in 7/82 cases (9%) and C-MYC 
breaks in 6/82 cases (8%). "Double-hit" cases with BCL2 and C-MYC rearrangements 
were not observed. Within the median follow-up of 53 months, there were 51
events, including 16 lethal events and 12 relapses. Factors able to predict worse
EFS in univariable models were failure to achieve response according to
international criteria, failure to achieve positron emission tomography response 
(p < 0.005), expression of CD5 (p = 0.02), and higher stage (p = 0.021). Factors 
predicting inferior PFS were failure to achieve response according to
international criteria (p < 0.005), higher stage (p = 0.005), higher
International Prognostic Index (IPI; p = 0.006), and presence of either C-MYC or 
BCL2 gene rearrangements (p = 0.033). Factors predicting inferior OS were failure
to achieve response according to international criteria and expression of FOXP1
(p < 0.005), cyclin E, CD5, bcl2, CD95, and pSTAT3 (p = 0.005, 0.007, 0.016, and 
0.025, respectively). Multivariable analyses revealed that expression of CD5 (p =
0.044) and FOXP1 (p = 0.004) are independent prognostic factors for EFS and OS,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: Phenotypic studies with carefully selected biomarkers like CD5 and
FOXP1 are able to prognosticate DLBCL course at diagnosis, independent of stage
and IPI and independent of response to R-CHOP.

PMCID: PMC4472251
PMID: 26071053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biomed Pharmacother. 2015 May;72:103-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2015.04.006. Epub
2015 Apr 14.

FOXP1 and SPINK1 reflect the risk of cirrhosis progression to HCC with HBV
infection.

Li F(1), Liu T(1), Xiao CY(1), Yu JX(1), Lu LG(1), Xu MY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai First People's Hospital, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200080, China. (2)Department of
Gastroenterology, Shanghai First People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200080, China. Electronic address:
xumingyi2014@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) deriving from cirrhosis with HBV
infection harbors higher morbidity and poor prognosis. The diagnosis of HCC at
its early stage is essential for improving the effect of treatment and survival
rate of patients.
METHOD: Affymetrix GeneChip was practiced to establish gene expression profile
and significance analysis of microarray (SAM) as well as prediction analysis of
microarray (PAM) was utilized to screen candidate marker genes in tissue of
carcinoma and para-cancerous with cirrhosis from 15 hepatitis B virus (HBV)
related HCC patients.
RESULT: Total 497 differential genes were selected by microarray (fold change >2;
P value<0.01). Then 162 significant genes were determined by SAM (fold change
-1.46 to 1.28). A number of 8-genes showing "poor risk signature" was validated
with threshold of 6.2, which was associated with cirrhosis progressing to HCC.
Only 3 down-regulated and 2 up-regulated predictor genes had statistical
difference in HCC and cirrhosis groups by RT-PCR (P value<0.01). Forkhead box
protein 1 (FOXP1) and serine protease inhibitor Kazal-type 1 (SPINK1) proteins
were found significantly increased in carcinoma tissues than para-cancerous
cirrhotic tissues by IH and WB.
CONCLUSION: Over-expression of FOXP1 and SPINK1 may participate in the
carcinogenesis of HBV related cirrhosis. They could use as potential biomarkers
for diagnosing early HCC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26054682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Diabetologia. 2015 Aug;58(8):1836-44. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3635-3. Epub 2015
May 29.

The FOXP1, FOXP2 and FOXP4 transcription factors are required for islet alpha
cell proliferation and function in mice.

Spaeth JM(1), Hunter CS, Bonatakis L, Guo M, French CA, Slack I, Hara M, Fisher
SE, Ferrer J, Morrisey EE, Stanger BZ, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, 723 Light Hall, 2215 Garland Avenue, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Several forkhead box (FOX) transcription factor family members
have important roles in controlling pancreatic cell fates and maintaining beta
cell mass and function, including FOXA1, FOXA2 and FOXM1. In this study we have
examined the importance of FOXP1, FOXP2 and FOXP4 of the FOXP subfamily in islet 
cell development and function.
METHODS: Mice harbouring floxed alleles for Foxp1, Foxp2 and Foxp4 were crossed
with pan-endocrine Pax6-Cre transgenic mice to generate single and compound Foxp 
mutant mice. Mice were monitored for changes in glucose tolerance by IPGTT, serum
insulin and glucagon levels by radioimmunoassay, and endocrine cell development
and proliferation by immunohistochemistry. Gene expression and glucose-stimulated
hormone secretion experiments were performed with isolated islets.
RESULTS: Only the triple-compound Foxp1/2/4 conditional knockout (cKO) mutant had
an overt islet phenotype, manifested physiologically by hypoglycaemia and
hypoglucagonaemia. This resulted from the reduction in glucagon-secreting alpha
cell mass and function. The proliferation of alpha cells was profoundly reduced
in Foxp1/2/4 cKO islets through the effects on mediators of replication (i.e.
decreased Ccna2, Ccnb1 and Ccnd2 activators, and increased Cdkn1a inhibitor).
Adult islet Foxp1/2/4 cKO beta cells secrete insulin normally while the remaining
alpha cells have impaired glucagon secretion.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Collectively, these findings reveal an important role
for the FOXP1, 2, and 4 proteins in governing postnatal alpha cell expansion and 
function.

PMCID: PMC4785827
PMID: 26021489  [PubMed - in process]


55. PLoS One. 2015 May 26;10(5):e0127671. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0127671.
eCollection 2015.

Foxp1 regulates cortical radial migration and neuronal morphogenesis in
developing cerebral cortex.

Li X(1), Xiao J(1), Fröhlich H(2), Tu X(1), Li L(1), Xu Y(1), Cao H(1), Qu J(1), 
Rappold GA(2), Chen JG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Visual Science, National Ministry of Health, and School of
Optometry and Ophthalmology, Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, 325027, P. R.
China. (2)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 366, 69120, Heidelberg, Germany.

FOXP1 is a member of FOXP subfamily transcription factors. Mutations in FOXP1
gene have been found in various development-related cognitive disorders. However,
little is known about the etiology of these symptoms, and specifically the
function of FOXP1 in neuronal development. Here, we report that suppression of
Foxp1 expression in mouse cerebral cortex led to a neuronal migration defect,
which was rescued by overexpression of Foxp1. Mice with Foxp1 knockdown exhibited
ectopic neurons in deep layers of the cortex postnatally. The neuronal
differentiation of Foxp1-downregulated cells was normal. However, morphological
analysis showed that the neurons with Foxp1 deficiency had an inhibited axonal
growth in vitro and a weakened transition from multipolar to bipolar in vivo.
Moreover, we found that the expression of Foxp1 modulated the dendritic
maturation of neurons at a late postnatal date. Our results demonstrate critical 
roles of Foxp1 in the radial migration and morphogenesis of cortical neurons
during development. This study may shed light on the complex relationship between
neuronal development and the related cognitive disorders.

PMCID: PMC4444005
PMID: 26010426  [PubMed - in process]


56. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Apr 27;14(2):3889-96. doi: 10.4238/2015.April.27.3.

Immunohistochemical subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in the head and
neck region.

Li JM(1), Hou J(2), Li L(2), Wang Y(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sichuan Cancer Hospital, Chengdu, China
lijiman_ljm@126.com. (2)Department of Pathology, Sichuan Cancer Hospital,
Chengdu, China.

The objectives of this study were to detect immunohistochemical subtypes of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) of the head and neck, to compare the Hans, 
Choi, and Tally algorithms and to examine the significance of protein expression 
in these algorithms. This study included 103 DLBCL patients at Sichuan Cancer
Hospital between May 2010 and October 2012. Immunohistochemistry was per-formed
for CD10, B-cell lymphoma 6 protein (Bcl-6), mutated melanoma-associated antigen 
1 (MUM1), germinal center B-cell-expressed transcript 1 (GCET1), forkhead box
protein P1 (FOXP1), and LIM do-main only 2 (LMO2). Subtypes were determined
according to the Hans, Choi, and Tally algorithms. Positive staining for CD10 was
detected in 16 patients (15.53%), for Bcl-6 in 68 patients (66.02%), for MUM1 in 
69 patients (66.99%), for GCET1 in 21 patients (20.39%), for FOXP1 in 75 patients
(72.82%), and for LMO2 in 50 patients (48.54%). The Hans algorithm identified 26 
patients (25.2%) with the germinal center B-cell (GCB) subtype and 77 (74.8%)
with the activated B-cell (ABC) subtype. In the Choi algorithm, 25 patients
(24.3%) were identified with the GCB subtype and 78 (75.7%) with the ABC subtype.
In the Tally algorithm, 20 patients (19.4%) had the GCB subtype and 83 (80.6%)
had the ABC subtype. Expression of CD10, MUM1, GCET1, FOXP1, and LMO2 correlated 
with algorithm (P < 0.05); however, Bcl-6 did not correlate with the Hans and
Choi algorithms. DLBCL of the head and neck is most commonly the ABC subtype, not
GCB. The Hans, Choi, and Tally algorithms were not significantly different.

PMID: 25966160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Tumour Biol. 2015 Sep;36(9):7269-75. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3383-5. Epub 2015
Apr 21.

Expression of FOXP1 in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) and its correlation with
chemotherapy resistance and prognosis.

Hu Z(1,)(2), Zhu L(1), Gao J(1), Cai M(1), Tan M(1), Liu J(1), Lin B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to
China Medical University, No. 36 Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang,
Liaoning Province, 110004, China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan Province,
450052, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to China Medical University, No. 36 Sanhao Street, 
Heping District, Shenyang, Liaoning Province, 110004, China. linbei2005@yeah.net.

We aimed to investigate the expression of FOXP1 in ovarian tumors and correlate
it with clinicopathological parameters, chemotherapy resistance, and prognosis.
FOXP1 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression was examined in fresh ovarian cancer
tissues and normal ovarian tissues, and FOXP1 protein expression was determined
in a total of 201 ovarian tissue samples, including 152 cases of primary
epithelial ovarian cancer, 26 borderline ovarian tumors, 13 benign ovarian
tumors, and 10 normal ovarian tissues. Complete chemotherapy and follow-up data
were available in 92 of the 152 epithelial ovarian cancer patients. The
relationship between FOXP1 protein expression and ovarian cancer pathological
characteristics, chemotherapy resistance, and survival time was analyzed. FOXP1
mRNA expression was downregulated in ovarian cancer tissues compared with that in
normal ovarian tissues. Decreased nuclear and increased cytoplasmic FOXP1 protein
expression was correlated with increasing tumor grade. Nuclear FOXP1 expression
was an independent risk factor associated with chemotherapy resistance and the
prognosis of patients with ovarian cancer. FOXP1 expression is closely related to
the degree of malignancy of epithelial ovarian cancer and may be a reliable index
of the chemoresistance and prognosis of ovarian cancer.

PMID: 25895457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 14;6:6778. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7778.

Foxp1-mediated programming of limb-innervating motor neurons from mouse and human
embryonic stem cells.

Adams KL(1), Rousso DL(2), Umbach JA(3), Novitch BG(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Neurobiology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 610
Charles E Young Dr East, TLSB 3024, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA [2] Eli
and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California, Los Angeles, 610 Charles E Young Dr East, TLSB 3024,
Los Angeles, California 90095, USA [3] Molecular Biology Institute Graduate
Program, University of California, Los Angeles, 610 Charles E Young Dr East, TLSB
3024, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA. (2)1] Department of Neurobiology, David
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 610 Charles E Young Dr East, TLSB 3024, Los
Angeles, California 90095, USA [2] Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, Los Angeles, 610
Charles E Young Dr East, TLSB 3024, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, University of California,
Los Angeles, 610 Charles E Young Dr East, TLSB 3024, Los Angeles, California
90095, USA.

Spinal motor neurons (MNs) control diverse motor tasks including respiration,
posture and locomotion that are disrupted by neurodegenerative diseases such as
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and spinal muscular atrophy. Methods directing MN
differentiation from stem cells have been developed to enable disease modelling
in vitro. However, most protocols produce only a limited subset of endogenous MN 
subtypes. Here we demonstrate that limb-innervating lateral motor column (LMC)
MNs can be efficiently generated from mouse and human embryonic stem cells
through manipulation of the transcription factor Foxp1. Foxp1-programmed MNs
exhibit features of medial and lateral LMC MNs including expression of specific
motor pool markers and axon guidance receptors. Importantly, they preferentially 
project axons towards limb muscle explants in vitro and distal limb muscles in
vivo upon transplantation-hallmarks of bona fide LMC MNs. These results present
an effective approach for generating specific MN populations from stem cells for 
studying MN development and disease.

PMCID: PMC4397664
PMID: 25868900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Dec;23(12):1702-7. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2015.66. Epub 2015 Apr
8.

A de novo FOXP1 variant in a patient with autism, intellectual disability and
severe speech and language impairment.

Lozano R(1), Vino A(2), Lozano C(1), Fisher SE(2,)(3), Deriziotis P(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Investigation of Neurodevelopmental Disorders (MIND) Institute,
Department of Pediatrics, UC Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, CA, USA.
(2)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

FOXP1 (forkhead box protein P1) is a transcription factor involved in the
development of several tissues, including the brain. An emerging phenotype of
patients with protein-disrupting FOXP1 variants includes global developmental
delay, intellectual disability and mild to severe speech/language deficits. We
report on a female child with a history of severe hypotonia, autism spectrum
disorder and mild intellectual disability with severe speech/language impairment.
Clinical exome sequencing identified a heterozygous de novo FOXP1 variant
c.1267_1268delGT (p.V423Hfs*37). Functional analyses using cellular models show
that the variant disrupts multiple aspects of FOXP1 activity, including
subcellular localization and transcriptional repression properties. Our findings 
highlight the importance of performing functional characterization to help
uncover the biological significance of variants identified by genomics
approaches, thereby providing insight into pathways underlying complex
neurodevelopmental disorders. Moreover, our data support the hypothesis that de
novo variants represent significant causal factors in severe sporadic disorders
and extend the phenotype seen in individuals with FOXP1 haploinsufficiency.

PMCID: PMC4795189 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 25853299  [PubMed - in process]


60. J Comput Biol. 2015 Apr;22(4):300-12. doi: 10.1089/cmb.2014.0299.

Inferring genome-wide functional modulatory network: a case study on NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA
transcription factor.

Li X(1), Zhu M, Brasier AR, Kudlicki AS.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas
Medical Branch , Galveston, Texas.

How different pathways lead to the activation of a specific transcription factor 
(TF) with specific effects is not fully understood. We model context-specific
transcriptional regulation as a modulatory network: triplets composed of a TF,
target gene, and modulator. Modulators usually affect the activity of a specific 
TF at the posttranscriptional level in a target gene-specific action mode. This
action may be classified as enhancement, attenuation, or inversion of either
activation or inhibition. As a case study, we inferred, from a large collection
of expression profiles, all potential modulations of NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA. The predicted
modulators include many proteins previously not reported as physically binding to
RelA but with relevant functions, such as RNA processing, cell cycle,
mitochondrion, ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis, and chromatin modification.
Modulators from different processes exert specific prevalent action modes on
distinct pathways. Modulators from noncoding RNA, RNA-binding proteins, TFs, and 
kinases modulate the NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA activity with specific action modes consistent
with their molecular functions and modulation level. The modulatory networks of
NF-<U+03BA>B/RelA in the context epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and burn injury
have different modulators, including those involved in extracellular matrix
(FBN1), cytoskeletal regulation (ACTN1), and metastasis-associated lung
adenocarcinoma transcript 1 (MALAT1), a long intergenic nonprotein coding RNA,
and tumor suppression (FOXP1) for EMT, and TXNIP, GAPDH, PKM2, IFIT5, LDHA, NID1,
and TPP1 for burn injury.

PMCID: PMC4394173
PMID: 25844669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Aug;39(8):1132-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000434.

Triple-hit B-cell Lymphoma With MYC, BCL2, and BCL6
Translocations/Rearrangements: Clinicopathologic Features of 11 Cases.

Wang W(1), Hu S, Lu X, Young KH, Medeiros LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX.

Lymphomas with translocations/rearrangements of MYC, BCL2, and BCL6, so-called
triple-hit B-cell lymphoma, are rare, and few studies on these tumors are
available in the literature. We report 11 cases of triple-hit B-cell lymphoma and
characterize their clinicopathologic findings. All patients were men, with a
median age of 64 years (range, 45 to 80 y), and 4 patients had antecedent or
concurrent follicular lymphoma. Using the 2008 World Health Organization
classification, these cases were classified as: 5 B-cell lymphoma,
unclassifiable, with features intermediate between diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
(DLBCL) and Burkitt lymphoma; 4 DLBCL; 1 DLBCL with concurrent follicular
lymphoma; and 1 low-grade follicular lymphoma. All cases were positive for CD10, 
BCL2, and FOXP1. Ten of 11 cases were positive for CD20. MYC expression was high 
in 10/11 (91%), BCL6 was positive in 8/11 (73%), and MUM1/IRF4 was positive in
6/11 (55%) cases. T-cell antigens, TdT, and Epstein-Barr virus-encoded RNA were
negative in all cases. Ten of 11 cases showed a high proliferation index-70% to
100%, and the follicular lymphoma had a 30% proliferation rate. Using most
algorithms, all cases belonged to germinal center B-cell-like group. All patients
received standard or more aggressive immunochemotherapy regimens. Three patients 
had no response to chemotherapy; 4 patients showed a partial response; 2 patients
had complete remission after chemotherapy; and 2 patients had just begun
chemotherapy. Three patients underwent a stem cell transplant. The median
follow-up time was 5.3 months. Five patients died, and 6 patients were alive at
last follow-up. Two patients who underwent stem cell transplant after complete
response to chemotherapy were in remission with 16 to 19 months of clinical
follow-up. In summary, triple-hit lymphomas are clinically aggressive tumors
associated with a poor prognosis. Patients often respond poorly to chemotherapy, 
but a subset may completely respond to chemotherapy followed by stem cell
transplant.

PMID: 25828391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J BUON. 2015 Jan-Feb;20(1):188-95.

Expression and significance of FOXP1, HIF-1a and VEGF in renal clear cell
carcinoma.

Wan L(1), Huang J, Chen J, Wang R, Dong C, Lu S, Wu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
University, Wenzhou, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the expressions of FOXP1, hypoxia inducible factor
(HIF)-1a and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in renal cell carcinoma of
the clear type (CCRCC) and their relationship with the patient
clinicopathological features.
METHODS: The expressions of forkhead box-P1 (FOXP1), HIF-1a and VEGF in 55 cases 
of CCRCC tissues were determined using immunohistochemistry. Then, their
correlations with clinical stage, histological grade and lymph node metastasis
were analyzed using chi-square test.
RESULTS: Thirty-seven of the 55 cases (67.3%) of CCRCC expressed FOXP1 with an
abnormal expression rate of 38.2% (21/55), in which there were 10 cases with
positive FOXP1 both in the nucleus and the cytoplasm and 11 cases with positive
FOXP1 in cell membrane. The abnormal expression rate of FOXP1 inhigh grade CCRCC 
(G3/G4) was significantly higher than that in low grade CCRCC (G1/G2, p<0.05).
FOXP1 expression was significantly correlated with the expression of HIF1 and
VEGF (r=0.54, p<0.01 and r=0.37, p<0.05, respectively), but was not obviously
correlated with clinical stage, lymph node metastasis and 5-year overall patient 
survival (p>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Abnormal expression of FOXP1 and its deficiency are common events in 
CCRCC. Abnormal expression of FOXP1 may create progression of tumor from low
grade to high grade by regulating the HIF-1-VEGF pathway.

PMID: 25778315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Clin Case Rep. 2015 Feb;3(2):110-3. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.167. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

A case report of de novo missense FOXP1 mutation in a non-Caucasian patient with 
global developmental delay and severe speech impairment.

Song H(1), Makino Y(1), Noguchi E(1), Arinami T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Medical Genetics, University of Tsukuba
Tsukuba-city, Ibaraki, Tsukuba.

The FOXP protein family (FOXP1-4) is a group of transcription factors that play
important roles in embryological, immunological, hematological, and speech and
language development. Here, we report FOXP1 de novo mutation and severe speech
delay in an individual belonging to a non-Caucasian population.

PMCID: PMC4352365
PMID: 25767709  [PubMed]


64. Protein J. 2015 Apr;34(2):111-21. doi: 10.1007/s10930-015-9603-4.

A Single Amino Acid in the Hinge Loop Region of the FOXP Forkhead Domain is
Significant for Dimerisation.

Perumal K(1), Dirr HW, Fanucchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Structure-Function Research Unit, School of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of the Witwatersrand, 1 Jan Smuts Ave, Johannesburg, 2050,
South Africa.

The forkhead box (FOX) proteins are a family of transcription factors that
interact with DNA via a winged helix motif that forms part of the forkhead
domain. The FOXP (FOXP1-4) subfamily is unique in the family in that the forkhead
domains of these proteins are able to dimerise via domain swapping. In this
event, structural elements are exchanged via extension of the hinge loop region. 
Despite the high sequence homology among the FOXP subfamily members, the
stability of their forkhead domain dimers varies, with FOXP3 forming the most
stable dimer. An amino acid difference is observed in the hinge region of the
FOXP subfamily where a tyrosine in all members is replaced with a phenylalanine
in FOXP3. In this work, the role of phenylalanine at this position in the hinge
region was investigated. This was done by creating the Y540F variant of the FOXP2
forkhead domain. The effect of the Y540F mutation on the structure, dimerisation 
propensity and DNA binding ability of the FOXP subfamily was investigated. The
mutation altered the structure of the protein by decreasing the disorder of the
backbone as measured by circular dichroism spectroscopy and by altering the local
environment of the hinge region as measured by tryptophan fluorescence. The
propensity of the forkhead domain to form a dimer was improved ~9.5 fold by the
mutation. This was attributed to increased hydrophobicity at the dimer interface 
as well as altered tension in the hinge loop region. DNA binding assays indicated
that the affinity for DNA was decreased by the mutation. Taken together, these
findings suggest that domain swapping may modulate DNA binding.

PMID: 25724387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Pathol. 2015 Jun;236(2):136-41. doi: 10.1002/path.4522. Epub 2015 Mar 26.

Recurrent genomic rearrangements in primary testicular lymphoma.

Twa DD(1,)(2), Mottok A(1,)(2), Chan FC(1,)(3), Ben-Neriah S(1), Woolcock BW(1), 
Tan KL(1), Mungall AJ(1,)(4), McDonald H(4), Zhao Y(4), Lim RS(1), Nelson
BH(5,)(6), Milne K(5), Shah SP(1,)(3), Morin RD(1,)(7), Marra MA(1,)(4), Scott
DW(1), Gascoyne RD(1,)(2), Steidl C(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Lymphoid Cancer Research, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC,
Canada. (2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (3)Bioinformatics Training Programme, University
of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (4)Canada's Michael Smith Genome
Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (5)Deeley Research
Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Victoria, BC, Canada. (6)Department of Medical
Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (7)Department of
Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, BC,
Canada.

Primary testicular diffuse large B cell lymphoma (PTL) is an aggressive
malignancy that occurs in the immune-privileged anatomical site of the testis. We
have previously shown that structural genomic rearrangements involving the MHC
class II transactivator CIITA and programmed death ligands (PDLs) 1 and 2 are
frequent across multiple B cell lymphoma entities. Specifically in PTL, we found 
rearrangements in the PDL locus by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
However, breakpoint anatomy and rearrangement partners were undetermined, while
CIITA rearrangements had not been reported previously in PTL. Here, we performed 
bacterial artificial chromosome capture sequencing on three archival,
formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue biopsies, interrogating 20 known
rearrangement hotspots in B cell lymphomas. We report novel CIITA, FOXP1 and PDL 
rearrangements involving IGHG4, FLJ45248, RFX3, SMARCA2 and SNX29. Moreover, we
present immunohistochemistry data supporting the association between PDL
rearrangements and increased protein expression. Finally, using FISH, we show
that CIITA (8/82; 10%) and FOXP1 (5/74; 7%) rearrangements are recurrent in PTL. 
In summary, we describe rearrangement frequencies and novel rearrangement
partners of the CIITA, FOXP1 and PDL loci at base-pair resolution in a rare,
aggressive lymphoma. Our data suggest immune-checkpoint inhibitor therapy as a
promising intervention for PTL patients harbouring PDL rearrangements.

Copyright © 2015 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25712539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Autoimmun. 2015 May;59:26-37. doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2015.01.011. Epub 2015 Feb
17.

Systems biologic analysis of T regulatory cells genetic pathways in murine
primary biliary cirrhosis.

Wang YH(1), Yang W(2), Yang JB(3), Jia YJ(4), Tang W(5), Gershwin ME(6), Ridgway 
WM(7), Lian ZX(8).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Immunology Laboratory, Institute of Immunology and The CAS Key
Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Life Sciences and
Medical Center, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui
230027, China. Electronic address: wangyh8@mail.ustc.edu.cn. (2)Liver Immunology 
Laboratory, Institute of Immunology and The CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity
and Chronic Disease, School of Life Sciences and Medical Center, University of
Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China. Electronic address: 
ywei0702@mail.ustc.edu.cn. (3)Liver Immunology Laboratory, Institute of
Immunology and The CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease,
School of Life Sciences and Medical Center, University of Science and Technology 
of China, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China. Electronic address:
yjingb@mail.ustc.edu.cn. (4)Liver Immunology Laboratory, Institute of Immunology 
and The CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Life
Sciences and Medical Center, University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, Anhui 230027, China. Electronic address: jyanjie@mail.ustc.edu.cn.
(5)Liver Immunology Laboratory, Institute of Immunology and The CAS Key
Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Life Sciences and
Medical Center, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui
230027, China. Electronic address: wayne012@mail.ustc.edu.cn. (6)Division of
Rheumatology, Allergy and Clinical Immunology, University of California at Davis 
School of Medicine, Davis, CA 95616, USA. Electronic address:
megershwin@ucdavis.edu. (7)Division of Immunology, Allergy and Rheumatology,
University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45220, USA. Electronic address:
wridg1@gmail.com. (8)Liver Immunology Laboratory, Institute of Immunology and The
CAS Key Laboratory of Innate Immunity and Chronic Disease, School of Life
Sciences and Medical Center, University of Science and Technology of China,
Hefei, Anhui 230027, China; Innovation Center for Cell Biology, Hefei National
Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China.
Electronic address: zxlian1@ustc.edu.cn.

CD4(+)Foxp3(+) regulatory T cells (Tregs) play a non-redundant role in control of
excessive immune responses, and defects in Tregs have been shown both in patients
and murine models of primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC), a progressive autoimmune
biliary disease. Herein, we took advantage of a murine model of PBC, the dominant
negative transforming growth factor ß receptor II (dnTGFßRII) mice, to assess
Treg genetic defects and their functional effects in PBC. By using
high-resolution microarrays with verification by PCR and protein expression, we
found profound and wide-ranging differences between dnTGFßRII and normal, wild
type Tregs. Critical transcription factors were down-regulated including Eos,
Ahr, Klf2, Foxp1 in dnTGFßRII Tregs. Functionally, dnTGFßRII Tregs expressed an
activated, pro-inflammatory phenotype with upregulation of Ccl5, Granzyme B and
IFN-<U+03B3>. Genetic pathway analysis suggested that the primary effect of loss of TGFß
pathway signaling was to down regulate immune regulatory processes, with a
secondary upregulation of inflammatory processes. These findings provide new
insights into T regulatory genetic defects; aberrations of the identified genes
or genetic pathways should be investigated in human PBC Tregs. This approach
which takes advantage of biologic pathway analysis illustrates the ability to
identify genes/pathways that are affected both independently and dependent on
abnormalities in TGFß signaling. Such approaches will become increasingly useful 
in human autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25701076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Genes Dev. 2015 Feb 15;29(4):409-25. doi: 10.1101/gad.255331.114.

The E-Id protein axis modulates the activities of the PI3K-AKT-mTORC1-Hif1a and
c-myc/p19Arf pathways to suppress innate variant TFH cell development, thymocyte 
expansion, and lymphomagenesis.

Miyazaki M(1), Miyazaki K(1), Chen S(1), Chandra V(1), Wagatsuma K(2), Agata
Y(2), Rodewald HR(3), Saito R(4), Chang AN(5), Varki N(6), Kawamoto H(7), Murre
C(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093, USA; (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Shiga University of Medical School, Shiga 520-2192, Japan; (3)Division
of Cellular Immunology, German Cancer Research Center, D-69120 Heidelberg,
Germany; (4)Department of Medicine, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093, USA; (5)Center for Computational Biology, Institute for 
Genomic Medicine, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California
92093, USA; (6)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego, La
Jolla, California 92093, USA; (7)Department of Immunology, Institute for Frontier
Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (8)Department of
Molecular Biology, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California
92093, USA; murre@biomail.ucsd.edu.

It is now well established that the E and Id protein axis regulates multiple
steps in lymphocyte development. However, it remains unknown how E and Id
proteins mechanistically enforce and maintain the naïve T-cell fate. Here we show
that Id2 and Id3 suppressed the development and expansion of innate variant
follicular helper T (TFH) cells. Innate variant TFH cells required major
histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I-like signaling and were associated with 
germinal center B cells. We found that Id2 and Id3 induced Foxo1 and Foxp1
expression to antagonize the activation of a TFH transcription signature. We show
that Id2 and Id3 acted upstream of the Hif1a/Foxo/AKT/mTORC1 pathway as well as
the c-myc/p19Arf module to control cellular expansion. We found that mice
depleted for Id2 and Id3 expression developed colitis and aß T-cell lymphomas.
Lymphomas depleted for Id2 and Id3 expression displayed elevated levels of c-myc,
whereas p19Arf abundance declined. Transcription signatures of Id2- and
Id3-depleted lymphomas revealed similarities to genetic deficiencies associated
with Burkitt lymphoma. We propose that, in response to antigen receptor and/or
cytokine signaling, the E-Id protein axis modulates the activities of the
PI3K-AKT-mTORC1-Hif1a and c-myc/p19Arf pathways to control cellular expansion and
homeostatic proliferation.

© 2015 Miyazaki et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4335296
PMID: 25691468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Leukemia. 2015 Jul;29(7):1564-70. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.43. Epub 2015 Feb 17.

Different biological risk factors in young poor-prognosis and elderly patients
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Horn H(1), Ziepert M(2), Wartenberg M(3), Staiger AM(1), Barth TF(4), Bernd
HW(5), Feller AC(5), Klapper W(6), Stuhlmann-Laeisz C(6), Hummel M(7), Stein
H(8), Lenze D(7), Hartmann S(9), Hansmann ML(9), Möller P(4), Cogliatti S(10),
Pfreundschuh M(11), Trümper L(12), Loeffler M(2), Glass B(13), Schmitz N(13), Ott
G(14), Rosenwald A(3); DSHNHL16.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus, and Dr Margarete
Fischer-Bosch Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, University of Tuebingen,
Stuttgart, Germany. (2)Institute for Medical Informatics, Statistics and
Epidemiology, Universität Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (3)Institute of Pathology,
Universität Würzburg and Comprehensive Cancer Center Mainfranken (CCCMF),
Würzburg, Germany. (4)Institute of Pathology, Universitätsklinikum Ulm, Ulm,
Germany. (5)Institute of Pathology, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein,
Campus Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. (6)Institute of Pathology, Hematopathology
Section and Lymph Node Registry, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein, Campus 
Kiel, Kiel, Germany. (7)Institute of Pathology, Campus Benjamin Franklin, Charité
Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany. (8)Pathodiagnostik Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(9)Institute of Pathology, Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(10)Institute of Pathology, Kantonal Hospital St Gallen, St Gallen, Switzerland. 
(11)Medizinische Klinik I, Saarland University Medical School, Homburg/Saar,
Germany. (12)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Georg-August Universität,
Göttingen, Germany. (13)Department of Hematology, Asklepios Klinik St Georg,
Hamburg, Germany. (14)Department of Clinical Pathology, Robert-Bosch-Krankenhaus,
Stuttgart, Germany.

Prognostically relevant risk factors in patients with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) have predominantly been evaluated in elderly populations. We
tested whether previously described risk factors are also valid in younger,
poor-prognosis DLBCL patients. Paraffin-embedded samples from 112 patients with
de novo DLBCL, enrolled in the R-MegaCHOEP trial of the German High Grade
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma Study Group (DSHNHL) were investigated using
immunohistochemistry (MYC, FOXP1, LMO2, GCET1, CD5, CD10, BCL2, BCL6, IRF4/MUM1) 
and fluorescence in situ hybridization (MYC, BCL2, BCL6). MYC, BCL2 and BCL6
breaks occurred in 14, 21 and 31%, respectively. In the majority of cases, MYC
was simultaneously rearranged with BCL2 and/or BCL6. The adverse impact of MYC
rearrangements was confirmed, but the sole presence of BCL2 breaks emerged as a
novel prognostic marker associated with inferior overall survival (OS) (P=0.002).
Combined overexpression of MYC and BCL2 showed only limited association with
inferior OS. All immunohistochemical cell of origin classifiers applied failed to
predict survival time. DLBCL tumors with significant proportion of immunoblastic 
and/or immunoblastic-plasmacytoid cells had inferior OS, independently from from 
BCL2 break. Younger, poor-prognosis DLBCL patients, therefore, display different 
biological risk factors compared with an elderly population, with BCL2
translocations emerging as a powerful negative prognostic marker.

PMID: 25687653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Seikagaku. 2014 Dec;86(6):807-11.

[Alternative splicing regulation during somatic cell reprogramming].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohta S, Yamamoto T.

PMID: 25675823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Oncol Lett. 2015 Mar;9(3):1482-1488. Epub 2015 Jan 16.

FOXP1 regulation via the PI3K/Akt/p70S6K signaling pathway in breast cancer
cells.

Halacli SO(1), Dogan AL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Immunology Unit, Institute of Children's Health, Hacettepe
University, Ankara 06100, Turkey. (2)Department of Basic Oncology, Institute of
Oncology, Hacettepe University, Ankara 06100, Turkey.

Loss of Forkhead box P1 (FOXP1) protein expression confers a poor prognosis in
sporadic and familial breast cancer patients, and the FOXP1 gene maps to a tumor 
suppressor locus at chromosome 3p14. Although correlation studies have indicated 
that FOXP1 has a role in tumor suppression, determination of the regulatory
mechanism of FOXP1 is required to establish its function in breast cancer. It has
previously been identified that FOXP1 is regulated by estrogen in breast cancer
and that treatment with bisphenol A is effective for regulating the
transformation of the normal human breast epithelial cell line, MCF-10F. In
addition, FOXO-regulated activation of FOXP1 inhibits the apoptosis of MCF-10F
cells following tamoxifen and Akt inhibitor VIII administration. The present
study indicates that FOXP1 regulation occurs via a PI3K/Akt/p70S6 kinase (p70S6K)
signaling pathway. Following treatment with wortmannin, an inhibitor of
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt, MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells
demonstrated decreased FOXP1 protein expression levels; this result was also
observed in the small interfering (si)RNA silencing of Akt. By contrast,
overexpression of Akt resulted in increased FOXP1 protein expression levels in
the MDA-MB-231 cells compared with the control cell lysates. Furthermore,
treatment with rapamycin, a specific inhibitor of the mammalian target of
rapamycin/p70S6K cascade, resulted in decreased FOXP1 expression in the MCF7
cells, but not in the MDA-MB-231 cells, which were resistant to rapamycin-induced
inhibition. In addition, silencing of p70S6K using siRNA produced a marked
decrease in FOXP1 expression. These data indicate that FOXP1 protein expression
is regulated by a PI3K/Akt/p70S6K signaling cascade in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC4315073
PMID: 25663935  [PubMed]


71. Sci Signal. 2015 Feb 3;8(362):ra12. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005654.

FOXP1 potentiates Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in diffuse large B cell lymphoma.

Walker MP(1), Stopford CM(2), Cederlund M(3), Fang F(4), Jahn C(3), Rabinowitz
AD(1), Goldfarb D(5), Graham DM(1), Yan F(1), Deal AM(6), Fedoriw Y(7), Richards 
KL(8), Davis IJ(4), Weidinger G(3), Damania B(2), Major MB(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, 
USA. (2)Division of Microbiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27516-7361, USA. (3)Institute for
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Ulm University, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11,
89081 Ulm, Germany. (4)Carolina Center for Genome Sciences, Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. (5)Department of Computer Science, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3175, USA. (6)UNC Lineberger
Comprehensive Cancer Center Biostatistics Core Facility, University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. (7)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. (8)Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, NC 27516-7361, USA. (9)Department of Cell Biology and
Physiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA. Division of Microbiology,
Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill, NC 27516-7361, USA. benmajor@med.unc.edu.

The transcription factor FOXP1 (forkhead box protein P1) is a master regulator of
stem and progenitor cell biology. In diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), copy 
number amplifications and chromosomal translocations result in overexpression of 
FOXP1. Increased abundance of FOXP1 in DLBCL is a predictor of poor prognosis and
resistance to therapy. We developed a genome-wide, mass spectrometry-coupled,
gain-of-function genetic screen, which revealed that FOXP1 potentiates
ß-catenin-dependent, Wnt-dependent gene expression. Gain- and loss-of-function
studies in cell models and zebrafish confirmed that FOXP1 was a general and
conserved enhancer of Wnt signaling. In a Wnt-dependent fashion, FOXP1 formed a
complex with ß-catenin, TCF7L2 (transcription factor 7-like 2), and the
acetyltransferase CBP [CREB (adenosine 3',5'-monophosphate response
element-binding protein)-binding protein], and this complex bound the promoters
of Wnt target genes. FOXP1 promoted the acetylation of ß-catenin by CBP, and
acetylation was required for FOXP1-mediated potentiation of ß-catenin-dependent
transcription. In DLBCL, we found that FOXP1 promoted sensitivity to Wnt pathway 
inhibitors, and knockdown of FOXP1 or blocking ß-catenin transcriptional activity
slowed xenograft tumor growth. These data connect excessive FOXP1 with
ß-catenin-dependent signal transduction and provide a molecular rationale for
Wnt-directed therapy in DLBCL.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4356208
PMID: 25650440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2014;165(4):229-43. doi: 10.1159/000370067. Epub 2015
Jan 29.

Exacerbating factors induce different gene expression profiles in peripheral
blood mononuclear cells from asthmatics, patients with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease and healthy subjects.

Pniewska E(1), Sokolowska M, Kuprys-Lipinska I, Kacprzak D, Kuna P, Pawliczak R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergology, Immunology and Dermatology, Department of
Immunopathology, Faculty of Biomedical Sciences and Postgraduate Training,
Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Despite several common phenotypic features, chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) and severe asthma differ with regard to their causative 
factors and pathophysiology. Both diseases may be exacerbated by environmental
factors, however, the molecular profiles of disease episodes have not been
comprehensively studied. We identified differences in gene and protein expression
profiles expressed by peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) of COPD patients,
patients with atopic asthma and healthy subjects when challenged with
exacerbating factors in vitro: lipopolysaccharide (LPS), house dust mite (HDM)
and cat allergen.
METHODS: PBMC isolated from patients with severe atopic asthma and COPD, as well 
as healthy subjects were stimulated with rDer p 1 DG, rFel d 1 DG and LPS. The
changes in the expression of 47 genes belonging to five groups (phospholipase A2,
eicosanoids, transcription factors, cytokines and airway remodeling) were studied
using TaqMan low density array cards. Immunoblotting was used to study relative
protein expression.
RESULTS: rDer p 1 significantly up-regulated the expression of PLA2G4A, PLA2G6,
PLA2G15, CYSLTR1, LB4R2, PTGS1, PTGS2, FOXP1, GATA3, HDAC2, IREB2, PPARG, STAT4, 
TSLP and CHI3L1 genes in asthmatics in comparison to healthy subjects. LPS
induced significant expression of ANXA1 and LTA4H in asthmatics when compared to 
COPD patients and healthy subjects. SOX6,STAT4 and IL1RL1 were induced in COPD
after LPS stimulation. Analysis of protein expression revealed a pattern similar 
to mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: LPS-induced exacerbation of asthma and COPD is characterized by
differential expression of selected genes in PBMC. HDM allergen changed the
expression profile of inflammatory genes between patients with asthma of atopic
origin and healthy controls.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25634111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Apr 15;283:22-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.01.017. Epub 2015 
Jan 16.

Neural FoxP2 and FoxP1 expression in the budgerigar, an avian species with adult 
vocal learning.

Hara E(1), Perez JM(2), Whitney O(2), Chen Q(3), White SA(4), Wright TF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003,
United States. Electronic address: harae@janelia.hhmi.org. (2)Department of
Biology, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003, United States.
(3)Interdepartment Program of Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Physiology,
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, United States. (4)Interdepartment Program of
Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Physiology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
United States; Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, United States.

Vocal learning underlies acquisition of both language in humans and vocal signals
in some avian taxa. These bird groups and humans exhibit convergent developmental
phases and associated brain pathways for vocal communication. The transcription
factor FoxP2 plays critical roles in vocal learning in humans and songbirds.
Another member of the forkhead box gene family, FoxP1 also shows high expression 
in brain areas involved in vocal learning and production. Here, we investigate
FoxP2 and FoxP1 mRNA and protein in adult male budgerigars (Melopsittacus
undulatus), a parrot species that exhibits vocal learning as both juveniles and
adults. To examine these molecules in adult vocal learners, we compared their
expression patterns in the budgerigar striatal nucleus involved in vocal
learning, magnocellular nucleus of the medial striatum (MMSt), across birds with 
different vocal states, such as vocalizing to a female (directed), vocalizing
alone (undirected), and non-vocalizing. We found that both FoxP2 mRNA and protein
expressions were consistently lower in MMSt than in the adjacent striatum
regardless of the vocal states, whereas previous work has shown that songbirds
exhibit down-regulation in the homologous region, Area X, only after singing
alone. In contrast, FoxP1 levels were high in MMSt compared to the adjacent
striatum in all groups. Taken together these results strengthen the general
hypothesis that FoxP2 and FoxP1 have specialized expression in vocal nuclei
across a range of taxa, and suggest that the adult vocal plasticity seen in
budgerigars may be a product of persistent down-regulation of FoxP2 in MMSt.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4351178 [Available on 2016-04-15]
PMID: 25601574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Methods. 2015 May;77-78:197-204. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2014.12.022. Epub 2015 Jan 
12.

Rapid in vivo validation of candidate drivers derived from the PTEN-mutant
prostate metastasis genome.

Cho H(1), Herzka T(1), Stahlhut C(1), Watrud K(1), Robinson BD(2), Trotman LC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, One Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY
11724, USA. (2)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, New
York-Presbyterian Hospital, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue, 525 
East 68th Street, New York, NY 10065, USA. (3)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, One 
Bungtown Road, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA. Electronic address:
trotman@cshl.edu.

Human genome analyses have revealed that increasing gene copy number alteration
is a driving force of incurable cancer of the prostate (CaP). Since most of the
affected genes are hidden within large amplifications or deletions, there is a
need for fast and faithful validation of drivers. However, classic genetic CaP
engineering in mouse makes this a daunting task because generation, breeding
based combination of alterations and non-invasive monitoring of disease are too
time consuming and costly. To address the unmet need, we recently developed
RapidCaP mice, which endogenously recreate human PTEN-mutant metastatic CaP based
on Cre/Luciferase expressing viral infection, that is guided to
Pten(loxP)/Trp53(loxP) prostate. Here we use a sensitized, non-metastatic
Pten/Trp53-mutant RapidCaP system for functional validation of human metastasis
drivers in a much accelerated time frame of only 3-4months. We used in vivo RNAi 
to target three candidate tumor suppressor genes FOXP1, RYBP and SHQ1, which
reside in a frequent deletion on chromosome 3p and show that Shq1 cooperates with
Pten and p53 to suppress metastasis. Our results thus demonstrate that the
RapidCaP system forms a much needed platform for in vivo screening and validation
of genes that drive endogenous lethal CaP.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4429512 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25592467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Nat Immunol. 2015 Feb;16(2):178-87. doi: 10.1038/ni.3076. Epub 2015 Jan 5.

Treg cells require the phosphatase PTEN to restrain TH1 and TFH cell responses.

Shrestha S(1), Yang K(2), Guy C(2), Vogel P(3), Neale G(4), Chi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA. [2] Integrated Biomedical Sciences Program, University of
Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA. (2)Department of
Immunology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.
(3)Department of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, USA. (4)Hartwell Center for Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2015 Feb;15(2):71.

The interplay between effector T cells and regulatory T cells (Treg cells) is
crucial for adaptive immunity, but how Treg cells control diverse effector
responses is elusive. We found that the phosphatase PTEN links Treg cell
stability to repression of type 1 helper T cell (TH1 cell) and follicular helper 
T cell (TFH cell) responses. Depletion of PTEN in Treg cells resulted in
excessive TFH cell and germinal center responses and spontaneous inflammatory
disease. These defects were considerably blocked by deletion of interferon-<U+03B3>,
indicating coordinated control of TH1 and TFH responses. Mechanistically, PTEN
maintained Treg cell stability and metabolic balance between glycolysis and
mitochondrial fitness. Moreover, PTEN deficiency upregulates activity of the
metabolic checkpoint kinase complex mTORC2 and the serine-threonine kinase Akt,
and loss of this activity restores functioning of PTEN-deficient Treg cells. Our 
studies establish a PTEN-mTORC2 axis that maintains Treg cell stability and
coordinates Treg cell-mediated control of effector responses.

PMCID: PMC4297581
PMID: 25559258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Comp Neurol. 2015 Jun 15;523(9):1318-40. doi: 10.1002/cne.23731. Epub 2015 Apr 
2.

Differential coexpression of FoxP1, FoxP2, and FoxP4 in the Zebra Finch
(Taeniopygia guttata) song system.

Mendoza E(1), Tokarev K, Düring DN, Retamosa EC, Weiss M, Arpenik N, Scharff C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Verhaltensbiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195, Berlin,
Germany.

Heterozygous disruptions of the Forkhead transcription factor FoxP2 impair
acquisition of speech and language. Experimental downregulation in brain region
Area X of the avian ortholog FoxP2 disrupts song learning in juvenile male zebra 
finches. In vitro, transcriptional activity of FoxP2 requires dimerization with
itself or with paralogs FoxP1 and FoxP4. Whether this is the case in vivo is
unknown. To provide the means for future functional studies we cloned FoxP4 from 
zebra finches and compared regional and cellular coexpression of FoxP1, FoxP2,
and FoxP4 mRNA and protein in brains of juvenile and adult male zebra finches. In
the telencephalic song nuclei HVC, RA, and Area X, the three investigated FoxPs
were either expressed alone or occurred in specific combinations with each other,
as shown by double in situ hybridization and triple immunohistochemistry. FoxP1
and FoxP4 but not FoxP2 were expressed in RA and in the HVCRA and HVCX projection
neurons. In Area X and the surrounding striatum the density of neurons expressing
all three FoxPs together or FoxP1 and FoxP4 together was significantly higher
than the density of neurons expressing other combinations. Interestingly, the
proportions of Area X neurons expressing particular combinations of FoxPs
remained constant at all ages. In addition, FoxP-expressing neurons in adult Area
X express dopamine receptors 1A, 1B, and 2. Together, these data provide the
first evidence that Area X neurons can coexpress all avian FoxP subfamily
members, thus allowing for a variety of regulatory possibilities via
heterodimerization that could impact song behavior in zebra finches.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25556631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Leukemia. 2015 May;29(5):1004-17. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.351. Epub 2014 Dec 26.

MicroRNAs in B-cell lymphomas: how a complex biology gets more complex.

Musilova K(1), Mraz M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech
Republic. (2)1] Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk University,
Brno, Czech Republic [2] Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology and
Oncology, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic [3] Faculty of Medicine,
Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) represent important regulators of gene expression besides
transcriptional control. miRNA regulation can be involved in the cell
developmental fate decisions, but can also have more subtle roles in buffering
stochastic fluctuations in gene expression. They participate in pathways
fundamental to B-cell development like B-cell receptor (BCR) signalling, B-cell
migration/adhesion, cell-cell interactions in immune niches, and the production
and class-switching of immunoglobulins. miRNAs influence B-cell maturation,
generation of pre-, marginal zone, follicular, B1, plasma and memory B cells. In 
this review, we discuss miRNAs with essential functions in malignant B-cell
development (such as miR-150, miR-155, miR-21, miR-34a, miR-17-92 and miR-15-16).
We also put these miRNAs in the context of normal B-cell differentiation, as this
is intimately connected to neoplastic B-cell development. We review miRNAs' role 
in the most common B-cell malignancies, including chronic lymphocytic leukaemia
(CLL), diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), follicular lymphoma (FL) and mantle
cell lymphoma (MCL). We focus on miR-contribution to the regulation of important 
signalling pathways (such as NF-<U+03BA>B, PI3K/AKT and TGF-ß), BCR signalling and its
modulators (such as PTEN, SHIP-1, ZAP-70, GAB1 and BTK), anti- and pro-apoptotic 
proteins (such as BCL2, MCL1, TCL1, BIM, p53 and SIRT1) and transcription factors
(such as MYC, MYB, PU.1, FOXP1 and BCL6). We also discuss the association of
miRNAs' expression levels with the patients' survival and response to therapy,
summarizing their potential use as predictive and prognostic markers.
Importantly, the targeting of miRNAs (like use of anti-miR-155 or miR-34a mimic) 
could provide a novel therapeutic approach as evidenced by tumour regression in
xenograft mouse models and initial promising data from clinical trials.

PMID: 25541152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dev Biol. 2015 Feb 15;398(2):242-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.007. Epub 2014 
Dec 17.

Foxp1/2/4 regulate endochondral ossification as a suppresser complex.

Zhao H(1), Zhou W(1), Yao Z(1), Wan Y(1), Cao J(1), Zhang L(1), Zhao J(1), Li
H(1), Zhou R(1), Li B(1), Wei G(2), Zhang Z(3), French CA(4), Dekker JD(5), Yang 
Y(6), Fisher SE(7), Tucker HO(5), Guo X(8).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China. (2)Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Shanghai 200032, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated the
Sixth People<U+05F3>s Hospital, Shanghai, China. (4)Champalimaud Neuroscience Programme,
Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Lisbon, Portugal. (5)Institute for Cellular 
and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
(6)Developmental Genetics Section, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH,
MD 20892, USA. (7)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (8)Bio-X 
Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric
Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200240, China. Electronic address: xzguo2005@sjtu.edu.cn.

Osteoblast induction and differentiation in developing long bones is dynamically 
controlled by the opposing action of transcriptional activators and repressors.
In contrast to the long list of activators that have been discovered over past
decades, the network of repressors is not well-defined. Here we identify the
expression of Foxp1/2/4 proteins, comprised of Forkhead-box (Fox) transcription
factors of the Foxp subfamily, in both perichondrial skeletal progenitors and
proliferating chondrocytes during endochondral ossification. Mice carrying
loss-of-function and gain-of-function Foxp mutations had gross defects in
appendicular skeleton formation. At the cellular level, over-expression of
Foxp1/2/4 in chondroctyes abrogated osteoblast formation and chondrocyte
hypertrophy. Conversely, single or compound deficiency of Foxp1/2/4 in skeletal
progenitors or chondrocytes resulted in premature osteoblast differentiation in
the perichondrium, coupled with impaired proliferation, survival, and hypertrophy
of chondrocytes in the growth plate. Foxp1/2/4 and Runx2 proteins interacted in
vitro and in vivo, and Foxp1/2/4 repressed Runx2 transactivation function in
heterologous cells. This study establishes Foxp1/2/4 proteins as coordinators of 
osteogenesis and chondrocyte hypertrophy in developing long bones and suggests
that a novel transcriptional repressor network involving Foxp1/2/4 may regulate
Runx2 during endochondral ossification.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4342236
PMID: 25527076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Med Oncol. 2015 Jan;32(1):426. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0426-5. Epub 2014 Dec 11.

Gene expression profile analysis identifies metastasis and
chemoresistance-associated genes in epithelial ovarian carcinoma cells.

Zhu L(1), Hu Z, Liu J, Gao J, Lin B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to
China Medical University, Shenyang, 110004, Liaoning Province, China,
zhulccmu@gmail.com.

The purpose of this study was to identify genes that associated with higher
ability of metastasis and chemotherapic resistance in epithelial ovarian
carcinoma (EOC) cells. An oligonucleotide microarray with probe sets
complementary to 41,000(+) unique human genes and transcripts was used to
determine whether gene expression profile may differentiate three epithelial
ovarian cell lines (RMG-I-C, COC1 and HO8910) from their sub-lines (RMG-I-H,
COCI/DDP and HO8910/PM) with higher ability of metastasis and chemotherapic
resistance. Quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemical staining validated
the microarray results. Hierarchic cluster analysis of gene expression identified
49 genes that exhibited =2.0-fold change and P value =0.05. Highly differential
expression of GCET2, NLRP4, FOXP1 and SNX29 genes was validated by quantitative
PCR in all cell line samples. Finally, FOXP1 was validated at the protein level
by immunohistochemistry in paraffin embedded ovarian tissues (i.e., for
metastasis, 15 primary EOC and 10 omental metastasis [OM]; for chemoresistance,
13 sensitive and 13 resistant EOC). The identification of higher ability of
metastasis and chemotherapic resistance-associated genes may provide a foundation
for the development of new type-specific diagnostic strategies and treatment for 
metastasis and chemotherapic resistance in epithelial ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC4262766
PMID: 25502083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Biochimie. 2015 Feb;109:42-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2014.12.001. Epub 2014 Dec
10.

The expression and correlation between the transcription factor FOXP1 and
estrogen receptors in epithelial ovarian cancer.

Hu Z(1), Zhu L(2), Tan M(2), Cai M(2), Deng L(2), Yu G(2), Liu D(2), Liu J(2),
Lin B(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to
China Medical University, No. 36 Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang,
Liaoning Province 110004, PR China; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The 
First Affiliated Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan Province
450052, PR China. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital 
Affiliated to China Medical University, No. 36 Sanhao Street, Heping District,
Shenyang, Liaoning Province 110004, PR China. (3)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Shengjing Hospital Affiliated to China Medical University, No. 36
Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang, Liaoning Province 110004, PR China.
Electronic address: linbei88@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Estrogen plays an important role in the progression of ovarian cancer
in humans. FOXP1 belongs to the forkhead/winged-helix transcription factor
family, and previous research indicated that FOXP1 functioned as a tumor
suppressor gene. FOXP1 may be similar to FOXA1 and is closely related to steroid 
hormone receptors, but the relationship between FOXP1 and ER currently remains
unclear.
METHODS: Ovarian tumors (60 malignant cases, 26 borderline cases, and 13 benign
cases) and 14 normal ovarian tissues were collected retrospectively.
Immunohistochemistry, western blotting and real-time PCR were used to
characterize the expression patterns of FOXP1, ERa, and ERß both at the mRNA and 
protein levels. We also used co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescent
colocalization to investigate whether a correlation exists between FOXP1 and
ERa/ERß in ovarian cancer tissues.
RESULTS: The mRNA level for FOXP1 and ERß in ovarian carcinoma tissues decreased,
while the expression level of ERa mRNA increased compared with normal ovarian
tissues. With an increase in the degree of ovarian carcinoma malignancy, the ERa 
expression level also increased. The expression pattern of ERß in ovarian
neoplasms was similar to that of the FOXP1 protein; presenting nuclear staining
decreased, while cytoplasmic expression increased. Colocalization of FOXP1, ERa, 
and ERß was present in the cytoplasm, with ERß specific co-localization with
FOXP1 in the perinuclear area. While immunoprecipitates created with FOXP1 mouse 
anti-human monoclonal antibody showed a positive reaction to an anti-ER antibody,
immunoprecipitates containing anti-ER antibody and react to anti-FOXP1 antibody.
CONCLUSION: Interactions between FOXP1 and ER may play a pivotal role in the
progression of ovarian cancer, and the activation or induction of FOXP1 and ERß
expression in cancer cells may inhibit tumor proliferation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. and Société française de biochimie et biologie
Moléculaire (SFBBM). All rights reserved.

PMID: 25500588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cell Rep. 2014 Dec 24;9(6):2001-10. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.11.022. Epub 2014 
Dec 11.

Genomic and functional overlap between somatic and germline chromosomal
rearrangements.

van Heesch S(1), Simonis M(1), van Roosmalen MJ(2), Pillalamarri V(3), Brand
H(3), Kuijk EW(1), de Luca KL(1), Lansu N(1), Braat AK(4), Menelaou A(2), Hao
W(1), Korving J(1), Snijder S(5), van der Veken LT(2), Hochstenbach R(2), Knegt
AC(5), Duran K(2), Renkens I(2), Alekozai N(2), Jager M(2), Vergult S(6), Menten 
B(6), de Bruijn E(1), Boymans S(1), Ippel E(2), van Binsbergen E(2), Talkowski
ME(3), Lichtenbelt K(2), Cuppen E(7), Kloosterman WP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, 
3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands. (2)Department of Medical Genetics, Center for
Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584
CG Utrecht, the Netherlands. (3)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (4)Department of Cell Biology, Center
for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100,
3584 CX Utrecht, the Netherlands. (5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Academic
Medical Center, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, the Netherlands. (6)Center for
Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium. (7)Hubrecht Institute-KNAW and University Medical Center Utrecht,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, the Netherlands; Department of Medical Genetics, 
Center for Molecular Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic address:
e.cuppen@hubrecht.eu. (8)Department of Medical Genetics, Center for Molecular
Medicine, University Medical Center Utrecht, Universiteitsweg 100, 3584 CG
Utrecht, the Netherlands. Electronic address: w.kloosterman@umcutrecht.nl.

Genomic rearrangements are a common cause of human congenital abnormalities.
However, their origin and consequences are poorly understood. We performed
molecular analysis of two patients with congenital disease who carried de novo
genomic rearrangements. We found that the rearrangements in both patients hit
genes that are recurrently rearranged in cancer (ETV1, FOXP1, and microRNA
cluster C19MC) and drive formation of fusion genes similar to those described in 
cancer. Subsequent analysis of a large set of 552 de novo germline genomic
rearrangements underlying congenital disorders revealed enrichment for genes
rearranged in cancer and overlap with somatic cancer breakpoints. Breakpoints of 
common (inherited) germline structural variations also overlap with cancer
breakpoints but are depleted for cancer genes. We propose that the same genomic
positions are prone to genomic rearrangements in germline and soma but that
timing and context of breakage determines whether developmental defects or cancer
are promoted.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25497101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Nat Genet. 2015 Jan;47(1):47-56. doi: 10.1038/ng.3164. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

A conditional piggyBac transposition system for genetic screening in mice
identifies oncogenic networks in pancreatic cancer.

Rad R(1), Rad L(2), Wang W(2), Strong A(2), Ponstingl H(2), Bronner IF(2), Mayho 
M(2), Steiger K(3), Weber J(4), Hieber M(5), Veltkamp C(5), Eser S(5), Geumann
U(4), Öllinger R(5), Zukowska M(5), Barenboim M(4), Maresch R(4), Cadiñanos J(6),
Friedrich M(2), Varela I(7), Constantino-Casas F(8), Sarver A(9), Ten Hoeve
J(10), Prosser H(2), Seidler B(5), Bauer J(11), Heikenwälder M(11), Metzakopian
E(2), Krug A(5), Ehmer U(5), Schneider G(5), Knösel T(12), Rümmele P(13), Aust
D(14), Grützmann R(15), Pilarsky C(15), Ning Z(2), Wessels L(10), Schmid RM(5),
Quail MA(2), Vassiliou G(2), Esposito I(16), Liu P(2), Saur D(4), Bradley A(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medicine II, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, München, Germany. [2] German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. [3] The Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, UK. (2)The Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, UK. (3)Department of
Pathology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, München,
Germany. (4)1] Department of Medicine II, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische
Universität München, München, Germany. [2] German Cancer Consortium (DKTK),
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department of
Medicine II, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, München,
Germany. (6)Instituto de Medicina Oncológica y Molecular de Asturias (IMOMA),
Oviedo, Spain. (7)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria
(UC-CSIC-SODERCAN), Santander, Spain. (8)Department of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (9)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics
Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(10)Bioinformatics and Statistics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam,
the Netherlands. (11)Institute of Virology, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany. (12)Institute of Pathology, Ludwig Maximilians Universität
München, München, Germany. (13)Institute of Pathology, Universität Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany. (14)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany. (15)Department of Surgery, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany. (16)Institute of Pathology, Medizinische Universität Insbruck, 
Insbruck, Austria.

Here we describe a conditional piggyBac transposition system in mice and report
the discovery of large sets of new cancer genes through a pancreatic insertional 
mutagenesis screen. We identify Foxp1 as an oncogenic transcription factor that
drives pancreatic cancer invasion and spread in a mouse model and correlates with
lymph node metastasis in human patients with pancreatic cancer. The propensity of
piggyBac for open chromatin also enabled genome-wide screening for
cancer-relevant noncoding DNA, which pinpointed a Cdkn2a cis-regulatory region.
Histologically, we observed different tumor subentities and discovered associated
genetic events, including Fign insertions in hepatoid pancreatic cancer. Our
studies demonstrate the power of genetic screening to discover cancer drivers
that are difficult to identify by other approaches to cancer genome analysis,
such as downstream targets of commonly mutated human cancer genes. These piggyBac
resources are universally applicable in any tissue context and provide unique
experimental access to the genetic complexity of cancer.

PMID: 25485836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Gastroenterology. 2015 Feb;148(2):367-78. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.10.041. Epub
2014 Nov 5.

Polymorphisms near TBX5 and GDF7 are associated with increased risk for Barrett's
esophagus.

Palles C(1), Chegwidden L(2), Li X(3), Findlay JM(4), Farnham G(2), Castro Giner 
F(4), Peppelenbosch MP(5), Kovac M(4), Adams CL(2), Prenen H(6), Briggs S(4),
Harrison R(7), Sanders S(8), MacDonald D(9), Haigh C(10), Tucker A(11), Love
S(12), Nanji M(13), deCaestecker J(14), Ferry D(15), Rathbone B(16), Hapeshi
J(17), Barr H(18), Moayyedi P(19), Watson P(20), Zietek B(13), Maroo N(13), Gay
L(13), Underwood T(21), Boulter L(21), McMurtry H(22), Monk D(23), Patel P(24),
Ragunath K(25), Al Dulaimi D(26), Murray I(27), Koss K(28), Veitch A(15),
Trudgill N(29), Nwokolo C(30), Rembacken B(31), Atherfold P(32), Green E(33), Ang
Y(34), Kuipers EJ(35), Chow W(36), Paterson S(37), Kadri S(16), Beales I(38),
Grimley C(39), Mullins P(40), Beckett C(41), Farrant M(42), Dixon A(43), Kelly
S(44), Johnson M(45), Wajed S(46), Dhar A(47), Sawyer E(48), Roylance R(49),
Onstad L(50), Gammon MD(51), Corley DA(52), Shaheen NJ(53), Bird NC(54), Hardie
LJ(55), Reid BJ(56), Ye W(57), Liu G(58), Romero Y(59), Bernstein L(60), Wu
AH(61), Casson AG(62), Fitzgerald R(63), Whiteman DC(64), Risch HA(65), Levine
DM(66), Vaughan TL(50), Verhaar AP(5), van den Brande J(67), Toxopeus EL(68),
Spaander MC(5), Wijnhoven BP(68), van der Laan LJ(68), Krishnadath K(69),
Wijmenga C(70), Trynka G(70), McManus R(71), Reynolds JV(72), O'Sullivan J(72),
MacMathuna P(73), McGarrigle SA(72), Kelleher D(74), Vermeire S(6), Cleynen I(6),
Bisschops R(6), Tomlinson I(75), Jankowski J(76).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
Electronic address: cpalles@well.ox.ac.uk. (2)Plymouth University Peninsula
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth, Devon, UK. (3)Centre of
Biostatistics, Bioinformatics and Biomarkers, Plymouth University Peninsula
Schools of Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth, Devon, UK. (4)Wellcome Trust Centre 
for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (5)Department of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Digestive Oncology, University
Hospital Gasthuisberg, Leuven, Belgium. (7)Department of Pathology, Leicester
Royal Infirmary, Leicester, UK. (8)Department of Cellular Pathology, Warwick
Hospital, Warwick, UK. (9)Department of Oral Biological and Medical Sciences,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(10)Department of Gastroenterology, Wansbeck General Hospital, Ashington,
Northumberland, UK. (11)William Harvey Research Institute, The Ernest Cooke
Vascular & Microvascular Unit, Centre for Clinical Pharmacology, St Bartholomew's
Hospital, London, UK. (12)Centre for Statistics in Medicine and Oxford Clinical
Trials Research Unit, Oxford, UK. (13)Centre for Digestive Diseases, Queen Mary
University of London, London, UK. (14)Department of Gastroenterology, Leicester
General Hospital, Leicester, UK. (15)Department of Oncology, New Cross Hospital, 
Royal Wolverhampton Hospitals NHS Trust, Wolverhampton, UK. (16)Department for
Gastroenterology, Leicester Royal Infirmary, Leicester, UK. (17)Gloucestershire
Royal Hospital, Great Western Road, Gloucester, UK. (18)Department of Upper GI
Surgery, Gloucestershire, Royal Hospital, Gloucester, UK. (19)Department of
Medicine, McMaster HC, Hamilton Ontario, Canada. (20)School of Medicine,
Dentistry, and Biomedical Sciences, Centre for Public Health, Queens University
Belfast, NI. (21)University of Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, Tremona
Road, Southampton, UK. (22)Lancashire Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust,
Royal Preston Hospital, Lancashire, UK. (23)General Surgery, Countess of Chester 
Hospital, Chester, UK. (24)Southampton University Hospitals NHS Trust,
Southampton, UK. (25)Wolfson Digestive Diseases Centre, Queens Medical Centre,
Nottingham, UK. (26)Worcestershire Acute Hospitals NHS Trust, Alexandra Hospital,
Redditch, UK. (27)Department of Gastroenterology, Royal Cornwall Hospital, Truro,
Cornwall, UK. (28)Macclesfield General Hospital, Macclefield, Cheshire, UK.
(29)Department of Gastroenterology, Sandwell General Hospital, Lyndon, West
Bromwich, UK. (30)Department of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of
Coventry, Coventry, UK. (31)Department of Gastroenterology, Leeds General
Infirmary, Leeds, UK. (32)Department of Clinical Pharmacology University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK. (33)School of Biomedical & Healthcare Sciences, Plymouth
University Peninsula Schools of Medicine and Dentistry, Plymouth, UK.
(34)Gastroenterology, Royal Albert Edward Infirmary NHS Trust, Wigan, UK; GI
Science Centre, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, University of Manchester,
Salford, UK. (35)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of
Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands. (36)Forth Valley Royal Hospital, Larbert, Scotland, UK.
(37)Norfolk and Norwich University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Norfolk and
Norwich University Hospital, Norwich, UK. (38)Burnley General Hospital, Burnley, 
Lancashire, UK. (39)Head of Gastroenterology, University Hospital of Northern BC,
Prince George, British Columbia, Canada. (40)Bradford Teaching Hospitals NHS
Foundation Trust, Bradford Royal Infirmary, Bradford, UK. (41)Royal United
Hospital Bath NHS Trust, Royal United Hospital, Avon, Bath, Somerset, UK.
(42)Kettering General Hospital NHS Foundation Trust, Kettering General Hospital, 
Rothwell Road, Kettering, Northants, UK. (43)York Teaching Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust, York, UK. (44)Luton and Dunstable University Hospital NHS
Foundation Trust, Luton, Bedfordshire, UK. (45)Department of Thoracic and Upper
Gastrointestinal Surgery, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter,
UK. (46)County and Durham and Darlington NHS Foundation Trust, Bishop Auckland,
County Durham, UK. (47)Guy's and St Thomas' NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK.
(48)Barts Cancer Institute, Barts and The London School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London, UK.
(49)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Centre,
Seattle, Washington. (50)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina
School of Public Health, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (51)Division of Research
and San Francisco Medical Center, Kaiser Permanente Northern California,
California. (52)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, UNC School of
Medicine, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(53)Department of Oncology, The Medical School, University of Sheffield, UK.
(54)Division of Epidemiology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. (55)Division of
Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington.
(56)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina School of Public
Health, Chapel Hill, North Carolina; Department of Medical Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (57)Princess Margaret
Cancer Centre, Ontario Cancer Institute, Toronto, ON, Canada. (58)Division of
Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. (59)Registry,
On behalf of the Romero; Department of Population Sciences, Beckman Research
Institute and City of Hope Comprehensive Cancer Center, Duarte, California.
(60)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California/Norris
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, California. (61)Department of Surgery, 
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada. (62)MRC Cancer Cell Unit,
Hutchison-MRC Research Centre and University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(63)Cancer Control, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Queensland,
Australia. (64)Department of Chronic Disease Epidemiology, Yale School of Public 
Health, New Haven, Connecticut. (65)Department of Biostatistics, University of
Washington School of Public Health, Seattle, Washington. (66)Department of
Gastroenterology, Tergooi Hospital, Hilversum, The Netherlands. (67)Department of
Surgery, Erasmus MC, University Medical Centre Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The
Netherlands. (68)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Academic Medical 
Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (69)Department of Genetics, University
Medical Centre Groningen and University of Groningen, The Netherlands.
(70)Department of Clinical Medicine & Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity
Centre for Health Sciences, Trinity College Dublin, St James's Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland. (71)Department of Surgery, Trinity Centre for Health Sciences, Trinity
College Dublin, St. James' Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (72)Gastrointestinal Unit, 
Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, University College Dublin, Dublin,
Ireland. (73)Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, South Kensington
Campus, London, UK. (74)Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, South Kensington
Campus, London, UK. (75)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK. Electronic address: iant@well.ox.ac.uk. (76)University
Hospitals Coventry & Warwickshire NHS Trust, Warwickshire, England; Warwick
Medical School, University of Warwick, Warwickshire, England. Electronic address:
J.Jankowski@warwick.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Barrett's esophagus (BE) increases the risk of esophageal
adenocarcinoma (EAC). We found the risk to be BE has been associated with single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on chromosome 6p21 (within the HLA region) and on
16q23, where the closest protein-coding gene is FOXF1. Subsequently, the
Barrett's and Esophageal Adenocarcinoma Consortium (BEACON) identified risk loci 
for BE and esophageal adenocarcinoma near CRTC1 and BARX1, and within 100 kb of
FOXP1. We aimed to identify further SNPs that increased BE risk and to validate
previously reported associations.
METHODS: We performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) to identify variants
associated with BE and further analyzed promising variants identified by BEACON
by genotyping 10,158 patients with BE and 21,062 controls.
RESULTS: We identified 2 SNPs not previously associated with BE: rs3072 (2p24.1; 
odds ratio [OR] = 1.14; 95% CI: 1.09-1.18; P = 1.8 × 10(-11)) and rs2701108
(12q24.21; OR = 0.90; 95% CI: 0.86-0.93; P = 7.5 × 10(-9)). The closest
protein-coding genes were respectively GDF7 (rs3072), which encodes a ligand in
the bone morphogenetic protein pathway, and TBX5 (rs2701108), which encodes a
transcription factor that regulates esophageal and cardiac development. Our data 
also supported in BE cases 3 risk SNPs identified by BEACON (rs2687201,
rs11789015, and rs10423674). Meta-analysis of all data identified another SNP
associated with BE and esophageal adenocarcinoma: rs3784262, within ALDH1A2 (OR =
0.90; 95% CI: 0.87-0.93; P = 3.72 × 10(-9)).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified 2 loci associated with risk of BE and provided data to
support a further locus. The genes we found to be associated with risk for BE
encode transcription factors involved in thoracic, diaphragmatic, and esophageal 
development or proteins involved in the inflammatory response.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4315134
PMID: 25447851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Blood. 2014 Nov 27;124(23):3340-1. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-10-605014.

A FOXy target in B-cell survival.

Hertlein E(1).

Author information: 
(1)THE OHIO STATE UNIVERSITY.

Comment on
    Blood. 2014 Nov 27;124(23):3431-40.

PMID: 25431475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Jul;75(7):778-90. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22247. Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Differential FoxP2 and FoxP1 expression in a vocal learning nucleus of the
developing budgerigar.

Whitney O(1), Voyles T(1), Hara E(1), Chen Q(2), White SA(2,)(3), Wright TF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico,
88003. (2)Interdepartmental Program of Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative
Physiology, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, 90095. (3)Department of Integrative
Biology and Physiology, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, 90095.

The forkhead domain FOXP2 and FOXP1 transcription factors are implicated in
several cognitive disorders with language deficits, notably autism, and thus play
a central role in learned vocal motor behavior in humans. Although a similar role
for FoxP2 and FoxP1 is proposed for other vertebrate species, including
songbirds, the neurodevelopmental expression of these genes are unknown in a
species with lifelong vocal learning abilities. Like humans, budgerigars
(Melopsittacus undulatus) learn new vocalizations throughout their entire
lifetime. Like songbirds, budgerigars have distinct brain nuclei for vocal
learning, which include the magnocellular nucleus of the medial striatum (MMSt), 
a basal ganglia region that is considered developmentally and functionally
analogous to Area X in songbirds. Here, we used in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry to investigate FoxP2 and FoxP1 expression in the MMSt of
juvenile and adult budgerigars. We found FoxP2 mRNA and protein expression levels
in the MMSt that were lower than the surrounding striatum throughout development 
and adulthood. In contrast, FoxP1 mRNA and protein had an elevated MMSt/striatum 
expression ratio as birds matured, regardless of their sex. These results show
that life-long vocal plasticity in budgerigars is associated with persistent
low-level FoxP2 expression in the budgerigar MMSt, and suggests the possibility
that FoxP1 plays an organizational role in the neurodevelopment of vocal motor
circuitry. Thus, developmental regulation of the FoxP2 and FoxP1 genes in the
basal ganglia appears essential for vocal mimicry in a range of species that
possess this relatively rare trait.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4437895
PMID: 25407828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. BMC Cancer. 2014 Nov 18;14:840. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-840.

FOXP1 inhibits cell growth and attenuates tumorigenicity of neuroblastoma.

Ackermann S(1), Kocak H, Hero B, Ehemann V, Kahlert Y, Oberthuer A, Roels F,
Theißen J, Odenthal M, Berthold F, Fischer M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology and Hematology and Center for Molecular
Medicine Cologne (CMMC), Children's Hospital, University of Cologne, Kerpener
Straße 62, Cologne 50924, Germany. sandra.ackermann@uk-koeln.de.

BACKGROUND: Segmental genomic copy number alterations, such as loss of 11q or 3p 
and gain of 17q, are well established markers of poor outcome in neuroblastoma,
and have been suggested to comprise tumor suppressor genes or oncogenes,
respectively. The gene forkhead box P1 (FOXP1) maps to chromosome 3p14.1, a tumor
suppressor locus deleted in many human cancers including neuroblastoma. FoxP1
belongs to a family of winged-helix transcription factors that are involved in
processes of cellular proliferation, differentiation and neoplastic
transformation.
METHODS: Microarray expression profiles of 476 neuroblastoma specimens were
generated and genes differentially expressed between favorable and unfavorable
neuroblastoma were identified. FOXP1 expression was correlated to clinical
markers and patient outcome. To determine whether hypermethylation is involved in
silencing of FOXP1, methylation analysis of the 5' region of FOXP1 in 47
neuroblastomas was performed. Furthermore, FOXP1 was re-expressed in three
neuroblastoma cell lines to study the effect of FOXP1 on growth characteristics
of neuroblastoma cells.
RESULTS: Low expression of FOXP1 is associated with markers of unfavorable
prognosis like stage 4, age >18 months and MYCN amplification and unfavorable
gene expression-based classification (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001 each). Moreover, FOXP1 expression
predicts patient outcome accurately and independently from well-established
prognostic markers. Array-based CGH analysis of 159 neuroblastomas revealed that 
heterozygous loss of the FOXP1 locus was a rare event (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>4), but if present,
was associated with low FOXP1 expression. By contrast, DNA methylation analysis
in 47 neuroblastomas indicated that hypermethylation is not regularly involved in
FOXP1 gene silencing. Re-expression of FoxP1 significantly impaired cell
proliferation, viability and colony formation in soft agar. Furthermore,
induction of FOXP1 expression led to cell cycle arrest and apoptotic cell death
of neuroblastoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that down-regulation of FOXP1 expression is a
common event in high-risk neuroblastoma pathogenesis and may contribute to tumor 
progression and unfavorable patient outcome.

PMCID: PMC4251948
PMID: 25406647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Sep 15;7(10):6852-61. eCollection 2014.

Male breast carcinoma: a clinicopathological and immunohistochemical
characterization study.

Zhou R(1), Yu L(1), Zhou S(1), Bi R(1), Shui R(1), Yu B(1), Lu H(1), Cai X(1),
Yang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center Shanghai
200032, P.R. China ; Department of Oncology, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan
University Shanghai 200032, P.R. China.

Male breast carcinoma is a relatively rare disease. This study retrospectively
investigated the clinicopathological features of 73 cases of male breast
carcinoma in Chinese population, and classified the molecular subtype based on
surrogate immunohistochemical definitions. The expression of GCDFP15, MGB, AR and
FOXP1 were evaluated. Invasive carcinoma of no special type was the most common
histological type in the study group (71.2%, 52/73). The luminal A and B subtypes
were the major types of male breast carcinoma (60.9%, 34.8% respectively). AR and
FOXP1 are expressed in 84.2% (48/57) and 71.9% (41/57) of the studied cases.
Carcinoma of the luminal A subtype expressed GCDFP15 (73.5%, 25/34) and MGB
(58.8%, 20/34) more frequently than cases of the luminal B subtypes (34.8%, 8/23 
and 43.5%, 10/23, respectively; P = 0.004, P = 0.255, respectively). In
conclusion, invasive carcinoma of no special type was the most common
histological type in male breast carcinoma among Chinese population. Our study
revealed that the luminal A and B subtypes were the major types of male breast
carcinoma. AR and FOXP1 are highly expressed in male breast cancer. The luminal A
subtype tends to express GCDFP15 and MGB more frequently than the luminal B
subtype.

PMCID: PMC4230132
PMID: 25400768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Dec;28(12):2012-24. doi: 10.1210/me.2014-1171.

Integrative analysis of FOXP1 function reveals a tumor-suppressive effect in
prostate cancer.

Takayama K(1), Suzuki T, Tsutsumi S, Fujimura T, Takahashi S, Homma Y, Urano T,
Aburatani H, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Anti-Aging Medicine (K.T., T.U., S.I.) and Geriatric Medicine
(K.T., T.U., S.I.) and Department of Urology (T.F., Y.H.), Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan; Department
of Pathology (T.S.), Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai,
Miyagi, 980-8575, Japan; Genome Science Division (Sh.T., H.A.), Research Center
for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo
153-8904, Japan; Department of Urology (Sa.T.), Nihon University School of
Medicine, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo 173-0032, Japan; and Division of Gene Regulation and
Signal Transduction (S.I.), Research Center for Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical
University, Hidaka, Saitama, 350-1241, Japan.

The transcriptional network of the androgen receptor (AR), a key molecule of
prostate cancer, is frequently modulated by interactions with other
transcriptional factors such as forkhead box protein A1 (FOXA1). However, global 
regulatory mechanisms of AR signaling mediated by such factors have not been well
investigated. Here we conducted a chromatin immunoprecipitation sequence
analysis, which revealed that another FOX family, FOXP1, is specifically
regulated by both AR and FOXA1. We also found that FOXP1 acts as a tumor
suppressor in prostate cancer through inhibiting cell proliferation and
migration. We generated an extensive global map of FOXP1 binding sites and found 
that FOXP1 is directly involved in AR-mediated transcription. We demonstrated
that FOXP1 has a repressive effect on AR-induced transcriptional activity or
histone modification in enhancer regions. Moreover, by a global analysis of
androgen-mediated transcriptional networks, we observed enrichment of FOXP1
binding genes in the gene cluster negatively regulated by FOXP1. Evaluation of
FOXP1 expression in clinical samples indicated that the decreased expression of
FOXP1 is another prognostic factor of prostate cancer. Taken together, our
results suggest a novel mechanism in which AR-induced FOXP1 functions as a direct
modulator of the AR and FOXA1 centric global transcriptional network.

PMID: 25329375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 3;5:5074. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6074.

Fucose-based PAMPs prime dendritic cells for follicular T helper cell
polarization via DC-SIGN-dependent IL-27 production.

Gringhuis SI(1), Kaptein TM(1), Wevers BA(1), van der Vlist M(1), Klaver EJ(2),
van Die I(2), Vriend LE(1), de Jong MA(1), Geijtenbeek TB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Immunology, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Meibergdreef 9, 1105 AZ Amsterdam,The Netherlands. (2)Department of
Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, VU University Medical Center, Van der
Boechorststraat 7, 1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Dendritic cells (DCs) orchestrate antibody-mediated responses to combat
extracellular pathogens including parasites by initiating T helper cell
differentiation. Here we demonstrate that carbohydrate-specific signalling by
DC-SIGN drives follicular T helper cell (TFH) differentiation via IL-27
expression. Fucose, but not mannose, engagement of DC-SIGN results in activation 
of IKKe, which collaborates with type I IFNR signalling to induce formation and
activation of transcription factor ISGF3. Notably, ISGF3 induces expression of
IL-27 subunit p28, and subsequent IL-27 secreted by DC-SIGN-primed DCs is pivotal
for the induction of Bcl-6(+)CXCR5(+)PD-1(hi)Foxp1(lo) TFH cells, IL-21 secretion
by TFH cells and T-cell-dependent IgG production by B cells. Thus, we have
identified an essential role for DC-SIGN-induced ISGF3 by fucose-based PAMPs in
driving IL-27 and subsequent TFH polarization, which might be harnessed for
vaccination design.

PMID: 25278262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Anticancer Res. 2014 Oct;34(10):5517-21.

Mixed adenoneuroendocrine carcinoma of the colon: molecular pathogenesis and
treatment.

Vanacker L(1), Smeets D(2), Hoorens A(3), Teugels E(1), Algaba R(4), Dehou MF(4),
De Becker A(5), Lambrechts D(2), De Greve J(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Medical Oncology, Brussels,
Belgium. (2)Vesalius Research Cancer, Flemish Institute for Biotechnology,
Leuven, Belgium Laboratory for Translational Genetics, Department of Oncology,
Catholic University Leuven, Belgium. (3)Department of Pathology, Brussels,
Belgium. (4)Department of Surgery and Pathology, Iris Hospitals South Campus
Joseph Bracops, Brussels, Belgium. (5)Department of Clinical Hematology,
Brussels, Belgium. (6)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Department of Medical
Oncology, Brussels, Belgium jacques.degreve@uzbrussel.be.

BACKGROUND/AIM: We report a case of a mixed adenoneuroendocrine carcinoma
developed in a colorectal adenocarcinoma with lymph node and liver metastases
exclusively emanating from the neuroendocrine carcinoma component. The patient
underwent right hemicolectomy and postoperatively received chemotherapy with
cisplatin and etoposide and subsequent high-dose induction chemotherapy, followed
by autologous stem cell transplantation. Following this treatment, there was a
complete remission. Currently, thirty months after treatment, the patient is in
unmaintained complete remission. Comparative exome sequencing of germline DNA and
DNA from the two separate malignant components revealed six somatic changes in
cancer consensus genes. Both components shared somatic mutations in Adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC), Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog (KRAS), B-cell
CLL/lymphoma 9 (BCL9) and Forkhead Box P1 (FOXP1) genes. Mutation in SWI/SNF
related, matrix associated, actin dependent regulator of chromatin, subfamily a, 
member 4 (SMARCA4) was only found in the neuroendocrine carcinoma component. The 
finding of several identical somatic mutations in both components supports a
clonal relationship between the neuroendocrine carcinoma and the adenocarcinoma. 
We suggest that a mutation in SMARCA4 could be responsible for the transformation
of the adenocarcinoma component into the neuroendocrine phenotype.

Copyright© 2014 International Institute of Anticancer Research (Dr. John G.
Delinassios), All rights reserved.

PMID: 25275049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Blood. 2014 Nov 27;124(23):3431-40. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-01-553412. Epub 2014 
Sep 29.

FOXP1 directly represses transcription of proapoptotic genes and cooperates with 
NF-<U+03BA>B to promote survival of human B cells.

van Keimpema M(1), Grüneberg LJ(1), Mokry M(2), van Boxtel R(3), Koster J(4),
Coffer PJ(5), Pals ST(1), Spaargaren M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Lymphoma and Myeloma Center Amsterdam, Academic
Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; (2)Division 
of Pediatrics, Wilhelmina Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands; (3)Hubrecht Institute for Developmental Biology and
Stem Cell Research, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands; (4)Department of Oncogenomics, 
Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
and. (5)Department of Cell Biology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht,
The Netherlands.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Nov 27;124(23):3340-1.

The forkhead transcription factor FOXP1 is involved in B-cell development and
function and is generally regarded as an oncogene in activated B-cell-like
subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue lymphoma, lymphomas relying on constitutive nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B)
activity for survival. However, the mechanism underlying its putative oncogenic
activity has not been established. By gene expression microarray, upon
overexpression or silencing of FOXP1 in primary human B cells and DLBCL cell
lines, combined with chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by next-generation
sequencing, we established that FOXP1 directly represses a set of 7 proapoptotic 
genes. Low expression of these genes, encoding the BH3-only proteins BIK and
Harakiri, the p53-regulatory proteins TP63, RASSF6, and TP53INP1, and AIM2 and
EAF2, is associated with poor survival in DLBCL patients. In line with these
findings, we demonstrated that FOXP1 promotes the expansion of primary mature
human B cells by inhibiting caspase-dependent apoptosis, without affecting B-cell
proliferation. Furthermore, FOXP1 is dependent upon, and cooperates with, NF-<U+03BA>B
signaling to promote B-cell expansion and survival. Taken together, our data
indicate that, through direct repression of proapoptotic genes, (aberrant)
expression of FOXP1 complements (constitutive) NF-<U+03BA>B activity to promote B-cell
survival and can thereby contribute to B-cell homeostasis and lymphomagenesis.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4246697
PMID: 25267198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Psychiatry. 2015 May;20(5):632-9. doi: 10.1038/mp.2014.116. Epub 2014 Sep 30.

Brain-specific Foxp1 deletion impairs neuronal development and causes
autistic-like behaviour.

Bacon C(1), Schneider M(2), Le Magueresse C(3), Froehlich H(1), Sticht C(4),
Gluch C(2), Monyer H(5), Rappold GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Molecular Human Genetics, Medical Faculty of Heidelberg
University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 366, Heidelberg, Germany [2] Interdisciplinary
Centre for Neurosciences (IZN), University of Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Research
Group Developmental Neuropsychopharmacology, Institute of Psychopharmacology,
Central Institute of Mental Health, Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg
University, Germany. (3)1] Interdisciplinary Centre for Neurosciences (IZN),
University of Heidelberg, Germany [2] Department of Clinical Neurobiology,
Medical Faculty of Heidelberg University and German Cancer Research Center
(DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany [3] INSERM UMR-S 839, University Pierre and Marie
Curie, Paris, France. (4)Medical Research Center, University of Heidelberg,
Theodor_Kutzer_Ufer 1-3, Mannheim, Germany. (5)1] Interdisciplinary Centre for
Neurosciences (IZN), University of Heidelberg, Germany [2] Department of Clinical
Neurobiology, Medical Faculty of Heidelberg University and German Cancer Research
Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany.

Neurodevelopmental disorders are multi-faceted and can lead to intellectual
disability, autism spectrum disorder and language impairment. Mutations in the
Forkhead box FOXP1 gene have been linked to all these disorders, suggesting that 
it may play a central role in various cognitive and social processes. To
understand the role of Foxp1 in the context of neurodevelopment leading to
alterations in cognition and behaviour, we generated mice with a brain-specific
Foxp1 deletion (Nestin-Cre(Foxp1-/-)mice). The mutant mice were viable and
allowed for the first time the analysis of pre- and postnatal neurodevelopmental 
phenotypes, which included a pronounced disruption of the developing striatum and
more subtle alterations in the hippocampus. More detailed analysis in the CA1
region revealed abnormal neuronal morphogenesis that was associated with reduced 
excitability and an imbalance of excitatory to inhibitory input in CA1
hippocampal neurons in Nestin-Cre(Foxp1-/-) mice. Foxp1 ablation was also
associated with various cognitive and social deficits, providing new insights
into its behavioural importance.

PMCID: PMC4419151
PMID: 25266127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Dec;164A(12):3027-34. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36751. Epub 2014
Sep 24.

Delineation of the 3p14.1p13 microdeletion associated with syndromic distal limb 
contractures.

Thevenon J(1), Monnier N, Callier P, Dieterich K, Francoise M, Montgomery T,
Kjaergaard S, Neas K, Dixon J, Dahm TL, Huet F, Ragon C, Mosca-Boidron AL, Marle 
N, Duplomb L, Aubriot-Lorton MH, Mugneret F, Vokes SA, Tucker HW, Lunardi J,
Faivre L, Jouk PS, Thauvin-Robinet C.

Author information: 
(1)Fédération Hospitalo-Universitaire TRANSLAD et Centre de Génétique et Centre
de Référence «Anomalies du Développement et Syndromes Malformatifs» du Grand Est,
Hôpital d'Enfants, CHU Dijon, Dijon, France; Université de Bourgogne, Dijon,
France.

Distal limb contractures (DLC) represent a heterogeneous clinical and genetic
condition. Overall, 20-25% of the DLC are caused by mutations in genes encoding
the muscle contractile apparatus. Large interstitial deletions of the 3p have
already been diagnosed by standard chromosomal analysis, but not associated with 
a specific phenotype. We report on four patients with syndromic DLC presenting
with a de novo 3p14.1p13 microdeletion. The clinical features associated multiple
contractures, feeding problems, developmental delay, and intellectual disability.
Facial dysmorphism was constant with low-set posteriorly rotated ears and
blepharophimosis. Review of previously reported cases with a precise mapping of
the deletions, documented a 250<U+2009>kb smallest region of overlap (SRO) necessary for
DLC. This region contained one gene, EIF4E3, the first three exons of the FOXP1
gene, and an intronic enhancer of FOXP1 named hs1149. Sanger sequencing and locus
quantification of hs1149, EIF4E3, and FOXP1 in a cohort of 11 French patients
affected by DLC appeared normal. In conclusion, we delineate a new microdeletion 
syndrome involving the 3p14.1p13 locus and associated with DLC and severe
developmental delay.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25258245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Endocrinology. 2014 Dec;155(12):4881-94. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1486. Epub 2014 Sep
23.

Androgen modulation of Foxp1 and Foxp2 in the developing rat brain: impact on sex
specific vocalization.

Bowers JM(1), Perez-Pouchoulen M, Roby CR, Ryan TE, McCarthy MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology (J.M.B., M.P.-P., C.R.R., M.M.M.), University of
Maryland School of Medicine and Programs in Neuroscience (M.M.M.) and Medicine
(T.E.R.), University of Maryland School of Medicine, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland 21201.

Sex differences in vocal communication are prevalent in both the animals and
humans. The mechanism(s) mediating gender differences in human language are
unknown, although, sex hormones, principally androgens, play a central role in
the development of vocalizations in a wide variety of animal species. The
discovery of FOXP2 has added an additional avenue for exploring the origins of
language and animal communication. The FOXP2 gene is a member of the forkhead box
P (FOXP) family of transcription factors. Prior to the prenatal androgen surge in
male fetuses, we observed no sex difference for Foxp2 protein levels in cultured 
cells. In contrast, 24 hours after the onset of the androgen surge, we found a
sex difference for Foxp2 protein levels in cultured cortical cells with males
having higher levels than females. Furthermore, we observed the potent
nonaromatizable androgen dihydrotestosterone altered not only Foxp2 mRNA and
protein levels but also Foxp1. Androgen effects on both Foxp2 and Foxp1 were
found to occur in the striatum, cerebellar vermis, and cortex. Immunofluorescence
microscopy and coimmunoprecipitation demonstrate Foxp2 and the androgen receptor 
protein interact. Databases for transcription factor binding sites predict a
consensus binding motif for androgen receptor on the Foxp2 promoter regions. We
also observed a sex difference in rat pup vocalization with males vocalizing more
than females and treatment of females with dihydrotestosterone eliminated the sex
difference. We propose that androgens might be an upstream regulator of both
Foxp2 and Foxp1 expression and signaling. This has important implications for
language and communication as well as neuropsychiatric developmental disorders
involving impairments in communication.

PMCID: PMC4239422
PMID: 25247470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;22(8):625-30. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.1007-3418.2014.08.015.

[Predication analysis of microarray data to determine altered gene profiles in
liver carcinoma related to HBV-related cirrhosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu J(1), Zhang Q, Li Z, Zhang Q, Qu Y, Lu L, Xu M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Qilu Hospital affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan
250012, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether gene expression profiles can be used to
determine risk genes and predict HBV-related cirrhosis progression to liver
carcinoma using Significance Analysis of Microarray (SAM) and Prediction Analysis
of Microarray (PAM) methods.
METHODS: The Affymetrix GeneChip was used to establish the gene expression
profiles of liver tissues from 15 patients with chronic hepatitis B and cirrhosis
or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Differentially expressed genes (fold-change
more than 2; P value less than 0.01) were selected by GeneSpring GX software.
Risk genes related to cirrhosis and liver carcinoma were generated by SAM and PAM
methods. Real-time PCR was used to verify the expression of risk genes in the
liver tissues.
RESULTS: Samples were clustered into the cirrhosis subgroup (n =15) or the HCC
subgroup (n =15). A total of 497 differentially expressed genes were identified, 
SAM identified 162 significant genes, including 18 up-regulated genes and 144
down-regulated genes (fold-change:-1.46 to 1.28). PAM identified 22 genes with a 
"poor risk signature" (defined with a threshold of 5.5), which were associated
with classifying cirrhosis and liver carcinoma; of these risk genes, 4 were
down-regulated and 18 were up-regulated in the HCC group compared to the
cirrhosis group (fold-change: 2.038 to 7.897, P value less than 0.01). The
correction of classification was more than 80% . FOXP1, SPINK1 and KCNJ16 were
verified by real-time PCR as differently expressed in the two subgroups (P value 
=0.011, 0.002 and 0.004, respectively).
CONCLUSION: The altered gene profiles of carcinogenesis in HBV-related cirrhosis 
involves hundreds of genes. The combination of three "poor risk genes" may
represent potential targets for diagnosis and prediction of liver carcinoma
progression.

PMID: 25243966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):427-39. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.08.012.

Transforming growth factor ß-mediated suppression of antitumor T cells requires
FoxP1 transcription factor expression.

Stephen TL(1), Rutkowski MR(1), Allegrezza MJ(1), Perales-Puchalt A(1), Tesone
AJ(1), Svoronos N(1), Nguyen JM(1), Sarmin F(1), Borowsky ME(2), Tchou J(3),
Conejo-Garcia JR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Microenvironment and Metastasis Program, The Wistar Institute,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Helen F. Graham Cancer Center, Christiana Care
Health System, 4701 Ogletown-Stanton Road, Newark, DE 19713, USA. (3)Division of 
Endocrine and Oncologic Surgery, Department of Surgery, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-1693, USA; Rena Rowan Breast Center,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-1693, USA; Abramson Cancer
Center Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104-1693, USA. (4)Tumor Microenvironment and Metastasis Program, The Wistar
Institute, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: jrconejo@wistar.org.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):345-7.

Tumor-reactive T cells become unresponsive in advanced tumors. Here we have
characterized a common mechanism of T cell unresponsiveness in cancer driven by
the upregulation of the transcription factor Forkhead box protein P1 (Foxp1),
which prevents CD8<U+207A> T cells from proliferating and upregulating Granzyme-B and
interferon-<U+03B3> in response to tumor antigens. Accordingly, Foxp1-deficient
lymphocytes induced rejection of incurable tumors and promoted protection against
tumor rechallenge. Mechanistically, Foxp1 interacted with the transcription
factors Smad2 and Smad3 in preactivated CD8<U+207A> T cells in response to
microenvironmental transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß), and was essential for
its suppressive activity. Therefore, Smad2 and Smad3-mediated c-Myc repression
requires Foxp1 expression in T cells. Furthermore, Foxp1 directly mediated
TGF-ß-induced c-Jun transcriptional repression, which abrogated T cell activity. 
Our results unveil a fundamental mechanism of T cell unresponsiveness different
from anergy or exhaustion, driven by TGF-ß signaling on tumor-associated
lymphocytes undergoing Foxp1-dependent transcriptional regulation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4174366
PMID: 25238097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):345-7. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2014.09.001.

Targeting foxp1 for reinstating anticancer immunosurveillance.

Zitvogel L(1), Kroemer G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France; INSERM U1015, Villejuif,
France; Université Paris Sud-XI, Faculté de Médecine, Le Kremlin Bicêtre, France;
Center of Clinical Investigations in Biotherapies of Cancer (CICBT) 507,
Villejuif, France. Electronic address: laurence.zitvogel@gustaveroussy.fr.
(2)Gustave Roussy Cancer Campus, Villejuif, France; Université Paris Descartes,
Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France; Metabolomics and Cell Biology Platforms,
Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France; Equipe 11 labellisée Ligue contre le Cancer,
Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, INSERM U 1138, Paris, France; Pôle de
Biologie, Hôpital Européen Georges Pompidou, AP-HP, Paris, France.

Comment on
    Immunity. 2014 Sep 18;41(3):427-39.

Transforming growth factor ß (TGF-ß) is a canonical immunosuppressive cytokine
secreted by tumors. In this issue of Immunity, Stephen et al. (2014) reveal that 
tumor-derived TGF-ß deactivates antitumor CD8(+) T cell responses through T cell 
upregulation of the FoxP1 transcription factor.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25238089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2014 Dec;24(8):593-602. doi: 10.3109/15376516.2014.956912. 
Epub 2014 Sep 4.

Molecular mechanisms of nano-selenium in mitigating hepatocellular carcinoma
induced by N-nitrosodiethylamine (NDEA) in rats.

Ahmed HH(1), Khalil WK, Hamza AH.

Author information: 
(1)Hormones Department, National Research Center , Dokki , Egypt .

The possible molecular mechanisms of Nano-selenium (nano-se) in attenuating
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) was investigated in this study. To achieve this
target, the apoptotic/necrotic rate in hepatic cells was investigated
morphologically by double staining with acridine orange/ethidium bromide to
address the type of cell death induced by nano-Se in HCC-bearing rats. To predict
the oxidative stress and DNA damage, the generation of 8-hydroxy-2-deoxyguanosine
(8-OHdG) and 2-deoxyguanosine (2-dG) was examined. Moreover, the expression of
some HCC-related genes was investigated such as aldo-keto reductase 1B10
(Akr1b10), ING3 and Foxp1 genes. As well as the histopathological study of liver 
tissue sections was performed. The results obtained from this study revealed that
(HCC+Nano Se) group shows the highest number of damaged cancerous cells.
Furthermore, the necrotic/apoptotic rate was significantly higher in
(nano-Se+HCC), (HCC+Doxo) and (HCC+Doxo+nano-se) compared to that in the
untreated HCC group. Treatment of HCC group with nano-se decreased the ratio of
8-OHdG/2-dG generation significantly with respect to the untreated HCC group. The
opposite was observed regarding the gene expression of AKr1b10 and ING3. The
treatment of HCC group with nano-se elicited significant increase in the
expression of Akr1b10 and ING3 genes compared with untreated HCC group. On the
other hand, the expression of Foxp1 gene was significantly decreased in HCC group
treated with nano-se in comparison with the untreated HCC group. The
histopathological study provided a supportive evidence for the molecular genetics
study. Our data shed light on the molecular mechanisms of nano-se in attenuating 
HCC in the experimental model.

PMID: 25156538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Aug;52(1):57-63. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8844-0. Epub 2014
Aug 12.

Complexin-1 and Foxp1 Expression Changes Are Novel Brain Effects of
Alpha-Synuclein Pathology.

Gispert S(1), Kurz A, Brehm N, Rau K, Walter M, Riess O, Auburger G.

Author information: 
(1)Exp. Neurology, Goethe University Medical School, Building 89, Theodor Stern
Kai 7, 60590, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

As the second most frequent neurodegenerative disorder of the aging population,
Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by progressive deficits in spontaneous 
movement, atrophy of dopaminergic midbrain neurons and aggregation of the protein
alpha-synuclein (SNCA). To elucidate molecular events before irreversible cell
death, we studied synucleinopathy-induced expression changes in mouse brain and
identified 49 midbrain/brainstem-specific transcriptional dysregulations. In
particular complexin-1 (Cplx1), Rabl2a and 14-3-3epsilon (Ywhae) downregulation, 
as well as upregulation of the midbrain-specific factor forkhead box P1 (Foxp1)
and of Rabgef1, were interesting as early mRNA level effects of alpha-synuclein
triggered pathology. The protein levels of complexin-1 were elevated in
midbrain/brainstem tissue of mice with A53T-SNCA overexpression and of mice with 
SNCA-knockout. The response of CPLX1 and Foxp1 levels to SNCA deficiency supports
the notion that these factors are regulated by altered physiological function of 
alpha-synuclein. Thus, their analysis might be useful in PD stages before the
advent of Lewy pathology. Because both alpha-synuclein and complexin-1 modulate
vesicle release, our findings support presynaptic dysfunction as an early event
in PD pathology.

PMCID: PMC4510914
PMID: 25112678  [PubMed - in process]


100. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2014 Nov;53(11):917-33. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22204. Epub
2014 Jul 17.

Deregulated FOX genes in Hodgkin lymphoma.

Nagel S(1), Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, Leibniz-Institute DSMZ-German
Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany.

FOX genes encode transcription factors which regulate basic developmental
processes during embryogenesis and in the adult. Several FOX genes show
deregulated expression in particular malignancies, representing oncogenes or
tumor suppressors. Here, we screened six Hodgkin lymphoma (HL) cell lines for FOX
gene activity by comparative microarray profiling, revealing overexpression of
FOXC1 and FOXD1, and reduced transcription of FOXN3, FOXO1, and FOXP1. In silico 
expression analyses of these FOX gene candidates in HL patient samples supported 
the cell line data. Chromosomal analyses demonstrated an amplification of the
FOXC1 locus at 6p25 and a gain of the FOXR2 locus at Xp11, indicting genomic
aberrations for their upregulation. Comparative expression profiling and ensuing 
stimulation experiments revealed implementation of the TGFß- and WNT-signaling
pathways in deregulation of FOXD1 and FOXN3. Functional analysis of FOXP1
implicated miR9 and miR34a as upstream regulators and PAX5, TCF3, and RAG2 as
downstream targets. A similar exercise for FOXC1 revealed repression of MSX1 and 
activation of IPO7, both mediating inhibition of the B-cell specific homeobox
gene ZHX2. Taken together, our data show that aberrantly expressed FOX genes and 
their downstream targets are involved in the pathogenesis of HL via deregulation 
of B-cell differentiation and may represent useful diagnostic markers and/or
therapeutic targets.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25043849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. An Pediatr (Barc). 2015 Apr;82(4):280-1. doi: 10.1016/j.anpedi.2014.06.007. Epub 
2014 Jul 16.

[Clinical phenotype of a patient with FOXP1 deletion].

[Article in Spanish]

Blanco Sánchez T(1), Duat Rodríguez A(2), Cantarín Extremera V(2), Lapunzina
P(3), Palomares Bralo M(4), Nevado Blanco J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Madrid,
España. Electronic address: teresablanc@hotmail.com. (2)Servicio de Neurología,
Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús, Madrid, España. (3)Unidad de Genética
Clínica, INGEMM, Instituto de Genética Médica y Molecular, Hospital Universitario
La Paz, Madrid, España; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades 
Raras (CIBERER), Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII), Madrid, España.
(4)Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria (IdiPAZ), Hospital Universitario La Paz, 
Madrid, España; Unidad de Genómica Estructural y Funcional, INGEMM, Instituto de 
Genética Médica y Molecular, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid, España.

PMID: 25037997  [PubMed - in process]


102. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 Feb;55(2):437-48. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0359-7. Epub 2014 
Jul 16.

Transcriptional regulation by FOXP1, FOXP2, and FOXP4 dimerization.

Sin C(1), Li H, Crawford DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

FOXP1, FOXP2, and FOXP4 are three members of the FOXP gene subfamily of
transcription factors involved in the development of the central nervous system. 
Previous studies have shown that the transcriptional activity of FOXP1/2/4 is
regulated by homo- and heterodimerization. However, their transcriptional gene
targets in the developing brain are still largely unknown. FOXP2 regulates the
expression of many genes important in embryonic development, including WNT and
Notch signaling pathways. In this study, we investigate whether dimerization of
FOXP1/2/4 leads to differential expression of ten known FOXP2 target genes (CER1,
SFRP4, WISP2, PRICKLE1, NCOR2, SNW1, NEUROD2, PAX3, EFNB3, and SLIT1). FOXP1/2/4 
open-reading frames were stably transfected into HEK293 cells, and the expression
level of these FOXP2 target genes was quantified using real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Our results revealed that the specific combination of FOXP1/2/4 dimers 
regulates transcription of various FOXP2 target genes involved in early neuronal 
development.

PMID: 25027557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Blood. 2014 Jul 3;124(1):2-4. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-05-574152.

miR in CLL: more than mere markers of prognosis?

Kater AP(1), Eldering E(1).

Author information: 
(1)ACADEMIC MEDICAL CENTER, UNIVERSITY OF AMSTERDAM.

Comment on
    Blood. 2014 Jul 3;124(1):84-95.

In this issue of Blood, Mraz et al show that microRNA-150 (miR-150) is the most
abundantly expressed miR in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and affects the
threshold for B-cell receptor (BCR) signaling by repressing expression levels of 
GAB1 and FOXP1. This functional link might explain the described association
between expression levels of miR-150 and prognosis.

PMID: 24993874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:735292. doi: 10.1155/2014/735292. Epub 2014 May 22.

Epigenetic alterations of chromosome 3 revealed by NotI-microarrays in clear cell
renal cell carcinoma.

Dmitriev AA(1), Rudenko EE(2), Kudryavtseva AV(1), Krasnov GS(3), Gordiyuk VV(2),
Melnikova NV(4), Stakhovsky EO(5), Kononenko OA(5), Pavlova LS(6), Kondratieva
TT(6), Alekseev BY(7), Braga EA(8), Senchenko VN(4), Kashuba VI(9).

Author information: 
(1)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow
119991, Russia ; P.A. Herzen Moscow Oncology Research Institute, Ministry of
Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow 125284, Russia. (2)Institute of
Molecular Biology and Genetics, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, Kiev 03680,
Ukraine. (3)Engelhardt Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of
Sciences, Moscow 119991, Russia ; Mechnikov Research Institute for Vaccines and
Sera, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow 105064, Russia. (4)Engelhardt
Institute of Molecular Biology, Russian Academy of Sciences, Moscow 119991,
Russia. (5)National Cancer Institute, Kiev 03022, Ukraine. (6)N.N. Blokhin
Russian Cancer Research Center, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Moscow
115478, Russia. (7)P.A. Herzen Moscow Oncology Research Institute, Ministry of
Healthcare of the Russian Federation, Moscow 125284, Russia. (8)Institute of
General Pathology and Pathophysiology, Russian Academy of Medical Sciences,
Moscow 125315, Russia ; Research Center of Medical Genetics, Russian Academy of
Medical Sciences, Moscow 115478, Russia. (9)Institute of Molecular Biology and
Genetics, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, Kiev 03680, Ukraine ; Department of
Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute, 17177 Stockholm,
Sweden.

This study aimed to clarify epigenetic and genetic alterations that occur during 
renal carcinogenesis. The original method includes chromosome 3 specific
NotI-microarrays containing 180 NotI-clones associated with 188 genes for
hybridization with 23 paired normal/tumor DNA samples of primary clear cell renal
cell carcinomas (ccRCC). Twenty-two genes showed methylation and/or deletion in
17-57% of tumors. These genes include tumor suppressors or candidates (VHL,
CTDSPL, LRRC3B, ALDH1L1, and EPHB1) and genes that were not previously considered
as cancer-associated (e.g., LRRN1, GORASP1, FGD5, and PLCL2). Bisulfite
sequencing analysis confirmed methylation as a frequent event in ccRCC. A set of 
six markers (NKIRAS1/RPL15, LRRN1, LRRC3B, CTDSPL, GORASP1/TTC21A, and VHL) was
suggested for ccRCC detection in renal biopsies. The mRNA level decrease was
shown for 6 NotI-associated genes in ccRCC using quantitative PCR: LRRN1,
GORASP1, FOXP1, FGD5, PLCL2, and ALDH1L1. The majority of examined genes showed
distinct expression profiles in ccRCC and papillary RCC. The strongest extent and
frequency of downregulation were shown for ALDH1L1 gene both in ccRCC and
papillary RCC. Moreover, the extent of ALDH1L1 mRNA level decrease was more
pronounced in both histological types of RCC stage III compared with stages I and
II (P = 0.03). The same was observed for FGD5 gene in ccRCC (P < 0.06). Dedicated
to thememory of Eugene R. Zabarovsky.

PMCID: PMC4054851
PMID: 24977159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):597-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.2922.

Navigating double negatives: new pathways for regulating T(FH) differentiation.

Yu D(1), Chen Y(1), Leong YA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunomodulation, School of Biomedical Sciences,
Monash University, Clayton, Australia.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):657-66.
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):667-75.

PMID: 24940946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Ann Diagn Pathol. 2014 Aug;18(4):232-7. doi: 10.1016/j.anndiagpath.2014.04.003.
Epub 2014 May 6.

Forkhead box protein P1 is a useful marker for the diagnosis of mucinous minimal 
deviation adenocarcinoma of uterine cervix.

Yang Q(1), Jiang W(2), Li L(3), Huang Q(3), Yang KX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Histology, Chengdu Medical College, 610083, Chengdu,
Sichuan Province, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of Pathology, West
China Second University Hospital, Sichuan University, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan
Province, People's Republic of China. Electronic address: jervis@126.com.
(3)Department of Pathology, West China Second University Hospital, Sichuan
University, 610041, Chengdu, Sichuan Province, People's Republic of China.

Mucinous minimal deviation adenocarcinoma (MDA) is a rare highly differentiated
tumor of uterine cervix, of which the confusing histopathology resembling some
benign lesions usually makes difficulty for pathologic diagnosis. The expression 
of forkhead box protein P1 (FOXP1) is found in some kinds of human tumors and is 
considered to be associated with the progression of the tumors. The purpose of
this study is to detect the FOXP1 expression in MDA and evaluate its possible
role in the diagnosis of MDA. Twenty-two MDA cases and 20 control cases
consisting of 10 cases of lobular endocervical glandular hyperplasia and 10 cases
of normal endocervical tissue were included in this study. All available clinical
data were collected and immunostaining for FOXP1, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA),
human milk fat globule antigen 1 (HMFG1), estrogen receptor, and progesterone
receptor were performed on these cases. The nuclear/cytoplasmic expression of
FOXP1 was found in 18 of 22 MDA cases while in 1 of 20 control cases, which
showed statistical significance (P = .000). The cytoplasmic CEA expression was
found in 14 of 22 MDA cases and 2 of 20 control cases (P = .000), whereas
cytoplasmic HMFG1 expression was found in 10 of 22 MDA cases and 4 of 20 control 
cases (P = .081). No statistical difference was found between FOXP1 and CEA
expression (P = .083) or between FOXP1 and HMFG1 expression (P = .375) in MDA.
Neither estrogen receptor nor PR expression was found in MDA. The significant
expression of FOXP1 in MDA may be helpful to some extent in the pathologic
diagnosis of cervical MDA. A widened observation range and further researches are
needed to elucidate the potential mechanism.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24908370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. BMC Cancer. 2014 Jun 3;14:396. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-396.

FOXP1 and TP63 involvement in the progression of myelodysplastic syndrome with
5q- and additional cytogenetic abnormalities.

L'Abbate A, Lo Cunsolo C, Macrì E, Iuzzolino P, Mecucci C, Doglioni C, Coco M,
Muscarella LA, Salati S, Tagliafico E, Minoia C, De Tullio G, Guarini A, Testoni 
N, Agostinelli C, Storlazzi CT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Bari, Via G,Amendola 165/A, Bari 70126,
Italy. cleliatiziana.storlazzi@uniba.it.

BACKGROUND: The progression of low-risk del(5q) myelodysplastic syndrome to acute
myeloid leukemia is increased when associated with mutations of TP53, or with
additional chromosomal abnormalities. However, to date the prognostic impact and 
molecular consequences of these rearrangements were poorly investigated. Single
additional alterations to del(5q) by balanced chromosome rearrangements were
rarely found in myelodysplasia. In particular, balanced alterations involving
TP63 and FOXP1 genes were never reported in the literature.
CASE PRESENTATION: Here we report on a 79-year woman with an aggressive form of
myelodysplastic syndrome with del(5q), no TP53 mutation, and a novel complex
rearrangement of chromosome 3 in bone marrow cells. Our results revealed that the
FOXP1 and TP63 genes were both relocated along chromosome 3. Strikingly,
immunohistochemistry analysis showed altered protein levels, disclosing that this
rearrangement triggered the expression of FOXP1 and TP63 genes. FOXP1 was also
found activated in other patients with myelodysplasia and acute myeloid leukemia,
showing that it is an important, recurrent event.
CONCLUSIONS: We document an apparent role of FOXP1 and TP63, up to now poorly
documented, in the progression of MDS in our patient who is lacking mutations in 
the TP53 tumor suppressor gene normally associated with poor outcome in
myelodysplastic syndrome with 5q-. Finally, our results may suggest a possible
broader role of FOXP1 in the pathogenesis and progression of myelodysplasia and
acute myeloid leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4059025
PMID: 24893616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 2;9(6):e98169. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098169. eCollection 
2014.

Immunohistochemical and molecular characteristics with prognostic significance in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Bellas C(1), García D(1), Vicente Y(1), Kilany L(1), Abraira V(2), Navarro B(3), 
Provencio M(4), Martín P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria,
Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro-Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain. (2)Unidad de 
Bioestadística Clínica, Hospital Universitario Ramón y Cajal, CIBER Epidemiología
y Salud Pública (CIBERESP), Madrid, Spain. (3)Department of Hematology, Hospital 
Universitario Puerta de Hierro-Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain. (4)Medical Oncology
Service, Onco-hematology Research Unit, Instituto de Investigación Sanitaria,
Hospital Universitario Puerta de Hierro-Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is an aggressive non-Hodgkin lymphoma with 
marked biologic heterogeneity. We analyzed 100 cases of DLBCL to evaluate the
prognostic value of immunohistochemical markers derived from the gene expression 
profiling-defined cell origin signature, including MYC, BCL2, BCL6, and FOXP1
protein expression. We also investigated genetic alterations in BCL2, BCL6, MYC
and FOXP1 using fluorescence in situ hybridization and assessed their prognostic 
significance. BCL6 rearrangements were detected in 29% of cases, and BCL6 gene
alteration (rearrangement and/or amplification) was associated with the
non-germinal center B subtype (non-GCB). BCL2 translocation was associated with
the GCB phenotype, and BCL2 protein expression was associated with the
translocation and/or amplification of 18q21. MYC rearrangements were detected in 
15% of cases, and MYC protein expression was observed in 29% of cases. FOXP1
expression, mainly of the non-GCB subtype, was demonstrated in 37% of cases.
Co-expression of the MYC and BCL2 proteins, with non-GCB subtype predominance,
was observed in 21% of cases. We detected an association between high FOXP1
expression and a high proliferation rate as well as a significant positive
correlation between MYC overexpression and FOXP1 overexpression. MYC, BCL2 and
FOXP1 expression were significant predictors of overall survival. The
co-expression of MYC and BCL2 confers a poorer clinical outcome than MYC or BCL2 
expression alone, whereas cases negative for both markers had the best outcomes. 
Our study confirms that DLBCL, characterized by the co-expression of MYC and BCL2
proteins, has a poor prognosis and establishes a significant positive correlation
with MYC and FOXP1 over-expression in this entity.

PMCID: PMC4041883
PMID: 24887414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. BMC Cancer. 2014 May 19;14:342. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-342.

Genome instability in blood cells of a BRCA1+ breast cancer family.

Xiao F, Kim YC, Snyder C, Wen H, Chen PX, Luo J, Becirovic D, Downs B, Cowan KH, 
Lynch H(1), Wang SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology and Anatomy, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.
htlynch@creighton.edu.

BACKGROUND: BRCA1 plays an essential role in maintaining genome stability.
Inherited BRCA1 germline mutation (BRCA1+) is a determined genetic predisposition
leading to high risk of breast cancer. While BRCA1+ induces breast cancer by
causing genome instability, most of the knowledge is known about somatic genome
instability in breast cancer cells but not germline genome instability.
METHODS: Using the exome-sequencing method, we analyzed the genomes of blood
cells in a typical BRCA1+ breast cancer family with an exon 13-duplicated founder
mutation, including six breast cancer-affected and two breast cancer unaffected
members.
RESULTS: We identified 23 deleterious mutations in the breast cancer-affected
family members, which are absent in the unaffected members. Multiple mutations
damaged functionally important and breast cancer-related genes, including
transcriptional factor BPTF and FOXP1, ubiquitin ligase CUL4B, phosphorylase
kinase PHKG2, and nuclear receptor activator SRA1. Analysis of the mutations
between the mothers and daughters shows that most mutations were germline
mutation inherited from the ancestor(s) while only a few were somatic mutation
generated de novo.
CONCLUSION: Our study indicates that BRCA1+ can cause genome instability with
both germline and somatic mutations in non-breast cells.

PMCID: PMC4031489
PMID: 24884718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):667-75. doi: 10.1038/ni.2890. Epub 2014 May 25.

The transcription factor Foxp1 is a critical negative regulator of the
differentiation of follicular helper T cells.

Wang H(1), Geng J(2), Wen X(2), Bi E(1), Kossenkov AV(1), Wolf AI(1), Tas J(3),
Choi YS(4), Takata H(1), Day TJ(1), Chang LY(1), Sprout SL(1), Becker EK(1),
Willen J(1), Tian L(1), Wang X(1), Xiao C(5), Jiang P(1), Crotty S(4), Victora
GD(3), Showe LC(1), Tucker HO(6), Erikson J(1), Hu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)1] The Wistar
Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. [2]. (3)Whitehead Institute for
Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (4)La Jolla Institute for
Allergy & Immunology, La Jolla, California, USA. (5)Department of Immunology and 
Microbial Science, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.
(6)Department of Molecular Genetics and The Institute for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):597-9.

CD4(+) follicular helper T cells (T(FH) cells) are essential for germinal center 
(GC) responses and long-lived antibody responses. Here we report that naive
CD4(+) T cells deficient in the transcription factor Foxp1 'preferentially'
differentiated into T(FH) cells, which resulted in substantially enhanced GC and 
antibody responses. We found that Foxp1 used both constitutive Foxp1A and Foxp1D 
induced by stimulation of the T cell antigen receptor (TCR) to inhibit the
generation of T(FH) cells. Mechanistically, Foxp1 directly and negatively
regulated interleukin 21 (IL-21); Foxp1 also dampened expression of the
costimulatory molecule ICOS and its downstream signaling at early stages of T
cell activation, which rendered Foxp1-deficient CD4(+) T cells partially
resistant to blockade of the ICOS ligand (ICOSL) during T(FH) cell development.
Our findings demonstrate that Foxp1 is a critical negative regulator of T(FH)
cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4142638
PMID: 24859450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Am J Surg Pathol. 2014 Jul;38(7):999-1006. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000225.

Methotrexate-associated B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders presenting in the
skin: A clinicopathologic and immunophenotypical study of 10 cases.

Koens L(1), Senff NJ, Vermeer MH, Willemze R, Jansen PM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of *Pathology Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center,
Leiden Department of Dermatology, Saint Lucas Andreas Hospital, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Methotrexate (MTX)-associated B-cell lymphoproliferative disorders (B-LPD) may
first present in the skin, but their clinicopathologic features are still ill
defined. Differentiation from primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma and
primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type (PCLBCL-LT) is
important, as MTX-associated B-LPD may show spontaneous regression after
withdrawal of MTX therapy. In the present study, the clinicopathologic and
phenotypical features of 10 patients with MTX-associated B-LPD first presenting
in the skin, including 5 EBV(+) and 5 EBV(-) cases, were investigated. Six
patients had skin-limited disease. Clinically, abrogation of MTX therapy resulted
in a complete response in 4 cases and a partial response in another 2. The 5-year
disease-specific survival was 90%. MTX-associated B-LPD differed from primary
cutaneous follicle center lymphoma by the presence of ulcerating and/or
generalized skin lesions, an infiltrate composed of centroblasts/immunoblasts
rather than large centrocytes, reduced staining for CD79a, and expression of
BCL2, IRF4, and FOXP1 in most cases. EBV(+) MTX-associated B-LPD differed from
PCLBCL-LT by the presence ulcerative skin lesions, marked tumor cell
polymorphism, reduced staining for CD79a, and expression of CD30 and EBV. EBV(-) 
cases showed morphologic and immunophenotypical similarities to PCLBCL-LT but
differed by presentation with generalized skin lesions in 4 of 5 cases. The
results of this study, showing a relatively good clinical outcome and spontaneous
disease regression after only withdrawal of MTX in a considerable proportion of
patients, underscores the importance of a careful wait-and-see policy before
considering more aggressive therapies in patients with MTX-associated B-LPD of
the skin.

PMID: 24805861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2014;2014:927619. doi: 10.1155/2014/927619. Epub 2014 Apr
6.

Olive (Olea europaea) leaf extract induces apoptosis and monocyte/macrophage
differentiation in human chronic myelogenous leukemia K562 cells: insight into
the underlying mechanism.

Samet I(1), Han J(2), Jlaiel L(3), Sayadi S(3), Isoda H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba,
Tennodai 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8572, Japan. (2)Faculty of Life and
Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tennodai 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki
305-8572, Japan ; Alliance of Research on North Africa, University of Tsukuba,
Tennodai 1-1-1, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8572, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Environmental 
Bioprocesses, Biotechnology Center of Sfax, Sfax 3018, Tunisia.

Differentiation therapy is an attractive approach aiming at reversing malignancy 
and reactivating endogenous differentiation programs in cancer cells. Olive leaf 
extract, known for its antioxidant activity, has been demonstrated to induce
apoptosis in several cancer cells. However, its differentiation inducing
properties and the mechanisms involved are still poorly understood. In this
study, we investigated the effect of Chemlali Olive Leaf Extract (COLE) for its
potential differentiation inducing effect on multipotent leukemia K562 cells.
Results showed that COLE inhibits K562 cells proliferation and arrests the cell
cycle at G0/G1, and then at G2/M phase over treatment time. Further analysis
revealed that COLE induces apoptosis and differentiation of K562 cells toward the
monocyte lineage. Microarray analysis was conducted to investigate the underlying
mechanism of COLE differentiation inducing effect. The differentially expressed
genes such as IFI16, EGR1, NFYA, FOXP1, CXCL2, CXCL3, and CXCL8 confirmed the
commitment of K562 cells to the monocyte/macrophage lineage. Thus our results
provide evidence that, in addition to apoptosis, induction of differentiation is 
one of the possible therapeutic effects of olive leaf in cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3997986
PMID: 24803988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Jul;10(1):467-72. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2197. Epub 2014 Apr 29.

FOXP1 has a low expression in human gliomas and its overexpression inhibits
proliferation, invasion and migration of human glioma U251 cells.

Xue L(1), Yue S(1), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Tianjin 300052, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to examine the clinical characteristics of forkhead box
protein P1 (FoxP1) in gliomas and its role in the proliferation, invasiveness,
migration and apoptosis of the human glioma U251 cell line. The expression levels
of FOXP1 were first studied in operation resection specimens of glioma and normal
peripheral brain tissues. The enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP)
expression vector of FOXP1 was prepared and transfected into U251 cells. MTT,
cell invasion, transwell and scratch assays were utilized to investigate the cell
growth activity and the rate of apoptosis of the cells was tested by flow
cytometry. Western blot analysis and quantitative polymerase chain reaction
assays were employed to measure the transfection efficacy. The results revealed
that FOXP1 was highly expressed in glioma, as compared with low levels detected
in normal brain tissues. Following transfection with pEGFP-N1-FOXP1, the
proliferation, invasiveness and migration capabilities of cells significantly
decreased, whilst the rate of apoptosis was markedly enhanced (P<0.01).
Furthermore, the expression of FOXP1 in U251 cells was enhanced (P<0.01). In
conclusion, the present study indicated that FOXP1 is closely associated with
tumorigenesis and development of glioma, as demonstrated by a reduction in the
proliferation, migration and invasion of glioma cells upon FOCP1 overexpression.

PMID: 24789678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Blood. 2014 Jul 3;124(1):84-95. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-09-527234. Epub 2014 May 
1.

miR-150 influences B-cell receptor signaling in chronic lymphocytic leukemia by
regulating expression of GAB1 and FOXP1.

Mraz M(1), Chen L(2), Rassenti LZ(2), Ghia EM(2), Li H(2), Jepsen K(2), Smith
EN(2), Messer K(2), Frazer KA(2), Kipps TJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)University of California-San Diego, Moores Cancer Center, Department of
Medicine, La Jolla, CA; Central European Institute of Technology, Masaryk
University, Brno, Czech Republic; and Department of Internal Medicine, Hematology
and Oncology, University Hospital Brno, Brno, Czech Republic. (2)University of
California-San Diego, Moores Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, La Jolla, CA;

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Jul 3;124(1):2-4.

We examined the microRNAs (miRNAs) expressed in chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) and identified miR-150 as the most abundant, but with leukemia cell
expression levels that varied among patients. CLL cells that expressed
<U+03B6>-chain-associated protein of 70 kDa (ZAP-70) or that used unmutated
immunoglobulin heavy chain variable (IGHV) genes, each had a median expression
level of miR-150 that was significantly lower than that of ZAP-70-negative CLL
cells or those that used mutated IGHV genes. In samples stratified for expression
of miR-150, CLL cells with low-level miR-150 expressed relatively higher levels
of forkhead box P1 (FOXP1) and GRB2-associated binding protein 1 (GAB1), genes
with 3' untranslated regions having evolutionary-conserved binding sites for
miR-150. High-level expression of miR-150 could repress expression of these
genes, which encode proteins that enhance B-cell receptor signaling, a putative
CLL-growth/survival signal. Also, high-level expression of miR-150 was a
significant independent predictor of longer treatment-free survival or overall
survival, whereas an inverse association was observed for high-level expression
of GAB1 or FOXP1 for overall survival. This study demonstrates that expression of
miR-150 can influence the relative expression of GAB1 and FOXP1 and the signaling
potential of the B-cell receptor, thereby possibly accounting for the noted
association of expression of miR-150 and disease outcome.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4125356
PMID: 24787006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Cell. 2014 Apr 28;29(2):130-1. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.04.014.

Evolving locomotion with Hoxc9.

Mallo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Rua da Quinta Grande 6, 2780-156 Oeiras,
Portugal. Electronic address: mallo@igc.gulbenkian.pt.

Comment on
    Dev Cell. 2014 Apr 28;29(2):171-87.

Limb innervation is established by opposing Hox-dependent activities. In this
issue of Developmental Cell, Jung et al. (2014) show that Hoxc9 restriction of
Foxp1, high levels of which specify limb-innervating motor neurons, first
appeared in vertebrates concomitantly with paired appendages. Spatial control of 
this activity shapes neural networks controlling locomotion patterns.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24780731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Brain Lang. 2014 Jun;133:26-38. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2014.03.007. Epub 2014 Apr
24.

Human speech- and reading-related genes display partially overlapping expression 
patterns in the marmoset brain.

Kato M(1), Okanoya K(2), Koike T(3), Sasaki E(4), Okano H(5), Watanabe S(6),
Iriki A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Symbolic Cognitive Development, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 
2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan; Laboratory for Biolinguistics, RIKEN
Brain Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan; Center for 
Advanced Research on Logic and Sensibility (CARLS), Keio University, 2-15-45
Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan. Electronic address:
makatou@brain.riken.jp. (2)Laboratory for Biolinguistics, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (3)Laboratory for
Symbolic Cognitive Development, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa,
Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (4)Department of Applied Developmental Biology,
Central Institute for Experimental Animals, 3-25-12 Tonomachi, Kawasaki, Kanagawa
210-0821, Japan; Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; KEIO-RIKEN Research Center for 
Human Cognition, Keio University, 2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan.
(5)Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; KEIO-RIKEN Research Center for Human
Cognition, Keio University, 2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan; Keio 
University Joint Research Laboratory, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (6)KEIO-RIKEN Research Center for Human 
Cognition, Keio University, 2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan;
Center for Advanced Research on Logic and Sensibility (CARLS), Keio University,
2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan. (7)Laboratory for Symbolic
Cognitive Development, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama
351-0198, Japan; KEIO-RIKEN Research Center for Human Cognition, Keio University,
2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan; Center for Advanced Research on
Logic and Sensibility (CARLS), Keio University, 2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo
108-8345, Japan. Electronic address: iriki@brain.riken.jp.

Language is a characteristic feature of human communication. Several familial
language impairments have been identified, and candidate genes for language
impairments already isolated. Studies comparing expression patterns of these
genes in human brain are necessary to further understanding of these genes.
However, it is difficult to examine gene expression in human brain. In this
study, we used a non-human primate (common marmoset; Callithrix jacchus) as a
biological model of the human brain to investigate expression patterns of human
speech- and reading-related genes. Expression patterns of speech disorder-
(FoxP2, FoxP1, CNTNAP2, and CMIP) and dyslexia- (ROBO1, DCDC2, and KIAA0319)
related genes were analyzed. We found the genes displayed overlapping expression 
patterns in the ocular, auditory, and motor systems. Our results enhance
understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying language impairments.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24769279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Eur J Immunol. 2014 Jun;44(6):1716-27. doi: 10.1002/eji.201344116. Epub 2014 Apr 
29.

The type 1 diabetes resistance locus B10 Idd9.3 mediates impaired B-cell
lymphopoiesis and implicates microRNA-34a in diabetes protection.

Berry GJ(1), Budgeon LR, Cooper TK, Christensen ND, Waldner H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, Pennsylvania
State University, Hershey, PA, USA.

NOD.B10 Idd9.3 mice are congenic for the insulin-dependent diabetes (Idd) Idd9.3 
locus, which confers significant type 1 diabetes (T1D) protection and encodes 19 
genes, including microRNA (miR)-34a, from T1D-resistant C57BL/10 mice. B cells
have been shown to play a critical role in the priming of autoantigen-specific
CD4(+) T cells in T1D pathogenesis in non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice. We show that
early B-cell development is impaired in NOD.B10 Idd9.3 mice, resulting in the
profound reduction of transitional and mature splenic B cells as compared with
NOD mice. Molecular analysis revealed that miR-34a expression was significantly
higher in B-cell progenitors and marginal zone B cells from NOD.B10 Idd9.3 mice
than in NOD mice. Furthermore, miR-34a expression in these cell populations
inversely correlated with levels of Foxp1, an essential regulator of B-cell
lymphopoiesis, which is directly repressed by miR-34a. In addition, we show that 
islet-specific CD4(+) T cells proliferated inefficiently when primed by NOD.B10
Idd9.3 B cells in vitro or in response to endogenous autoantigen in NOD.B10
Idd9.3 mice. Thus, Idd9.3-encoded miR-34a is a likely candidate in negatively
regulating B-cell lymphopoiesis, which may contribute to inefficient expansion of
islet-specific CD4(+) T cells and to T1D protection in NOD.B10 Idd9.3 mice.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 24752729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Dev Cell. 2014 Apr 28;29(2):171-87. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.03.008. Epub 2014 
Apr 17.

Evolving Hox activity profiles govern diversity in locomotor systems.

Jung H(1), Mazzoni EO(2), Soshnikova N(3), Hanley O(1), Venkatesh B(4), Duboule
D(5), Dasen JS(6).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, NYU Neuroscience Institute, Department of
Neuroscience and Physiology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
10016, USA. (2)Department of Biology, New York University, New York, NY 10003,
USA. (3)Department of Genetics and Evolution, University of Geneva, Sciences III,
Quai Ernest-Ansermet 30, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland; Institute of Molecular
Biology, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany. (4)Comparative Genomics
Laboratory, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A(*)STAR, Biopolis,
Singapore 138673, Singapore; Department of Paediatrics, Yong Loo Lin School of
Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore 119228, Singapore.
(5)Department of Genetics and Evolution, University of Geneva, Sciences III, Quai
Ernest-Ansermet 30, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland; School of Life Sciences, Ecole
Polytechnique Fédérale, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. (6)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, NYU Neuroscience Institute, Department of Neuroscience and Physiology,
New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA. Electronic
address: jeremy.dasen@nyumc.org.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2014 Apr 28;29(2):130-1.

The emergence of limb-driven locomotor behaviors was a key event in the evolution
of vertebrates and fostered the transition from aquatic to terrestrial life. We
show that the generation of limb-projecting lateral motor column (LMC) neurons in
mice relies on a transcriptional autoregulatory module initiated via transient
activity of multiple genes within the HoxA and HoxC clusters. Repression of this 
module at thoracic levels restricts expression of LMC determinants, thus
dictating LMC position relative to the limbs. This suppression is mediated by a
key regulatory domain that is specifically found in the Hoxc9 proteins of
appendage-bearing vertebrates. The profile of Hoxc9 expression inversely
correlates with LMC position in land vertebrates and likely accounts for the
absence of LMC neurons in limbless species such as snakes. Thus, modulation of
both Hoxc9 protein function and Hoxc9 gene expression likely contributed to
evolutionary transitions between undulatory and ambulatory motor circuit
connectivity programs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4024207
PMID: 24746670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. JAMA Psychiatry. 2014 Jun;71(6):657-64. doi: 10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2014.176.

Identification of pathways for bipolar disorder: a meta-analysis.

Nurnberger JI Jr(1), Koller DL(2), Jung J(3), Edenberg HJ(4), Foroud T(1), Guella
I(5), Vawter MP(5), Kelsoe JR(6); Psychiatric Genomics Consortium Bipolar Group.

Collaborators: Sklar P, Ripke S, Scott LJ, Andreassen A, Cichon S, Craddock N,
Edenberg HJ, Nurnberger JI Jr, Rietschel M, Blackwood D, Corvin A, Flickinger M, 
Guan W, Mattingsdal M, McQuillin A, Wienker TF, Daly M, Dudbridge F, Holmans PA, 
Lin D, Burmeister M, Greenwood TA, Hamshere ML, Muglia P, Smith EN, Zandi PP,
Nievergelt CM, McKinney R, Shilling PD, Schork NJ, Bloss CS, Foroud T, Koller DL,
Gershon ES, Liu C, Badner JA, Scheftner WA, Lawson WB, Nwulia EA, Hipolito M,
Coryell W, Rice J, Byerley W, McMahon FJ, Schulze TG, Berrettini W, Lohoff FW,
Potash JB, Mahon PB, McInnis MG, Zöllner S, Zhang P, Craig DW, Szelinger S,
Barrett TB, Breuer R, Meier S, Strohmaier J, Witt SH, Tozzi F, Farmer A, McGuffin
P, Strauss J, Xu W, Kennedy JL, Vincent JB, Matthews K, Day R, Ferreira MA,
O'Dushlaine C, Perlis R, Raychaudhuri S, Ruderfer D, Lee PH, Smoller W, Li J,
Absher D, Bunney WE, Barchas JD, Schatzberg AF, Jones EG, Meng F, Thompson RC,
Watson SJ, Myers RM, Akil H, Boehnke M, Chambert K, Moran J, Scolnick EM,
Djurovic S, Melle I, Morken G, Gill M, Morris D, Quinn E, Mühleisen TW,
Degenhardt FA, Mattheisen M, Schumacher J, Maier W, Steffens M, Propping P,
Nöthen MM, Anjorin A, Bass N, Gurling H, Kandaswamy R, Lawrence J, McGhee K,
McIntosh AM, McLean AW, Muir WJ, Pickard BS, Breen G, Clair DS, Caesar S,
Gordon-Smith K, Jones L, Fraser C, Green EK, Grozeva D, Jones IR, Kirov G,
Moskvina V, Nikolov I, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ, Collier DA, Elkin A, Williamson R, 
Young AH, Ferrier I, Stefansson K, Stefansson H, Þorgeirsson Þ, Steinberg S,
Gustafsson Ó, Bergen SE, Nimgaonkar V, Hultman C, Landén M, Lichtenstein P,
Sullivan PF, Schalling M, Osby U, Backlund L, Frisén L, Langstrom N, Jamain S,
Leboyer M, Etain B, Bellivier F, Petursson H, Sigurðsson E, Müller-Mysok B, Lucae
S, Schwarz M, Fullerton JM, Schofield PR, Martin N, Montgomery GW, Lathrop M,
Óskarsson H, Bauer M, Wright A, Mitchell PB, Hautzinger M, Reif A, Kelsoe JR,
Purcell SM.

IMPORTANCE: Genome-wide investigations provide systematic information regarding
the neurobiology of psychiatric disorders.
OBJECTIVE: To identify biological pathways that contribute to risk for bipolar
disorder (BP) using genes with consistent evidence for association in multiple
genome-wide association studies (GWAS).
DATA SOURCES: Four independent data sets with individual genome-wide data
available in July 2011 along with all data sets contributed to the Psychiatric
Genomics Consortium Bipolar Group by May 2012. A prior meta-analysis was used as 
a source for brain gene expression data.
STUDY SELECTION: The 4 published GWAS were included in the initial sample. All
independent BP data sets providing genome-wide data in the Psychiatric Genomics
Consortium were included as a replication sample.
DATA EXTRACTION AND SYNTHESIS: We identified 966 genes that contained 2 or more
variants associated with BP at P <<U+2009>.05 in 3 of 4 GWAS data sets (n = 12,127 [5253
cases, 6874 controls]). Simulations using 10,000 replicates of these data sets
corrected for gene size and allowed the calculation of an empirical P value for
each gene; empirically significant genes were entered into a pathway analysis.
Each of these pathways was then tested in the replication sample (n = 8396 [3507 
cases, 4889 controls]) using gene set enrichment analysis for single-nucleotide
polymorphisms. The 226 genes were also compared with results from a meta-analysis
of gene expression in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Empirically significant genes and biological
pathways. RESULTS Among 966 genes, 226 were empirically significant (P <<U+2009>.05).
Seventeen pathways were overrepresented in analyses of the initial data set. Six 
of the 17 pathways were associated with BP in both the initial and replication
samples: corticotropin-releasing hormone signaling, cardiac ß-adrenergic
signaling, phospholipase C signaling, glutamate receptor signaling, endothelin 1 
signaling, and cardiac hypertrophy signaling. Among the 226 genes, 9 differed in 
expression in the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex in patients with BP: CACNA1C,
DTNA, FOXP1, GNG2, ITPR2, LSAMP, NPAS3, NCOA2, and NTRK3.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Pathways involved in the genetic predisposition to BP 
include hormonal regulation, calcium channels, second messenger systems, and
glutamate signaling. Gene expression studies implicate neuronal development
pathways as well. These results tend to reinforce specific hypotheses regarding
BP neurobiology and may provide clues for new approaches to treatment and
prevention.

PMCID: PMC4523227
PMID: 24718920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Jun 15;20(12):3078-86. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-1597. 
Epub 2014 Mar 14.

EZH2 mutations in follicular lymphoma from different ethnic groups and associated
gene expression alterations.

Guo S(1), Chan JK(2), Iqbal J(2), McKeithan T(2), Fu K(2), Meng B(2), Pan Y(2),
Cheuk W(2), Luo D(2), Wang R(2), Zhang W(2), Greiner TC(2), Chan WC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital, the Fourth
Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of Pathology,
Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong University
School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology, Tianjin
Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
NebraskaAuthors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital, the
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of
Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology,
Tianjin Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska. (2)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital,
the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of
Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology,
Tianjin Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska. (3)Authors' Affiliations: Department of Pathology, Xi Jing Hospital,
the Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, Shaan Xi Province; Department of
Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Hong Kong; Department of Pathology, Shandong
University School of Medicine, Jinan, Shandong Province; Department of Pathology,
Tianjin Cancer Hospital; Department of Pathology, Guangdong General Hospital and 
Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou, China; and Department of
Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha,
Nebraska jochan@coh.org.

PURPOSE: Gain-of-function mutations of enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) occur
frequently in diffuse large B-cell lymphomas and in follicular lymphomas.
However, the frequency of EZH2 mutation in Chinese follicular lymphomas and the
potential targets affected by this mutation are unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We determined EZH2 codon 641 mutations in Chinese follicular
lymphomas (n = 124) and compared them with Western follicular lymphomas (n = 70) 
using a sensitive pyrosequencing assay. Gene expression profiling (GEP) was
performed to determine differential gene expression between the mutated versus
unmutated subgroups, and selected genes were validated using
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Our results showed similar frequencies of EZH2 codon 641 mutations in
Chinese and Western follicular lymphoma cohorts (16.9% vs. 18.6%, <U+03C7>(2) test, P = 
0.773), including all five reported mutation variants. We observed significant
association of EZH2 mutation with low morphologic grade follicular lymphomas
(grade 1-2, 23.6% vs. grade 3, 7.7%, <U+03C7>(2) test, P = 0.02). EZH2 mutations also
showed significant association with BCL2 rearrangement in the Chinese cohort
(26.8% vs. 8.8%, <U+03C7>(2) test, P = 0.008) and combined cohorts (26.3% vs. 9.1%, <U+03C7>(2)
test, P = 0.002). GEP analysis identified several genes, including TCF4, FOXP1,
TCL1A, BIK, and RASSF6P, with significantly lower mRNA expression (P < 0.01) in
mutated cases, and the potential target TCL1A showed consistent results at the
protein level.
CONCLUSION: Similar prevalence of EZH2 mutation in two ethnic groups suggests
shared pathogenetic mechanisms. The much lower frequency of EZH2 mutation in
cases without BCL2 translocation suggests a different pattern of evolution of
this subtype of follicular lymphoma. GEP studies showed a set of differentially
expressed genes and suggested that EZH2 mutation may help to lock the tumor cells
at the germinal center stage of differentiation.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 24634383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Am J Hematol. 2012 Nov;87(11):1010-6. doi: 10.1002/ajh.23309. Epub 2012 Aug 7.

Clinical significance of genetic aberrations in secondary acute myeloid leukemia.

Milosevic JD(1), Puda A, Malcovati L, Berg T, Hofbauer M, Stukalov A, Klampfl T, 
Harutyunyan AS, Gisslinger H, Gisslinger B, Burjanivova T, Rumi E, Pietra D,
Elena C, Vannucchi AM, Doubek M, Dvorakova D, Robesova B, Wieser R, Koller E,
Suvajdzic N, Tomin D, Tosic N, Colinge J, Racil Z, Steurer M, Pavlovic S, Cazzola
M, Kralovics R.

Author information: 
(1)CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of
Sciences, Vienna, Austria.

The study aimed to identify genetic lesions associated with secondary acute
myeloid leukemia (sAML) in comparison with AML arising de novo (dnAML) and assess
their impact on patients' overall survival (OS). High-resolution genotyping and
loss of heterozygosity mapping was performed on DNA samples from 86 sAML and 117 
dnAML patients, using Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP 6.0 arrays. Genes TP53,
RUNX1, CBL, IDH1/2, NRAS, NPM1, and FLT3 were analyzed for mutations in all
patients. We identified 36 recurrent cytogenetic aberrations (more than five
events). Mutations in TP53, 9pUPD, and del7q (targeting CUX1 locus) were
significantly associated with sAML, while NPM1 and FLT3 mutations associated with
dnAML. Patients with sAML carrying TP53 mutations demonstrated lower 1-year OS
rate than those with wild-type TP53 (14.3% ± 9.4% vs. 35.4% ± 7.2%; P = 0.002),
while complex karyotype, del7q (CUX1) and del7p (IKZF1) showed no significant
effect on OS. Multivariate analysis confirmed that mutant TP53 was the only
independent adverse prognostic factor for OS in sAML (hazard ratio 2.67; 95% CI: 
1.33-5.37; P = 0.006). Patients with dnAML and complex karyotype carried
sAML-associated defects (TP53 defects in 54.5%, deletions targeting FOXP1 and
ETV6 loci in 45.4% of the cases). We identified several co-occurring lesions
associated with either sAML or dnAML diagnosis. Our data suggest that distinct
genetic lesions drive leukemogenesis in sAML. High karyotype complexity of sAML
patients does not influence OS. Somatic mutations in TP53 are the only
independent adverse prognostic factor in sAML. Patients with dnAML and complex
karyotype show genetic features associated with sAML and myeloproliferative
neoplasms.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22887079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cell Rep. 2012 Jun 28;1(6):665-75. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2012.04.012. Epub 2012
Jun 15.

Structural and biological features of FOXP3 dimerization relevant to regulatory T
cell function.

Song X(1), Li B, Xiao Y, Chen C, Wang Q, Liu Y, Berezov A, Xu C, Gao Y, Li Z, Wu 
SL, Cai Z, Zhang H, Karger BL, Hancock WW, Wells AD, Zhou Z, Greene MI.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China 200031.

FOXP3 is a key transcription factor for regulatory T cell function. We report the
crystal structure of the FOXP3 coiled-coil domain, through which a loose or
transient dimeric association is formed and modulated, accounting for the
activity variations introduced by disease-causing mutations or posttranslational 
modifications. Structure-guided mutagenesis revealed that FOXP3
coiled-coil-mediated homodimerization is essential for Treg function in vitro and
in vivo. In particular, we identified human FOXP3 K250 and K252 as key residues
for the conformational change and stability of the FOXP3 dimer, which can be
regulated by protein posttranslational modifications such as reversible lysine
acetylation. These studies provide structural and mechanistic explanations for
certain disease-causing mutations in the coiled-coil domain of FOXP3 that are
commonly found in IPEX syndrome. Overall, the regulatory machinery involving
homooligomerization, acetylation, and heteroassociation has been dissected,
defining atomic insights into the biological and pathological characteristics of 
the FOXP3 complex.

Copyright © 2012 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3401381
PMID: 22813742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Acta Histochem. 2013 Mar;115(2):137-43. doi: 10.1016/j.acthis.2012.06.001. Epub
2012 Jul 17.

Both FOXP1 and p65 expression are adverse risk factors in diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma: a retrospective study in China.

Hu CR(1), Wang JH, Wang R, Sun Q, Chen LB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Jinling Hospital, Medical School of Nanjing
University, Nanjing, Jangsu Province, People's Republic of China.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the clinical significance of FOXP1
and p65 expression in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Immunohistochemistry
was performed to determine the expression of FOXP1 and p65 protein in 92 DLBCL
tissues and analyze their correlations with clinicopathological features or
prognosis of patients. The survival was assessed by the Kaplan-Meier method and
proportional hazards model. Results showed that positive FOXP1 expression was
detected in 68 (73.9%) cases and positive p65 expression was detected in 56
(60.9%) cases. There were 46 (50.0%) co-expression of FOXP1 and p65 protein in
all cases, a positive correlation between the expression of FOXP1 and p65 was
noted (r=0.234, p=0.025). The status of FOXP1 was correlated with patient's age, 
worse performance status score, higher lactate dehydrogenase levels and
International Prognostic Index (IPI) factor score. The status of p65 was
correlated with patient's age, B symptom and higher IPI factor scores. Both FOXP1
and p65 protein expression were associated with the non-GCB phenotype (p=0.001 or
0.000). The Kaplan-Meier curves showed that both FOXP1 and p65 expression were
associated with poor survival of patients. Meanwhile, FOXP1+/p65+ subgroup had
the worst PFS (p=0.012) and OS (p=0.030), whereas the FOXP1-/p65- subgroup had
the best prognosis. Thus, immunohistochemical assessment of both FOXP1 and p65
status in DLBCL tissues may be a valuable approach for predicting the survival of
DLBCL patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22809882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2012 Aug;71(8):741-9.

Delayed maturation and differentiation of neurons in focal cortical dysplasia
with the transmantle sign: analysis of layer-specific marker expression.

Sakakibara T(1), Sukigara S, Saito T, Otsuki T, Takahashi A, Kaneko Y, Kaido T,
Saito Y, Sato N, Kimura Y, Nakagawa E, Sugai K, Sasaki M, Goto Y, Itoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

Transmantle dysplasia is a rare type of focal cortical dysplasia (FCD)
characterized by expansion of the cortex from the deep white matter to the
surface and in which there is a FCD IIA or IIB pathologic pattern. To
characterize possible mechanisms underlying this regional disorder of radial
migrating cells, we studied the expression patterns of neocortical layer-specific
markers using immunohistochemistry in surgical specimens from 5 FCD IIA and 4 FCD
IIB cases in children. All neuronal cells expressed the mature neuron marker
MAP2/2B but not the microglia markers Iba-1 and CD68. Some layer-specific markers
showed distinct expression patterns. TBR1-positive, SATB2-positive, and
FOXP1-positive cells were diffusely distributed in the cortex and/or the white
matter. TBR1-positive and FOXP1-positive cells were generally more numerous in
FCD IIB than in FCD IIA and were mostly in the cortical molecular and upper
layers. FOXP1-, FOXP2-, and CUTL1-positive cells also expressed the immature
neuron marker, Nestin/PROX1, whereas TBR1-, CTIP2-, and SATB2-positive cells only
expressed MAP2/2B. These data highlight differences between FCD IIB and FCD IIA
with more cells having the immature marker in upper layer markers in the former. 
By analyzing layer-specific marker expression patterns, we identified apparent
neuronal maturation differences between FCD IIA and FCD IIB in cases of
transmantle dysplasia.

PMID: 22805777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Circ J. 2012;76(8):1811-8. Epub 2012 Jul 30.

Inflammation and vascular injury: basic discovery to drug development.

Simon DI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Harrington Heart & Vascular Institute,
University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Case Western Reserve University School 
of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. Daniel.simon@uhhospitals.org

The invited special lecture at the 76(th) Annual Scientific Meeting of the
Japanese Circulation Society focused on the central role of inflammation in
vascular injury and repair. Early studies pioneered the concept that mechanical
injury, such as balloon angioplasty and endovascular stent deployment, elicits an
inflammatory response from the vessel wall. This hypothesis was developed and
substantiated at a time when the prevailing dogma viewed restenosis following
angioplasty as a primarily proliferative smooth muscle cell disease. Antibody
targeting of Mac-1 reduced leukocyte accumulation and limited neointimal
formation following balloon injury or stent implantation. Genetic absence of
Mac-1 resulted in diminished leukocyte accumulation and neointimal thickening
after carotid artery injury in mice. In the course of those studies, our
laboratory made fundamental discoveries regarding the mechanism of leukocyte
recruitment at sites of vascular injury and identified platelet glycoprotein (GP)
Iba, a component of the GPIb-IX-V complex, as the previously unknown platelet
counter-receptor for Mac-1. Follow-on studies have focused extensively on the
structure, function, and signaling of the leukocyte integrin Mac-1. The binding
site for GPIba in Mac-1 has been mapped and subsequently showed that leukocyte
engagement of platelet GPIba via Mac-1 is critical not only for the biological
response to vascular injury, but also for thrombosis, vasculitis,
glomerulonephritis, and multiple sclerosis, thereby advancing the hypothesis that
virtually all inflammation is platelet-dependent. Furthermore, ligand engagement 
of Mac-1 initiates a novel gene program that promotes inflammation by activating 
NF<U+03BA>B and downregulating the expression of the forkhead transcription factor Foxp1
that controls monocyte differentiation. Small molecule inhibitors of Mac-1
function have been pursued, including targeting of Mac-1-GPIba binding or the
downstream tyrosine kinase spleen tyrosine kinase. Drs Teruo Inoue, Koichi Node, 
Tatsuya Fukotomi, Masashi Sakuma, Toshifumi Morooka, and Kohsuke Nakajima, valued
Japanese collaborators and post-doctoral fellows, have contributed enormously to 
these discoveries.

PMCID: PMC4090145
PMID: 22785436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2012 Feb;34(2):110-6. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.0253-3766.2012.02.007.

[Analysis of the immunohistochemical subtypes and prognosis of primary diffuse
large B cell lymphoma of the central nervous system].

[Article in Chinese]

Min M(1), Lin L, Bi CF, Wang XQ, Luo TY, Zhao S, Zhang WY, Liu WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the subtypes of primary diffuse large B cell lymphoma of
the central nervous system (CNS DLBCL) and to explore the relationship between
the subtype classification and prognosis.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining was used to determine the expression of
CD20, CD3, CD10, Bcl-6, Mum-1, CD5, Bcl-2, Ki-67, FOXP-1, GCET-1, BLIMP-1 and
LMO-2 antigens on paraffin-embedded sections of 47 cases. Hans, Choi and Tally
subtypes were classified, and univariate and multivariate analyses were used to
elucidate the relationship between the subtypes and prognosis.
RESULTS: In the 47 cases, the expression of Bcl-2 in the tumor cells was 46.8%,
CD10 4.3%, Bcl-6 70.2%, Mum-1 53.2%, GCET-1 36.2%, BLIMP-1 4.3%, FOXP-1 63.8% and
LMO-2 19.2%. The positive rate of Ki-67 was 30% to 95%, with a median of 80%, of 
which 12 cases (25.5%) was > or = 90%. The Hans subtype classification showed 16 
cases (34.0%) were of GCB type and 31 cases (66.0%) of non-GCB type. The Choi
subtype classification showed 16 cases (34.0%) were of GCB type and 31 cases
(66.0%) of ABC type. The Tally subtype classification showed 6 cases (12.8%) were
of GCB type and 41 cases (87.2%) of non-GCB type.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study show that there is no significant
correlation between the three subtypes and prognosis. The prognosis is correated 
with post-operative radiotherapy, chemotherapy and MTX therapy.

PMID: 22780928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Brain Res. 2012 Aug 27;1470:89-97. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2012.06.009. Epub 2012
Jul 1.

Abnormal maturation and differentiation of neocortical neurons in epileptogenic
cortical malformation: unique distribution of layer-specific marker cells of
focal cortical dysplasia and hemimegalencephaly.

Arai A(1), Saito T, Hanai S, Sukigara S, Nabatame S, Otsuki T, Nakagawa E,
Takahashi A, Kaneko Y, Kaido T, Saito Y, Sugai K, Sasaki M, Goto Y, Itoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

Focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) and hemimegalencephaly (HME) are major causes of
intractable epilepsy in children. The probable pathogenesis of FCD and HMG is the
abnormal migration and differentiation of neurons. The aim of the present study
was to clarify the abnormal cytoarchitecture, based on neuronal immaturation.
Tissue samples were obtained from 16 FCD and seven HME patients, aged between 2
months and 12 years, who had been diagnosed as typical FCD and HME, following
surgical treatment for intractable epilepsy. Paraffin-embedded sections were
stained with the antibodies of three layer-markers that are usually present only 
during the fetal period, namely SATB2 (expressed in the upper layer of the normal
fetal neocortex), FOXP1 (expressed in the 5th layer), and TBR1 (expressed in the 
6th layer). In FCD, SATB2-positive (+) cells located in the middle and deep
regions of FCD Ia and Ib, but only in the superficial region of FCD IIa and IIb. 
FOXP1+ cells diffusely located in the neocortex, especially the upper layer of
FCD IIa and IIb. TBR1+ cells mainly located in the middle and deep regions, and
also white matter. In FCD IIb, TBR1+ cells were in the superficial region. In
HME, SATB2+ and FOXP1+ cells were found diffusely. TBR1+ cells were in the middle
and deep regions. On the basis of continued expression of fetal cortical
layer-specific markers in FCD and HME brains, the abnormal neocortical formation 
in both is likely to be the result of disrupted neuronal migration and
dysmaturation. The expression pattern is different between FCD and HME.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22759905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Hum Genet. 2012 Nov;131(11):1687-98. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-1193-z. Epub 2012
Jun 27.

The distinct and overlapping phenotypic spectra of FOXP1 and FOXP2 in cognitive
disorders.

Bacon C(1), Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 366, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
claire.bacon@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Rare disruptions of FOXP2 have been strongly implicated in deficits in language
development. Research over the past decade has suggested a role in the formation 
of underlying neural circuits required for speech. Until recently no evidence
existed to suggest that the closely related FOXP1 gene played a role in
neurodevelopmental processes. However, in the last few years, novel rare
disruptions in FOXP1 have been reported in multiple cases of cognitive
dysfunction, including intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder,
together with language impairment. As FOXP1 and FOXP2 form heterodimers for
transcriptional regulation, one may assume that they co-operate in common
neurodevelopmental pathways through the co-regulation of common targets. Here we 
compare the phenotypic consequences of FOXP1 and FOXP2 impairment, drawing on
well-known studies from the past as well as recent exciting findings and consider
what these tell us regarding the functions of these two genes in neural
development.

PMCID: PMC3470686
PMID: 22736078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Med Oncol. 2012 Dec;29(5):3352-9. doi: 10.1007/s12032-012-0288-7. Epub 2012 Jun
27.

Expression of FOXP1 in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma suggests a
large tumor cell transformation and predicts a poorer prognosis in the positive
thyroid patients.

Jiang W(1), Li L, Tang Y, Zhang WY, Liu WP, Li GD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, No. 37
Guoxuexiang Street, Chengdu, Sichuan, 610041, People's Republic of China.

The forkhead box protein P1 (FOXP1) expression resulted from chromosome
translocation was found in MALT lymphoma, and its nuclear expression in diffuse
large B cell lymphoma has been believed to be a poor prognostic factor. In our
study, FOXP1 expression was investigated in its relationship to the occurrence of
large tumor cells, clinical features, and prognosis in a series of 115 MALT
lymphomas divided into two groups with or without the large tumor cells. All
cases were morphologically reviewed, and FOXP1 expression was detected both in
mRNA and protein levels by real-time PCR, immunochemical staining, and Western
blot hybridization. All available clinical data were collected. In the MALT
lymphoma with large cells, FOXP1 expression was higher at both mRNA (P = 0.008)
and protein (P = 0.000) levels than that in group without large cells, and most
large tumor cells showed FOXP1 positivity. It was also found that cases beyond
Ann Arbor stage I have a higher FOXP1 expression rate than cases in stage I (P = 
0.01), moreover, FOXP1-positive group has more plasmacytic differentiation (P =
0.025), deeper filtrating depth in digestive tract (P = 0.039), and a higher Ki67
proliferation index (P = 0.022). However, no statistical significance was
identified in the involved anatomic sites and prognosis. Our data demonstrated
the close relationship between FOXP1 nuclear expression and the occurrence of
large tumor cells in MALT lymphoma, which suggested the possibility of large cell
transformation of FOXP1-positive cases. And FOXP1 positivity was associated with 
enhanced invasion and proliferation ability of tumor cells. In the thyroid cases,
the FOXP1 positivity showed a poorer prognosis (P = 0.043), but the significance 
was not found in the overall survival analysis (P = 0.1123).

PMID: 22736042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Stem Cells. 2012 Aug;30(8):1655-63. doi: 10.1002/stem.1152.

Specification of midbrain dopamine neurons from primate pluripotent stem cells.

Xi J(1), Liu Y, Liu H, Chen H, Emborg ME, Zhang SC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, Institutes of Biomedical
Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.

By sequentially applying sonic hedgehog (C25II) and CHIR99021 (GSK3ß inhibitor)
to induce the midbrain floor plate (FP) progenitors and fibroblast growth factor 
8 (FGF8) to promote dopaminergic differentiation in a chemically defined medium, 
we have established a robust system for the generation of midbrain dopamine (DA) 
neurons from human and rhesus monkey embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent
stem cells (PSCs). We found that CHIR99021 specifies diencephalon to hind brain
fates in a concentration-dependent manner and only a narrow concentration range
of CHIR99021 at a particular window is necessary to induce the midbrain FP
progenitors, expressing Corin, En1, FoxA2, and Lmx1a. FGF8 enhances the
dopaminergic fate of the progenitors, thus generating DA neurons with midbrain
characteristics, including expression of tyrosine hydroxylase, Lmx1a/b, FoxA2,
FoxP1, Nurr1, and En1 as well as typical electrophysiological properties. More
than half of these DA neurons expressed A9 DA neuron markers Girk2 and ALDH1a1.
The new strategy will allow generation of enriched populations of functional
midbrain DA neurons from both human and monkey PSCs for disease modeling, drug
testing, and potential cell therapy.

Copyright © 2012 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3405174
PMID: 22696177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Development. 2012 Jul;139(14):2500-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.079699. Epub 2012 Jun 6.

Foxp1/4 control epithelial cell fate during lung development and regeneration
through regulation of anterior gradient 2.

Li S(1), Wang Y, Zhang Y, Lu MM, DeMayo FJ, Dekker JD, Tucker PW, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

The molecular pathways regulating cell lineage determination and regeneration in 
epithelial tissues are poorly understood. The secretory epithelium of the lung is
required for production of mucus to help protect the lung against environmental
insults, including pathogens and pollution, that can lead to debilitating
diseases such as asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. We show that
the transcription factors Foxp1 and Foxp4 act cooperatively to regulate lung
secretory epithelial cell fate and regeneration by directly restricting the
goblet cell lineage program. Loss of Foxp1/4 in the developing lung and in
postnatal secretory epithelium leads to ectopic activation of the goblet cell
fate program, in part, through de-repression of the protein disulfide isomerase
anterior gradient 2 (Agr2). Forced expression of Agr2 is sufficient to promote
the goblet cell fate in the developing airway epithelium. Finally, in a model of 
lung secretory cell injury and regeneration, we show that loss of Foxp1/4 leads
to catastrophic loss of airway epithelial regeneration due to default
differentiation of secretory cells into the goblet cell lineage. These data
demonstrate the importance of Foxp1/4 in restricting cell fate choices during
development and regeneration, thereby providing the proper balance of functional 
epithelial lineages in the lung.

PMCID: PMC3383227
PMID: 22675208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Apr;2(3-5):213-216. Epub 2011 Aug 30.

Mild to Moderate Intellectual Disability and Significant Speech and Language
Deficits in Patients with FOXP1 Deletions and Mutations.

Horn D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medical Genetics and Human Genetics, Charité, University
Medicine of Berlin, Germany.

Very recently, FOXP1 deficiency was shown to result in a phenotype of
intellectual disability with significant speech and language impairment.
Behavioral abnormalities should be considered as part of the clinical spectrum.
Mild craniofacial abnormalities found in half of the described patients expand
the clinical spectrum associated with FOXP1 mutations.

PMCID: PMC3366708
PMID: 22670142  [PubMed]


193. Int J Oncol. 2012 Jul;41(1):369-77. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1444. Epub 2012 Apr 20.

Expression and DNA methylation changes in human breast epithelial cells after
bisphenol A exposure.

Fernandez SV(1), Huang Y, Snider KE, Zhou Y, Pogash TJ, Russo J.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Research Laboratory, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111, USA. sandra.fernandez@fccc.edu

It has been suggested that xenoestrogens, a group of agents termed endocrine
disruptors, may contribute to the development of hormone-dependent cancers, such 
as breast and endometrial cancers. We previously demonstrated that the
xenoestrogen, bisphenol A (BPA), was able to induce the transformation in vitro
of human breast epithelial cells. The normal-like human breast epithelial cell
line, MCF-10F, formed tubules in collagen (3-D cultures), although after
treatment with BPA (10-5 M and 10-6 M BPA) the cells produced less tubules (73%
and 80%, respectively) and some spherical masses (27% and 20%, respectively). In 
the present study, expression and DNA methylation analyses were performed in
these cells after exposure to BPA. These cells showed an increased expression of 
BRCA1, BRCA2, BARD1, CtIP, RAD51 and BRCC3, all of which are genes involved in
DNA repair, as well as the downregulation of PDCD5 and BCL2L11 (BIM), both of
which are involved in apoptosis. Furthermore, DNA methylation analysis showed
that the BPA exposure induced the hypermethylation of BCL2L11, PARD6G, FOXP1 and 
SFRS11, as well as the hypomethylation of NUP98 and CtIP (RBBP8). Our results
indicate that normal human breast epithelial cells exposed to BPA have increased 
expressions of genes involved in DNA repair in order to overcome the DNA damage
induced by this chemical. These results suggest that the breast tissue of women
with BRCA1 or BRCA2 mutations could be more susceptible to the effects of BPA.

PMCID: PMC3466112
PMID: 22576693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Cell. 2012 Apr 27;149(3):525-37. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2012.03.028. Epub 2012 Apr
19.

Sequencing chromosomal abnormalities reveals neurodevelopmental loci that confer 
risk across diagnostic boundaries.

Talkowski ME(1), Rosenfeld JA, Blumenthal I, Pillalamarri V, Chiang C, Heilbut A,
Ernst C, Hanscom C, Rossin E, Lindgren AM, Pereira S, Ruderfer D, Kirby A, Ripke 
S, Harris DJ, Lee JH, Ha K, Kim HG, Solomon BD, Gropman AL, Lucente D, Sims K,
Ohsumi TK, Borowsky ML, Loranger S, Quade B, Lage K, Miles J, Wu BL, Shen Y,
Neale B, Shaffer LG, Daly MJ, Morton CC, Gusella JF.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetic Research, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA.

Balanced chromosomal abnormalities (BCAs) represent a relatively untapped
reservoir of single-gene disruptions in neurodevelopmental disorders (NDDs). We
sequenced BCAs in patients with autism or related NDDs, revealing disruption of
33 loci in four general categories: (1) genes previously associated with abnormal
neurodevelopment (e.g., AUTS2, FOXP1, and CDKL5), (2) single-gene contributors to
microdeletion syndromes (MBD5, SATB2, EHMT1, and SNURF-SNRPN), (3) novel risk
loci (e.g., CHD8, KIRREL3, and ZNF507), and (4) genes associated with later-onset
psychiatric disorders (e.g., TCF4, ZNF804A, PDE10A, GRIN2B, and ANK3). We also
discovered among neurodevelopmental cases a profoundly increased burden of
copy-number variants from these 33 loci and a significant enrichment of polygenic
risk alleles from genome-wide association studies of autism and schizophrenia.
Our findings suggest a polygenic risk model of autism and reveal that some
neurodevelopmental genes are sensitive to perturbation by multiple mutational
mechanisms, leading to variable phenotypic outcomes that manifest at different
life stages.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3340505
PMID: 22521361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Neurosci. 2012 Apr 18;32(16):5562-72. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0142-12.2012.

Necdin controls Foxo1 acetylation in hypothalamic arcuate neurons to modulate the
thyroid axis.

Hasegawa K(1), Kawahara T, Fujiwara K, Shimpuku M, Sasaki T, Kitamura T,
Yoshikawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Regulation of Neuronal Development, Institute for Protein
Research, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The forkhead transcription factor Foxo1 regulates energy homeostasis by
modulating gene expression in the hypothalamus. Foxo1 undergoes
post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation and acetylation, which
modulate its functional activities. Sirtuin1 (Sirt1), a nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide-dependent protein deacetylase, regulates the acetylation status of
Foxo1 in mammalian cells. Necdin, a pleiotropic protein required for neuronal
development and survival, interacts with both Sirt1 and p53 to facilitate p53
deacetylation. The necdin gene (Ndn), an imprinted gene transcribed only from the
paternal allele, is strongly expressed in hypothalamic neurons. Here, we
demonstrate that necdin controls the acetylation status of Foxo1 in vivo in
hypothalamic arcuate neurons to modulate the thyroid function. Necdin forms a
stable ternary complex with Sirt1 and Foxo1, diminishes Foxo1 acetylation, and
suppresses the transcriptional activity of Foxo1 in vitro. Paternal Ndn mutant
mice express high levels of acetylated Foxo1 and mRNAs encoding agouti-related
protein and neuropeptide Y in the hypothalamus in vivo during the juvenile
period. The mutant mice exhibit endocrine dysfunction characteristic of
hypothalamic hypothyroidism. Chemically induced hyperthyroidism and
hypothyroidism lead to hypothalamic responses similar to those under
necdin-deficient and excessive conditions, respectively, suggesting that thyroid 
hormone serves as a negative regulator of this system. These results suggest that
necdin regulates Foxo1 acetylation and neuropeptide gene expression in the
arcuate neurons to modulate the hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid axis during
development.

PMID: 22514318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Am J Ophthalmol. 2012 Jul;154(1):87-98.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2012.01.021. Epub
2012 Apr 13.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of the orbit: clinicopathologic,
immunohistochemical, and prognostic features of 20 cases.

Stacy RC(1), Jakobiec FA, Herwig MC, Schoenfield L, Singh A, Grossniklaus HE.

Author information: 
(1)David G. Cogan Ophthalmic Pathology Laboratory, Harvard Medical School,
Massachusetts Eye and Ear Infirmary, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

PURPOSE: To evaluate a series of orbital diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL)
for prognostic features and therapeutic outcomes.
DESIGN: Retrospective multicenter case study of clinical and immunohistochemical 
features of 20 patients.
METHODS: Clinical, histopathologic, and immunohistochemical features were
correlated with outcomes. Immunohistochemistry for biomarkers including Bcl-6,
CD5, CD10, CD20, FOXP1, GCET1, and MUM1 was performed to differentiate between 2 
major genetic subtypes of DLBCL: activated B-cell-like (ABC) and germinal center 
B-cell-like (GCB).
RESULTS: Sixteen patients presented with unilateral and 4 with bilateral tumors. 
Three had bony erosion of the orbit on imaging studies. Of 14 patients with
detailed follow-ups, 3 had a prior or concurrent lymphomatous disease; 8 had
stage I disease (limited to the orbit) at presentation; and 3 were newly
diagnosed with systemic (stage IV) DLBCL. Localized disease was treated with
combined systemic chemotherapy, including rituximab and radiation with no deaths 
to date; there was 1 death related to systemic DLBCL. Clinical staging was the
best predictive method and no immunohistochemical feature or subcategory (ABC vs 
GCB) correlated with outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: Primary orbital DLBCL has a more favorable prognosis than systemic
DLBCL and may arise from a preexistent hematolymphomatous neoplasm (4 out of 20
cases). In our series, orbital DLBCL had a 57% likelihood of being restricted to 
the ocular adnexa. Clinical staging was more helpful in predicting outcome than
any single immunohistopathologic feature or combination of biomarkers. Orbital
radiation of 30 gray in conjunction with systemic chemotherapy with rituximab can
achieve disease-specific survival approaching 100% in purely localized cases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22503694  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 15;21(14):3097-111. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds132. Epub 2012
Apr 6.

Forkhead box protein p1 is a transcriptional repressor of immune signaling in the
CNS: implications for transcriptional dysregulation in Huntington disease.

Tang B(1), Becanovic K, Desplats PA, Spencer B, Hill AM, Connolly C, Masliah E,
Leavitt BR, Thomas EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North
Torrey Pines Rd., La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Forkhead box protein p1 (Foxp1), a transcription factor showing highly enriched
expression in the striatum, has been implicated in central nervous system (CNS)
development, but its role in the mature brain is unknown. In order to ascertain
functional roles for Foxp1 in the CNS, we have identified gene targets for Foxp1 
both in vitro and in vivo using genome-wide expression microarrays and
chromatin-immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq)
assays. We found that mouse Foxp1 overexpression in striatal cells elicited
expression changes of genes related to immune signaling, transcriptional
regulation and a manually curated Huntington's disease (HD)-signaling pathway.
Similar results were found when the gene expression data set was integrated with 
Foxp1-binding data determined from ChIP-seq analysis. In vivo lentiviral-mediated
overexpression of human FOXP1 in the context of mutant huntingtin (Htt) protein
resulted in a robust downregulation of glial cell-associated, immune genes,
including those encoding a variety of cytokines and chemokines. Furthermore,
Foxp1-induced expression changes were significantly negatively correlated with
those changes elicited by mutant Htt protein in several different HD mouse
models, and most significantly in post-mortem caudate from human HD subjects. We 
finally show that Foxp1 interacts with mutant Htt protein in mouse brain and is
present in nuclear Htt aggregates in the striatum of R6/1 transgenic mice. These 
findings implicate Foxp1 as a key repressor of immune signaling in the CNS and
suggest that the loss of Foxp1-mediated gene regulation in HD contributes to the 
immune dysfunction in this disease. We further suggest that Foxp1-regulated
pathways might be important mediators of neuronal-glial cell communication.

PMCID: PMC3384380
PMID: 22492998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Epigenetics. 2012 May;7(5):502-13. doi: 10.4161/epi.19801. Epub 2012 May 1.

Genetic and epigenetic analysis of non-small cell lung cancer with
NotI-microarrays.

Dmitriev AA(1), Kashuba VI, Haraldson K, Senchenko VN, Pavlova TV, Kudryavtseva
AV, Anedchenko EA, Krasnov GS, Pronina IV, Loginov VI, Kondratieva TT, Kazubskaya
TP, Braga EA, Yenamandra SP, Ignatjev I, Ernberg I, Klein G, Lerman MI,
Zabarovsky ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institute,
Stockholm, Sweden.

This study aimed to clarify genetic and epigenetic alterations that occur during 
lung carcinogenesis and to design perspective sets of newly identified
biomarkers. The original method includes chromosome 3 specific NotI-microarrays
containing 180 NotI clones associated with genes for hybridization with 40 paired
normal/tumor DNA samples of primary lung tumors: 28 squamous cell carcinomas
(SCC) and 12 adenocarcinomas (ADC). The NotI-microarray data were confirmed by
qPCR and bisulfite sequencing analyses. Forty-four genes showed methylation
and/or deletions in more than 15% of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) samples. 
In general, SCC samples were more frequently methylated/deleted than ADC.
Moreover, the SCC alterations were observed already at stage I of tumor
development, whereas in ADC many genes showed tumor progression specific
methylation/deletions. Among genes frequently methylated/deleted in NSCLC, only a
few were already known tumor suppressor genes: RBSP3 (CTDSPL), VHL and THRB. The 
RPL32, LOC285205, FGD5 and other genes were previously not shown to be involved
in lung carcinogenesis. Ten methylated genes, i.e., IQSEC1, RBSP3, ITGA 9, FOXP1,
LRRN1, GNAI2, VHL, FGD5, ALDH1L1 and BCL6 were tested for expression by qPCR and 
were found downregulated in the majority of cases. Three genes (RBSP3, FBLN2 and 
ITGA9) demonstrated strong cell growth inhibition activity. A comprehensive
statistical analysis suggested the set of 19 gene markers, ANKRD28, BHLHE40,
CGGBP1, RBSP3, EPHB1, FGD5, FOXP1, GORASP1/TTC21, IQSEC1, ITGA9, LOC285375,
LRRC3B, LRRN1, MITF, NKIRAS1/RPL15, TRH, UBE2E2, VHL, WNT7A, to allow early
detection, tumor progression, metastases and to discriminate between SCC and ADC 
with sensitivity and specificity of 80-100%.

PMID: 22491060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Horm Cancer. 2012 Aug;3(4):147-59. doi: 10.1007/s12672-012-0111-0. Epub 2012 Apr 
3.

Association of double-positive FOXA1 and FOXP1 immunoreactivities with favorable 
prognosis of tamoxifen-treated breast cancer patients.

Ijichi N(1), Shigekawa T, Ikeda K, Horie-Inoue K, Shimizu C, Saji S, Aogi K,
Tsuda H, Osaki A, Saeki T, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Research Center for
Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Saitama, Japan.

Breast cancer is primarily a hormone-dependent tumor that can be regulated by the
status of the steroid hormones estrogen and progesterone. Forkhead box A1 (FOXA1)
is a member of the forkhead box transcription factor family and functions as a
pioneer factor of the estrogen receptor (ER) in breast cancer. In the present
study, we demonstrate that FOXA1 mRNA was upregulated by estrogen and that
estrogen receptor-a (ERa) recruitment to ER-binding sites in the vicinity of the 
FOXA1 gene was increased by estrogen in ERa-positive MCF-7 breast cancer cells.
The estrogen-induced FOXA1 upregulation was repressed by 4-hydroxytamoxifen
treatment. We also demonstrated that the proliferation and the migration of MCF-7
cells were decreased by FOXA1-specific small interfering RNA (siRNA; siFOXA1).
Furthermore, siFOXA1 decreased the estrogen response element-driven transcription
and the estrogen-dependent upregulation of ERa target genes in MCF-7 cells. Next,
the immunohistochemical analyses of FOXA1 were performed using two groups of
breast cancer specimens. The nuclear immunoreactivity of FOXA1 was detected in 80
(74%) of 108 human invasive breast cancers and was negatively correlated with
tumor grade and positively correlated with hormone receptor status, including ERa
and progesterone receptor, pathological tumor size, and immunoreactivity of
FOXP1, another FOX family transcription factor. FOXA1 immunoreactivity was
significantly elevated in the relapse-free breast cancer patients treated with
tamoxifen. Notably, the double-positive immunoreactivities of FOXA1 and FOXP1
were significantly associated with a favorable prognosis for the relapse-free and
overall survival of patients with tamoxifen-treated breast cancer, with lower P
values compared with FOXA1 or FOXP1 immunoreactivity alone. These results suggest
that FOXA1 plays an important role in the proliferation and migration of breast
cancer cells by modulating estrogen signaling and that the double-positive
immunoreactivities of FOXA1 and FOXP1 are associated with a favorable prognosis
of tamoxifen-treated breast cancer.

PMID: 22476979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Leukemia. 2012 Sep;26(9):2103-13. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.83. Epub 2012 Mar 22.

Comprehensive gene expression profiling and immunohistochemical studies support
application of immunophenotypic algorithm for molecular subtype classification in
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: a report from the International DLBCL
Rituximab-CHOP Consortium Program Study.

Visco C(1), Li Y, Xu-Monette ZY, Miranda RN, Green TM, Li Y, Tzankov A, Wen W,
Liu WM, Kahl BS, d'Amore ES, Montes-Moreno S, Dybkær K, Chiu A, Tam W, Orazi A,
Zu Y, Bhagat G, Winter JN, Wang HY, O'Neill S, Dunphy CH, Hsi ED, Zhao XF, Go RS,
Choi WW, Zhou F, Czader M, Tong J, Zhao X, van Krieken JH, Huang Q, Ai W, Etzell 
J, Ponzoni M, Ferreri AJ, Piris MA, Møller MB, Bueso-Ramos CE, Medeiros LJ, Wu L,
Young KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematopathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Erratum in
    Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):980.

Gene expression profiling (GEP) has stratified diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(DLBCL) into molecular subgroups that correspond to different stages of
lymphocyte development-namely germinal center B-cell like and activated B-cell
like. This classification has prognostic significance, but GEP is expensive and
not readily applicable into daily practice, which has lead to immunohistochemical
algorithms proposed as a surrogate for GEP analysis. We assembled tissue
microarrays from 475 de novo DLBCL patients who were treated with rituximab-CHOP 
chemotherapy. All cases were successfully profiled by GEP on formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue samples. Sections were stained with antibodies reactive 
with CD10, GCET1, FOXP1, MUM1 and BCL6 and cases were classified following a
rationale of sequential steps of differentiation of B cells. Cutoffs for each
marker were obtained using receiver-operating characteristic curves, obviating
the need for any arbitrary method. An algorithm based on the expression of CD10, 
FOXP1 and BCL6 was developed that had a simpler structure than other recently
proposed algorithms and 92.6% concordance with GEP. In multivariate analysis,
both the International Prognostic Index and our proposed algorithm were
significant independent predictors of progression-free and overall survival. In
conclusion, this algorithm effectively predicts prognosis of DLBCL patients
matching GEP subgroups in the era of rituximab therapy.

PMCID: PMC3637886
PMID: 22437443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Clin Pathol. 2012 Jun;65(6):528-33. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2011-200547. Epub
2012 Mar 15.

Prognostic significance of FOXP1 as an oncogene in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhang Y(1), Zhang S, Wang X, Liu J, Yang L, He S, Chen L, Huang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Affiliated Tumor Hospital of Nantong
University, Nantong, Jiangsu Province, China.

BACKGROUND: Forkhead Box P1 (FOXP1) has been described as both a tumour
suppressor candidate and a potential oncogene. The aim of this study is to
identify new prognostic biomarkers and therapeutic target structures for the
diagnosis and treatment of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: The expression of FOXP1 mRNA in HCC was characterised using real-time
PCR and 20 pairs of fresh frozen HCC tissues and corresponding non-cancerous
tissues. FOXP1 protein expression in HCC was confirmed using immunohistochemistry
on a tissue microarray chip. Finally, FOXP1 expression was correlated with
conventional clinicopathological features of HCC and patient outcome.
RESULTS: The expression of FOXP1 mRNA and protein in HCC cells was much higher
than in normal hepatic cells (Z=2.315, p=0.021 and <U+03C7>(2)=28.071, 95% CI 0.233 to
0.480, p<0.001, individually). The comparison of clinicopathological
characteristics and immunohistochemistry by <U+03C7>(2) test analysis showed that the
high expression of FOXP1 in HCC was related to large tumour diameter (<U+03C7>(2)=6.210,
p=0.013), high serum a-fetoprotein levels (<U+03C7>(2)=6.920, p=0.031) and later stage
grouping with tumour node metastasis classification (<U+03C7>(2)=6.714, p=0.035).
Kaplan-Meier survival and Cox regression analysis showed that high FOXP1
expression (HR=2.182, 95% CI 1.146 to 4.154, p=0.018) and regional lymph node
metastasis (HR=2.326, 95% CI 1.037 to 5.217, p=0.041) were independent prognosis 
factors.
CONCLUSIONS: From this investigation the authors elucidated for the first time
that the correlation of high FOXP1 expression correlates with an aggressive
malignant phenotype and may constitute a novel prognostic factor for HCC. These
results also support a role for FOXP1 as an oncogene in HCC.

PMID: 22422806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Future Med Chem. 2012 Mar;4(4):395-424. doi: 10.4155/fmc.12.12.

The impact of CDK inhibition in human malignancies associated with pronounced
defects in apoptosis: advantages of multi-targeting small molecules.

Wesierska-Gadek J(1), Kramer MP.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Cycle Regulation Group, Division: Institute of Cancer Research, Dept of
Medicine I, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna,
Austria. jozefa.gadek-wesierski@meduniwien.ac.at

Malignant cells in chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) and related diseases are
heterogeneous and consist primarily of long-lived resting cells in the periphery 
and a minor subset of dividing cells in proliferating centers. Both cell
populations have different molecular signatures that play a major role in
determining their sensitivity to therapy. Contemporary approaches to treating CLL
are heavily reliant on cytotoxic chemotherapeutics. However, none of the current 
treatment regimens can be considered curative. Pharmacological CDK inhibitors
have extended the repertoire of potential drugs for CLL. Multi-targeted CDK
inhibitors affect CDKs involved in regulating both cell cycle progression and
transcription. Their interference with transcriptional elongation represses
anti-apoptotic proteins and, thus, promotes the induction of apoptosis.
Importantly, there is evidence that treatment with CDK inhibitors can overcome
resistance to therapy. The pharmacological CDK inhibitors have great potential
for use in combination with other therapeutics and represent promising tools for 
the development of new curative treatments for CLL.

PMID: 22416772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Hum Pathol. 2012 Aug;43(8):1322-7. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.10.013. Epub 2012 
Mar 7.

Forkhead box P1 overexpression and its clinicopathologic significance in
peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified.

Yamada S(1), Sato F, Xia H, Takino H, Kominato S, Ri M, Ishida T, Iida S, Inagaki
H, Yamada K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nagoya City University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Nagoya 467-8601, Japan.

Forkhead box P1 protein is a transcription factor involved in cell signaling and 
regulation of gene expression and is essential for B-cell development. Forkhead
box P1 overexpression has been associated with a worsened prognosis in some
B-cell lymphomas. However, little is known about the clinicopathologic
significance of forkhead box P1 in T-cell malignancies. In this study,
immunohistochemistry for forkhead box P1 was performed in peripheral T-cell
lymphoma, not otherwise specified, cases (n = 41), which were then divided into
lower (n = 15) and higher (n = 26) forkhead box P1 expressers. Results of
real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction for
forkhead box P1 messenger RNA supported the data on immunohistochemical forkhead 
box P1 expression. Forkhead box P1 overexpression in lymphoma cells was inversely
associated with proliferation activity as evaluated by Ki-67 expression. Double
immunostain for forkhead box P1 and a T-cell marker in normal lymph nodes showed 
forkhead box P1 signals in many of nonneoplastic T cells. Prognostic analysis
showed that forkhead box P1 overexpression was associated with an improved
overall survival of the patients with peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise
specified, and was independent of the International Prognostic Index in
multivariate analysis. Forkhead box P1 overexpression may be associated with less
activated phenotype of the tumors and with a better prognosis in patients with
peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not otherwise specified. The clinicopathologic
significance of forkhead box P1 overexpression in peripheral T-cell lymphoma, not
otherwise specified, may be different from that in B-cell lymphomas.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22401769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Histopathology. 2012 Jul;61(1):18-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2012.04179.x. Epub
2012 Feb 28.

Inter- and intra-observational variability in immunohistochemistry: a multicentre
analysis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma staining.

Lawrie CH(1), Ballabio E, Soilleux E, Sington J, Hatton CS, Dirnhofer S, Tzankov 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Biodonostia Research Institute, San Sebastián, and IKERBASQUE, Basque
Foundation for Science, Bilbao, Spain. charles.lawrie@ndcls.ox.ac.uk

AIMS: Although many immunohistochemical (IHC) cancer biomarkers have been
identified, very few have translated into routine clinical practice, primarily
because of technical and observational inconsistencies between studies. However, 
despite the obvious need to address such variability, very few studies have done 
so.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Using bcl-6, CD10, MUM1, GCET1 and FOXP1 antibody staining
on diffuse large B-cell lymphoma cases (n = 138) as a model, we employed Cronbach
a analysis to quantify interobserver and intraobserver variability between four
independent observers (two per institution), scoring two tissue microarrays
(TMAs) stained at both institutions using differing staining procedures. The
overall concordance between all observations irrespective of staining procedure
or TMA source was high (average a = 0.951), with the highest level being reached 
for CD10 staining (average a = 0.967) and the lowest for bcl-6 (average a =
0.924). Interslide and interinstitutional reproducibility were similarly high
(average a = 0.952 and average a = 0.934, respectively).
Interobserver/intrainstitutional and interobserver/interinstitutional comparisons
showed lower levels of concordance (average a = 0.870 and average a = 0.877,
respectively), and intraobserver/interinstitutional comparisons showed the lowest
levels of concordance (average a = 0.810), particularly for bcl-6 staining (a =
0.658).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that most variability in IHC studies between
centres results from inherent limitations of the biomarkers investigated rather
than procedural or observational differences.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22372580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Head Neck. 2013 Feb;35(2):165-71. doi: 10.1002/hed.22928. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

Clinicopathologic study and outcome analysis of thyroid lymphomas: experience
from a tertiary cancer center.

Katna R(1), Shet T, Sengar M, Menon H, Laskar S, Prabhash K, D'Cruz A, Nair R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Head and Neck Surgery, Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai, India.

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to review clinicopathologic presentations
of patients diagnosed with thyroid lymphomas at a tertiary cancer center. Thyroid
lymphomas represent less than 2% of all lymphomas.
METHODS: The lymphoma clinic database was retrospectively reviewed to collect
information on patients diagnosed with thyroid lymphomas. Tissue microarrays were
constructed in 37 patients for evaluation of germinal center (CD10/bcl-6) and
activated B-cell immunophenotype markers (FoxP1, Mum1).
RESULTS: During 2000 to 2010, 64 of 5668 patients registered at our lymphoma
clinic were diagnosed with thyroid lymphoma (1.7%). Complete response (CR) to
treatment was seen in 80.7%. The germinal center immunophenotype and activated
B-cell immune phenotype did not influence the prognosis. FoxP1, however, was
associated with poor treatment response and decreased survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Advanced International Prognostic Index (IPI) score and
combined-modality treatment emerged as significant prognostic factors for
treatment response and overall survival. Immunophenotype expression of FoxP1
carries a poor prognosis in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma as elsewhere.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22368156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Front Neurosci. 2012 Jan 5;5:146. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2011.00146. eCollection
2011.

An Optimized Sponge for microRNA miR-9 Affects Spinal Motor Neuron Development in
vivo.

Otaegi G(1), Pollock A, Sun T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University New York, NY, USA.

The specification of motor neuron (MN) subtypes and columnar organization in
developing spinal cord is controlled by multiple transcription factors. FoxP1
drives specification of lateral motor neuron (LMN) subtypes, and we demonstrated 
in our previous work that FoxP1 expression levels are regulated by the microRNA
miR-9. Here we show that ectopic FoxP1 expression in the chick spinal cord can
rescue Lhx3 and Hb9 expression in MNs altered by miR-9 over-expression,
demonstrating that FoxP1 is a critical functional interaction partner for miR-9
in LMN development. Moreover, we have optimized a technique called a miRNA sponge
in vitro, to permit easy discovery of the role of individual miRNA in vivo using 
a loss-of-function approach. We here show that narrow spacing between binding
sites, inclusion of a coding gene, and optimizing the number of miRNA binding
sites can significantly increase the blocking ability of a sponge. We go on to
show that a miR-9 sponge reduces detectable miR-9 in the ventral horn, preventing
miR-9 silencing of FoxP1 in vivo, and in turn modifies MN subtypes in the spinal 
cord. Our designs for optimized sponges provide a knockdown tool that is ready to
be used to study the function of miRNA in vivo, and in particular for generating 
transgenic animal models.

PMCID: PMC3251795
PMID: 22291613  [PubMed]


207. J Child Neurol. 2012 Aug;27(8):1062-6. doi: 10.1177/0883073811431016. Epub 2012
Jan 30.

3p interstitial deletion: novel case report and review.

Tutulan-Cunita AC(1), Papuc SM, Arghir A, Rötzer KM, Deshpande C, Lungeanu A,
Budisteanu M.

Author information: 
(1)Victor Babes National Institute of Pathology, Bucharest, Romania.

Erratum in
    J Child Neurol. 2013 Feb;28(2):282-3.

3p interstitial deletions have emerged in recent years as a new cause of
neurodevelopmental delay and intellectual disability. Since the first report of
this condition in 1979, 16 cases have been described in the literature,
delineating it as a presumptive syndrome. Here, we add a novel case presenting
severely delayed neurodevelopment and psychomotor development; facial dysmorphism
(square facies, broad forehead, short palpebral fissures, epicanthic folds, broad
nasal bridge, and low-set malformed ears); cerebral, cardiac, and genital
malformations; hand and feet anomalies; sacral sinus; and hearing impairment.
Genetic investigations revealed a del(3)(p12.3p14.1) of 12.5 Mb, including 31
ORFs, among which ROBO2, PDZRN3, MITF, and FOXP1 are known to act in
neurodevelopment. The clinical features of our patient are compared with those
previously reported in the literature, thus providing further support for the
delineation of the 3p interstitial deletion syndrome.

PMID: 22290856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e29355. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029355. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Cord blood derived CD4+ CD25(high) T cells become functional regulatory T cells
upon antigen encounter.

Mayer E(1), Bannert C, Gruber S, Klunker S, Spittler A, Akdis CA, Szépfalusi Z,
Eiwegger T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Upon antigen exposure, cord blood derived T cells respond to
ubiquitous environmental antigens by high proliferation. To date it remains
unclear whether these "excessive" responses relate to different regulatory
properties of the putative T regulatory cell (Treg) compartment or even expansion
of the Treg compartment itself.
METHODS: Cord blood (>37 week of gestation) and peripheral blood (healthy
controls) were obtained and different Treg cell subsets were isolated. The
suppressive potential of Treg populations after antigen exposure was evaluated
via functional inhibition assays ([(3)H]thymidine incorporation assay and CFSE
staining) with or without allergen stimulation. The frequency and markers of
CD4(+)CD25(high)FoxP3(+) T cells were characterized by mRNA analysis and flow
cytometry.
RESULTS: Cord blood derived CD4(+)CD25(high) cells did not show substantial
suppressor capacity upon TCR activation, in contrast to CD4(+)CD25(high) cells
freshly purified from adult blood. This could not be explained by a lower
frequency of FoxP3(+)CD4(+)CD25(high)cells or FOXP3 mRNA expression. However,
after antigen-specific stimulation in vitro, these cells showed strong
proliferation and expansion and gained potent suppressive properties. The
efficiency of their suppressive capacity can be enhanced in the presence of
endotoxins. If T-cells were sorted according to their CD127 expression, a tiny
subset of Treg cells (CD4(+)CD25(+)CD127(low)) is highly suppressive even without
prior antigen exposure.
CONCLUSION: Cord blood harbors a very small subset of CD4(+)CD25(high) Treg cells
that requires antigen-stimulation to show expansion and become functional
suppressive Tregs.

PMCID: PMC3260151
PMID: 22272233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Aug 10;21(12):2239-51. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0607. Epub 2012
Jan 26.

Helios transcription factor expression depends on Gsx2 and Dlx1&2 function in
developing striatal matrix neurons.

Martín-Ibáñez R(1), Crespo E, Esgleas M, Urban N, Wang B, Waclaw R, Georgopoulos 
K, Martínez S, Campbell K, Vicario-Abejón C, Alberch J, Chan S, Kastner P,
Rubenstein JL, Canals JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Immunology and Neuroscience, and Cell Therapy
Program, Faculty of Medicine, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i
Sunyer-IDIBAPS, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Development of the nervous system is finely regulated by consecutive expression
of cell-specific transcription factors. Here we show that Helios, a member of the
Ikaros transcription factor family, is expressed in ectodermal and
neuroectodermal-derived tissues. During embryonic development, Helios is
expressed by several brain structures including the lateral ganglionic eminence
(LGE, the striatal anlage); the cingulated, insular and retrosplenial cortex; the
hippocampus; and the accessory olfactory bulb. Moreover, Helios is also expressed
by Purkinje neurons during postnatal cerebellar development. Within the LGE,
Helios expression follows a dynamic spatio-temporal pattern starting at embryonic
stages (E14.5), peaking at E18.5, and completely disappearing during postnatal
development. Helios is expressed by a small population of nestin-positive neural 
progenitor cells located in the subventricular zone as well as by a larger
population of immature neurons distributed throughout the mantle zone. In the
later, Helios is preferentially expressed in the matrix compartment, where it
colocalizes with Bcl11b and Foxp1, well-known markers of striatal projection
neurons. In addition, we observed that Helios expression is not detected in
Dlx1/2 and Gsx2 null mutants, while its expression is maintained in Ascl1
mutants. These findings allow us to introduce a new transcription factor in the
cascade of events that take part of striatal development postulating the
existence of at least 4 different neural progenitors in the LGE. An
Ascl1-independent but Gsx2- & Dlx1/2-dependent precursor will express Helios
defining a new lineage for a subset of matrix striatal neurons.

PMCID: PMC3411368
PMID: 22142223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. PLoS Genet. 2011 Nov;7(11):e1002334. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002334. Epub 2011
Nov 10.

Relative burden of large CNVs on a range of neurodevelopmental phenotypes.

Girirajan S(1), Brkanac Z, Coe BP, Baker C, Vives L, Vu TH, Shafer N, Bernier R, 
Ferrero GB, Silengo M, Warren ST, Moreno CS, Fichera M, Romano C, Raskind WH,
Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington, United States of America.

While numerous studies have implicated copy number variants (CNVs) in a range of 
neurological phenotypes, the impact relative to disease severity has been
difficult to ascertain due to small sample sizes, lack of phenotypic details, and
heterogeneity in platforms used for discovery. Using a customized microarray
enriched for genomic hotspots, we assayed for large CNVs among 1,227 individuals 
with various neurological deficits including dyslexia (376), sporadic autism
(350), and intellectual disability (ID) (501), as well as 337 controls. We show
that the frequency of large CNVs (>1 Mbp) is significantly greater for
ID-associated phenotypes compared to autism (p = 9.58 × 10(-11), odds ratio =
4.59), dyslexia (p = 3.81 × 10(-18), odds ratio = 14.45), or controls (p = 2.75 ×
10(-17), odds ratio = 13.71). There is a striking difference in the frequency of 
rare CNVs (>50 kbp) in autism (10%, p = 2.4 × 10(-6), odds ratio = 6) or ID (16%,
p = 3.55 × 10(-12), odds ratio = 10) compared to dyslexia (2%) with essentially
no difference in large CNV burden among dyslexia patients compared to controls.
Rare CNVs were more likely to arise de novo (64%) in ID when compared to autism
(40%) or dyslexia (0%). We observed a significantly increased large CNV burden in
individuals with ID and multiple congenital anomalies (MCA) compared to ID alone 
(p = 0.001, odds ratio = 2.54). Our data suggest that large CNV burden positively
correlates with the severity of childhood disability: ID with MCA being most
severely affected and dyslexics being indistinguishable from controls. When
autism without ID was considered separately, the increase in CNV burden was
modest compared to controls (p = 0.07, odds ratio = 2.33).

PMCID: PMC3213131
PMID: 22102821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Cell. 2011 Oct 28;147(3):653-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.10.012.

Patterns of spinal sensory-motor connectivity prescribed by a dorsoventral
positional template.

Sürmeli G(1), Akay T, Ippolito GC, Tucker PW, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Kavli Institute for Brain Science, Department of Neuroscience, Columbia
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Sensory-motor circuits in the spinal cord are constructed with a fine specificity
that coordinates motor behavior, but the mechanisms that direct sensory
connections with their motor neuron partners remain unclear. The dorsoventral
settling position of motor pools in the spinal cord is known to match the
distal-to-proximal position of their muscle targets in the limb, but the
significance of invariant motor neuron positioning is unknown. An analysis of
sensory-motor connectivity patterns in FoxP1 mutant mice, where motor neuron
position has been scrambled, shows that the final pattern of sensory-motor
connections is initiated by the projection of sensory axons to discrete
dorsoventral domains of the spinal cord without regard for motor neuron subtype
or, indeed, the presence of motor neurons. By implication, the clustering and
dorsoventral settling position of motor neuron pools serve as a determinant of
the pattern of sensory input specificity and thus motor coordination.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3238499
PMID: 22036571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Hematol Oncol. 2012 Sep;30(3):143-9. doi: 10.1002/hon.1017. Epub 2011 Oct 18.

Cell of origin fails to predict survival in patients with diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma treated with autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation.

Gu K(1), Weisenburger DD, Fu K, Chan WC, Greiner TC, Aoun P, Smith LM, Bast M,
Liu Z, Bociek RG, Bierman PJ, Armitage JO, Vose JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-3135, USA.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) includes two prognostically important
subtypes, the germinal center B-cell (GCB) and the non-GCB types. The aim of this
study was to evaluate immunohistochemical approaches for predicting the survival 
of patients with DLBCL following autologous hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation (AHSCT). We identified 62 patients with DLBCL who either had an
initial complete remission (17 patients) or received salvage chemotherapy for
relapsed or refractory disease (45 patients), followed by AHSCT. Tissue
microarrays were immunostained with monoclonal antibodies against GCET1, CD10,
BCL6, MUM1, FOXP1 and LMO2. Using the Hans algorithm, we classified 50% of the
cases as GCB type, whereas the Choi algorithm classified 58% as GCB type and LMO2
was positive in 69%. However, no significant differences were found in the 5-year
overall or event-free survivals using any of these approaches. In conclusion,
cell of origin fails to predict survival of DLBCL patients treated with AHSCT.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4524810
PMID: 22009820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cancer Genet. 2011 Aug;204(8):462-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cancergen.2011.07.006.

FOXP1 and PAX5 are rare but recurrent translocations partners in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Put N(1), Deeren D, Michaux L, Vandenberghe P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Universitaire Ziekenhuizen Leuven, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Here, we report the case of a 57-year-old man, who was diagnosed with B-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL). His diagnostic workup identified a
translocation t(3;9)(p13;p13). This is the fifth case reported to date that
involved the forkhead box P1 gene (FOXP1) and paired box gene 5 (PAX5). The
PAX5-FOXP1 translocation is a nonrandom aberration, which is recurrent in both
childhood and in adult B-ALL, and may contribute to leukemogenesis by blocking
differentiation of hematopoietic cells into mature B-cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21962897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Cell. 2011 Sep 30;147(1):22-4. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.09.004.

Splicing up pluripotency.

Graveley BR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, University of Connecticut
Stem Cell Institute, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT
06030, USA. graveley@neuron.uchc.edu

Comment on
    Cell. 2011 Sep 30;147(1):132-46.

In this issue of Cell, Gabut and colleagues (2011) identify a new splice variant 
of FOXP1 that directly regulates the expression of pluripotency genes. It endows 
human embryonic stem cells with their pluripotent nature and is required for the 
reprogramming of somatic cells to induced pluripotent stem cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21962502  [PubMed]


215. J Clin Oncol. 2011 Nov 1;29(31):4079-87. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2011.35.4423. Epub 2011
Sep 26.

The germinal center/activated B-cell subclassification has a prognostic impact
for response to salvage therapy in relapsed/refractory diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma: a bio-CORAL study.

Thieblemont C(1), Briere J, Mounier N, Voelker HU, Cuccuini W, Hirchaud E,
Rosenwald A, Jack A, Sundstrom C, Cogliatti S, Trougouboff P, Boudova L, Ysebaert
L, Soulier J, Chevalier C, Bron D, Schmitz N, Gaulard P, Houlgatte R,
Gisselbrecht C.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology, APHP, Hôpital Saint Louis, INSERM U728, IUH, Paris, France.
catherine.thieblemont@sls.aphp.fr

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2011 Nov 1;29(31):4065-6.

PURPOSE: To evaluate the prognostic value of the cell of origin (COO) in patients
with relapsed/refractory diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBLC), prospectively
treated by rituximab, dexamethasone, high-dose cytarabine, and cisplatin (R-DHAP)
versus rituximab, ifosfamide, carboplatin, and etoposide and followed by
intensive therapy plus autologous stem-cell transplantation on the Collaborative 
Trial in Relapsed Aggressive Lymphoma (CORAL) trial.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Among the 396 patients included on the trial, histologic
material was available for a total of 249 patients at diagnosis (n = 189
patients) and/or at relapse (n = 147 patients), which included 87 matched pairs. 
The patient data were analyzed by immunochemistry for CD10, BCL6, MUM1, FOXP1,
and BCL2 expression and by fluorescent in situ hybridization for BCL2, BCL6 and
c-MYC breakpoints. The correlation with survival data was performed by using the 
log-rank test and the Cox model.
RESULTS: Characteristics of immunophenotype and chromosomal abnormalities were
statistically highly concordant in the matched biopsies. In univariate analysis, 
the presence of c-MYC gene rearrangement was the only parameter to be
significantly correlated with a worse progression-free survival (PFS; P = .02)
and a worse overall survival (P = .04). When treatment interaction was tested,
the germinal center B (GCB) -like DLBCL that was based on the algorithm by Hans
was significantly associated with a better PFS in the R-DHAP arm. In multivariate
analysis, independent prognostic relevance was found for the GCB/non-GCB the Hans
phenotype interaction treatment (P = .04), prior rituximab exposure (P = .0052), 
secondary age-adjusted International Prognostic Index (P = .039), and FoxP1
expression (P = .047). Confirmation was obtained by gene expression profiling in 
a subset of 39 patients.
CONCLUSION: COO remains a major and independent factor in relapsed/refractory
DLBCL, with a better response to R-DHAP in GCB-like DLBCL. This needs
confirmation by a prospective study.

PMID: 21947824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Indian J Pathol Microbiol. 2011 Jul-Sep;54(3):591-3. doi:
10.4103/0377-4929.85104.

Primary cardiac diffuse large B-cell lymphoma with activated B-cell-like
phenotype.

Gadage V(1), Kembhavi S, Kumar P, Shet T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, India.

Primary cardiac lymphoma (PCL) is a rare and fatal disorder. It may often mimic
other common cardiac tumors like cardiac myxoma because of similarities in the
clinical presentation. We report a case of PCL of diffuse large B-cell type, in a
38-year-old, immunocompetent male who presented with superior vena cava syndrome 
that was excised as a myxoma. Histology revealed a large cell population
diffusely and strongly expressing CD45, CD20, MUM1/IRF4 and FOXP1 hinting at an
activated B-cell (ABC)-like phenotype. After four cycles of Rituximab with CHOP
(cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, Oncovin, and prednisolone) the tumor
regressed completely but the patient had a relapse and subsequently succumbed to 
the disease confirming the aggressive nature. The aggressive behavior of PCL may 
be possibly linked to its ABC-like origin.

PMID: 21934230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Nov;31(22):4593-608. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05798-11. Epub 2011 Sep
19.

Distinct functions of Sox2 control self-renewal and differentiation in the
osteoblast lineage.

Seo E(1), Basu-Roy U, Zavadil J, Basilico C, Mansukhani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

The transcription factor Sox2 is a key player in the maintenance of pluripotency 
and "stemness." We have previously shown that Sox2 maintains self-renewal in the 
osteoblast lineage while inhibiting differentiation (U. Basu-Roy et al., Cell
Death Differ. 17:1345-1353, 2010; A. Mansukhani, D. Ambrosetti, G. Holmes, L.
Cornivelli, and C. Basilico, J. Cell Biol. 168:1065-1076, 2005). Sox2 also
interferes with Wnt signaling by binding ß-catenin, a central mediator of the Wnt
pathway. Here we show that these multiple functions of Sox2 are encoded in
distinct domains. The self-renewal function of Sox2 is dependent on its
transcriptional activity and requires both its DNA-binding and C-terminal
activation regions, while only the third C-terminal transactivation (TA) region
is required for binding ß-catenin and interfering with Wnt-induced transcription.
The results of gene expression analysis upon Sox2 deletion strongly support the
notion that Sox2 maintains stemness. We show also that Sox2 suppresses
differentiation by attenuating Wnt signaling by posttranscriptional and
transcriptional mechanisms and that adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and GSK3ß,
which are negative regulators of the Wnt pathway, are direct Sox2 targets in
osteoblasts. Several genes, such as the FoxP1 and BMI-1 genes, that are
associated with stemness are downregulated upon Sox2 inactivation. Constitutive
expression of the Polycomb complex member BMI-1 can bypass the Sox2 requirement
for self-renewal but does not affect differentiation. Our results establish a
connection between Sox2 and BMI-1 in maintaining self-renewal and identify BMI-1 
as a key mediator of Sox2 function.

PMCID: PMC3209254
PMID: 21930787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Oncogene. 2012 May 10;31(19):2401-11. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.423. Epub 2011 Sep
19.

Connective tissue growth factor modulates oral squamous cell carcinoma invasion
by activating a miR-504/FOXP1 signalling.

Yang MH(1), Lin BR, Chang CH, Chen ST, Lin SK, Kuo MY, Jeng YM, Kuo ML, Chang CC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    Oncogene. 2013 Jan 31;32(5):670.

Connective tissue growth factor (CTGF) is a multi-functional secreted protein,
and it has been shown either to promote or suppress tumor progression among
different kinds of cancers. Here, we investigated the role of CTGF in oral
squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) invasion and metastasis. In five OSCC cell lines, 
endogenous CTGF negatively correlated with invasiveness. Exogenous CTGF protein
or forced expression of CTGF gene in the oral cancer cell line SAS significantly 
decreased their invasive and migratory abilities. MicroRNA (miRNA) microarray
analysis was performed in CTGF-overexpressed SAS cells (SAS/CTGF-M3) versus
control cells to investigate the mechanism of CTGF-mediated inhibition of OSCC
invasion. Among the miRNAs regulated by CTGF, miR-504 and miR-346 were the top
two miRNAs downregulated in CTGF transfectants, and the result was confirmed by
quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR. Ectopic miR-504 increased migration and
invasion in SAS/CTGF-M3, however, miR-346 did not have such impact on
migration/invasion. Furthermore, we identified FOXP1, a member of forkhead
transcription factors, as a target gene that takes part in the miR-504-induced
cellular invasion. Knockdown of FOXP1 increased invasiveness in SAS/CTGF-M3,
confirming the signal axis of CTGF/miR-504/FOXP1 in OSCC. Animal experiments
showed that SAS/CTGF-M3-formed orthotopic tumors were associated with a lesser
invasive phenotype than control cells. Expression of miR-504 in SAS/CTGF-M3
increased lymph node metastasis, and co-expression of FOXP1 in
miR-504-transfected SAS/CTGF-M3 alleviated miR-504-induced metastasis. In OSCC
samples, high CTGF was associated with a lower clinical stage and a better
outcome. A reverse correlation between CTGF and miR-504, miR-504 and FOXP1, and a
positive correlation between CTGF and FOXP1 were shown. Our study discovers a
novel signal pathway involving the regulation of miRNA machinery by a secreted
cytokine, which will be beneficial for developing therapeutic strategy against
advanced OSCC.

PMID: 21927029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Cell. 2011 Sep 30;147(1):132-46. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.08.023. Epub 2011 Sep
15.

An alternative splicing switch regulates embryonic stem cell pluripotency and
reprogramming.

Gabut M(1), Samavarchi-Tehrani P, Wang X, Slobodeniuc V, O'Hanlon D, Sung HK,
Alvarez M, Talukder S, Pan Q, Mazzoni EO, Nedelec S, Wichterle H, Woltjen K,
Hughes TR, Zandstra PW, Nagy A, Wrana JL, Blencowe BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Banting and Best Department of Medical Research, University of Toronto, 160
College Street, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E1, Canada.

Comment in
    Cell. 2011 Sep 30;147(1):22-4.

Alternative splicing (AS) is a key process underlying the expansion of proteomic 
diversity and the regulation of gene expression. Here, we identify an
evolutionarily conserved embryonic stem cell (ESC)-specific AS event that changes
the DNA-binding preference of the forkhead family transcription factor FOXP1. We 
show that the ESC-specific isoform of FOXP1 stimulates the expression of
transcription factor genes required for pluripotency, including OCT4, NANOG,
NR5A2, and GDF3, while concomitantly repressing genes required for ESC
differentiation. This isoform also promotes the maintenance of ESC pluripotency
and contributes to efficient reprogramming of somatic cells into induced
pluripotent stem cells. These results reveal a pivotal role for an AS event in
the regulation of pluripotency through the control of critical ESC-specific
transcriptional programs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21924763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Horm Cancer. 2011 Oct;2(5):286-97. doi: 10.1007/s12672-011-0082-6.

FOXP1, an estrogen-inducible transcription factor, modulates cell proliferation
in breast cancer cells and 5-year recurrence-free survival of patients with
tamoxifen-treated breast cancer.

Shigekawa T(1), Ijichi N, Ikeda K, Horie-Inoue K, Shimizu C, Saji S, Aogi K,
Tsuda H, Osaki A, Saeki T, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation and Signal Transduction, Research Center for
Genomic Medicine, Saitama Medical University, Japan.

Breast cancer is primarily a hormone-dependent tumor that can be regulated by the
status of steroid hormones, including estrogen and progesterone. Forkhead box P1 
(FOXP1) is a member of the forkhead box transcription factor family and has been 
reported to be associated with various types of tumors. In the present study, we 
investigated the expression of FOXP1 in 133 human invasive breast cancers,
obtained by core biopsy, by immunohistochemical analysis. Nuclear
immunoreactivity of FOXP1 was detected in 89 cases (67%) and correlated
positively with tumor grade and hormone receptor status, including estrogen
receptor alpha (ERa) and progesterone receptor, and negatively with pathological 
tumor size. In ERa-positive MCF-7 breast cancer cells, we demonstrated that FOXP1
mRNA was upregulated by estrogen and increased ERa recruitment to ER binding
sites identified by ChIP-on-chip analysis within the FOXP1 gene region. We also
demonstrated that proliferation of MCF-7 cells was increased by exogenously
transfected FOXP1 and decreased by FOXP1-specific siRNA. Furthermore, FOXP1
enhanced estrogen response element-driven transcription in MCF-7 cells. Finally, 
FOXP1 immunoreactivity was significantly elevated in relapse-free breast cancer
patients treated with tamoxifen. These results suggest that FOXP1 plays an
important role in proliferation of breast cancer cells by modulating estrogen
signaling and that FOXP1 immunoreactivity could be associated with the estrogen
dependency of clinical breast cancers, which may predict favorable prognosis in
the patients treated with tamoxifen.

PMID: 21901488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Neurosci Methods. 2011 Oct 15;201(2):381-4. doi:
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2011.08.012. Epub 2011 Aug 17.

Optimisation of in ovo electroporation of the chick neural tube.

Croteau LP(1), Kania A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Unité de Developpement
des Circuits Neuronaux, Montréal, QC, Canada.

Chick in ovo neural tube electroporation has become a widely used method for
assaying gene function during embryonic development. Since its first description,
many variants of this technique have been described, with varying values for
specific parameters such as electrode type and spacing, voltage, pulse duration
and plasmid DNA concentration. Here we examine the influence of some of these
variables and derive a detailed and optimal protocol for electroporating the
caudal neural tube during the third day of embryonic development. Our findings
highlight the importance of electrode placement and DNA dilution buffer for
optimal expression and absence of electroporation artifacts.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21871488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Histochem Cytochem. 2011 Oct;59(10):918-31. doi: 10.1369/0022155411417309. Epub
2011 Aug 10.

Genotypic and phenotypic differences between nodal and extranodal diffuse large
B-Cell lymphomas.

Al-Humood SA(1), Al-Qallaf AS, Alshemmari SH, Francis IM, Junaid TA, Marouf RA,
Al-Mulla F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Kuwait University, Safat,
Kuwait.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) is a heterogeneous group of diseases that
have diverse clinical, pathological, and biological features. Here, it is shown
that primary nodal and extranodal DLBCLs differ genomically and phenotypically.
Using conventional comparative genomic hybridization (CGH), the authors assessed 
the chromosomal aberrations in 18 nodal, 13 extranodal, and 5 mixed DLBCLs. The
results demonstrate significantly distinct chromosomal aberrations exemplified by
gains of chromosomal arms 1p, 7p, 12q24.21-12q24.31, and 22q and chromosome X and
loss of chromosome 4, 6q, and 18q22.3-23 in extranodal compared with nodal
DLBCLs. Nodal DLBCLs showed an increased tendency for 18q amplification and BCL2 
protein overexpression compared with extranodal and mixed tumors. Using a panel
of five antibodies against GCET1, MUM1, CD10, BCL6, and FOXP1 proteins to
subclassify DLBCLs according to the recent Choi algorithm, the authors showed
that the genomic profiles observed between the nodal and extranodal DLBCLs were
not due to the different proportions of GCB vs ABC in the two groups. Further
delineation of these genomic differences was illuminated by the use of
high-resolution 21K BAC array CGH performed on 12 independent new cases of
extranodal DLBCL. The authors demonstrated for the first time a novel genome and 
proteome-based signatures that may differentiate the two lymphoma types.

PMCID: PMC3201129
PMID: 21832150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2012 Apr;66(4):650-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jaad.2011.03.031. Epub
2011 Aug 3.

Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, leg type and secondary cutaneous
involvement by testicular B-cell lymphoma share identical clinicopathological and
immunophenotypical features.

Muniesa C(1), Pujol RM, Estrach MT, Gallardo F, García-Muret MP, Climent J, Salar
A, Servitje O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Hospital de Viladecans, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (PCDLBCL), leg type
can eventually disseminate to extracutaneous sites including testes. In addition,
patients with testicular lymphoma can develop specific skin involvement.
OBJECTIVE: We sought to describe similarities between PCDLBCL, leg type and
testicular B-cell lymphoma affecting the skin.
METHODS: We report two cases with typical clinicopathological and
immunophenotypical features of leg type lymphoma occurring simultaneously with a 
testicular B-cell lymphoma. We also report an additional case of PCDLBCL, leg
type with secondary testicular involvement.
RESULTS: All cases presented with typical red tumors exclusively located on the
legs. Histologically, all cases showed a diffuse nonepidermotropic infiltrate
composed of large blastic cells mainly centroblastic type. Phenotype showed
strong positivity for Bcl-2, MUM-1, and FOXP1. Epstein-Barr virus stains and CD30
were negative in the 3 cases. In all cases the testicular infiltration showed the
same pathological and phenotypical changes to those observed in the skin.
LIMITATIONS: This was a retrospective case series study.
CONCLUSION: Skin involvement by testicular B-cell lymphomas and PCDLBCL, leg type
are indistinguishable on the basis of pathologic and immunophenotypical features,
therefore specific investigation and clinic correlation are needed.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Dermatology, Inc. Published by Mosby, Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21816504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Sep;218(1):26-7. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2011.06.014. Epub 2011 Jun 21.

Can Forkhead Box P1 be a novel therapeutic target for atherosclerosis?

Nakagami H(1), Morishita R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vascular Medicine and Epigenetics, Osaka University United
Graduate School of Child Development, Osaka, Japan.

Comment on
    Atherosclerosis. 2011 Sep;218(1):33-43.

PMID: 21742330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Atherosclerosis. 2011 Sep;218(1):33-43. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2011.05.017. Epub 2011 May 25.

Forkhead box protein P1 as a downstream target of transforming growth factor-ß
induces collagen synthesis and correlates with a more stable plaque phenotype.

Bot PT(1), Grundmann S, Goumans MJ, de Kleijn D, Moll F, de Boer O, van der Wal
AC, van Soest A, de Vries JP, van Royen N, Piek JJ, Pasterkamp G, Hoefer IE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, AMC Amsterdam, The Netherlands. ptgbot@gmail.com

Comment in
    Atherosclerosis. 2011 Sep;218(1):26-7.

OBJECTIVE: Atherosclerosis is an inflammatory disease, modulated by plaque
stabilizing and de-stabilizing cell populations such as infiltrating monocytes
and vascular smooth muscle cells (vSMCs). Transcription factors regulating
proliferation and differentiation of atherosclerosis relevant cell types are of
interest in this context. The forkhead box transcription factor FoxP1 modulates
monocyte differentiation. We studied FoxP1 expression in atherosclerotic tissue, 
correlated FoxP1 expression with plaque characteristics and identified
associations between FoxP1 and plaque proteins.
METHODS: 116 Atherosclerotic plaques from carotid endarterectomy samples were
histologically classified (fibrous, fibroatheromatous, atheromatous) and
subjected to semi-quantitative protein analysis. Macrophage, SMC content and
intraplaque thrombus amount were determined histologically. FoxP1 expression was 
investigated by western blotting and immunohistochemistry. In addition FoxP1 was 
overexpressed in vitro to identify causal relations between FoxP1 and plaque
proteins.
RESULTS: FoxP1 expression was observed in SMCs, macrophages, endothelial cells
and T-cells within the plaque. High SMC and collagen content correlated with
increased FoxP1 isoform (72 kD and 95 kD) levels. 72 kD FoxP1 expression was
lower in plaques containing intraplaque thrombus. FoxP1 correlated with active
intraplaque TGFß signaling. In vitro stimulation of SMCs with TGFß resulted in
increased FoxP1 levels. 72 kD FoxP1 correlated with expression of pro-fibrotic
EGR-1 and increased Col1A1 expression.
CONCLUSION: FoxP1 is expressed by different cell types in atherosclerotic lesions
and associated with more stable plaque characteristics and intraplaque TGFß
signaling. FoxP1 expression in vitro is induced by TGFß, resulting in increased
collagen and EGR-1 expression, providing a mechanism for the observed association
with a more stable plaque phenotype.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21683954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Tumour Biol. 2011 Oct;32(5):913-20. doi: 10.1007/s13277-011-0192-3. Epub 2011 Jun
10.

Expression of PIK3CA and FOXP1 in gastric and intestinal non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type.

Zhai L(1), Zhao Y, Ye S, Huang H, Tian Y, Wu Q, Lin H, Lin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Traditional
Chinese Medicine University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) type arises
from a wide variety of extranodal sites, most frequently from the
gastrointestinal tract. Recently, it has been demonstrated that karyotypic
alterations involving the PIK3CA and FOXP1 genes of chromosome 3 occur in MALT
lymphoma. However, their associated protein expression has not been extensively
studied. Tumor tissues from 27 gastric and 23 intestinal MALT lymphomas were
analyzed for PIK3CA and FOXP1 protein expression using immunohistochemistry and
correlated with histological features and treatment outcomes. Expression of
PIK3CA, a novel indicator, was found in 40% of gastrointestinal cases and
indicated an inferior progression-free survival in both gastric and intestinal
MALT lymphomas (P = 0.001 and P = 0.015). Tumor staining of nuclear FOXP1 (46.0%)
was more common in gastric than intestinal MALT lymphomas (P = 0.042) and was
significantly associated with polymorphic histology (P = 0.007). FOXP1 expression
was identified as an adverse prognostic factor for overall survival in gastric
MALT lymphomas (P = 0.035). We further combined these two markers and observed
that patients that are positive for both PIK3CA and FOXP1 had a worse overall and
progression-free survival. Considering the small sample size of this study, these
results should be confirmed in a large prospective study.

PMID: 21660567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20475. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020475. Epub 2011 May 31.

Transcription factors E2A, FOXO1 and FOXP1 regulate recombination activating gene
expression in cancer cells.

Chen Z(1), Xiao Y, Zhang J, Li J, Liu Y, Zhao Y, Ma C, Luo J, Qiu Y, Huang G,
Korteweg C, Gu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Shantou University Medical College, Shantou, China.

It has long been accepted that immunoglobulins (Igs) were produced by B lymphoid 
cells only. Recently Igs have been found to be expressed in various human cancer 
cells and promote tumor growth. Recombination activating gene 1 (RAG1) and RAG2, 
which are essential enzymes for initiating variable-diversity-joining segment
recombination, have also been found to be expressed in cancer cells. However, the
mechanism of RAG activation in these cancer cells has not been elucidated. Here, 
we investigated the regulatory mechanism of RAG expression in four human cancer
cell lines by analyzing transcription factors that induce RAG activation in B
cells. By RT-PCR, Western blot and immunofluorescence, we found that
transcription factors E2A, FOXO1 and FOXP1 were expressed and localized to the
nuclei of these cancer cells. Over-expression of E2A, FOXO1 or Foxp1 increased
RAG expression, while RNA interference of E2A, FOXO1 or FOXP1 decreased RAG
expression in the cancer cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments showed 
acetylation of RAG enhancer (Erag) and E2A, FOXO1 or FOXP1 were bound to Erag in 
vivo. These results indicate that in these cancer cells the transcription factors
E2A, FOXO1 and FOXP1 regulate RAG expression, which initiates Ig gene
rearrangement much in the way similar to B lymphocytes.

PMCID: PMC3105062
PMID: 21655267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Apr;40(4):220-6.

[Primary gastrointestinal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma: an immunohistochemical
and prognostic study of 90 cases].

[Article in Chinese]

Lin L(1), Min M, Bi CF, Wang XQ, Luo TY, Zhao S, Zhang WY, Liu WP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu
610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the immunophenotype and prognostic significance of primary
gastrointestinal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, with reference to Hans, Choi and 
Tally algorithms.
METHODS: The clinicopathologic features and follow-up data in 90 cases of primary
gastrointestinal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma were analyzed by Kaplan-Meier
method, Log-rank test and Cox regression model. Immunohistochemistry was carried 
out using EliVision and EnVision methods for CD20, CD3e, CD10, bcl-6, MUM-1, CD5,
bcl-2, GCET1, FOXP1, LMO2, BLIMP1 and Ki-67.
RESULTS: The age of patients ranged from 27 to 83 years (mean = 58 years). The
male-to-female ratio was 1.31:1. Amongst the 90 cases studied, 64.4% (58/90)
involved the stomach and 35.6% (32/90) involved the intestine. The
immunohistochemical findings were as follows: 100% positivity for CD20, 0% for
CD3e and CD5, 17.8% (16/90) for CD10, 75.6% (68/90) for bcl-6, 52.2% (47/90) for 
MUM-1 (cut off was 30%), 43.3% (39/90) for MUM-1 (cut off was 80%), 50.0% (45/90)
for GCET1, 45.6% (41/90) for FOXP1, 23.3% (21/90) for LMO2, 42.2% (38/90) for
bcl-2 and 8.9% (8/90) for BLIMP1. The Ki-67 index ranged from 20% to 95% (median 
= 80%). According to Hans algorithm, 51.1% of the cases belonged to germinal
center B-cell (GCB) subtype and 48.9% belonged to non-GCB subtype. In contrast,
Choi algorithm classified 55.6% cases as GCB subtype and 44.4% as activated
B-cell (ABC) subtype. According to Tally algorithm, 34.4% were of GCB subtype and
65.6% of non-GCB subtype. Most of the patients (67.8%, 61/90) received
chemotherapy and 68.9% (62/90) underwent surgical resection. The overall 2, 3 and
5-year survival rates were 58.5%, 52.8% and 49.8%, respectively. The overall 2, 3
and 5-year survival rates in the CHOP therapy group were 68.5%, 61.2% and 52.9%, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: There is no significant difference in ratio between the GCB and
non-GCB/ABC subtypes by Hans and Choi algorithms. The non-GCB subtype seems to be
more prevalent according to Tally algorithm. Although there is no significant
difference in survival between GCB and non-GCB/ABC subtypes by the 3 algorithms, 
GCB subtype tends to show a better survival. In univariate analysis, LDH level,
international prognostic index, chemotherapy, surgical resection, B symptoms,
number of involved sites and clinical stage are found to have prognostic
significance. In multivariate analysis, Choi algorithm, Tally algorithm,
chemotherapy, surgical resection, LDH level and clinical stage are independent
prognostic factors.

PMID: 21615994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Mol Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;31(14):3068-80. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00925-10. Epub 2011 May 
23.

Opposing roles of FoxP1 and Nfat3 in transcriptional control of cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy.

Bai S(1), Kerppola TK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109-0650, USA.

Cardiac homeostasis is maintained by a balance of growth-promoting and
growth-modulating factors. Sustained elevation of calcium signaling can induce
cardiac hypertrophy through activation of Nfat family transcription factors. FoxP
family transcription factors are known to interact with Nfat proteins and to
modulate their transcriptional activities in lymphocytes. We investigated FoxP1
interaction with Nfat3 (Nfatc4) and their effects on transcription of
hypertrophy-associated genes in neonatal rat cardiomyocytes. FoxP1-Nfat3
complexes were visualized using bimolecular fluorescence complementation (BiFC)
analysis. Calcineurin activation induced FoxP1-Nfat3 BiFC complex formation.
Amino acid substitutions in the predicted interaction interface inhibited it.
FoxP1 repressed hypertrophy-associated genes (Myh7, Rcan1, Cx43, Anf, and Bnp)
and counteracted their activation by constitutively nuclear Nfat3 (cnNfat3). In
contrast, FoxP1 activated genes that maintain normal heart functions (Myh6 and
p57Kip2) and cnNfat3 counteracted their activation by FoxP1. Amino acid
substitutions in FoxP1 or cnNfat3 that inhibited their interaction abrogated the 
activation of hypertrophy-associated gene transcription by cnNfat3 and the
repression of these genes by FoxP1. FoxP1 and Nfat3 co-occupied the promoter
regions of hypertrophy-associated genes in neonatal and adult heart tissue. FoxP1
counteracted hypertrophic cardiomyocyte growth, and connexin 43 mislocalization
caused by cnNfat3 expression. These data suggest that the opposing
transcriptional activities of FoxP1 and Nfat3 maintain cardiomyocyte homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3133389
PMID: 21606195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun;12(6):522-4. doi: 10.1038/ni.2040.

Fox factors fight over T cell quiescence.

Skon CN(1), Jameson SC.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Immunology, University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun;12(6):544-50.

The transcription factor Foxp1 helps maintain the quiescence of naive T cells by 
inhibiting IL-7Ra expression and diminishing signaling by the kinase Erk.

PMID: 21587312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Nat Genet. 2011 Jun;43(6):585-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.835. Epub 2011 May 15.

Exome sequencing in sporadic autism spectrum disorders identifies severe de novo 
mutations.

O'Roak BJ(1), Deriziotis P, Lee C, Vives L, Schwartz JJ, Girirajan S, Karakoc E, 
Mackenzie AP, Ng SB, Baker C, Rieder MJ, Nickerson DA, Bernier R, Fisher SE,
Shendure J, Eichler EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2012 Apr;44(4):471.

Comment in
    Clin Genet. 2011 Oct;80(4):331-3.

Evidence for the etiology of autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) has consistently
pointed to a strong genetic component complicated by substantial locus
heterogeneity. We sequenced the exomes of 20 individuals with sporadic ASD
(cases) and their parents, reasoning that these families would be enriched for de
novo mutations of major effect. We identified 21 de novo mutations, 11 of which
were protein altering. Protein-altering mutations were significantly enriched for
changes at highly conserved residues. We identified potentially causative de novo
events in 4 out of 20 probands, particularly among more severely affected
individuals, in FOXP1, GRIN2B, SCN1A and LAMC3. In the FOXP1 mutation carrier, we
also observed a rare inherited CNTNAP2 missense variant, and we provide
functional support for a multi-hit model for disease risk. Our results show that 
trio-based exome sequencing is a powerful approach for identifying new candidate 
genes for ASDs and suggest that de novo mutations may contribute substantially to
the genetic etiology of ASDs.

PMCID: PMC3115696
PMID: 21572417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun;12(6):544-50. doi: 10.1038/ni.2034. Epub 2011 May 1.

Transcription factor Foxp1 exerts essential cell-intrinsic regulation of the
quiescence of naive T cells.

Feng X(1), Wang H, Takata H, Day TJ, Willen J, Hu H.

Author information: 
(1)The Wistar Institute, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2011 Jun;12(6):522-4.

The molecular mechanisms that underlie T cell quiescence are poorly understood.
Here we report that mature naive CD8(+) T cells lacking the transcription factor 
Foxp1 gained effector phenotype and function and proliferated directly in
response to interleukin 7 (IL-7) in vitro. Foxp1 repressed expression of the IL-7
receptor a-chain (IL-7Ra) by antagonizing Foxo1 and negatively regulated
signaling by the kinases MEK and Erk. Acute deletion of Foxp1 induced naive T
cells to gain an effector phenotype and proliferate in lympho-replete mice.
Foxp1-deficient naive CD8(+) T cells proliferated even in lymphopenic mice
deficient in major histocompatibility complex class I. Our results demonstrate
that Foxp1 exerts essential cell-intrinsic regulation of naive T cell quiescence,
providing direct evidence that lymphocyte quiescence is achieved through actively
maintained mechanisms that include transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC3631322
PMID: 21532575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Blood. 2011 Jul 7;118(1):167-76. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-01-331678. Epub 2011 Apr
29.

Genome integrity of myeloproliferative neoplasms in chronic phase and during
disease progression.

Klampfl T(1), Harutyunyan A, Berg T, Gisslinger B, Schalling M, Bagienski K,
Olcaydu D, Passamonti F, Rumi E, Pietra D, Jäger R, Pieri L, Guglielmelli P,
Iacobucci I, Martinelli G, Cazzola M, Vannucchi AM, Gisslinger H, Kralovics R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna,
Austria.

Philadelphia chromosome-negative myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are clonal
myeloid disorders with increased production of terminally differentiated cells.
The disease course is generally chronic, but some patients show disease
progression (secondary myelofibrosis or accelerated phase) and/or leukemic
transformation. We investigated chromosomal aberrations in 408 MPN samples using 
high-resolution single-nucleotide polymorphism microarrays to identify
disease-associated somatic lesions. Of 408 samples, 37.5% had a wild-type
karyotype and 62.5% harbored at least 1 chromosomal aberration. We identified 25 
recurrent aberrations that were found in 3 or more samples. An increased number
of chromosomal lesions was significantly associated with patient age, as well as 
with disease progression and leukemic transformation, but no association was
observed with MPN subtypes, Janus kinase 2 (JAK2) mutational status, or disease
duration. Aberrations of chromosomes 1q and 9p were positively associated with
disease progression to secondary myelofibrosis or accelerated phase. Changes of
chromosomes 1q, 7q, 5q, 6p, 7p, 19q, 22q, and 3q were positively associated with 
post-MPN acute myeloid leukemia. We mapped commonly affected regions to single
target genes on chromosomes 3p (forkhead box P1 [FOXP1]), 4q (tet oncogene family
member 2 [TET2]), 7p (IKAROS family zinc finger 1 [IKZF1]), 7q (cut-like homeobox
1 [CUX1]), 12p (ets variant 6 [ETV6]), and 21q (runt-related transcription factor
1 [RUNX1]). Our data provide insight into the genetic complexity of MPNs and
implicate new genes involved in disease progression.

PMID: 21531982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 15;17(12):4125-35. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-11-0224. 
Epub 2011 Apr 27.

MicroRNAs are independent predictors of outcome in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
patients treated with R-CHOP.

Alencar AJ(1), Malumbres R, Kozloski GA, Advani R, Talreja N, Chinichian S,
Briones J, Natkunam Y, Sehn LH, Gascoyne RD, Tibshirani R, Lossos IS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology and Molecular and
Cellular Pharmacology, Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA.

PURPOSE: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) heterogeneity has prompted
investigations for new biomarkers that can accurately predict survival. A
previously reported 6-gene model combined with the International Prognostic Index
(IPI) could predict patients' outcome. However, even these predictors are not
capable of unambiguously identifying outcome, suggesting that additional
biomarkers might improve their predictive power.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We studied expression of 11 microRNAs (miRNA) that had
previously been reported to have variable expression in DLBCL tumors. We measured
the expression of each miRNA by quantitative real-time PCR analyses in 176
samples from uniformly treated DLBCL patients and correlated the results to
survival.
RESULTS: In a univariate analysis, the expression of miR-18a correlated with
overall survival (OS), whereas the expression of miR-181a and miR-222 correlated 
with progression-free survival (PFS). A multivariate Cox regression analysis
including the IPI, the 6-gene model-derived mortality predictor score and
expression of the miR-18a, miR-181a, and miR-222, revealed that all variables
were independent predictors of survival except the expression of miR-222 for OS
and the expression of miR-18a for PFS.
CONCLUSION: The expression of specific miRNAs may be useful for DLBCL survival
prediction and their role in the pathogenesis of this disease should be examined 
further.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3117929
PMID: 21525173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Blood. 2011 Jun 9;117(23):6227-36. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-312231. Epub 2011
Apr 1.

Myc-mediated repression of microRNA-34a promotes high-grade transformation of
B-cell lymphoma by dysregulation of FoxP1.

Craig VJ(1), Cogliatti SB, Imig J, Renner C, Neuenschwander S, Rehrauer H,
Schlapbach R, Dirnhofer S, Tzankov A, Müller A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zürich, Zürich,
Switzerland.

Gastric marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of MALT type (MALT lymphoma) arises in the 
context of chronic inflammation induced by the bacterial pathogen Helicobacter
pylori. Although generally considered an indolent disease, MALT lymphoma may
transform to gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (gDLBCL) through mechanisms
that remain poorly understood. By comparing microRNA expression profiles of
gastric MALT lymphoma and gDLBCL, we have identified a signature of 27
deregulated microRNAs(miRNAs) that share the characteristic of being
transcriptionally repressed by Myc. Myc overexpression was consequently detected 
in 80% of gDLBCL but only 20% of MALT lymphomas spotted on a tissue microarray. A
highly similar signature of Myc-repressed miRNAs was further detected in nodal
DLBCL. Small interfering RNA-mediated knock-down of Myc blocked proliferation of 
DLBCL cell lines. Of the Myc-repressed miRNAs down-regulated in malignant
lymphoma, miR-34a showed the strongest antiproliferative properties when
overexpressed in DLBCL cells. We could further attribute miR-34a's
tumor-suppressive effects to deregulation of its target FoxP1. FoxP1
overexpression was detected in gDLBCL but not in gastric MALT lymphoma; FoxP1
knock-down efficiently blocked DLBCL proliferation. In conclusion, our results
elucidate a novel Myc- and FoxP1-dependent pathway of malignant transformation
and suggest miR-34a replacement therapy as a promising strategy in lymphoma
treatment.

PMCID: PMC3790944
PMID: 21460242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Blood. 2011 May 5;117(18):4836-43. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-322362. Epub 2011
Mar 25.

Gene-expression profiling and not immunophenotypic algorithms predicts prognosis 
in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with immunochemotherapy.

Gutiérrez-García G(1), Cardesa-Salzmann T, Climent F, González-Barca E, Mercadal 
S, Mate JL, Sancho JM, Arenillas L, Serrano S, Escoda L, Martínez S, Valera A,
Martínez A, Jares P, Pinyol M, García-Herrera A, Martínez-Trillos A, Giné E,
Villamor N, Campo E, Colomo L, López-Guillermo A; Grup per l'Estudi dels Limfomes
de Catalunya I Balears (GELCAB).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Pathology, Hospital Clínic, University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) can be divided into germinal-center B
cell-like (GCB) and activated-B cell-like (ABC) subtypes by gene-expression
profiling (GEP), with the latter showing a poorer outcome. Although this
classification can be mimicked by different immunostaining algorithms, their
reliability is the object of controversy. We constructed tissue microarrays with 
samples of 157 DLBCL patients homogeneously treated with immunochemotherapy to
apply the following algorithms: Colomo (MUM1/IRF4, CD10, and BCL6 antigens), Hans
(CD10, BCL6, and MUM1/IRF4), Muris (CD10 and MUM1/IRF4 plus BCL2), Choi (GCET1,
MUM1/IRF4, CD10, FOXP1, and BCL6), and Tally (CD10, GCET1, MUM1/IRF4, FOXP1, and 
LMO2). GEP information was available in 62 cases. The proportion of misclassified
cases by immunohistochemistry compared with GEP was higher when defining the GCB 
subset: 41%, 48%, 30%, 60%, and 40% for Colomo, Hans, Muris, Choi, and Tally,
respectively. Whereas the GEP groups showed significantly different 5-year
progression-free survival (76% vs 31% for GCB and activated DLBCL) and overall
survival (80% vs 45%), none of the immunostaining algorithms was able to retain
the prognostic impact of the groups (GCB vs non-GCB). In conclusion,
stratification based on immunostaining algorithms should be used with caution in 
guiding therapy, even in clinical trials.

PMID: 21441466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Protein Sci. 2011 May;20(5):908-24. doi: 10.1002/pro.626. Epub 2011 Apr 11.

Solution structure and backbone dynamics of the DNA-binding domain of FOXP1:
insight into its domain swapping and DNA binding.

Chu YP(1), Chang CH, Shiu JH, Chang YT, Chen CY, Chuang WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Cheng Kung
University College of Medicine, Tainan, Taiwan.

FOXP1 belongs to the P-subfamily of forkhead transcription factors and contains a
conserved forkhead DNA-binding domain. According to size exclusion chromatography
analysis, the forkhead domain of FOXP1 existed as a mixture of monomer and dimer.
The dissociation constants of the forkhead domain of wild-type, C61S, and C61Y
mutants of FOXP1 were 27.3, 28.8, and 332.0 µM, respectively. In contrast, FOXP1 
A39P mutant formed only a monomer. NMR analysis also showed that FOXP1 C61S and
C61Y mutants existed as a mixture. The solution structure of FOXP1 A39P/C61Y
mutant was similar to the X-ray structure of the FOXP2 monomer. Comparison of
backbone dynamics of FOXP1 A39P/C61Y and C61Y mutants showed that the residues
preceding helix 3, the hinge region, exhibited the largest conformational
exchange in FOXP1 monomer. The A39 residue of FOXP1 dimer has a lower order
parameter with internal motion on the ps-ns timescale, suggesting that the
dynamics of the hinge region of FOXP1 are important in the formation of the
swapped dimer. The analysis also showed that the residues exhibiting the motions 
on the ps-ns and µs-ms timescales were located at the DNA-binding surface of
FOXP1, suggesting the interactions between FOXP1 and DNA may be highly dynamic.

Copyright © 2011 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC3125874
PMID: 21416545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Br J Haematol. 2011 Apr;153(1):43-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2010.08457.x. Epub 
2011 Feb 1.

Identification of FOXP1 and SNX2 as novel ABL1 fusion partners in acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Ernst T(1), Score J, Deininger M, Hidalgo-Curtis C, Lackie P, Ershler WB, Goldman
JM, Cross NC, Grand F.

Author information: 
(1)University of Southampton School of Medicine, Southampton, UK.

We have identified two novel ABL1 fusion genes in two patients with B-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) associated with a t(3;9)(p12;q34) and a
t(5;9)(q23;q34), respectively. Molecular analysis revealed a FOXP1-ABL1 fusion
for the t(3;9) and a SNX2-ABL1 fusion for the t(5;9). The fusions were confirmed 
by specific amplification of the genomic breakpoints using reverse transcription 
polymerase chain reaction. The identification of ALL with rare ABL1 fusion
partners is important because the leukaemia may respond to tyrosine kinase
inhibitors in the same way as ALL patients with a classical BCR-ABL1 fusion gene.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21391972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Clin Chim Acta. 2011 May 12;412(11-12):952-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2011.01.030.
Epub 2011 Feb 16.

Non-invasive screening of HLA-DPA1 and HLA-DPB1 alleles for persistent hepatitis 
B virus infection: susceptibility for vertical transmission and toward a
personalized approach for vaccination and treatment.

Lau KC(1), Lam CW, Law CY, Lai ST, Tsang TY, Siu CW, To WK, Leung KF, Mak CM,
Poon WT, Chan PK, Chan YW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital,
Hong Kong, China.

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms in the major histocompatibility complex (MHC) and
non-MHC genes were recently reported to be associated with persistent hepatitis B
virus (HBV) infection and host response to hepatitis B vaccine in Asian
populations. We aimed to confirm the associations in Chinese population and
develop a non-invasive screening method for the risk loci.
METHODS: We genotyped 2 risk alleles on the MHC loci, HLA-DPA1 (rs3077) and
HLA-DPB1 (rs9277535), and 1 risk allele near a non-MHC gene, FOXP1 (rs6789153)
using high-resolution melting curve analysis. With minimal processing steps and
time, salivary DNA was extracted with a modified protocol of a blood kit. We
compared the genotyping fidelity between peripheral blood DNA and salivary DNA.
RESULTS: Both rs3077 and rs9277535, but not rs6789153, are significantly
associated with CHB in Chinese population (p-value<0.001). High genotype
concordance between different sources of genomic DNA was obtained.
CONCLUSIONS: Genotyping salivary DNA using our modified methods provides a
non-invasive fast screening for host susceptibility loci. The transmission
mechanism of hepatitis B can now be modified by adding genetic susceptibility to 
the traditional vertical transmission model of hepatitis B.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21310144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Neurosci. 2011 Jan 19;31(3):809-18. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4330-10.2011.

MicroRNA miR-9 modifies motor neuron columns by a tuning regulation of FoxP1
levels in developing spinal cords.

Otaegi G(1), Pollock A, Hong J, Sun T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York 10065, USA.

The precise organization of motor neuron subtypes in a columnar pattern in
developing spinal cords is controlled by cross-interactions of multiple
transcription factors and segmental expressions of Hox genes and their accessory 
proteins. Accurate expression levels and domains of these regulators are
essential for organizing spinal motor neuron columns and axonal projections to
target muscles. Here, we show that microRNA miR-9 is transiently expressed in a
motor neuron subtype and displays overlapping expression with its target gene
FoxP1. Overexpression or knockdown of miR-9 alters motor neuron subtypes,
switches columnar identities, and changes axonal innervations in developing chick
spinal cords. miR-9 modifies spinal columnar organization by specifically
regulating FoxP1 protein levels, which in turn determine distinct motor neuron
subtypes. Our findings demonstrate that miR-9 is an essential regulator of motor 
neuron specification and columnar formation. Moreover, the overlapping expression
of miR-9 and its target FoxP1 further illuminates the importance of fine-tuning
regulation by microRNAs in motor neuron development.

PMCID: PMC3040495
PMID: 21248104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Cancer Invest. 2011 Feb;29(2):123-9. doi: 10.3109/07357907.2010.535059. Epub 2011
Jan 6.

Expression of the Forkhead transcription factor FOXP1 is associated with tumor
grade and Ki67 expression in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

Toma MI(1), Weber T, Meinhardt M, Zastrow S, Grimm MO, Füssel S, Wirth MP,
Baretton GB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Medicine University Carl Gustav Carus, Technical
University of Dresden, Dresden, Germany. marieta.toma@uniklinikum-dresden.de

Expression of FOXP1 and Ki67 was immunohistochemically assessed on tissue
microarrays of 129 cases of clear cell renal cell carcinomas. Overall and
disease-specific survival correlated inversely with pT-category, grading and
lymph node metastasis in (p < .05). Expression of FOXP1 correlated negatively
with tumor grading (p = .02), but neither with pT-category nor with lymph node
metastasis. Significant positive correlation was shown for Ki67 expression and
tumor stage and lymph node metastasis (p < .05). The overall survival and the
disease-specific survival correlated negatively with the Ki67 status (p < .05).
FOXP1 expression negatively correlated with Ki67 expression in clear cell renal
cell carcinomas (p = .036).

PMID: 21210727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Histol Histopathol. 2011 Feb;26(2):213-21.

FOXP1 molecular cytogenetics and protein expression analyses in primary cutaneous
large B cell lymphoma, leg-type.

Espinet B(1), García-Herrera A, Gallardo F, Baró C, Salgado R, Servitje O,
Estrach T, Colomo L, Romagosa V, Barranco C, Serrano S, Campo E, Pujol RM, Solé
F.

Author information: 
(1)Servei de Patologia (Laboratori de Citogenètica i Biologia Molecular),
IMIM-Hospital del Mar, GRETNHE, IMIM. Barcelona, Spain.
bespinet@parcdesalutmar.cat

FOXP1 protein is expressed in normal activated B cells and overexpressed in a
subset of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, including primary cutaneous large
B-cell lymphomas (PCLBCL), leg type. High expression of FOXP1 has been associated
to an unfavourable prognosis with independent survival significance. However,
little is known regarding the mechanisms underlying the overexpression of FOXP1
in PCLBCL, leg type. Our aims were to analyze FOXP1 cytogenetic status and
protein expression in a series of PCLBCL, leg type. Finally, we compared the
observed results with those obtained in a group of patients with primary
cutaneous follicle centre lymphoma (PCFCL). Fifteen patients with PCLBCL, leg
type and nine patients with primary cutaneous follicle centre lymphoma (PCFCL)
were included in the study. For each biopsy specimen, FOXP1 translocation and
copy number changes were evaluated by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
and protein expression by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Immunohistochemistry showed
FOXP1 staining in 13 PCLBCL, leg type, whereas all PCFCL were negative. FISH
analysis disclosed no translocations involving FOXP1 gene in any of the cases.
However, FOXP1 gene gains (3 to 4 copies) were observed in 82% of samples of
PCLBCL, leg type and in 37% of PCFCL. FOXP1 expression was independent from FOXP1
translocation. Our results confirm that overexpression of FOXP1 is present in a
considerable proportion of PCLBCL, leg type and might indicate an unfavourable
prognosis. Mechanisms not related to translocation seem to be responsible for
this overexpression.

PMID: 21154235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Ann Hematol. 2011 Jun;90(6):701-8. doi: 10.1007/s00277-010-1124-9. Epub 2010 Dec 
1.

FOXP1 expression and its clinicopathologic significance in nodal and extranodal
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Yu B(1), Zhou X, Li B, Xiao X, Yan S, Shi D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Fudan University Shanghai Cancer Center, Fudan
University, Shanghai, 200032, China.

The aims of this study were to investigate FOXP1 expression in nodal and
extranodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) and its association with the
subclassification and other clinicopathologic parameters of DLBCL. Expression of 
FOXP1, CD10, Bcl6, MUM1, and Bcl2 was detected by immunohistochemistry on tissue 
microarray sections. The Kaplan-Meier method was used to estimate the overall
survival of patients, and the log-rank test was used to compare survival
differences between groups with different FOXP1 protein expressions. Expression
of FOXP1 was detected in 67.4% (95/141) of DLBCLs. FOXP1 expression in non-GCB
(67/90, 74.4%) was significantly higher than that in GCB (28/51, 54.9%)
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). FOXP1 expression in MUM1-positive cases (62/81, 76.5%) was
significantly higher than that in MUM1-negative cases (33/60, 55%) (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.01).
FOXP1 expression was positively correlated with Bcl2 (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) in non-GCB among 
nodal DLBCL cases. Among the extranodal group, patients with FOXP1 expression had
a significantly inferior OS compared to those with negative FOXP1 expression
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), which was not seen in nodal group. In conclusion, FOXP1 expression
might be involved in the tumorigenesis of both nodal and extranodal DLBCL. The
most striking finding of this study was that FOXP1 expression had an adverse
effect on survival of patients with extranodal DLBCL, which indicated that FOXP1 
function might be mediated by different mechanisms in nodal and extranodal
DLBCLs. FOXP1 might play a role in the pathogenesis of nodal non-GCB DLBCL
through the pathways in which Bcl2 was involved, and it might be a second
important biomarker for non-GCB.

PMID: 21120478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Bull Cancer. 2010 Nov;97(11):1347-64. doi: 10.1684/bdc.2010.1214.

[Molecular abnormalities in lymphomas].

[Article in French]

Delsol G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Université Paul-Sabatier,CHU de Toulouse-Purpan, Toulouse, France.
georges.delsol@inserm.fr

Numerous molecular abnormalities have been described in lymphomas. They are of
diagnostic and prognostic value and are taken into account for the WHO
classification of these tumors. They also shed some light on the underlying
molecular mechanisms involved in lymphomas. Overall, four types of molecular
abnormalities are involved: mutations, translocations, amplifications and
deletions of tumor suppressor genes. Several techniques are available to detect
these molecular anomalies: conventional cytogenetic analysis, multicolor FISH,
CGH array or gene expression profiling using DNA microarrays. In some lymphomas, 
genetic abnormalities are responsible for the expression of an abnormal protein
(e.g. tyrosine-kinase, transcription factor) detectable by immunohistochemistry. 
In the present review, molecular abnormalities observed in the most frequent B, T
or NK cell lymphomas are discussed. In the broad spectrum of diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas microarray analysis shows mostly two subgroups of tumors, one with gene
expression signature corresponding to germinal center B-cell-like (GCB: CD10+,
BCL6 [B-Cell Lymphoma 6]+, centerine+, MUM1-) and a subgroup expressing an
activated B-cell-like signature (ABC: CD10-, BCL6-, centerine-, MUM1+). Among
other B-cell lymphomas with well characterized molecular abnormalies are
follicular lymphoma (BCL2 deregulation), MALT lymphoma (Mucosa Associated
Lymphoid Tissue) [API2-MALT1
(mucosa-associated-lymphoid-tissue-lymphoma-translocation-gene1) fusion protein
or deregulation BCL10, MALT1, FOXP1. MALT1 transcription factors], mantle cell
lymphoma (cycline D1 [CCND1] overexpression) and Burkitt lymphoma (c-Myc
expression). Except for ALK (anaplastic lymphoma kinase)-positive anaplastic
large cell lymphoma, well characterized molecular anomalies are rare in lymphomas
developed from T or NK cells. Peripheral T cell lymphomas not otherwise specified
are a heterogeneous group of tumors with frequent but not recurrent molecular
abnormalities. Gene profiling analysis shows that the expression of several genes
is deregulated including PDGFRA (platelet-derived growth factor receptor) gene,
encoding a receptor with tyrosine kinase activity. In angio-immunoblastic T-cell 
lymphomas molecular abnormalities are found in follicular helper T-cell (TFH)
that express some distinctive markers such as CD10, PD-1, CXCR5 and the CXCL13
chemokine. ALK-positive anaplastic large cell lymphoma is a paradigme of T-cell
lymphoma since it is associated with an X-ALK oncogenic fusion protein due to a
translocation involving ALK gene at 2p23. ALK tyrosine kinase activates
downstream pathways (Stat3/5b, Src kinases, PLC<U+03B3>, PI3 kinase) implicated in
lymphomagenesis, proliferation and protection against apoptosis. Specific ALK
inhibitors are currently in clinical evaluation. Lastly several lymphomas are
associated with infectious agents that play a direct (EB virus, HTLV1) or
indirect role (e.g. Helicobacter pylori in MALT lymphoma) in lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 21084243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Ann Dermatol Venereol. 2010 Nov;137(11):755-6. doi: 10.1016/j.annder.2010.09.011.
Epub 2010 Oct 18.

[Alopecia areata and vitiligo: Can genetics tell us more about their
mechanisms?].

[Article in French]

Dereure O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Saint-Éloi, Montpellier, France. o-dereure@chu-montpellier.fr

PMID: 21074666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Aug;39(8):513-7.

[Study on genetic aberrations of ocular mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
lymphomas occurring in southern China].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang XM(1), Zhang WY, Zhou YP, Mo XL, Li YP, Wang GQ, Zhou YQ, Zeng SE, Li GD,
Ye HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Guangxi Medical
University, Liuzhou, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the genetic aberrations of ocular extranodal marginal zone
B-cell lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) type occurring in
patients from southern China.
METHODS: Fifty seven paraffin-embedded ocular MALT lymphoma specimens from
patients in southern China were studied by interphase fluorescence-in-situ
hybridization (FISH) for genetic aberrations including
t(11;18)(q21;q21)/API2-MALT1, t(1;14)(p22;q32)/IgH-bcl-10, t(14;18)
(q32;q21)/IgH-MALT1 and bcl-6/FOXP1 gene translocations.
RESULTS: Amongst the 57 cases studied, 9 cases (15.8%) showed chromosome
translocations, including 4 cases (7.0%) of t(11;18)(q21;q21)/API2-MALT1, 1 case 
(1.8%) of t(14;18) (q32;q21)/IgH-MALT1, 1 case (1.8%) of bcl-6 gene-related
chromosome translocation and 3 cases (5.3%) of IgH-unknown translocation partner.
FISH revealed 17 cases (29.8%) with 3 copies of bcl-6 gene, 21 cases (36.8%) with
3 copies of MALT1 gene and 12 cases (21.1%) with 3 copies of both genes.
CONCLUSIONS: The MALT lymphoma-associated chromosome translocations
t(11;18)(q21;q21)/API2-MALT1 and t(14;18) (q32;q21)/IgH-MALT1 are demonstrated in
ocular MALT lymphomas of southern Chinese patients. The prevalence is
significantly different from that reported in northern Chinese and northern
American patients, indicating a geographic heterogeneity in the MALT
lymphoma-associated genetic aberrations. The presence of 3 copies of bcl-6 and
MALT1 genes is the commonest genetic abnormalities observed in ocular MALT
lymphomas, suggesting a possible role in MALT lymphomagenesis.

PMID: 21055028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Cell Cycle. 2010 Nov 1;9(21):4251-2. Epub 2010 Nov 12.

Regulation of cardiomyocyte proliferation by Foxp1.

Wang Y, Morrisey E.

PMID: 21051948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. BMC Cancer. 2010 Oct 22;10:576. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-576.

Identification of differentially expressed genes using an annealing control
primer system in stage III serous ovarian carcinoma.

Kim YS(1), Hwan JD, Bae S, Bae DH, Shick WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Soonchunhyang University Chunan
Hospital, Chungcheongnam-do, Korea. drsook@schch.co.kr

BACKGROUND: Most patients with ovarian cancer are diagnosed with advanced stage
disease (i.e., stage III-IV), which is associated with a poor prognosis.
Differentially expressed genes (DEGs) in stage III serous ovarian carcinoma
compared to normal tissue were screened by a new differential display method, the
annealing control primer (ACP) system. The potential targets for markers that
could be used for diagnosis and prognosis, for stage III serous ovarian cancer,
were found by cluster and survival analysis.
METHODS: The ACP-based reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT PCR)
technique was used to identify DEGs in patients with stage III serous ovarian
carcinoma. The DEGs identified by the ACP system were confirmed by quantitative
real-time PCR. Cluster analysis was performed on the basis of the expression
profile produced by quantitative real-time PCR and survival analysis was carried 
out by the Kaplan-Meier method and Cox proportional hazards multivariate model;
the results of gene expression were compared between chemo-resistant and
chemo-sensitive groups.
RESULTS: A total of 114 DEGs were identified by the ACP-based RT PCR technique
among patients with stage III serous ovarian carcinoma. The DEGs associated with 
an apoptosis inhibitory process tended to be up-regulated clones while the DEGs
associated with immune response tended to be down-regulated clones. Cluster
analysis of the gene expression profile obtained by quantitative real-time PCR
revealed two contrasting groups of DEGs. That is, a group of genes including:
SSBP1, IFI6 DDT, IFI27, C11orf92, NFKBIA, TNXB, NEAT1 and TFG were up-regulated
while another group of genes consisting of: LAMB2, XRCC6, MEF2C, RBM5, FOXP1,
NUDCP2, LGALS3, TMEM185A, and C1S were down-regulated in most patients. Survival 
analysis revealed that the up-regulated genes such as DDAH2, RNase K and TCEAL2
might be associated with a poor prognosis. Furthermore, the prognosis of patients
with chemo-resistance was predicted to be very poor when genes such as RNase K,
FOXP1, LAMB2 and MRVI1 were up-regulated.
CONCLUSION: The DEGs in patients with stage III serous ovarian cancer were
successfully and reliably identified by the ACP-based RT PCR technique. The DEGs 
identified in this study might help predict the prognosis of patients with stage 
III serous ovarian cancer as well as suggest targets for the development of new
treatment regimens.

PMCID: PMC2974737
PMID: 20969748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Neuron. 2010 Oct 21;68(2):309-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.10.001.

Genetic advances in the study of speech and language disorders.

Newbury DF(1), Monaco AP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Headington, Oxford, UK.
dianne@well.ox.ac.uk

Developmental speech and language disorders cover a wide range of childhood
conditions with overlapping but heterogeneous phenotypes and underlying
etiologies. This characteristic heterogeneity hinders accurate diagnosis, can
complicate treatment strategies, and causes difficulties in the identification of
causal factors. Nonetheless, over the last decade, genetic variants have been
identified that may predispose certain individuals to different aspects of speech
and language difficulties. In this review, we summarize advances in the genetic
investigation of stuttering, speech-sound disorder (SSD), specific language
impairment (SLI), and developmental verbal dyspraxia (DVD). We discuss how the
identification and study of specific genes and pathways, including FOXP2,
CNTNAP2, ATP2C2, CMIP, and lysosomal enzymes, may advance our understanding of
the etiology of speech and language disorders and enable us to better understand 
the relationships between the different forms of impairment across the spectrum.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2977079
PMID: 20955937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov 12;87(5):671-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.09.017. Epub
2010 Oct 14.

De novo mutations in FOXP1 in cases with intellectual disability, autism, and
language impairment.

Hamdan FF(1), Daoud H, Rochefort D, Piton A, Gauthier J, Langlois M, Foomani G,
Dobrzeniecka S, Krebs MO, Joober R, Lafrenière RG, Lacaille JC, Mottron L,
Drapeau P, Beauchamp MH, Phillips MS, Fombonne E, Rouleau GA, Michaud JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Excellence in Neuromics of Université de Montréal, Sainte-Justine
Hospital Research Center, Montréal, Canada.

Heterozygous mutations in FOXP2, which encodes a forkhead transcription factor,
have been shown to cause developmental verbal dyspraxia and language impairment. 
FOXP2 and its closest homolog, FOXP1, are coexpressed in brain regions that are
important for language and cooperatively regulate developmental processes,
raising the possibility that FOXP1 may also be involved in developmental
conditions that are associated with language impairment. In order to explore this
possibility, we searched for mutations in FOXP1 in patients with intellectual
disability (ID; mental retardation) and/or autism spectrum disorders (ASD). We
first performed array-based genomic hybridization on sporadic nonsyndromic ID
(NSID) (n = 30) or ASD (n = 80) cases. We identified a de novo intragenic
deletion encompassing exons 4-14 of FOXP1 in a patient with NSID and autistic
features. In addition, sequencing of all coding exons of FOXP1 in sporadic NSID
(n = 110) or ASD (n = 135) cases, as well as in 570 controls, revealed the
presence of a de novo nonsense mutation (c.1573C>T [p.R525X]) in the conserved
forkhead DNA-binding domain in a patient with NSID and autism. Luciferase
reporter assays showed that the p.R525X alteration disrupts the activity of the
protein. Formal assessments revealed that both patients with de novo mutations in
FOXP1 also show severe language impairment, mood lability with physical
aggressiveness, and specific obsessions and compulsions. In conclusion, both
FOXP1 and FOXP2 are associated with language impairment, but decrease of the
former has a more global impact on brain development than that of the latter.

Copyright © 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2978954
PMID: 20950788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Int J Mol Med. 2010 Nov;26(5):691-700.

Extensive demethylation of normally hypermethylated CpG islands occurs in human
atherosclerotic arteries.

Castillo-Díaz SA(1), Garay-Sevilla ME, Hernández-González MA, Solís-Martínez MO, 
Zaina S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Nutrition, Division of Health Sciences, Leon
Campus, University of Guanajuato, 37000 Leon, Guanajuato, Mexico.

Global DNA hypomethylation potentially leading to pro-atherogenic gene expression
occurs in atherosclerotic lesions. However, limited information is available on
the genomic location of hypomethylated sequences. We present a microarray-based
survey of the methylation status of CpG islands (CGIs) in 45 human
atherosclerotic arteries and 16 controls. Data from 10,367 CGIs revealed that a
subset (151 or 1.4%) of these was hypermethylated in control arteries. The vast
majority (142 or 94%) of this CGI subset was found to be unmethylated or
partially methylated in atherosclerotic tissue, while only 17 of the normally
unmethylated CGIs were hypermethylated in the diseased tissue. The most common
functional classes among annotated genes adjacent to or containing differentially
methylated CGIs, were transcription (23%) and signalling factors (16%). The
former included HOX members, PROX1, NOTCH1 and FOXP1, which are known to regulate
key steps of atherogenesis. Expression analysis revealed differential expression 
of all CGI-associated genes analysed. Sequence analysis identified novel DNA
motifs with regulatory potential, associated with differentially methylated CGIs.
This study is the first large-scale analysis of DNA methylation in
atherosclerosis. Our data suggest that aberrant DNA methylation in
atherosclerosis affects the transcription of critical regulatory genes for the
induction of a pro-atherogenic cellular phenotype.

PMID: 20878091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Pathology. 2010;42(6):547-52. doi: 10.3109/00313025.2010.508786.

Primary central nervous system lymphoma: a clinicopathological study of 75 cases.

Preusser M(1), Woehrer A, Koperek O, Rottenfusser A, Dieckmann K, Gatterbauer B, 
Roessler K, Slavc I, Jaeger U, Streubel B, Hainfellner JA, Chott A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Medical University of Vienna, Austria.

AIMS: Pathological and clinical data in a large series of immunocompetent
patients with primary lymphoma of the central nervous system (PCNSL) were
analysed.
METHODS: We immunostained tumour specimens of 75 patients for CD3, CD4, CD5, CD8,
CD10, CD20, CD30, CD79a, Bcl-2, Bcl-6, CD138, MUM1, TDT, PAX5, FOXP1 and Ki-67
and performed in situ hybridisation for Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) RNA. Eleven
cases were investigated for rearrangements of BCL6, immunoglobulin heavy chain
(IGH) and FOXP1 genes using fluorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH).
RESULTS: Histologically, most cases were classified as diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (80.2%) predominantly of centroblastic type. Immunophenotypic profiling 
revealed that 96% and 4% of cases corresponded to non-germinal centre and
germinal centre type, respectively. FISH analysis showed t(3;14)/IGH-BCL6 in 2/11
cases and trisomy 3 in 2/11 cases. FOXP1 rearrangements were not found. At
survival analysis, Karnofsky index<U+2009>>80 and presence of Bcl-6 expression showed
independent significant association with favourable patient outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: PCNSL represents a histologically and immunophenotypically very
homogeneous lymphoma type, probably derived from germinal centre exit B cells.
The frequent overexpression of FOXP1 appears not to be related to FOXP1 gene
rearrangement. Survival analyses disclosed Bcl-6 expression and high Karnofsky
performance score as independent prognostic parameters associated with favourable
outcome.

PMID: 20854073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Hum Mutat. 2010 Nov;31(11):E1851-60. doi: 10.1002/humu.21362.

Identification of FOXP1 deletions in three unrelated patients with mental
retardation and significant speech and language deficits.

Horn D(1), Kapeller J, Rivera-Brugués N, Moog U, Lorenz-Depiereux B, Eck S,
Hempel M, Wagenstaller J, Gawthrope A, Monaco AP, Bonin M, Riess O, Wohlleber E, 
Illig T, Bezzina CR, Franke A, Spranger S, Villavicencio-Lorini P, Seifert W,
Rosenfeld J, Klopocki E, Rappold GA, Strom TM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Charité, University Medicine of Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

Mental retardation affects 2-3% of the population and shows a high
heritability.Neurodevelopmental disorders that include pronounced impairment in
language and speech skills occur less frequently. For most cases, the molecular
basis of mental retardation with or without speech and language disorder is
unknown due to the heterogeneity of underlying genetic factors.We have used
molecular karyotyping on 1523 patients with mental retardation to detect copy
number variations (CNVs) including deletions or duplications. These studies
revealed three heterozygous overlapping deletions solely affecting the forkhead
box P1 (FOXP1) gene. All three patients had moderate mental retardation and
significant language and speech deficits. Since our results are consistent with a
de novo occurrence of these deletions, we considered them as causal although we
detected a single large deletion including FOXP1 and additional genes in 4104
ancestrally matched controls. These findings are of interest with regard to the
structural and functional relationship between FOXP1 and FOXP2. Mutations in
FOXP2 have been previously related to monogenic cases of developmental verbal
dyspraxia. Both FOXP1 and FOXP2 are expressed in songbird and human brain regions
that are important for the developmental processes that culminate in speech and
language.

©2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3049153
PMID: 20848658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Int J Cancer. 2011 Jul 1;129(1):70-7. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25663. Epub 2010 Dec 1.

BCL6 gene rearrangement and protein expression are associated with large cell
presentation of extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue.

Flossbach L(1), Antoneag E, Buck M, Siebert R, Mattfeldt T, Möller P, Barth TF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany.

Extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT lymphoma) is an indolent B-cell lymphoma, which is often localized in the
stomach. It is characterized by typical morphology, immunology, cytogenetics and 
expression profile. The coexistence of a large B-cell lymphoma and a MALT
lymphoma in the gastrointestinal tract is defined as a composite lymphoma (ComL) 
and, as we have previously shown, is almost always the consequence of secondary
transformation of MALT lymphoma. Here, we have analyzed a panel of seven MALT
lymphomas, seven ComL and thirteen large cell variants of marginal zone B-cell
lymphomas (MZBL) using FISH for the detection of rearrangements of IGH, MALT1,
BCL6, BCL10 and FOXP1 and immunohistochemistry for Bcl6, Bcl10 and FoxP1.
Translocations involving IGH were found in 10/27 lymphomas including two cases
with IGH-BCL6 fusion and one with IGH-BCL10 fusion; in 7/10 cases, the
translocation partner was not identified. Bcl10 and FoxP1 protein expression was 
heterogeneous throughout the series. Genetic rearrangements of BCL6 and Bcl6
protein expression were found almost exclusively in the large cell components of 
the ComL and the large cell extranodal MZBL (p = 0.2093 and p = 0.0261,
respectively). These findings suggest Bcl6 as a marker for transformation of MALT
lymphoma.

Copyright © 2010 UICC.

PMID: 20830719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Neuron. 2010 Sep 9;67(5):781-96. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.08.008.

Global control of motor neuron topography mediated by the repressive actions of a
single hox gene.

Jung H(1), Lacombe J, Mazzoni EO, Liem KF Jr, Grinstein J, Mahony S, Mukhopadhyay
D, Gifford DK, Young RA, Anderson KV, Wichterle H, Dasen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Smilow Neuroscience Program, Department of
Physiology and Neuroscience, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
10016, USA.

In the developing spinal cord, regional and combinatorial activities of Hox
transcription factors are critical in controlling motor neuron fates along the
rostrocaudal axis, exemplified by the precise pattern of limb innervation by more
than fifty Hox-dependent motor pools. The mechanisms by which motor neuron
diversity is constrained to limb levels are, however, not well understood. We
show that a single Hox gene, Hoxc9, has an essential role in organizing the motor
system through global repressive activities. Hoxc9 is required for the generation
of thoracic motor columns, and in its absence, neurons acquire the fates of
limb-innervating populations. Unexpectedly, multiple Hox genes are derepressed in
Hoxc9 mutants, leading to motor pool disorganization and alterations in the
connections by thoracic and forelimb-level subtypes. Genome-wide analysis of
Hoxc9 binding suggests that this mode of repression is mediated by direct
interactions with Hox regulatory elements, independent of chromatin marks
typically associated with repressed Hox genes.

2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2955411
PMID: 20826310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Genes Dev. 2010 Aug 15;24(16):1746-57. doi: 10.1101/gad.1929210.

Foxp1 coordinates cardiomyocyte proliferation through both cell-autonomous and
nonautonomous mechanisms.

Zhang Y(1), Li S, Yuan L, Tian Y, Weidenfeld J, Yang J, Liu F, Chokas AL,
Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

Cardiomyocyte proliferation is high in early development and decreases
progressively with gestation, resulting in the lack of a robust cardiomyocyte
proliferative response in the adult heart after injury. Little is understood
about how both cell-autonomous and nonautonomous signals are integrated to
regulate the balance of cardiomyocyte proliferation during development. In this
study, we show that a single transcription factor, Foxp1, can control the balance
of cardiomyocyte proliferation during development by targeting different pathways
in the endocardium and myocardium. Endocardial loss of Foxp1 results in decreased
Fgf3/Fgf16/Fgf17/Fgf20 expression in the heart, leading to reduced cardiomyocyte 
proliferation. This loss of myocardial proliferation can be rescued by exogenous 
Fgf20, and is mediated, in part, by Foxp1 repression of Sox17. In contrast,
myocardial-specific loss of Foxp1 results in increased cardiomyocyte
proliferation and decreased differentiation, leading to increased myocardial mass
and neonatal demise. We show that Nkx2.5 is a direct target of Foxp1 repression, 
and Nkx2.5 expression is increased in Foxp1-deficient myocardium. Moreover,
transgenic overexpression of Nkx2.5 leads to increased cardiomyocyte
proliferation and increased ventricular mass, similar to the myocardial-specific 
loss of Foxp1. These data show that Foxp1 coordinates the balance of
cardiomyocyte proliferation and differentiation through cell lineage-specific
regulation of Fgf ligand and Nkx2.5 expression.

PMCID: PMC2922503
PMID: 20713518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. PLoS Biol. 2010 Aug 10;8(8):e1000446. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000446.

Foxp1 and lhx1 coordinate motor neuron migration with axon trajectory choice by
gating Reelin signalling.

Palmesino E(1), Rousso DL, Kao TJ, Klar A, Laufer E, Uemura O, Okamoto H, Novitch
BG, Kania A.

Author information: 
(1)Neural Circuit Development Laboratory, Institut de recherches cliniques de
Montréal, Montréal, Canada.

Topographic neuronal maps arise as a consequence of axon trajectory choice
correlated with the localisation of neuronal soma, but the identity of the
pathways coordinating these processes is unknown. We addressed this question in
the context of the myotopic map formed by limb muscles innervated by spinal
lateral motor column (LMC) motor axons where the Eph receptor signals specifying 
growth cone trajectory are restricted by Foxp1 and Lhx1 transcription factors. We
show that the localisation of LMC neuron cell bodies can be dissociated from axon
trajectory choice by either the loss or gain of function of the Reelin signalling
pathway. The response of LMC motor neurons to Reelin is gated by Foxp1- and
Lhx1-mediated regulation of expression of the critical Reelin signalling
intermediate Dab1. Together, these observations point to identical transcription 
factors that control motor axon guidance and soma migration and reveal the
molecular hierarchy of myotopic organisation.

PMCID: PMC2919418
PMID: 20711475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2010 May;39(5):313-8.

[Prevalence of germinal center B-cell-like and non-germinal center B-cell-like
types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in Shanghai, China].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen Y(1), Chen H, Fu K, Zhu XZ, Irons R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Hospital, Department of Oncology, Shanghai
Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the prevalence of germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) and
non-GCB-like types of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) in Chinese patients.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical study for CD10, bcl-6, MUM1, GCET1 and FOXP1 was
performed on 124 cases of DLBCL from Shanghai, China. The Hans algorithm and Choi
algorithm were applied to classify DLBCL into GCB and non-GCB-like types.
Fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH) for t (14;18) and bcl-6 gene
rearrangement was also carried out on 118 cases.
RESULTS: Of the 124 DLBCL cases studied, 27 cases (22%) showed a GCB-like type
and 97 cases (78%) showed a non-GCB-like type, when using Hans algorithm. On the 
other hand, 34 cases (27%) belonged to GCB-like type and 90 cases (73%) belonged 
to non-GCB-like type when applying Choi algorithm. The prevalence of GCB-like
type was significantly lower than that of non-GCB-like type (P=0.0001). Only four
cases (3%) were positive for t (14;18), and three of them were classified as
GCB-like type. bcl-6 rearrangement was found in 46 cases (39%) and more
frequently encountered in the GCB-like type. There is no relationship between
bcl-6 gene rearrangement and bcl-6 protein expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The GCB-like type of DLBCL is significantly less common than
non-GCB-like type in Chinese population. This phenomenon is possibly related to
the low frequency of t (14;18).

PMID: 20654154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Biol Evol. 2011 Jan;28(1):237-47. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msq182. Epub 2010 Jul
22.

Alternative splicing and gene duplication in the evolution of the FoxP gene
subfamily.

Santos ME(1), Athanasiadis A, Leitão AB, DuPasquier L, Sucena E.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Animal, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.

The FoxP gene subfamily of transcription factors is defined by its characteristic
110 amino acid long DNA-binding forkhead domain and plays essential roles in
vertebrate biology. Its four members, FoxP1-P4, have been extensively
characterized functionally. FoxP1, FoxP2, and FoxP4 are involved in lung, heart, 
gut, and central nervous system (CNS) development. FoxP3 is necessary and
sufficient for the specification of regulatory T cells (Tregs) of the adaptive
immune system. In Drosophila melanogaster, in silico predictions identify one
unique FoxP subfamily gene member (CG16899) with no described function. We
characterized this gene and established that it generates by alternative splicing
two isoforms that differ in the forkhead DNA-binding domain. In D. melanogaster, 
both isoforms are expressed in the embryonic CNS, but in hemocytes, only isoform 
A is expressed, hinting to a putative modulation through alternative splicing of 
FoxP1 function in immunity and/or other hemocyte-dependent processes.
Furthermore, we show that in vertebrates, this novel alternative splicing pattern
is conserved for FoxP1. In mice, this new FoxP1 isoform is expressed in brain,
liver, heart, testes, thymus, and macrophages (equivalent in function to
hemocytes). This alternative splicing pattern has arisen at the base of the
Bilateria, probably through exon tandem duplication. Moreover, our phylogenetic
analysis suggests that in vertebrates, FoxP1 is more related to the FoxP gene
ancestral form and the other three paralogues, originated through serial
duplications, which only retained one of the alternative exons. Also, the newly
described isoform differs from the other in amino acids critical for DNA-binding 
specificity. The integrity of its fold is maintained, but the molecule has lost
the direct hydrogen bonding to DNA bases leading to a putatively lower
specificity and possibly affinity toward DNA. With the present comparative study,
through the integration of experimental and in silico studies of the FoxP gene
subfamily across the animal kingdom, we establish a new model for the FoxP gene
in invertebrates and for the vertebrate FoxP1 paralogue. Furthermore, we present 
a scenario for the structural evolution of this gene class and reveal new
previously unsuspected levels of regulation for FoxP1 in the vertebrate system.

PMCID: PMC3002244
PMID: 20651048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cereb Cortex. 2011 Mar;21(3):588-96. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhq125. Epub 2010 Jul
12.

Neocortical layer formation of human developing brains and lissencephalies:
consideration of layer-specific marker expression.

Saito T(1), Hanai S, Takashima S, Nakagawa E, Okazaki S, Inoue T, Miyata R,
Hoshino K, Akashi T, Sasaki M, Goto Y, Hayashi M, Itoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mental Retardation and Birth Defect Research, National Center of
Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, 187-8502, Japan.

To investigate layer-specific molecule expression in human developing
neocortices, we performed immunohistochemistry of the layer-specific markers
(TBR1, FOXP1, SATB2, OTX1, CUTL1, and CTIP2), using frontal neocortices of the
dorsolateral precentral gyri of 16 normal controls, aged 19 gestational weeks to 
1 year old, lissencephalies of 3 Miller-Dieker syndrome (MDS) cases, 2 X-linked
lissencephaly with abnormal genitalia (XLAG) cases, and 4 Fukuyama-type
congenital muscular dystrophy (FCMD) cases. In the fetal period, we observed
SATB2+ cells in layers II-IV, CUTL1+ cells in layers II-V, FOXP1+ cells in layer 
V, OTX1+ cells in layers II or V, and CTIP2+ and TBR1+ cells in layers V and VI. 
SATB2+ and CUTL1+ cells appeared until 3 months of age, but the other markers
disappeared after birth. Neocortices of MDS and XLAG infants revealed SATB2+,
CUTL1+, FOXP1+, and TBR1+ cells diffusely located in the upper layers. In fetal
FCMD neocortex, neurons labeled with the layer-specific markers located over the 
glia limitans. The present study provided new knowledge indicating that the
expression pattern of these markers in the developing human neocortex was similar
to those in mice. Various lissencephalies revealed abnormal layer formation by
random migration.

PMID: 20624841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Immunity. 2010 Jul 23;33(1):48-59. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.06.013. Epub 2010
Jul 1.

MicroRNA-34a perturbs B lymphocyte development by repressing the forkhead box
transcription factor Foxp1.

Rao DS(1), O'Connell RM, Chaudhuri AA, Garcia-Flores Y, Geiger TL, Baltimore D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125,
USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) can influence lineage choice or affect critical developmental 
checkpoints during hematopoiesis. We examined the role of the p53-induced
microRNA miR-34a in hematopoiesis by gain-of-function analysis in murine bone
marrow. Constitutive expression of miR-34a led to a block in B cell development
at the pro-B-cell-to-pre-B-cell transition, leading to a reduction in mature B
cells. This block appeared to be mediated primarily by inhibited expression of
the transcription factor Foxp1. Foxp1 was a direct target of miR-34a in a
3'-untranslated region (UTR)-dependent fashion. Knockdown of Foxp1 by siRNA
recapitulated the B cell developmental phenotype induced by miR-34a, whereas
cotransduction of Foxp1 lacking its 3' UTR with miR-34a rescued B cell
maturation. Knockdown of miR-34a resulted in increased amounts of Foxp1 and
mature B cells. These findings identify a role for miR-34a in connecting the p53 
network with suppression of Foxp1, a known B cell oncogene.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2911227
PMID: 20598588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):11-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.05.026. Epub 2010
Jun 24.

Integrative genomic profiling of human prostate cancer.

Taylor BS(1), Schultz N, Hieronymus H, Gopalan A, Xiao Y, Carver BS, Arora VK,
Kaushik P, Cerami E, Reva B, Antipin Y, Mitsiades N, Landers T, Dolgalev I, Major
JE, Wilson M, Socci ND, Lash AE, Heguy A, Eastham JA, Scher HI, Reuter VE,
Scardino PT, Sander C, Sawyers CL, Gerald WL.

Author information: 
(1)Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2010 Aug;7(8):420.
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):1-2.

Annotation of prostate cancer genomes provides a foundation for discoveries that 
can impact disease understanding and treatment. Concordant assessment of DNA copy
number, mRNA expression, and focused exon resequencing in 218 prostate cancer
tumors identified the nuclear receptor coactivator NCOA2 as an oncogene in
approximately 11% of tumors. Additionally, the androgen-driven TMPRSS2-ERG fusion
was associated with a previously unrecognized, prostate-specific deletion at
chromosome 3p14 that implicates FOXP1, RYBP, and SHQ1 as potential cooperative
tumor suppressors. DNA copy-number data from primary tumors revealed that
copy-number alterations robustly define clusters of low- and high-risk disease
beyond that achieved by Gleason score. The genomic and clinical outcome data from
these patients are now made available as a public resource.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3198787
PMID: 20579941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Histopathology. 2010 Jul;57(1):73-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2010.03600.x. Epub
2010 Jun 23.

FOXP1 protein overexpression is associated with inferior outcome in nodal diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas with non-germinal centre phenotype, independent of gains
and structural aberrations at 3p14.1.

Hoeller S(1), Schneider A, Haralambieva E, Dirnhofer S, Tzankov A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

AIMS: To determine the molecular epidemiology and prognostic importance of
structural and numeric FOXP1 gene aberrations with respect to BCL-6 gene and to
FOXP1 protein expression in 389 diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) from the
pre-rituximab era on tissue microarrays.
METHODS AND RESULTS: By interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization with
colour-labelled bacterial artificial chromosome clones, 12% (27/223) analysable
cases showed FOXP1 gains and 1% (2/210) FOXP1 breaks. Seven percent of cases with
known BCL-6 and FOXP1 gene status (n = 159) showed an isolated FOXP1 gain, 19% an
isolated BCL-6 gain and 18% a trisomy 3. FOXP1 gains (isolated and due to trisomy
3) were more frequent in nodal than extranodal DLBCL and in non-germinal centre
B-cell-like (non-GCB) DLBCL than in GCB DLBCL. By immunohistochemistry, FOXP1
protein was more often overexpressed in non-GCB than in GCB cases. FOXP1
overexpression was associated with poor disease-specific survival in all DLBCL,
particularly in nodal and non-GCB cases. There was no correlation between FOXP1
gene aberrations and either FOXP1 protein expression or survival.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXP1 is recurrently targeted by numeric, and rarely by structural, 
genetic aberrations in DLBCL. Only the presence of FOXP1 protein, irrespective of
its gene status, is decisive for prognosis in DLBCL.

PMID: 20579129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov;18(11):1216-20. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.96. Epub 2010
Jun 23.

Chiari I malformation, delayed gross motor skills, severe speech delay, and
epileptiform discharges in a child with FOXP1 haploinsufficiency.

Carr CW(1), Moreno-De-Luca D, Parker C, Zimmerman HH, Ledbetter N, Martin CL,
Dobyns WB, Abdul-Rahman OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson,
MS 39216, USA.

Human FOXP2 deficiency has been identified as a cause of hereditary developmental
verbal dyspraxia. Another member of the same gene family, FOXP1, has expression
patterns that overlap with FOXP2 in some areas of the brain, and FOXP1 and FOXP2 
have the ability to form heterodimers. These findings suggest the possibility
that FOXP1 may also contribute to proper speech development. However, no such
role of FOXP1 has been established to date. Recently, a child was reported who
presented with a 3p13-14.1 deletion of four genes, including FOXP1, and a
constellation of deficits that included speech delay. In this study, we report
the case of a patient with a single deletion of FOXP1. This patient presented
with speech and motor developmental delays, a Chiari I malformation, and
epileptiform discharges. The nature of the speech deficit is different from the
primary oromotor verbal dyspraxia found in patients with FOXP2 deficiency. The
patient's developmental deficits may support a role for FOXP1 in the development 
of verbal and motor skills.

PMCID: PMC2987472
PMID: 20571508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Nat Genet. 2010 Jul;42(7):576-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.602. Epub 2010 Jun 6.

Common variants in FOXP1 are associated with generalized vitiligo.

Jin Y(1), Birlea SA, Fain PR, Mailloux CM, Riccardi SL, Gowan K, Holland PJ,
Bennett DC, Wallace MR, McCormack WT, Kemp EH, Gawkrodger DJ, Weetman AP, Picardo
M, Leone G, Taïeb A, Jouary T, Ezzedine K, van Geel N, Lambert J, Overbeck A,
Spritz RA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Medical Genetics Program, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Colorado School of Medicine, Aurora, Colorado, USA.

In a recent genome-wide association study of generalized vitiligo, we identified 
ten confirmed susceptibility loci. By testing additional loci that showed
suggestive association in the genome-wide study, using two replication cohorts of
European descent, we observed replicated association of generalized vitiligo with
variants at 3p13 encompassing FOXP1 (rs17008723, combined P=1.04x10(-8)) and with
variants at 6q27 encompassing CCR6 (rs6902119, combined P=3.94x10(-7)).

PMCID: PMC2893242
PMID: 20526340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2010 Jun;7(6):336-46. doi:
10.1038/nrgastro.2010.58. Epub 2010 May 4.

Gastric MALT lymphoma: a model of chronic inflammation-induced tumor development.

Sagaert X(1), Van Cutsem E, De Hertogh G, Geboes K, Tousseyn T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals of K. U. Leuven,
Minderbroederstraat 12, B-3000 Leuven, Belgium. xavier.sagaert@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma, or extranodal marginal zone
lymphoma of MALT, is an indolent B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma arising in lymphoid 
infiltrates that are induced by chronic inflammation in extranodal sites. The
stomach is the most commonly affected organ, in which MALT lymphoma pathogenesis 
is clearly associated with Helicobacter pylori gastroduodenitis. Gastric MALT
lymphoma has attracted attention because of the involvement of genetic
aberrations in the nuclear factor kappaB (NFkappaB) pathway, one of the most
investigated pathways in the fields of immunology and oncology. This Review
presents gastric MALT lymphoma as an outstanding example of the close
pathogenetic link between chronic inflammation and tumor development, and
describes how this information can be integrated into daily clinical practice.
Gastric MALT lymphoma is considered one of the best models of how genetic events 
lead to oncogenesis, determine tumor biology, dictate clinical behavior and
represent viable therapeutic targets. Moreover, in view of the association of
gastric MALT lymphoma with dysregulation of the NFkappaB pathway, this signaling 
pathway will be discussed in depth in both normal and pathological conditions,
highlighting strategies to identify new therapeutic targets in this lymphoma.

PMID: 20440281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Genes Immun. 2010 Apr;11(3):232-8. doi: 10.1038/gene.2010.1. Epub 2010 Mar 18.

New genetic associations detected in a host response study to hepatitis B
vaccine.

Davila S(1), Froeling FE, Tan A, Bonnard C, Boland GJ, Snippe H, Hibberd ML,
Seielstad M.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore.

The immune response to hepatitis B vaccination differs greatly among individuals,
with 5-10% of healthy people failing to produce protective levels of antibodies. 
Several factors have been implicated in determining this response, chiefly
individual genetic variation and age. Aiming to identify genes involved in the
response to hepatitis B vaccination, a two-stage investigation of 6091
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 914 immune genes was performed in an
Indonesian cohort of 981 individuals showing normal levels of anti-HBs versus 665
individuals displaying undetectable levels of anti-HBs 18 months after initial
dose of the vaccine. Of 275 SNPs identified in the first stage (476 normal/372
nonresponders) with P<0.05, significant associations were replicated for 25
polymorphisms in 15 genes (503 normal/295 nonresponders). We validated previous
findings (HLA-DRA, rs5000563, P-value combined=5.57 x 10(-10); OR (95%CI)=0.61
(0.52-0.71)). In addition, we detected a new association outside of the human
leukocyte antigen loci region that passed correction for multiple testing. This
SNP is in the 3' downstream region of FOXP1, a transcription factor involved in
B-cell development (P-value combined=9.2 x 10(-6); OR (95%CI)=1.38
(1.2-1.6)).These findings might help to understand the biological reasons behind 
vaccine failure and other aspects of variation in the immune responses of healthy
individuals.

PMID: 20237496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Immunol. 2010 Apr 1;184(7):3697-709. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0903316. Epub 2010
Feb 26.

Integrin alphaMbeta2 clustering triggers phosphorylation and activation of
protein kinase C delta that regulates transcription factor Foxp1 expression in
monocytes.

Xue ZH(1), Zhao CQ, Chua GL, Tan SW, Tang XY, Wong SC, Tan SM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Cell Biology, School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang
Technological University, Singapore.

Integrins are type I membrane and heterodimeric (alphabeta) cell adhesion
receptors. Intracellular signals triggered by ligand-bound integrins are
important for cell growth, differentiation, and migration. Integrin
alpha(M)beta(2) plays key roles in myeloid cell adhesion, phagocytosis, and
degranulation. In this study, we show that protein kinase C (PKC) delta is
involved in alpha(M)beta(2) signaling. In human monocytic U937 cells and
peripheral blood monocytes, alpha(M)beta(2) clustering induced PKCdelta
translocation to the plasma membrane, followed by Tyr(311) phosphorylation and
activation of PKCdelta by the src family kinases Hck and Lyn. Interestingly,
alpha(M)beta(2)-induced PKCdelta Tyr(311) phosphorylation was not mediated by the
tyrosine kinase Syk, which is a well reported kinase in beta(2) integrin
signaling. Analysis of the beta(2) cytoplasmic tail showed that the sequence
Asn(727)-Ser(734) is important in alpha(M)beta(2)-induced PKCdelta Tyr(311)
phosphorylation. It has been shown that alpha(M)beta(2) clustering regulates the 
expression the transcription factor Foxp1 that has a role in monocyte
differentiation. We show that Foxp1 expression was reduced in monocytes that were
allowed to adhere to human microvascular endothelial cells. However, the
expression of Foxp1 was not affected in monocytes that were treated with
PKCdelta-targeting small interfering RNA, suggesting that PKCdelta regulates
Foxp1 expression. These results demonstrate a role of PKCdelta in
alpha(M)beta(2)-mediated Foxp1 regulation in monocytes.

PMID: 20190138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):13304-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.088468. Epub
2010 Feb 25.

Foxp1/2/4-NuRD interactions regulate gene expression and epithelial injury
response in the lung via regulation of interleukin-6.

Chokas AL(1), Trivedi CM, Lu MM, Tucker PW, Li S, Epstein JA, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

To determine the underlying mechanism of Foxp1/2/4-mediated transcriptional
repression, a yeast two-hybrid screen was performed that identified p66beta, a
transcriptional repressor and component of the NuRD chromatin-remodeling complex.
We show that direct interactions between Foxp1/4 and p66beta are mediated by the 
CR2 domain within p66beta and the zinc finger/leucine zipper repression domain
found in Foxp1/2/4. These direct interactions are functionally relevant as
overexpression of p66beta in combination with Foxp factors cooperatively
represses Foxp target gene expression, whereas loss of p66 and Foxp factors
results in de-repression of endogenous Foxp target genes in lung epithelial
cells. Moreover, the NuRD components HDAC1/2 associate in a macromolecular
complex with Foxp proteins, and loss of expression or inhibition of HDAC1/2
activity leads to de-repression of Foxp target gene expression. Importantly, we
show in vivo that Foxp1 and HDAC2 act cooperatively to regulate expression of the
cytoprotective cytokine interleukin-6, which results in increased resistance to
hyperoxic lung injury in Foxp1/HDAC2 compound mutant animals. These data reveal
an important interaction between the Foxp transcription factors and the NuRD
chromatin-remodeling complex that modulates transcriptional repression critical
for the lung epithelial injury response.

PMCID: PMC2857082
PMID: 20185820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. J Neurochem. 2010 May;113(4):836-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2010.06650.x. Epub 
2010 Feb 19.

FoxP1 promotes midbrain identity in embryonic stem cell-derived dopamine neurons 
by regulating Pitx3.

Konstantoulas CJ(1), Parmar M, Li M.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College, London,
UK. constantine.konstantoulas@imperial.ac.uk

The robust generation of midbrain dopamine neurons from embryonic stem cells and 
patient-specific induced pluripotent stem cells is a prospective tool for the
development of new drugs and cell based therapies, and investigations into the
aetiology of Parkinson's disease. To achieve this, it is crucial to identify the 
fate-determining regulatory factors that influence dopamine cell fate decision
and the underlying molecular machinery. We identified FoxP1 as a novel marker for
midbrain dopamine neurons. Enforced expression of FoxP1 in embryonic stem cells
actuates the expression of Pitx3, a homeobox protein that is exclusively
expressed in midbrain dopaminergic neurons and is required for their
differentiation and survival during development and from embryonic stem cells in 
vitro. We show that FoxP1 can be recruited to the Pitx3 locus in embryonic stem
cells and regulate Pitx3 promoter activity in a dual-luciferase assay. This
transcriptional regulation of Pitx3 by FoxP1 depends on the presence of two high 
affinity binding sites in the distal Pitx3 promoter, through which FoxP1 directly
binds as demonstrated by chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic
mobility shift assay. Thus, this study demonstrates for the first time a
transcription regulatory role for FoxP1 on the Pitx3 gene in mammalian stem
cells.

PMID: 20175877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Br J Haematol. 2010 Apr;149(2):221-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.08070.x.
Epub 2010 Jan 20.

Aberrant expression of the neuronal transcription factor FOXP2 in neoplastic
plasma cells.

Campbell AJ(1), Lyne L, Brown PJ, Launchbury RJ, Bignone P, Chi J, Roncador G,
Lawrie CH, Gatter KC, Kusec R, Banham AH.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Oxford,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

FOXP2 mutation causes a severe inherited speech and language defect, while the
related transcription factors FOXP1, FOXP3 and FOXP4 are implicated in cancer.
FOXP2 mRNA and protein expression were characterised in normal human tissues,
haematological cell lines and multiple myeloma (MM) patients' samples. FOXP2 mRNA
and protein were absent in mononuclear cells from different anatomical sites,
lineages and stages of differentiation. However, FOXP2 mRNA and protein was
detected in several lymphoma (8/20) and all MM-derived cell lines (n = 4). FOXP2 
mRNA was expressed in bone marrow samples from 96% of MM patients (24/25), 66.7% 
of patients with the pre-neoplastic plasma cell proliferation monoclonal
gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) (6/9), but not in reactive plasma 
cells. The frequency of FOXP2 protein expression in CD138(+) plasma cells was
significantly higher in MGUS (P = 0.0005; mean 46.4%) and MM patients (P < or =
0.0001; mean 57.3%) than in reactive marrows (mean 2.5%). FOXP2 (>10% nuclear
positivity) was detectable in 90.2% of MM (55/61) and 90.9% of MGUS (10/11)
patients, showing more frequent expression than CD56 and labelling 75% of
CD56-negative MM (9/12). FOXP2 represents the first transcription factor whose
expression consistently differentiates normal and abnormal plasma cells and FOXP2
target genes are implicated in MM pathogenesis.

PMID: 20096010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Neuroscience. 2010 Mar 31;166(3):785-95. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.12.054.
Epub 2010 Jan 6.

Alpha-synuclein deficiency affects brain Foxp1 expression and ultrasonic
vocalization.

Kurz A(1), Wöhr M, Walter M, Bonin M, Auburger G, Gispert S, Schwarting RK.

Author information: 
(1)Section Molecular Neurogenetics, Department Neurology, Goethe University
Medical School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Alpha-synuclein is an abundant protein implicated in synaptic function and
plasticity, but the molecular mechanism of its action is not understood. Missense
mutations and gene duplication/triplication events result in Parkinson's disease,
a neurodegenerative disorder of old age with impaired movement and emotion
control. Here, we systematically investigated the striatal as well as the
cerebellar transcriptome profile of alpha-synuclein-deficient mice via a
genome-wide microarray survey in order to gain hypothesis-free molecular insights
into the physiological function of alpha-synuclein. A genotype-dependent,
specific and strong downregulation of forkhead box P1 (Foxp1) transcript levels
was observed in all brain regions from postnatal age until old age and could be
validated by qPCR. In view of the co-localization and heterodimer formation of
FOXP1 with FOXP2, a transcription factor with a well established role for
vocalization, and the reported regulation of both alpha-synuclein and FOXP2
expression during avian song learning, we performed a detailed assessment of
mouse movements and vocalizations in the postnatal period. While there was no
difference in isolation-induced behavioral activity in these animals, the
alpha-synuclein-deficient mice exhibited an increased production of
isolation-induced ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs). This phenotype might also
reflect the reduced expression of the anxiety-related GABA-A receptor subunit
gamma 2 (Gabrg2) we observed. Taken together, we identified an early behavioral
consequence of alpha-synuclein deficiency and accompanying molecular changes,
which supports the notion that the neural connectivity of sound or emotion
control systems is affected.

Copyright 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20056137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Neuroscience. 2010 Mar 17;166(2):551-63. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.12.055.
Epub 2009 Dec 28.

The forkhead transcription factors, Foxp1 and Foxp2, identify different
subpopulations of projection neurons in the mouse cerebral cortex.

Hisaoka T(1), Nakamura Y, Senba E, Morikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1
Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.

Foxp1 and Foxp2, which belong to the forkhead transcription factor family, are
expressed in the developing and adult mouse brain, including the striatum,
thalamus, and cerebral cortex. Recent reports suggest that FOXP1 and FOXP2 are
involved in the development of speech and language in humans. Although both Foxp1
and Foxp2 are expressed in the neural circuits that mediate speech and language, 
including the corticostriatal circuit, the functions of Foxp1 and Foxp2 in the
cerebral cortex remain unclear. To gain insight into the functions of Foxp1 and
Foxp2 in the cerebral cortex, we characterized Foxp1- and Foxp2-expressing cells 
in postnatal and adult mice using immunohistochemistry. In adult mice, Foxp1 was 
expressed in neurons of layers III-VIa in the neocortex, whereas the expression
of Foxp2 was restricted to dopamine and cyclic adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate-regulated phosphoprotein, 32 kDa (DARPP-32)(+) neurons of
layer VI. In addition, Foxp2 was weakly expressed in the neurons of layer V of
the motor cortex and hindlimb and forelimb regions of the primary somatosensory
cortex. Both Foxp1 and Foxp2 were expressed in the ionotropic glutamate receptor 
(GluR) 2/3(+) neurons, and colocalized with none of GluR1, gamma-aminobutyric
acid, calbindin, and parvalbumin, indicating that expression of Foxp1 and Foxp2
is restricted to projection neurons. During the postnatal stages, Foxp1 was
predominantly expressed in Satb2(+)/Ctip2(-) corticocortical projection neurons
of layers III-V and in Tbr1(+) corticothalamic projection neurons of layer VIa.
Although Foxp2 was also expressed in Tbr1(+) corticothalamic projection neurons
of layer VI, no colocalization of Foxp1 with Foxp2 was observed from postnatal
day (P) 0 to P7. These findings suggest that Foxp1 and Foxp2 may be involved in
the development of different cortical projection neurons during the early
postnatal stages in addition to the establishment and maintenance of different
cortical circuits from the late postnatal stage to adulthood.

Copyright (c) 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20040367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Neuroscience. 2010 Mar 10;166(1):220-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.12.004.
Epub 2009 Dec 14.

Molecular characterization of the intercalated cell masses of the amygdala:
implications for the relationship with the striatum.

Kaoru T(1), Liu FC, Ishida M, Oishi T, Hayashi M, Kitagawa M, Shimoda K,
Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Group, Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life
Sciences, Machida-shi, Tokyo 194-8511, Japan.

The intercalated cell masses of the amygdala consist of cell clusters located
between the basolateral complex of the amygdala and its surrounding structures
including the central nucleus of the amygdala and the external capsule. Although 
recent studies have revealed that the intercalated cell masses may play an
important role in emotional learning and memory, there are only a few reports on 
its molecular characterization. We examined the expression patterns of
transcription factors in the intercalated cell masses in late embryonic stage and
postnatal rats, and non-human primates. Dlx5, Foxp2, Pbx3 and Meis2 were
expressed in all subdivisions of the intercalated cell masses, while Ebf1, Nkx2.1
and Foxp1 were not. In contrast, Pax6 was only expressed in a small population of
the main intercalated islands, but not in the medial or lateral cell clusters. In
addition, few Pax6-positive neurons co-expressed Foxp2. Thus the intercalated
cell masses do not contain a homogeneous population of neurons, in terms of their
molecular constituents. Given that Foxp2, Pbx3 and Meis2 are preferentially
expressed in distinct cell populations in the developing striatum, and that the
intercalated cell masses of the amygdala appear to be a ventrocaudal expansion of
the striatum, the intercalated neurons may share a common origin with some types 
of neurons located in the dorsal striatum.

Copyright 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20004711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Nihon Rinsho. 2009 Dec;67(12):2327-31.

[Gastric MALT lymphoma: recent topics regarding treatment and genetic
aberrations].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakamura S(1), Matsumoto T, Iida M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Kyushu University.

The recent topics in the treatment and genetic aberrations of gastric MALT
lymphoma were reviewed. The chromosomal translocation t(11;18)
(q21;q21)/API2-MALT1 has been frequently detected not only in gastric MALT
lymphoma cases, but also in gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cases
in two studies. Conversely, IGH-involved translocations, including t(3;14)
(p14;q32)/FOXP1-IGH, are rarely seen in gastric MALT lymphoma. Several
large-scaled clinical series have revealed that Helicobacter pylori eradication
therapy is the optimal first-line treatment for patients with gastric MALT
lymphoma, which leads to a favorable long-term outcome. A number of modalities
and/or regimens, including chemotherapy, immunotherapy, and radioimmuotherapy,
have been developed as the second-line treatments for patients not responding to 
eradication therapy.

PMID: 19999120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Blood. 2010 Jan 21;115(3):510-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-232694. Epub 2009 Nov
12.

Foxp1 is an essential transcriptional regulator for the generation of quiescent
naive T cells during thymocyte development.

Feng X(1), Ippolito GC, Tian L, Wiehagen K, Oh S, Sambandam A, Willen J, Bunte
RM, Maika SD, Harriss JV, Caton AJ, Bhandoola A, Tucker PW, Hu H.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program and Wistar Vaccine Center, The Wistar Institute,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Proper thymocyte development is required to establish T-cell central tolerance
and to generate naive T cells, both of which are essential for T-cell homeostasis
and a functional immune system. Here we demonstrate that the loss of
transcription factor Foxp1 results in the abnormal development of T cells.
Instead of generating naive T cells, Foxp1-deficient single-positive thymocytes
acquire an activated phenotype prematurely in the thymus and lead to the
generation of peripheral CD4(+) T and CD8(+) T cells that exhibit an activated
phenotype and increased apoptosis and readily produce cytokines upon T-cell
receptor engagement. These results identify Foxp1 as an essential transcriptional
regulator for thymocyte development and the generation of quiescent naive T
cells.

PMCID: PMC2810984
PMID: 19965654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. PLoS One. 2009 Dec 1;4(12):e8109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008109.

Domain requirements and sequence specificity of DNA binding for the forkhead
transcription factor FOXP3.

Koh KP(1), Sundrud MS, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School and Immune Disease Institute, 
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

The forkhead, winged-helix transcription factor FOXP3 is preferentially expressed
in T regulatory (Treg) cells and is critical for their immunosuppressive
function. Mutations that abolish FOXP3 function lead to systemic autoimmunity in 
mice and humans. However, the manner by which FOXP3 recognizes cognate DNA
elements is unclear. Here we identify an in vitro optimized DNA sequence to
assess FOXP3 DNA binding by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). The
optimized sequence contains two tandem copies of a core DNA element resembling,
but not identical to, the canonical forkhead (FKH) binding element. The tandem
nature of this optimized FOXP3-binding oligonucleotide suggests a requirement for
multimerization, and EMSA experiments confirm that both the DNA-binding FKH
domain and an intact leucine-zipper domain, which mediates homo-multimerization
of FOXP3, are required for DNA binding. These results establish a practical
framework for understanding the molecular basis by which FOXP3 regulates gene
transcription and programs Treg suppressive function.

PMCID: PMC2779587
PMID: 19956618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 Feb;51(2):199-212. doi: 10.3109/10428190903370338.

Prognostic immunophenotypic biomarker studies in diffuse large B cell lymphoma
with special emphasis on rational determination of cut-off scores.

Tzankov A(1), Zlobec I, Went P, Robl H, Hoeller S, Dirnhofer S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
atzankov@uhbs.ch

A number of biomarkers, particularly proteins that contribute to prognosis in
diffuse large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL), have been identified. However, translation
into accepted standards to predict survival has not yet been accomplished,
primarily due to contradictory reports in the literature resulting from, among
other factors, arbitrary methodologies used to set cut-off values for determining
positivity. Some of these problems might be resolved by application of rational
statistical methods for determination of cut-off scores. Herein, we critically
address issues on in situ phenotypic prognostic tumor-related biomarkers in DLBCL
with a particular and practical emphasis on tools for cut-off level
determination, especially receiver operating characteristic curve analysis.
Moreover, we candidly illustrate the application of these tools for efficient
disease-specific survival prognostication on a tissue microarray collective of
240 primary DLBCL using the common prognostic biomarkers Bcl-2, Bcl-6, CD10,
FOXP1, MUM1, and Cyclin E. Comparison of the results relative to disease-specific
survival unequivocally showed the superior discriminatory power of the cut-off
levels calculated by receiver operating curves and the Youden's index, compared
to arbitrary cut-off values from the literature, advocating fundamental
application of rational methods for determination of clinically relevant
prognostic biomarkers' cut-off scores.

PMID: 19925052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Dev Neurosci. 2009;31(6):511-22. doi: 10.1159/000243715. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

Detailed expression pattern of Foxp1 and its possible roles in neurons of the
spinal cord during embryogenesis.

Morikawa Y(1), Komori T, Hisaoka T, Senba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama,
Japan. yoshim@wakayama-med.ac.jp

A member of winged-helix/forkhead transcription factors, Foxp1, is expressed in
the developing spinal cord during mouse embryogenesis. To shed light on the
potential role of Foxp1 in neurons of the developing spinal cord, we investigated
the detailed expression pattern of Foxp1 between embryonic day (E) 9.5 and E17.5.
At E10.25, some postmitotic neurons with strong expression of Foxp1 (Foxp1(high))
were first detected in the ventral half of the brachial spinal cord. By E11.5,
Foxp1(high) neurons increased in the ventral spinal cord at the limb levels. All 
of Foxp1(high) neurons at the limb levels were Islet2(+)/Lhx3(-) motor neurons
(MNs) of the lateral motor column and some neurons that expressed Foxp1 weakly
(Foxp1(low)) at the thoracic level were MNs of the preganglionic motor column.
Between E12.5 and E17.5, Foxp1(low) neurons were also observed in the
intermediate zone throughout the ventral spinal cord, all of which were Pax2(+), 
En1(+), Evx1(-), Chx10(-), Gata3(-), and Lhx3(-) V1 interneurons. Interestingly, 
no colocalization of Foxp1 with Lhx3 was observed in the developing spinal cord. 
In addition, overexpression of Foxp1 markedly attenuated the endogenous
expression of Lhx3 in a neuroendocrine cell line. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays in a neuronal cell line and E13.5 spinal cords revealed an interaction
between Foxp1 and the consensus motif in the Lhx3 promoter. These results suggest
that Foxp1 may play some important roles in the determination of neuronal fates
of the ventral spinal cord, possibly through the suppression of Lhx3 expression.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19797899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Dec 1;517(4):405-51. doi: 10.1002/cne.22115.

Genoarchitectonic profile of developing nuclear groups in the chicken pretectum.

Ferran JL(1), de Oliveira ED, Merchán P, Sandoval JE, Sánchez-Arrones L,
Martínez-De-La-Torre M, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, University of Murcia, Murcia,
E30071, Spain.

Earlier results on molecularly coded progenitor domains in the chicken pretectum 
revealed an anteroposterior subdivision of the pretectum in precommissural (PcP),
juxtacommissural (JcP), and commissural (CoP) histogenetic areas, each specified 
differentially (Ferran et al. [2007] J Comp Neurol 505:379-403). Here we examined
the nuclei derived from these areas with regard to characteristic gene expression
patterns and gradual histogenesis (eventually, migration patterns). We sought a
genoarchitectonic schema of the avian pretectum within the prosomeric model of
the vertebrate forebrain (Puelles and Rubenstein [2003] Trends Neurosci
26:469-476; Puelles et al. [2007] San Diego: Academic Press).
Transcription-factor gene markers were used to selectively map derivatives of the
three pretectal histogenetic domains: Pax7 and Pax6 (CoP); FoxP1 and Six3 (JcP); 
and FoxP2, Ebf1, and Bhlhb4 (PcP). The combination of this genoarchitectonic
information with additional data on Lim1, Tal2, and Nbea mRNA expression and
other chemoarchitectonic results allowed unambiguous characterization of some 30 
pretectal nuclei. Apart from grouping them as derivatives of the three early
anteroposterior domains, we also assigned them to postulated dorsoventral
subdomains (Ferran et al. [2007]). Several previously unknown neuronal
populations were detected, thus expanding the list of pretectal structures, and
we corrected some apparently confused concepts in the earlier literature. The
composite gene expression map represents a substantial advance in anatomical and 
embryological knowledge of the avian pretectum. Many nuclear primordia can be
recognized long before the mature differentiated state of the pretectum is
achieved. This study provides fundamental notions for ultimate scientific study
of the specification and regionalization processes building up this brain area,
both in birds and other vertebrates.

PMID: 19790262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Nov 20;27(33):5573-9. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2009.22.7058. Epub 2009
Sep 28.

Immuno-fluorescence in situ hybridization index predicts survival in patients
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated with R-CHOP: a GELA study.

Copie-Bergman C(1), Gaulard P, Leroy K, Briere J, Baia M, Jais JP, Salles GA,
Berger F, Haioun C, Tilly H, Emile JF, Banham AH, Mounier N, Gisselbrecht C,
Feugier P, Coiffier B, Molina TJ.

Author information: 
(1)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Groupe Henri Mondor-Albert Chenevier,
L'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 955, Institut 
Mondor de Recherche Biomédicale; Université Paris 12, Faculté de médecine,
Créteil. christiane.copie@hmn.aphp.fr

PURPOSE: To evaluate the prognostic value of cell of origin immunohistochemical
markers and BCL2, BCL6, and c-MYC translocations in a homogeneous cohort of
patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) treated with rituximab plus
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone (R-CHOP).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Patients with CD20+ DLBCL were enrolled in the randomized
LNH98-5 and 01-5B Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes de l'Adulte trials.
Paraffin-embedded tumor samples of 119 patients treated with R-CHOP were analyzed
by immunohistochemistry for CD10, BCL6, MUM1/IRF4, LMO2, and forkhead box protein
P1 (FOXP1) expression and for BCL2, BCL6, and c-MYC breakpoints by fluorescence
in situ hybridization (FISH) on tissue microarray.
RESULTS: LMO2 expression and BCL2 breakpoint were associated with the germinal
center (GC) subtype defined by Hans' algorithm, respectively (P < .0001; P =
.0002) whereas FOXP1 expression and BCL6 breakpoint were associated with the
non-germinal center (non-GC) subtype (P = .008 and P = .0001, respectively). The 
immunohistochemical markers analyzed independently, GC/non-GC phenotype and BCL2 
breakpoint did not predict overall survival (OS). BCL6 breakpoint was
significantly associated with an unfavorable impact on OS (P = .04).
Interestingly, an immunoFISH index, defined by positivity for at least two of
three non-GC markers (FOXP1, MUM1/IRF4, BCL6 breakpoint) was significantly
associated with a shorter 5-year OS rate (44%; 95% CI, 28 to 60 v 78%; 95% CI, 59
to 89; P = .01) which was independent (P = .04) of the age-adjusted International
Prognostic Index (P = .04) in multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates that combining immunohistochemistry with FISH 
allows construction of an immunoFISH index that significantly predicts survival
in elderly DLBCL patients treated with R-CHOP.

PMID: 19786664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Histol Histopathol. 2009 Nov;24(11):1399-404.

FOXP1 status in splenic marginal zone lymphoma: a fluorescence in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry approach.

Baró C(1), Espinet B, Salido M, Colomo L, Luño E, Florensa L, Ferrer A, Salar A, 
Campo E, Serrano S, Solé F.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Biologia Animal, Vegetal i Ecologia. Unitat d'Antropologia Biològica.
Facultat de Biociències. Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Bellaterra,
Barcelona, Spain.

Splenic marginal zone lymphoma (SMZL) is a well-recognized entity in which
chromosomal aberrations seem to be potential markers in diagnosis, prognosis and 
disease monitoring. FOXP1 is a transcriptional regulator of B lymphopoiesis that 
is deregulated in some types of NHL. Translocation t(3;14)(p14;q32) has been
described in marginal zone lymphomas but few series have studied FOXP1
involvement in SMZL. We performed cytogenetic, fluorescence in situ hybridization
(FISH) and immunohistochemical (IHC) studies in a series of 36 patients in order 
to study the status of FOXP1 in this entity. According to our results, FOXP1 is
not rearranged in SMZL, although we were able to demonstrate gains of FOXP1 gene 
due to trisomy 3/3p by FISH. FOXP1 protein expression seemed to be not related to
any aberration and IHC studies are not conclusive.

PMID: 19760589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Oct 20;27(30):5039-48. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.20.5450. Epub
2009 Sep 14.

Immunophenotypic analysis of AIDS-related diffuse large B-cell lymphoma and
clinical implications in patients from AIDS Malignancies Consortium clinical
trials 010 and 034.

Chadburn A(1), Chiu A, Lee JY, Chen X, Hyjek E, Banham AH, Noy A, Kaplan LD,
Sparano JA, Bhatia K, Cesarman E.

Author information: 
(1)Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2010 Jun 1;28(16):e260; author reply e261-2.

PURPOSE: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) represents a clinically
heterogeneous disease. Models based on immunohistochemistry predict clinical
outcome. These include subdivision into germinal center (GC) versus non-GC
subtypes; proliferation index (measured by expression of Ki-67), and expression
of BCL-2, FOXP1, or B-lymphocyte-induced maturation protein (Blimp-1)/PRDM1. We
sought to determine whether immunohistochemical analyses of biopsies from
patients with DLBCL having HIV infection are similarly relevant for prognosis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We examined 81 DLBCLs from patients with AIDS in AMC010
(cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and prednisone [CHOP] v
CHOP-rituximab) and AMC034 (etoposide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone, and 
dose-adjusted cyclophosphamide plus rituximab concurrent v sequential) clinical
trials and compared the immunophenotype with survival data, Epstein-Barr virus
(EBV) positivity, and CD4 counts.
RESULTS: The GC and non-GC subtypes of DLBCL did not differ significantly with
respect to overall survival or CD4 count at cancer presentation. EBV could be
found in both subtypes of DLBCL, although less frequently in the GC subtype, and 
did not affect survival. Expression of FOXP1, Blimp-1/PRDM1, or BCL-2 was not
correlated with the outcome in patients with AIDS-related DLBCL.
CONCLUSION: These data indicate that with current treatment strategies for
lymphoma and control of HIV infection, commonly used immunohistochemical markers 
may not be clinically relevant in HIV-infected patients with DLBCL. The only
predictive immunohistochemical marker was found to be Ki-67, where a higher
proliferation index was associated with better survival, suggesting a better
response to therapy in patients whose tumors had higher proliferation rates.

PMCID: PMC2799056
PMID: 19752343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;15(17):5291-3. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-1444.
Epub 2009 Aug 25.

Complexity made simple in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Aster J(1), Kutok J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA. jaster@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Comment on
    Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;15(17):5494-502.

PMCID: PMC2737086
PMID: 19706818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;15(17):5494-502. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-09-0113. 
Epub 2009 Aug 25.

A new immunostain algorithm classifies diffuse large B-cell lymphoma into
molecular subtypes with high accuracy.

Choi WW(1), Weisenburger DD, Greiner TC, Piris MA, Banham AH, Delabie J, Braziel 
RM, Geng H, Iqbal J, Lenz G, Vose JM, Hans CP, Fu K, Smith LM, Li M, Liu Z,
Gascoyne RD, Rosenwald A, Ott G, Rimsza LM, Campo E, Jaffe ES, Jaye DL, Staudt
LM, Chan WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-3135, USA.

Comment in
    Clin Cancer Res. 2009 Sep 1;15(17):5291-3.
    Clin Cancer Res. 2010 Jul 15;16(14):3805-6.

PURPOSE: Hans and coworkers previously developed an immunohistochemical algorithm
with approximately 80% concordance with the gene expression profiling (GEP)
classification of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) into the germinal center 
B-cell-like (GCB) and activated B-cell-like (ABC) subtypes. Since then, new
antibodies specific to germinal center B-cells have been developed, which might
improve the performance of an immunostain algorithm.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We studied 84 cases of
cyclophosphamide-doxorubicin-vincristine-prednisone (CHOP)-treated DLBCL (47 GCB,
37 ABC) with GCET1, CD10, BCL6, MUM1, FOXP1, BCL2, MTA3, and cyclin D2
immunostains, and compared different combinations of the immunostaining results
with the GEP classification. A perturbation analysis was also applied to
eliminate the possible effects of interobserver or intraobserver variations. A
separate set of 63 DLBCL cases treated with rituximab plus CHOP (37 GCB, 26 ABC) 
was used to validate the new algorithm.
RESULTS: A new algorithm using GCET1, CD10, BCL6, MUM1, and FOXP1 was derived
that closely approximated the GEP classification with 93% concordance.
Perturbation analysis indicated that the algorithm was robust within the range of
observer variance. The new algorithm predicted 3-year overall survival of the
validation set [GCB (87%) versus ABC (44%); P < 0.001], simulating the predictive
power of the GEP classification. For a group of seven primary mediastinal large
B-cell lymphoma, the new algorithm is a better prognostic classifier (all "GCB") 
than the Hans' algorithm (two GCB, five non-GCB).
CONCLUSION: Our new algorithm is significantly more accurate than the Hans'
algorithm and will facilitate risk stratification of DLBCL patients and future
DLBCL research using archival materials.

PMID: 19706817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2009 Sep;68(9):972-6. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181b31cd6.

Preferential expression of truncated isoforms of FOXP1 in primary central nervous
system lymphoma.

Courts C(1), Brunn A, Montesinos-Rongen M, Siemer D, Hans V, Paulus W, Wiestler
OD, Küppers R, Siebert R, Deckert M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne.

Forkhead box P1 (FOXP1) protein is a transcription factor involved in cell
signaling and regulation of gene expression. The overexpression of FOXP1 in a
subgroup of systemic diffuse large B-cell lymphomas has been associated with an
exceptionally poor clinical outcome. Data on FOXP1 expression in primary central 
nervous system lymphomas (PCNSL), that is, diffuse large B-cell lymphomas
confined to the central nervous system, are not yet available. We analyzed 43
PCNSL from immunocompetent patients. Immunohistochemistry showed expression of
FOXP1 protein in 21 (88%) of 24 cases. All 19 PCNSL analyzed by quantitative gene
expression analysis showed overexpression of truncated FOXP1 Isoforms 3 and 9 and
downregulation of normal-size FOXP1 compared with nonmalignant germinal center B 
cells, the normal counterpart of PCNSL tumor cells. Thus, truncated FOXP1
isoforms are preferentially overexpressed in PCNSL as they are in diffuse large
B-cell lymphomas. Although the mechanisms are presently unclear, this
overexpression may contribute to a poor prognosis in PCNSL.

PMID: 19680146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Oct;62(10):896-902. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2009.065169. Epub 2009
Jul 20.

Expression of the forkhead box transcription factor FOXP1 is associated with
oestrogen receptor alpha, oestrogen receptor beta and improved survival in
familial breast cancers.

Rayoo M(1), Yan M, Takano EA, Bates GJ, Brown PJ, Banham AH, Fox SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, East Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia.

BACKGROUND: The role of FOXP1 in sporadic breast cancers has been widely studied 
but its role in familial breast cancers is yet unexplored.
AIMS: To investigate FOXP1 expression in different molecular subtypes of familial
breast cancers and to correlate its expression with clinicopathological
parameters, oestrogen receptors (ER) and survival.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining for FOXP1 was performed in 126 familial
breast carcinomas comprising 35 BRCA1, 34 BRCA2 and 57 BRCAX.
RESULTS: Nuclear FOXP1 expression ranged from focal weak to widespread strong
expression. Expression of FOXP1 was higher in familial breast cancers (54%)
compared with sporadic cancers (46%) (p<0.001). There was a significant
correlation between FOXP1 with ERalpha (p = 0.038) and ERbeta (p = 0.007) in
familial breast cancers. FOXP1 was more highly expressed in familial breast
cancers compared with sporadic cancers for luminal (p = 0.021) and basal
(p<0.001), but not HER2 and null phenotypes (both p>0.05). The absence of FOXP1
expression was associated with a shorter relapse-free (p = 0.025) and overall
survival (p = 0.009) in familial breast cancer. Negativity for FOXP1 was
associated with a significantly worse overall survival in BRCA2 cancers (p =
0.021) and there was a non-significant separation of the survival curves for
BRCA1 cancers (p = 0.183). No differences in survival were seen for BRCAX cancers
(p = 0.762).
CONCLUSION: Results suggest that FOXP1 demonstrates different expression patterns
in familial breast cancers than sporadic tumours, even in tumours showing similar
phenotypes. They also suggest a different role of FOXP1 as a tumour suppressor in
familial tumours, which is unrelated to ER expression and may impact on
therapeutic options.

PMID: 19622517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Leuk Res. 2009 Dec;33(12):1699-702. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.05.004. Epub 2009
May 31.

Relative abundance of full-length and truncated FOXP1 isoforms is associated with
differential NFkappaB activity in Follicular Lymphoma.

Green MR(1), Gandhi MK, Courtney MJ, Marlton P, Griffiths L.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Centre, Griffith University, Queensland, Australia.

FOXP1 is a transcriptional repressor that has been proposed to repress the
expression of some NFkappaB-responsive genes. Furthermore, truncated forms of
FOXP1 have been associated with a subtype of Diffuse Large B-cell Lymphoma
characterised by constitutive NFkappaB activity, indicating that they may inhibit
this repression. We have shown that FL tumors have increased relative abundance
of truncated FOXP1 isoforms and this is associated with increased expression of
NFkappaB-associated genes. Our results provide strong evidence that relative
FOXP1 isoform abundance is associated with NFkappaB activity in FL, and could
potentially be used as a marker for this gene signature.

PMID: 19487025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Neuroscience. 2009 Sep 15;162(4):1150-62. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.05.022. Epub 2009 May 20.

Characterization of Foxp2-expressing cells in the developing spinal cord.

Morikawa Y(1), Hisaoka T, Senba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1,
Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan. yoshim@wakayama-med.ac.jp

Two members of winged-helix/forkhead transcription factors, Foxp1 and Foxp2, are 
expressed in the developing and adult CNS, including the striatum, cerebral
cortex, and thalamus. In a previous study, we have demonstrated that Foxp1 is
expressed in a subpopulation of V1 interneurons in addition to motor neurons of
the spinal cord during mouse embryogenesis. However, the detailed expression
pattern of Foxp2 and its relationship with Foxp1 in the developing spinal cord
remains to be elucidated. To shed light on the potential roles of Foxp1 and Foxp2
in the developing spinal cord, we characterized Foxp2-expressing cells during
mouse embryogenesis. At embryonic day (E) 11.0, Foxp2-expressing cells were first
observed in the ventral spinal cord, which were Pax6(-), p27(+), and
neuron-specific class III beta-tubulin(+) postmitotic neurons. Between E13.5 and 
E15.5, high expression of Foxp2 was observed in both medial and lateral parts of 
the ventral spinal cord. Double-immunofluorescence staining for Foxp2 with some
homeodomain transcription factors revealed that Foxp2-expressing neurons were
Pax2(+), En1(+), Evx1(-), Chx10(-), Gata3(-), and Lhx3(-) V1 interneurons in the 
intermediate zone throughout the ventral spinal cord, indicating that
Foxp2-expressing neurons were also V1 interneurons with the same phenotypes as
Foxp1-expressing interneurons. In addition, neither Foxp1 nor Foxp2 was expressed
in ventral calbindin(+) Renshaw cells. However, Foxp2 did not colocalize with
Foxp1 in interneurons of the ventral spinal cord. These findings suggest that
Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed in the distinct subsets of V1 interneurons that
belong to non-Renshaw cells in the ventral spinal cord during embryogenesis.
Thus, Foxp1 and Foxp2 may be involved in the determination of the cell type
identities during late embryogenesis: the classes of neurotransmitters and the
functional subtypes of non-Renshaw cells, such as Ia and Ib inhibitory
interneurons.

PMID: 19463901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Mod Pathol. 2009 Aug;22(8):1094-101. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2009.73. Epub 2009
May 15.

Prognostic impact of activated B-cell focused classification in diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma patients treated with R-CHOP.

Nyman H(1), Jerkeman M, Karjalainen-Lindsberg ML, Banham AH, Leppä S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland. heidi.nyman@helsinki.fi

Gene expression profiling studies initially enabled diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
to be divided into germinal center and activated B-cell-like subtypes, which
define high- and low-risk patient groups when treated with chemotherapy. Attempts
to reproduce the prognostic classification immunohistochemically have, however,
provided inconsistent results. The aim of this study was to determine whether
modified immunohistochemical classification of cell of origin focusing on
activated B-cell-like markers could be used to predict the outcome of
immunochemotherapy-treated diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients. The expression
of CD10, Bcl-6, MUM1/IRF4, Bcl-2, and FOXP1 was determined immunohistochemically 
from 88 samples of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma patients treated uniformly with 
R-CHOP. When the modified classification using MUM1/IRF4 and FOXP1 positivities
as activated B-cell-like markers was applied to distinguish the patients between 
the activated B-cell-like and other diffuse large B-cell lymphoma subtypes, a
significantly worse outcome was seen for the patients with the activated
B-cell-like phenotype (3-year failure-free survival 63 vs 82%, P=0.048, overall
survival 69 vs 85%, P=0.110). Similarly, according to the Muris algorithm, the
group 2 patients representing Bcl-2-positive post-germinal center patients showed
an inferior outcome in comparison to the group 1 patients (failure-free survival 
59 vs 81%, P=0.041, overall survival 67 vs 82%, P=0.159). In contrast, when the
classification of the same cohort was performed according to the Hans algorithm, 
no significant difference in survival was observed between the germinal center
and non-germinal center patients. In conclusion, the data suggest that both the
modified activated B-cell-like and Muris classifications define the non-germinal 
center phenotype as an adverse risk factor in R-CHOP-treated diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma patients.

PMID: 19448593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Histopathology. 2009 May;54(6):770-1. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2009.03277.x.

Atypical FOXP1 expression in malignant plasma cells that show several
simultaneous translocations.

Korac P, Skrtic A, Peran I, Ventura RA, Dominis M.

PMID: 19438754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Pathol Int. 2009 May;59(5):354-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2009.02377.x.

FOXP1 expression in monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance and
multiple myeloma.

Korac P(1), Peran I, Skrtic A, Ajdukovic R, Kristo DR, Dominis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology and Cytology, University Hospital Merkur,
Zagreb, Croatia.

Multiple myeloma (MM) is a clonal disorder of terminally differentiated B cells. 
In some cases the premalignant state is monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined
significance (MGUS). Neoplastic plasma cells in both entities carry multiple and 
complex chromosomal abnormalities that make understanding of the disease
development difficult. New insight into malignant mechanisms that underlie
multiple myeloma may come from forkhead box P1 transcription factor (FOXP1)
analysis in neoplastic plasma cells. FOXP1 is known to be important for B-cell
maturation and differentiation and could play a significant role in plasma cell
tumors. The purpose of the present study was therefore to analyze FOXP1 protein
presence and FOXP1 gene abnormalities in 13 cases of MGUS and 60 cases of MM. It 
was found that FOXP1 protein was expressed in neoplastic plasma cells, unlike in 
their normal counterparts, and that additional FOXP1 gene copies could be found
in both MGUS and MM. Based on FOXP1 presence in MM and its role in diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma and extranodal marginal zone lymphoma of mucosa-associated
lymphoid tissue, FOXP1 might play an important role in plasma cell neoplasm.

PMID: 19432679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2009 Dec;17(6):500-4. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e3181a20307.

FOXP1 and BCL2 show similar immunoenzymatic pattern in bone marrow trephines of
chronic lymphocytic leukemia patients.

Korac P(1), Vintar MG, Ajdukovic R, Kardum Paro MM, Jaksic B, Dominis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cytology, Merkur University Hospital, Zagreb,
Croatia.

Indolent B lymphoproliferative disorder, chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL)
represents one of the most common hematologic diseases in the Western world.
Although there are many disease development markers known so far, for example,
B-cell lymphoma/leukemia (BCL) 2, new ones are needed for better understanding
course of the disease. FOXP1 is known to be strongly expressed after B-cell
activation. Its essential role in B-cell development suggested that it could also
have a role in a various tumor B-cells. We have analyzed 74 bone marrow samples
from B-CLL patients for presence of FOXP1 and its gene aberrations in tumor
cells. Our results showed presence of FOXP1 protein mostly in the same tumor
cells as BCL2 protein, and their specific immunostaining pattern. Diffuse
immunostaining pattern of both proteins is present in patients with higher
clinical stages of B-CLL and with some other markers that indicate worse outcome 
of the disease. Thus, FOXP1 and/or BCL2 immunostaining of bone marrow trephine
sections could serve as an immunohistochemical marker in B-CLL.

PMID: 19417623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Dig Surg. 2009;26(2):156-62. doi: 10.1159/000212058. Epub 2009 Apr 9.

FOXP1 expression predicts polymorphic histology and poor prognosis in gastric
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas.

Han SL(1), Wu XL, Wan L, Zeng QQ, Li JL, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou Medical
College, Wenzhou, PR China. slhan88@126.com

RATIONALE/HYPOTHESIS: Forkhead box protein P1 (FOXP1) is one member of the
forkhead box protein P (FOXP) subfamily, which are transcription factors that
mediate signaling and affect gene regulation, and elevated expression of FOXP1
has been reported to correlate with poor prognosis of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL). Recently, it was also found that FOXP1 expression occurs in
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas.OBJECTIVE: FOXP1 expression
and its relationship to morphology and prognosis in a series of 43 gastric MALT
lymphomas were investigated retrospectively.
FINDINGS: The FOXP1 nuclear expression (44.2%, 19/43) of tumors between mono- and
polymorphic histology (4 of 26 [15.4%] vs. 15 of 17 [88.2%]) was significantly
different (p < 0.001). All 14 relapsed tumors after operation featured strong
nuclear FOXP1 positivity. A significantly shorter cumulative 10-year survival
(52.6%,10/19) was found in high FOXP1 expression patients, compared with patients
with negative expression (83.3%, 20/24) (p < 0.01). Also, the cumulative 10-year 
survival rate (30.8%, 4/13) for stage IIE+IV was significantly shorter than that 
(83.3%, 25/30) in stage I+II (p < 0.01). Moreover, high FOXP1 expression and
advanced stage IIE+IV were independent prognostic factors in multivariate Cox
regression analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that FOXP1 expression is correlated with morphic
histology, and FOXP1 and clinical staging appear to be independent prognostic
factors in gastric MALT lymphomas.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19365123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Oct;17(10):1354-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.43. Epub 2009 Apr
8.

Assessing the impact of FOXP1 mutations on developmental verbal dyspraxia.

Vernes SC(1), MacDermot KD, Monaco AP, Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford, UK.

Neurodevelopmental disorders that disturb speech and language are highly
heritable. Isolation of the underlying genetic risk factors has been hampered by 
complexity of the phenotype and potentially large number of contributing genes.
One exception is the identification of rare heterozygous mutations of the FOXP2
gene in a monogenic syndrome characterised by impaired sequencing of articulatory
gestures, disrupting speech (developmental verbal dyspraxia, DVD), as well as
multiple deficits in expressive and receptive language. The protein encoded by
FOXP2 belongs to a divergent subgroup of forkhead-box transcription factors, with
a distinctive DNA-binding domain and motifs that mediate hetero- and
homodimerisation. FOXP1, the most closely related member of this subgroup, can
directly interact with FOXP2 and is co-expressed in neural structures relevant to
speech and language disorders. Moreover, investigations of songbird orthologues
indicate that combinatorial actions of the two proteins may play important roles 
in vocal learning, leading to the suggestion that human FOXP1 should be
considered a strong candidate for involvement in DVD. Thus, in this study, we
screened the entire coding region of FOXP1 (exons and flanking intronic sequence)
for nucleotide changes in a panel of probands used earlier to detect novel
mutations in FOXP2. A non-synonymous coding change was identified in a single
proband, yielding a proline-to-alanine change (P215A). However, this was also
found in a random control sample. Analyses of non-coding SNP changes did not find
any correlation with affection status. We conclude that FOXP1 mutations are
unlikely to represent a major cause of DVD.

PMCID: PMC2784575
PMID: 19352412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Lab Invest. 2009 Jun;89(6):708-16. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2009.26. Epub 2009 Apr 
6.

miRNA profiling of B-cell subsets: specific miRNA profile for germinal center B
cells with variation between centroblasts and centrocytes.

Tan LP(1), Wang M, Robertus JL, Schakel RN, Gibcus JH, Diepstra A, Harms G, Peh
SC, Reijmers RM, Pals ST, Kroesen BJ, Kluin PM, Poppema S, van den Berg A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are an important class of small RNAs that regulate gene
expression at the post-transcriptional level. It has become evident that miRNAs
are involved in hematopoiesis, and that deregulation of miRNAs may give rise to
hematopoietic malignancies. The aim of our study was to establish miRNA profiles 
of naïve, germinal center (GC) and memory B cells, and validate their expression 
patterns in normal lymphoid tissues. Quantitative (q) RT-PCR profiling revealed
that several miRNAs were elevated in GC B cells, including miR-17-5p, miR-106a
and miR-181b. One of the most abundant miRNAs in all three B-cell subsets
analyzed was miR-150, with a more than 10-fold lower level in GC B cell as
compared with the other two subsets. miRNA in situ hybridization (ISH) in tonsil 
tissue sections confirmed the findings from the profiling work. Interestingly,
gradual decrease of miR-17-5p, miR-106a and miR-181b staining intensity from the 
dark to the light zone was observed in GC. A strong cytoplasmic staining of
miR-150 was observed in a minority of the centroblasts in the dark zone of the
GC. Inverse staining pattern of miR-150 against c-Myb and Survivin was observed
in tonsil tissue sections, suggesting possible targeting of these genes by
miR-150. In line with this, the experimental induction of miR-150 lead to reduced
c-Myb, Survivin and Foxp1 expression levels in the Burkitt's lymphoma cell line, 
DG75. In conclusion, miRNA profiles of naïve, GC and memory B cells were
established and validated by miRNA ISH. Within the GC cells, a marked difference 
was observed between the light and the dark zone.

PMID: 19349957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Eur J Med Genet. 2009 Mar-Jun;52(2-3):123-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.03.012.
Epub 2009 Mar 28.

A 785kb deletion of 3p14.1p13, including the FOXP1 gene, associated with speech
delay, contractures, hypertonia and blepharophimosis.

Pariani MJ(1), Spencer A, Graham JM Jr, Rimoin DL.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8700 Beverly Blvd,
Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. mitchel.pariani@cshs.org

We report a child with a 785kb deletion of the 3p14.1p13 region including the
genes FOXP1, EIF4E3, PROK2, GPR27 resulting in speech delay, contractures,
hypertonia and blepharophimosis. FOXP1 and FOXP2 are transcription factors
containing a polyglutamine tract and a forkhead DNA binding domain. They both
play a role in the developing human foregut and brain [W. Shu, M.M. Lu, Y. Zhang,
P. Tucker, D. Zhou, E.E. Morrisey, Foxp2 and Foxp1 cooperatively regulate lung
and esophagus development, Development 134 (2007) 1991-2000, E. Spiteri, G.
Konopka, G. Coppola, J. Bomar, M. Oldham, J. Ou, et al. Identification of the
transcriptional targets of FOXP2, a gene linked to speech and language, in
developing human brain, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81 (2007) 1144-1157, S. Tamura, Y.
Morikawa, H. Iwanishi, T. Hisaoka, E. Senba. Expression pattern of the
winged-helix/forkhead transcription factor Foxp1 in the developing central
nervous system, Gene Expr. Patterns. 3 (2003) 193-197.]. Mutations in FOXP2 are
known to cause severe speech and language abnormalities [C.S.L. Lai, S.E. Fisher,
J.A. Hurst, F. Vargha-Khadem, A.P. Monaco, A forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a
severe speech and language disorder, Nature 413 (2001) 519-523.] in humans and
animals. It has been suggested that overlap of FOXP1 and FOXP2 expression in the 
songbird and human brain may indicate that mutations in FOXP1 would also result
in speech and language abnormalities. The roles of EIF4E3, PROK2 and GPR27 are
also evaluated.

PMCID: PMC2853231
PMID: 19332160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Biol Chem. 2009 Apr 17;284(16):10755-63. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M809115200. Epub 2009
Feb 24.

On the role of FOX transcription factors in adipocyte differentiation and
insulin-stimulated glucose uptake.

Gerin I(1), Bommer GT, Lidell ME, Cederberg A, Enerback S, Macdougald OA.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Molecular & Integrative Physiology and Internal Medicine,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

In this study, we explore the effects of several FOX and mutant FOX transcription
factors on adipocyte determination, differentiation, and metabolism. In addition 
to Foxc2 and Foxo1, we report that Foxf2, Foxp1, and Foxa1 are other members of
the Fox family that show regulated expression during adipogenesis. Although
enforced expression of FOXC2 inhibits adipogenesis, Foxf2 slightly enhances the
rate of differentiation. Constitutively active FOXC2-VP16 inhibits adipogenesis
through multiple mechanisms. FOXC2-VP16 impairs the transient induction of
C/EBPbeta during adipogenesis and induces expression of the transcriptional
repressor Hey1 as well as the activator of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling, Wnt10b.
The constitutive transcriptional repressor, FOXC2-Eng, enhances adipogenesis of
preadipocytes and multipotent mesenchymal precursors and determines NIH-3T3 and
C2C12 cells to the adipocyte lineage. Although PPARgamma ligand or C/EBPalpha are
not necessary for stimulation of adipogenesis by FOXC2-Eng, at least low levels
of PPARgamma protein are absolutely required. Finally, expression of FOXC2-Eng in
adipocytes increases insulin-stimulated glucose uptake, further expanding the
profound and pleiotropic effects of FOX transcription factors on adipocyte
biology.

PMCID: PMC2667763
PMID: 19244248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Genes Cells. 2009 Mar;14(3):407-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01281.x. Epub
2009 Feb 17.

Identification of mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-transcription factors by microarray
and knockdown analyses, and signature molecule-marked MSC in bone marrow by
immunohistochemistry.

Kubo H(1), Shimizu M, Taya Y, Kawamoto T, Michida M, Kaneko E, Igarashi A,
Nishimura M, Segoshi K, Shimazu Y, Tsuji K, Aoba T, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Although ex vivo expanded mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) have been used in numerous
studies, the molecular signature and in vivo distribution status of MSC remain
unknown. To address this matter, we identified numerous human MSC-characteristic 
genes--including nine transcription factor genes--using DNA microarray and
real-time RT-PCR analyses: Most of the MSC-characteristic genes were
down-regulated 24 h after incubation with osteogenesis-, chondrogenesis- or
adipogenesis-induction medium, or 48-72 h after knockdown of the nine
transcription factors. Furthermore, knockdowns of ETV1, ETV5, FOXP1, GATA6,
HMGA2, SIM2 or SOX11 suppressed the self-renewal capacity of MSC, whereas those
of FOXP1, SOX11, ETV1, SIM2 or PRDM16 reduced the osteogenic- and/or adipogenic
potential. In addition, immunohistochemistry using antibodies for the MSC
characteristic molecules--including GATA6, TRPC4, FLG and TGM2--revealed that
MSC-like cells were present near the endosteum and in the interior of bone marrow
of adult mice. These findings indicate that MSC synthesize a set of MSC markers
in vitro and in vivo, and that MSC-characteristic transcription factors are
involved in MSC stemness regulation.

PMID: 19228201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Dec;37(12):809-14.

[Primary ocular adnexal lymphoproliferative lesions: clinicopathologic features
and genetic alterations].

[Article in Chinese]

Dong LN(1), Liu HG, Jin HS, Ye HT, Gao ZF, Zhou XG, Dong GH, Zhang DD, Gong LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Basic Medical College, Capital Medical University,
Beijing 100069, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate clinicopathological and genetic characteristics of
primary ocular adnexal lymphoproliferative lesions.
METHODS: Clinical, morphological and immunohistochemical features of 37 archival 
cases of primary ocular adnexal lymphoproliferative lesions were studied
including 5 cases of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia and 32 lymphomas
retrospectively. Classification of the lymphomas were made according to the WHO
classification of tumors of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues. All cases were
studied by interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using dual color 
break apart probes of IgH, MALT1, bcl-6, c-Myc, bcl-2, CCND1, bcl-10, and FOXP1
for detection of chromosomal aberrations involving IgH, MALT1, bcl-6, c-Myc,
bcl-2, cyclinD1, bcl-10 and FOXP1 genes, respectively. FISH with IgH / bcl-2 dual
color dual fusion probe was used for detection of t(14;18)(q32;q21)/IgH-bcl-2.
CEP18 spectrum orange probe was used for detection of aneuploidy of the
chromosome 18.
RESULTS: Among 32 cases of lymphomas, 28 cases (87.5%) were extranodal marginal
zone B-cell lymphomas of mucosa associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma), 2
cases were follicular lymphoma (FL) and 2 cases diffuse large B cell lymphoma
(DLBCL). Among the 28 cases of MALT lymphoma, chromosomal aberrations were found 
in 60.7% (17/28) by interphase FISH analysis. One case showed positive IgH
break-apart signal with unknown partner. 16 cases showed three copies of
different genes, of which, three copies of MALT1, bcl-6, and c-Myc were
identified in 7 cases (25%), 12 cases (43%), and 2 cases (8%) of MALT lymphomas, 
respectively. In addition, 5 cases showed two genes including three copies of
bcl-6 and MALT1 in 4 cases, and three copies of bcl-6 together with c-Myc in one 
case. Furthermore, all cases with three copies of MALT1 had trisomy 18.
t(14;18)(q32;q21) was detected in both follicular lymphomas. Of the 2 DLBCL
cases, one showed three copies of bcl-6 together with trisomy 18 and the other
one showed three copies of bcl-6 together with IgH and c-Myc rearrangements.
Chromosomal aberration was not found in all 5 cases of reactive lymphoid
hyperplasia.
CONCLUSIONS: The most common entity of primary ocular adnexal lymphomas is MALT
lymphoma and FISH is helpful for their differential diagnosis and classification.
Trisomy 18 and three copies of bcl-6 are common chromosomal aberrations in
primary ocular adnexal MALT lymphomas.

PMID: 19159526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Eur J Haematol. 2009 May;82(5):364-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2009.01222.x.
Epub 2009 Jan 9.

Bcl-2 but not FOXP1, is an adverse risk factor in immunochemotherapy-treated
non-germinal center diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.

Nyman H(1), Jerkeman M, Karjalainen-Lindsberg ML, Banham AH, Enblad G, Leppä S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland.

OBJECTIVES: Non-germinal center (non-GC) phenotype, high level expression of the 
transcription factor forkhead box protein P1 (FOXP1) and anti-apoptotic protein
Bcl-2 have been identified as unfavorable prognostic factors for diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) patients treated with chemotherapy. Our aim was to
re-evaluate the prognostic impact of these biologic factors on the survival of
the patients treated with immunochemotherapy.
METHODS: Expression of Bcl-2 and FOXP1, and cell of origin based on the Hans
algorithm were determined immunohistochemically from samples of 117 de novo DLBCL
patients treated with R-CHOP and R-CHOEP regimens, and correlated with clinical
data.
RESULTS: Consistent with our previous studies, no significant difference in 2-yr 
survival rates between the GC- and non-GC phenotypes was found. Both FOXP1 and
Bcl-2 expression were associated with the non-GC phenotype. For all patients, no 
prognostic impact of FOXP1 positivity on survival was observed. However, Bcl-2
negative patients had a better survival as compared to Bcl-2 positive patients
[failure free survival (FFS) 97% vs. 71%, P = 0.001 and overall survival (OS) 97%
vs. 82%, P = 0.034]. When Bcl-2 related survival was analyzed in the GC- and
non-GC subgroups, a significant prognostic effect of Bcl-2 on FFS was seen only
in the non-GC group of patients (positive 65% vs. negative 100%, P = 0.011). A
trend for the difference in OS was also observed (positive 84% vs. negative 100%,
P = 0.082).
CONCLUSIONS: The data demonstrate that expression of Bcl-2 and FOXP1 is
associated with the non-GC phenotype, but only Bcl-2 expression continues to be
of prognostic significance in DLBCL patients treated with immunochemotherapy.

PMID: 19141121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 27;284(9):5709-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807322200. Epub 2008
Dec 24.

Foxp3 processing by proprotein convertases and control of regulatory T cell
function.

de Zoeten EF(1), Lee I, Wang L, Chen C, Ge G, Wells AD, Hancock WW, Ozkaynak E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, USA.

Foxp3 is a 47-kDa transcription factor central to regulatory T cell (Treg)
function. The importance of Foxp3(+) Tregs in controlling self-reactive T cells
and preventing autoimmunity is well established. Our analysis of Foxp3 expression
in natural Tregs led to identification of a shorter 41-kDa Foxp3 species in
activated Tregs, indicating that Foxp3 may be processed by proteolytic cleavage
upon cell activation. Searches of murine and human Foxp3 sequences for potential 
cleavage sites responsible for the generation of the short Foxp3 species revealed
the presence of two RXXR proprotein convertase (PC) motifs, (48)RDLR(51) and
(414)RKKR(417), located near the N- and C-terminal ends, respectively. We show,
using retroviral expression of Foxp3 in CD4(+) T cells, that Foxp3 is cleaved at 
both the N- and C-terminal RXXR sites and that mutagenesis of the RXXR motif
prevents cleavage. The cleaved forms of Foxp3 are found in the chromatin fraction
but not in nuclear or cytoplasmic extracts. CD4(+) T cells expressing Foxp3
species engineered to mimic N-terminally, C-terminally, or N- and C-terminally
cleaved Foxp3 forms are functionally distinct, as indicated by differences in
expression of key Treg genes, such as interleukin-10 and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
antigen 4 (CTLA-4). In addition, CD4(+) cells expressing C-cleaved Foxp3 are
superior to those that express WT Foxp3 in preventing experimental colitis.
Coexpression of Foxp3 with PC1 or PC7 results in cleavage of the Foxp3 C
terminus. The mechanism by which Foxp3 is processed likely extends to other
members of the FoxP subfamily, because Foxp1 and Foxp2 also have N-terminal RXXR 
proteolytic cleavage motifs at similar locations to Foxp3. Our results indicate
that the generation of fully functionally competent Tregs is complex and
dependent on the generation of multiple forms of Foxp3 that have differing
effects on Treg cytokine production and suppressive function.

PMCID: PMC2645825
PMID: 19117830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Jun;37(6):384-9.

[Primary diffuse large B-cell lymphoma of central nervous system belongs to
activated B-cell-like subgroup: a study of 47 cases].

[Article in Chinese]

Cheng J(1), Tu P, Shi QL, Zhou HB, Zhou ZY, Zhao YC, Ma HH, Zhou XJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nanjing University Medical College/Nanjing General
Hospital of Nanjing Command, Nanjing 210002, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the histogenetic origin of primary central nervous
system diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) with respect to the stage of B-cell 
differentiation, and identification of the relevant prognostic markers.
METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining (EnVision method) for CD10, bcl-6, MUM-1,
CD138 and FOXP1 antigens was performed on 47 paraffin-embedded sections.
RESULTS: CD10, bcl-6, MUM-1 and FOXP1 expression in the tumor cells were 6.4%,
53.2%, 91.5% and 93.6% respectively. There was no expression of CD138 in all the 
cases. Among the 47 patients, 43 cases (91.5%) showed an activated B-cell-like
(ABC) phenotype: 21 (44.7%) were bcl-6+ and MUM-1+, suggesting an "activated
germinal center (GC) B-cell-like" in origin; 22 (46.8%) were exclusively MUM-1+, 
suggesting an "activated non-GCB" in origin. No significant correlation of the
classification and FOXP1 expression found on the outcome (P=0.279 and P=0.154).
CONCLUSIONS: Most primary central nervous system DLBCL are shown belonging to the
ABC subgroup, suggesting that primary central nervous system DLBCL is quite
similar to a DLBCL subset, which is derived from late GC to early post-GC B cell.
The classification and FOXP1 expression do not show prognostic value in primary
central nervous system DLBCL.

PMID: 19031717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Nov;62(11):986-97. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2008.059063. Epub 2008
Oct 31.

New time-dependent approach to analyse the prognostic significance of
immunohistochemical biomarkers in colon cancer and diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Adams H(1), Tzankov A, Lugli A, Zlobec I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

AIMS: Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis is a
well-established method to study the accuracies of biological markers. It may,
however, be suboptimal for analysing outcomes over time, such as prognosis. Here,
the clinical value of time-dependent ROC curve analysis for improving the
identification of high-risk patients with colon cancers and diffuse large B-cell 
lymphomas (DLBCL) is explored.
METHODS: Using tissue microarrays, immunohistochemistry was performed on two
matched sets (N = 469, each) of colon cancers (p53, CD8(+) tumour infiltrating
lymphocytes (TILs), mammalian sterile-like 20 kinase 1 (MST1), mucin 2 (MUC2) and
urokinase plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR)) and on 208 DLBCL (Bcl2, Bcl6,
CD10, FOXP1 and Ki67). The area-under-the-curve (AUC)-over-time plots, cut-off
scores for tumour marker positivity and Kaplan-Meier survival curves were
analysed.
RESULTS: With the exception of uPAR, all markers were most accurate within the
first 18 months following diagnosis. Expression of p53 (AUC = 0.75), uPAR (AUC = 
0.64), Bcl2 (AUC = 0.58) and FOXp1 (AUC = 0.68) was linked to more aggressive
tumours, while TILs (AUC = 0.38), MST1 (AUC = 0.39), MUC2 (AUC = 0.38), Bcl6 (AUC
= 0.4), CD10 (AUC = 0.49) and Ki67 (AUC = 0.41) were predictive of improved
survival. Cut-off scores for markers at their peak accuracies as well as survival
time differences were reproducible between colon cancer groups. Only FOXp1 at its
optimal cut-off of 60% had significant effects on survival in DLBCL (p = 0.019).
CONCLUSIONS: Time-dependent ROC curve analysis is a novel tool for identifying
potential immunohistochemical prognostic markers across varying follow-up times. 
Use of this tool could facilitate the identification of high-risk patients not
only with colon cancer and DLBCL but with a range of other tumour types.

PMID: 18977805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Lijec Vjesn. 2007 May;129 Suppl 3:43.

[FOXP1 in B-lymphoproliferative diseases].

[Article in Croatian]

Mara D.

PMID: 18959064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Oct 15;14(20):6426-31. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-08-0702.

Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma: novel translocations including
rearrangements of ODZ2, JMJD2C, and CNN3.

Vinatzer U(1), Gollinger M, Müllauer L, Raderer M, Chott A, Streubel B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Internal Medicine 1, Medical University of Vienna,
Vienna, Austria.

PURPOSE: The well-known translocations identified in MALT lymphomas include
t(11;18)/API2-MALT1, t(1;14)/IGH-BCL10, and t(14;18)/IGH-MALT1. Molecular
investigations have suggested that these three disparate translocations affect a 
common pathway, resulting in the constitutive activation of nuclear
factor-kappaB. However, the vast majority of MALT lymphomas are negative for any 
of the above-mentioned translocations and the underlying pathogenesis is unclear.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Fresh tissue of 29 gastric and extragastric MALT lymphomas
was studied for genetic aberrations by conventional karyotyping, long-distance
inverse PCR (LDI-PCR), fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), reverse
transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), and real-time quantitative RT-PCR (QRT-PCR).
RESULTS: Conventional cytogenetics, FISH, and RT-PCR identified aberrations in 26
of 29 MALT lymphoma. Balanced translocations were found in 21 cases. IGH was
rearranged in the majority of cases with balanced translocations (n = 17/21); 3
cases had t(11;18)/API2-MALT1 and 1 case had novel t(6;7)(q25;q11), respectively.
IGH partner genes involved MALT1, FOXP1, BCL6, and four new chromosomal regions
on chromosome arms 1p, 1q, 5q, and 9p. LDI-PCR identified three novel partner
genes on 1p (CNN3), 5q (ODZ2), and 9p (JMJD2C). FISH assays were established and 
confirmed LDI-PCR results. QRT-PCR showed deregulation of the novel genes in the 
translocation-positive cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study expands the knowledge on the genetic heterogeneity of MALT
lymphomas.

PMID: 18927281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Croat Med J. 2008 Oct;49(5):618-24.

Prognostic markers and gene abnormalities in subgroups of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma: single center experience.

Korac P(1), Dominis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cytology, Merkur University Hospital, Zagreb,
Croatia.

AIM: To explore the association between FOXP1, BCL2, and BCL6 gene expression in 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma tumor cells and their association with the presence
of FOXP3 lymphocytes.
METHODS: Samples of lymph nodes from 53 patients with newly diagnosed diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma were taken at the time of the diagnosis and immunostained
for CD10, MUM1, BCL6, BCL2, FOXP1, and FOXP3. Fluorescent in situ hybridization
analysis was used for the detection of FOXP1, BCL2, and BCL6 gene abnormalities. 
The chi(2) test was used for data analysis.
RESULTS: FOXP1 protein was detected in 28 cases, genetic abnormalities involving 
the FOXP1 locus were found in 19 cases, and both were present in 13 cases
(chi(2)=7.157; P=0.028). FOXP3 positive cells were detected in 37 cases. There
was a significant relationship between BCL2 expression and FOXP1 genetic
abnormalities (chi(2)= 5.858; P=0.016) and between BCL2 expression and BCL2
genetic abnormalities (chi(2)= 6.349; P=0.012). There was also an association
between BCL6 and FOXP1 genetic abnormalities (chi(2)=8.497;P=0.004).
CONCLUSION: There was an association between FOXP1 and BCL2. The presence of
FOXP3 positive cells had no influence on any of the analyzed markers.

PMCID: PMC2582354
PMID: 18925695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Nat Neurosci. 2008 Oct;11(10):1122-4. doi: 10.1038/nn1008-1122.

FoxP1: conducting the Hox symphony in spinal motor neurons.

Arber S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biozentrum, University of Basel, Klingelbergstrasse 50/70, CH-4056 Basel and
the Friedrich Miescher Institute, Maulbeerstrasse 66, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland.
silvia.arber@unibas.ch

PMID: 18818591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 28;283(48):33394-405. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804788200. Epub
2008 Sep 25.

Down-regulation of micro-RNA-1 (miR-1) in lung cancer. Suppression of tumorigenic
property of lung cancer cells and their sensitization to doxorubicin-induced
apoptosis by miR-1.

Nasser MW(1), Datta J, Nuovo G, Kutay H, Motiwala T, Majumder S, Wang B, Suster
S, Jacob ST, Ghoshal K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and Pathology, Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

Micro-RNAs are approximately 21-25-nucleotide-long noncoding RNAs that regulate
gene expression primarily at the post-transcriptional level in animals. Here, we 
report that micro-RNA-1 (miR-1), abundant in the cardiac and smooth muscles, is
expressed in the lung and is down-regulated in human primary lung cancer tissues 
and cell lines. In situ hybridization demonstrated localization of miR-1 in
bronchial epithelial cells. The tumor suppressor C/EBPalpha, frequently
suppressed in lung cancer, reactivated miR-1 expression in the lung cancer cells.
Repressed miR-1 was also activated in lung cancer cells upon treatment with a
histone deacetylase inhibitor. These observations led us to examine the
antitumorigenic potential of miR-1 in lung cancer cells. Expression of miR-1 in
nonexpressing A549 and H1299 cells reversed their tumorigenic properties, such as
growth, replication potential, motility/migration, clonogenic survival, and tumor
formation in nude mice. Exogenous miR-1 significantly reduced expression of
oncogenic targets, such as MET, a receptor tyrosine kinase, and Pim-1, a Ser/Thr 
kinase, frequently up-regulated in lung cancer. Similarly, the levels of two
additional targets, FoxP1, a transcription factor with oncogeneic property, and
HDAC4 that represses differentiation-promoting genes, were reduced in
miR-1-expressing cells. Conversely, depletion of miR-1 facilitated N417 cell
growth with concomitant elevation of these targets. Further, ectopic miR-1
induced apoptosis in A549 cells in response to the potent anticancer drug
doxorubicin. Enhanced activation of caspases 3 and 7, cleavage of their substrate
PARP-1, and depletion of anti-apoptotic Mcl-1 contributed to the sensitivity of
miR-1-expressing cells to doxorubicin. Thus, miR-1 has potential therapeutic
application against lung cancers.

PMCID: PMC2586284
PMID: 18818206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Nature. 2008 Sep 18;455(7211):295-7. doi: 10.1038/455295a.

Developmental neuroscience: Hox and Fox.

Pfaff SL.

PMCID: PMC3071742
PMID: 18800121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Blood. 2008 Dec 1;112(12):4699-711. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-137018. Epub 2008 
Sep 17.

Down-regulation of the forkhead transcription factor Foxp1 is required for
monocyte differentiation and macrophage function.

Shi C(1), Sakuma M, Mooroka T, Liscoe A, Gao H, Croce KJ, Sharma A, Kaplan D,
Greaves DR, Wang Y, Simon DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department ofMedicine, Case Cardiovascular Center, Case Western Reserve
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH 44022, USA.

Down-regulation of the forkhead transcription factor Foxp1 by integrin engagement
controls monocyte differentiation in vitro. To determine whether Foxp1 plays a
critical role in monocyte differentiation and macrophage functions in vivo, we
generated transgenic mice (macFoxp1tg) overexpressing human FOXP1 in
monocyte/macrophage lineage cells using the CD68 promoter. Circulating blood
monocytes from macFoxp1tg mice have reduced expression of the receptor for
macrophage colony-stimulating factor (c-Fms/M-CSFR), impaired migratory capacity,
and diminished accumulation as splenic macrophages. Macrophage functions,
including cytokine production, phagocytosis, and respiratory burst were globally 
impaired in macFoxp1tg compared with wild-type cells. Osteoclastogenesis and bone
resorption activity were also attenuated in macFoxp1tg mice. In models of
chemical and bacterial peritonitis, macFoxp1tg mice exhibited reduced macrophage 
accumulation, bacterial clearance, and survival. Enforced overexpression of
c-Fms/M-CSFR reversed the cytokine production and phagocytosis defects in
macFoxp1tg macrophages, indicating that repression of c-fms/M-CSFR is likely the 
dominant mechanism responsible for Foxp1 action in monocyte differentiation and
macrophage function. Taken together, these observations identify down-regulation 
of Foxp1 as critical for monocyte differentiation and macrophage functions in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC2597137
PMID: 18799727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Cancer Res. 2008 Sep 15;68(18):7541-9. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-5930.

Truncated ETV1, fused to novel tissue-specific genes, and full-length ETV1 in
prostate cancer.

Hermans KG(1), van der Korput HA, van Marion R, van de Wijngaart DJ, Ziel-van der
Made A, Dits NF, Boormans JL, van der Kwast TH, van Dekken H, Bangma CH, Korsten 
H, Kraaij R, Jenster G, Trapman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

In this study, we describe the properties of novel ETV1 fusion genes, encoding
N-truncated ETV1 (dETV1), and of full-length ETV1, overexpressed in clinical
prostate cancer. We detected overexpression of novel ETV1 fusion genes or of
full-length ETV1 in 10% of prostate cancers. Novel ETV1 fusion partners included 
FOXP1, an EST (EST14), and an endogenous retroviral repeat sequence (HERVK17).
Like TMPRSS2, EST14 and HERVK17 were prostate-specific and androgen-regulated
expressed. This unique expression pattern of most ETV1 fusion partners seems an
important determinant in prostate cancer development. In transient reporter
assays, full-length ETV1 was a strong transactivator, whereas dETV1 was not.
However, several of the biological properties of dETV1 and full-length ETV1 were 
identical. On stable overexpression, both induced migration and invasion of
immortalized nontumorigenic PNT2C2 prostate epithelial cells. In contrast to
dETV1, full-length ETV1 also induced anchorage-independent growth of these cells.
PNT2C2 cells stably transfected with dETV1 or full-length ETV1 expression
constructs showed small differences in induced expression of target genes. Many
genes involved in tumor invasion/metastasis, including uPA/uPAR and MMPs, were
up-regulated in both cell types. Integrin beta3 (ITGB3) was clearly up-regulated 
by full-length ETV1 but much less by dETV1. Based on the present data and on
previous findings, a novel concept of the role of dETV1 and of full-length ETV1
overexpression in prostate cancer is proposed.

PMID: 18794142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 9;105(36):13520-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0804295105. Epub 2008 Sep 2.

Molecular subtypes of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma arise by distinct genetic
pathways.

Lenz G(1), Wright GW, Emre NC, Kohlhammer H, Dave SS, Davis RE, Carty S, Lam LT, 
Shaffer AL, Xiao W, Powell J, Rosenwald A, Ott G, Muller-Hermelink HK, Gascoyne
RD, Connors JM, Campo E, Jaffe ES, Delabie J, Smeland EB, Rimsza LM, Fisher RI,
Weisenburger DD, Chan WC, Staudt LM.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Branch, Biometric Research Branch, Center for Information
Technology, and Laboratory of Pathology, Center for Cancer Research, National
Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. lstaudt@mail.nih.gov

Gene-expression profiling has been used to define 3 molecular subtypes of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), termed germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) DLBCL,
activated B-cell-like (ABC) DLBCL, and primary mediastinal B-cell lymphoma
(PMBL). To investigate whether these DLBCL subtypes arise by distinct
pathogenetic mechanisms, we analyzed 203 DLBCL biopsy samples by high-resolution,
genome-wide copy number analysis coupled with gene-expression profiling. Of 272
recurrent chromosomal aberrations that were associated with gene-expression
alterations, 30 were used differentially by the DLBCL subtypes (P < 0.006). An
amplicon on chromosome 19 was detected in 26% of ABC DLBCLs but in only 3% of GCB
DLBCLs and PMBLs. A highly up-regulated gene in this amplicon was SPIB, which
encodes an ETS family transcription factor. Knockdown of SPIB by RNA interference
was toxic to ABC DLBCL cell lines but not to GCB DLBCL, PMBL, or myeloma cell
lines, strongly implicating SPIB as an oncogene involved in the pathogenesis of
ABC DLBCL. Deletion of the INK4a/ARF tumor suppressor locus and trisomy 3 also
occurred almost exclusively in ABC DLBCLs and was associated with inferior
outcome within this subtype. FOXP1 emerged as a potential oncogene in ABC DLBCL
that was up-regulated by trisomy 3 and by more focal high-level amplifications.
In GCB DLBCL, amplification of the oncogenic mir-17-92 microRNA cluster and
deletion of the tumor suppressor PTEN were recurrent, but these events did not
occur in ABC DLBCL. Together, these data provide genetic evidence that the DLBCL 
subtypes are distinct diseases that use different oncogenic pathways.

PMCID: PMC2533222
PMID: 18765795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Aug 19;105(33):11921-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0711039105. Epub 2008 Aug 12.

Cloning of genes involved in chromosomal translocations by high-resolution single
nucleotide polymorphism genomic microarray.

Kawamata N(1), Ogawa S, Zimmermann M, Niebuhr B, Stocking C, Sanada M, Hemminki
K, Yamatomo G, Nannya Y, Koehler R, Flohr T, Miller CW, Harbott J, Ludwig WD,
Stanulla M, Schrappe M, Bartram CR, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center/UCLA School of Medicine, Los 
Angeles, CA 90048, USA. kawamatan@cshs.org

High-resolution single nucleotide polymorphism genomic microarray (SNP-chip) is a
useful tool to define gene dosage levels over the whole genome, allowing precise 
detection of deletions and duplications/amplifications of chromosomes in cancer
cells. We found that this new technology can also identify breakpoints of
chromosomes involved in unbalanced translocations, leading to identification of
fusion genes. Using this technique, we found that the PAX5 gene was rearranged to
a variety of partner genes including ETV6, FOXP1, AUTS2, and C20orf112 in
pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The 3' end of the PAX5 gene was
replaced by the partner gene. The PAX5 fusion products bound to PAX5 recognition 
sequences as strongly as wild-type PAX5 and suppressed its transcriptional
activity in a dominant-negative fashion. In human B cell leukemia cells, binding 
of wild-type PAX5 to a regulatory region of BLK, one of the direct downstream
target genes of PAX5, was diminished by expression of the PAX5-fusion protein,
leading to repression of BLK. Expression of PAX5-fusion genes in murine bone
marrow cells blocked development of mature B cells. PAX5-fusion proteins may
contribute to leukemogenesis by blocking differentiation of hematopoietic cells
into mature B cells. SNP-chip is a powerful tool to identify fusion genes in
human cancers.

PMCID: PMC2575257
PMID: 18697940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Neuron. 2008 Jul 31;59(2):226-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2008.06.025.

Coordinated actions of the forkhead protein Foxp1 and Hox proteins in the
columnar organization of spinal motor neurons.

Rousso DL(1), Gaber ZB, Wellik D, Morrisey EE, Novitch BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative
Medicine and Stem Cell Research, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

The formation of locomotor circuits depends on the spatially organized generation
of motor columns that innervate distinct muscle and autonomic nervous system
targets along the body axis. Within each spinal segment, multiple motor neuron
classes arise from a common progenitor population; however, the mechanisms
underlying their diversification remain poorly understood. Here, we show that the
Forkhead domain transcription factor Foxp1 plays a critical role in defining the 
columnar identity of motor neurons at each axial position. Using genetic
manipulations, we demonstrate that Foxp1 establishes the pattern of LIM-HD
protein expression and accordingly organizes motor axon projections, their
connectivity with peripheral targets, and the establishment of motor pools. These
functions of Foxp1 act in accordance with the rostrocaudal pattern provided by
Hox proteins along the length of the spinal cord, suggesting a model by which
motor neuron diversity is achieved through the coordinated actions of Foxp1 and
Hox proteins.

PMCID: PMC2547125
PMID: 18667151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Cell. 2008 Jul 25;134(2):304-16. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.019.

Hox repertoires for motor neuron diversity and connectivity gated by a single
accessory factor, FoxP1.

Dasen JS(1), De Camilli A, Wang B, Tucker PW, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Smilow Neuroscience Program, Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, New
York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.
jeremy.dasen@nyumc.org

The precision with which motor neurons innervate target muscles depends on a
regulatory network of Hox transcription factors that translates neuronal identity
into patterns of connectivity. We show that a single transcription factor, FoxP1,
coordinates motor neuron subtype identity and connectivity through its activity
as a Hox accessory factor. FoxP1 is expressed in Hox-sensitive motor columns and 
acts as a dose-dependent determinant of columnar fate. Inactivation of Foxp1
abolishes the output of the motor neuron Hox network, reverting the spinal motor 
system to an ancestral state. The loss of FoxP1 also changes the pattern of motor
neuron connectivity, and in the limb motor axons appear to select their
trajectories and muscle targets at random. Our findings show that FoxP1 is a
crucial determinant of motor neuron diversification and connectivity, and clarify
how this Hox regulatory network controls the formation of a topographic neural
map.

PMID: 18662545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Sep 19;374(2):388-93. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.07.056. Epub 2008 Jul 18.

FOXP1 is an androgen-responsive transcription factor that negatively regulates
androgen receptor signaling in prostate cancer cells.

Takayama K(1), Horie-Inoue K, Ikeda K, Urano T, Murakami K, Hayashizaki Y, Ouchi 
Y, Inoue S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Androgen and androgen receptor (AR) play important roles in the formation and the
progression of prostate cancer. AR activates its target genes by recruiting
various coregulators and transcriptional factors. Here we show that the FOXP1
forkhead transcription factor is a novel androgen-regulated gene. By sequencing
DNA fragments obtained from chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), a bona-fide AR 
binding site (ARBS) is identified in an intron region of FOXP1 gene. FOXP1 can be
induced by androgen in hormone-sensitive prostate cancer LNCaP cells at both mRNA
and protein levels. In particular, a smaller FOXP1 variant, FOXP1D, is
upregulated in response to androgen. Notably, we demonstrate that FOXP1 directly 
interacts with AR and negatively regulates AR signaling ligand-dependently, as
exemplified by the transcriptional repression of PSA gene regulated by
androgen-dependent FOXP1 recruitment on its enhancer region. We show that several
other forkhead transcription factors are also androgen-responsive in LNCaP cells.
Our study provides a new insight to the function of forkhead transcription
factors that modulates AR signaling as an androgen-regulated transcriptional
factor, which would contribute to the tumorigenesis of prostate cancer.

PMID: 18640093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Leukemia. 2008 Oct;22(10):1917-24. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.188. Epub 2008 Jul 10.

The expression of 16 genes related to the cell of origin and immune response
predicts survival in elderly patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma treated 
with CHOP and rituximab.

Jais JP(1), Haioun C, Molina TJ, Rickman DS, de Reynies A, Berger F, Gisselbrecht
C, Brière J, Reyes F, Gaulard P, Feugier P, Labouyrie E, Tilly H, Bastard C,
Coiffier B, Salles G, Leroy K; Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes de l'Adulte.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Biostatistique, AP-HP, hôpital Necker, Paris, France.

Gene expression profiles have been associated with clinical outcome in patients
with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) treated with anthracycline-containing 
chemotherapy. Using Affymetrix HU133A microarrays, we analyzed the lymphoma
transcriptional profile of 30 patients treated with CHOP (cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisone) and 23 patients treated with rituximab
(R)-CHOP in the Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes de l'Adulte clinical centers. We
used this data set to select transcripts showing an association with
progression-free survival in all patients or showing a differential effect in the
two treatment groups. We performed real-time quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR in the 23 R-CHOP samples of the screening set and an additional
44 R-CHOP samples set to evaluate the prognostic significance of these
transcripts. In these 67 patients, the level of expression of 16 genes and the
cell-of-origin classification were significantly associated with overall
survival, independently of the International Prognostic Index. A multivariate
model comprising four genes of the cell-of-origin signature (LMO2, MME, LPP and
FOXP1) and two genes related to immune response, identified for their
differential effects in R-CHOP patients (APOBEC3G and RAB33A), demonstrated a
high predictive efficiency in this set of patients, suggesting that both features
affect outcome in DLBCL patients receiving immunochemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2675107
PMID: 18615101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Cancer Res. 2008 Jul 1;68(13):5049-58. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-07-6655.

Methylation mediated silencing of MicroRNA-1 gene and its role in hepatocellular 
carcinogenesis.

Datta J(1), Kutay H, Nasser MW, Nuovo GJ, Wang B, Majumder S, Liu CG, Volinia S, 
Croce CM, Schmittgen TD, Ghoshal K, Jacob ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, College of Pharmacy, and
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA.

MicroRNAs (miR) are a class of small ( approximately 21 nucleotide) noncoding
RNAs that, in general, negatively regulate gene expression. Some miRs harboring
CGIs undergo methylation-mediated silencing, a characteristic of many tumor
suppressor genes. To identify such miRs in liver cancer, the miRNA expression
profile was analyzed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines treated with
5-azacytidine (DNA hypomethylating agent) and/or trichostatin A (histone
deacetylase inhibitor). The results showed that these epigenetic drugs
differentially regulate expression of a few miRs, particularly miR-1-1, in HCC
cells. The CGI spanning exon 1 and intron 1 of miR-1-1 was methylated in HCC cell
lines and in primary human HCCs but not in matching liver tissues. The miR-1-1
gene was hypomethylated and activated in DNMT1-/- HCT 116 cells but not in DNMT3B
null cells, indicating a key role for DNMT1 in its methylation. miR-1 expression 
was also markedly reduced in primary human hepatocellular carcinomas compared
with matching normal liver tissues. Ectopic expression of miR-1 in HCC cells
inhibited cell growth and reduced replication potential and clonogenic survival. 
The expression of FoxP1 and MET harboring three and two miR-1 cognate sites,
respectively, in their respective 3'-untranslated regions, was markedly reduced
by ectopic miR-1. Up-regulation of several miR-1 targets including FoxP1, MET,
and HDAC4 in primary human HCCs and down-regulation of their expression in
5-AzaC-treated HCC cells suggest their role in hepatocarcinogenesis. The
inhibition of cell cycle progression and induction of apoptosis after
re-expression of miR-1 are some of the mechanisms by which DNA hypomethylating
agents suppress hepatocarcinoma cell growth.

PMCID: PMC2562630
PMID: 18593903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Neoplasia. 2008 Jul;10(7):634-42.

Loss of heterozygosity and copy number abnormality in clear cell renal cell
carcinoma discovered by high-density affymetrix 10K single nucleotide
polymorphism mapping array.

Toma MI(1), Grosser M, Herr A, Aust DE, Meye A, Hoefling C, Fuessel S, Wuttig D, 
Wirth MP, Baretton GB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathology, University of Technology Dresden, D-01307 Dresden,
Germany. Marieta.Toma@uniklinikum-dresden.de

Genetic aberrations are crucial in renal tumor progression. In this study, we
describe loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and DNA-copy number abnormalities in clear 
cell renal cell carcinoma (cc-RCC) discovered by genome-wide single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) arrays. Genomic DNA from tumor and normal tissue of 22 human
cc-RCCs was analyzed on the Affymetrix GeneChip Human Mapping 10K Array. The
array data were validated by quantitative polymerase chain reaction and
immunohistochemistry. Reduced DNA copy numbers were detected on chromosomal arm
3p in 91%, on chromosome 9 in 32%, and on chromosomal arm 14q in 36% of the
tumors. Gains were detected on chromosomal arm 5q in 45% and on chromosome 7 in
32% of the tumors. Copy number abnormalities were found not only in FHIT and VHL 
loci, known to be involved in renal carcinogenesis, but also in regions
containing putative new tumor suppressor genes or oncogenes. In addition,
microdeletions were detected on chromosomes 1 and 6 in genes with unknown impact 
on renal carcinogenesis. In validation experiments, abnormal protein expression
of FOXP1 (on 3p) was found in 90% of tumors (concordance with SNP array data in
85%). As assessed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction, PARK2 and PACRG were
down-regulated in 57% and 100%, respectively, and CSF1R was up-regulated in 69%
of the cc-RCC cases (concordance with SNP array data in 57%, 33%, and 38%).
Genome-wide SNP array analysis not only confirmed previously described large
chromosomal aberrations but also detected novel microdeletions in genes
potentially involved in tumor genesis of cc-RCC.

PMCID: PMC2435001
PMID: 18592004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. J Neurosci Res. 2008 Nov 1;86(14):3106-16. doi: 10.1002/jnr.21770.

Expression of Foxp4 in the developing and adult rat forebrain.

Takahashi K(1), Liu FC, Hirokawa K, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Group, Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life
Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. hiroshi@mitils.jp

Many members of the Fox family are transcription factors that regulate the
morphogenesis of various organs. In the present study, we examined the expression
pattern of Foxp4, a member of the Foxp subfamily, and compared its pattern with
the patterns of Foxp2 and Foxp1 in the developing rat brain. In general, these
three Foxp genes shared partially overlapping and yet differentially regulated
expression patterns in the striatum, the cerebral cortex, and the thalamus during
development. In the developing dorsal telencephalon, a mediolateral gradient of
Foxp4 was present in the cortical primordium, with high levels in the ventricular
zone of the medial cortex. By contrast, no gradient of Foxp2 and Foxp1 was
detected in the dorsal telencephalon. At later stages, Foxp4 was expressed
throughout all cortical layers as opposed to the layer-specific expression of
Foxp2 and Foxp1. In the developing striatum, the pattern of Foxp4 expression was 
distinct from the patterns of Foxp2 and Foxp1. The spatial expression pattern of 
Foxp4 was similar to that of Foxp2 during the early embryonic stage. However,
from the late embryonic stage to postnatal day 4, Foxp4 was expressed in a
mediolateral gradient and decreased in the striosomal compartment, in contrast to
the striosomal expression of Foxp2 and homogeneous expression of Foxp1. Foxp4 was
developmentally down-regulated such that Foxp4 was undetectable in the forebrain 
after postnatal day 14, whereas Foxp2 and Foxp1 were persistently expressed in
adulthood. Given that Foxp4, Foxp2, and Foxp1 are capable of heterodimerization
for transcriptional regulation, the partially overlapping expression patterns of 
Foxp4, Foxp2, and Foxp1 in different domains of the developing forebrain suggest 
that each member and/or different combinatory actions of the Foxp subfamily may
play a pivotal role in regulating forebrain development.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18561326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. PLoS One. 2008 May 28;3(5):e2321. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002321.

Resistance of Foxp3+ regulatory T cells to Nur77-induced apoptosis promotes
allograft survival.

Tao R(1), Hancock WW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Stokes Research Institute and
Biesecker Pediatric Liver Center, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

The NR4A nuclear receptor family member Nur77 (NR4A1) promotes thymocyte
apoptosis during negative selection of autoreactive thymocytes, but may also
function in mature extrathymic T cells. We studied the effects of over-expression
of Nur77 on the apoptosis of murine peripheral T cells, including thymic-derived 
Foxp3+ regulatory (Treg) cells. Overexpression of Nur77 in the T cell lineage
decreased numbers of peripheral CD4 and CD8 T cells by approximately 80% compared
to wild-type (WT) mice. However, the proportions of Treg cells were markedly
increased in the thymus (61% of CD4+Foxp3+ singly positive thymocytes vs. 8% in
WT) and secondary lymphoid organs (40-50% of CD4+Foxp3+ T cells vs. 7-8% in WT)
of Nur77 transgenic (Nur77Tg) mice, and immunoprecipitation studies showed Nur77 
was associated with a recently identified HDAC7/Foxp3 transcriptional complex.
Upon activation through the T cell receptor in vitro or in vivo, Nur77Tg T cells 
showed only marginally decreased proliferation but significantly increased
apoptosis. Fully allogeneic cardiac grafts transplanted to Nur77Tg mice survived 
long-term with well-preserved structure, and recipient splenocytes showed
markedly enhanced apoptosis and greatly reduced anti-donor recall responses.
Allografts in Nur77Tg recipients had significantly increased expression of
multiple Treg-associated genes, including Foxp3, Foxp1, Tip60 and HDAC9.
Allograft rejection was restored by CD25 monoclonal antibody therapy, indicating 
that allograft acceptance was dependent upon Treg function in Nur77Tg recipients.
These data show that compared to conventional CD4 and CD8 T cells, Foxp3+ Tregs
are relatively resistant to Nur77-mediated apoptosis, and that tipping the
balance between the numbers of Tregs and responder T cells in the early period
post-transplantation can determine the fate of the allograft. Hence, induced
expression of Nur77 might be a novel means to achieve long-term allograft
survival.

PMCID: PMC2386419
PMID: 18509529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mod Pathol. 2008 Jul;21(7):902-11. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2008.74. Epub 2008 May 
16.

FOXP1 abnormalities in lymphoma: translocation breakpoint mapping reveals
insights into deregulated transcriptional control.

Goatly A(1), Bacon CM, Nakamura S, Ye H, Kim I, Brown PJ, Ruskoné-Fourmestraux A,
Cervera P, Streubel B, Banham AH, Du MQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Molecular Histopathology, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Deregulation of FOXP1 expression plays an important role in lymphoma development 
although the underlying molecular mechanism is poorly understood. FOXP1 is
targeted by chromosome translocations in MALT lymphoma and diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma, where high-level protein expression is associated with poor prognosis. 
Nonetheless, the incidence and nature of FOXP1 abnormalities at both the genetic 
and protein levels, and their correlation in these lymphomas are not well
established. We investigated FOXP1 translocation, copy number change and protein 
expression in MALT lymphoma (n=321), MALT lymphoma with a diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma component (59), nodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (64) and extranodal 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (151) by interphase fluorescence in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry. FOXP1 translocation was found in eight
MALT lymphomas and three MALT lymphomas with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, with 
all positive cases originating in the stomach. In diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, 
the translocation was seen in 5 cases originating in the stomach (2), tonsil (1),
large intestine (1) and lymph node (1). Immunoglobulin heavy chain gene was the
translocation partner in 11 of the 16 positive cases. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization mapping revealed FOXP1 breakpoints within the 5' untranslated
region of the gene (upstream of exon 6, the first coding exon of full-length
FOXP1) in 14 cases, but downstream of exon 6 (most likely upstream of exon 8) in 
the remaining 2 cases. Three copies of the FOXP1 gene were observed in MALT
lymphoma (17%), MALT lymphoma with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (12%) and
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (32%), including cases with FOXP1 translocation
(19%). Immunohistochemistry showed strong/moderate FOXP1 staining in all the
cases with FOXP1 translocation. However, FOXP1 expression was independent of
FOXP1 translocation or copy number changes. Our findings suggest that (1) FOXP1
translocation may disrupt the full-length FOXP1 transcript and lead to expression
of FOXP1 transcript variants with alternate 5' ends and (2) mechanisms other than
translocation and copy number changes are also responsible for FOXP1
overexpression in lymphoma.

PMID: 18487996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Jul 10;509(2):180-9. doi: 10.1002/cne.21740.

Expression of FOXP2 in the developing monkey forebrain: comparison with the
expression of the genes FOXP1, PBX3, and MEIS2.

Takahashi K(1), Liu FC, Oishi T, Mori T, Higo N, Hayashi M, Hirokawa K, Takahashi
H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Group, Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life
Sciences, Tokyo, Tokyo 194-8511, Japan.

By using the developing monkey brain as a model for human development, we
investigated the expression pattern of the FOXP2 gene, a member of the FOX family
of transcription factors in the developing monkey brain, and compared its
expression pattern with transcription factors PBX3, MEIS2, and FOXP1. We observed
FOXP2 mRNA expression in several brain structures, including the striatum, the
islands of Calleja and other basal forebrain regions, the cerebral cortex, and
the thalamus. FOXP2 mRNA was preferentially expressed in striosomal compartments 
during striatal development. The striosomal expression was transient and
developmentally down-regulated in a topographical order. Specifically, during the
perinatal state, striosomal FOXP2 expression was detected in both the caudate
nucleus and the putamen, although expression was more prominent in the caudate
nucleus than in the putamen. Striosomal FOXP2 expression declined during the
postnatal period, first in the putamen and later in the caudate nucleus. During
the same period, we also detected PBX3 mRNA in the striosomal compartment of the 
developing monkey striatum. FOXP2, as well as PBX3 and MEIS2, was expressed in
the islands of Calleja and other cell clusters of the basal forebrain. FOXP2, in 
combination with PBX3 and MEIS2, may play a pivotal role in the development of
striosomal neurons of the striatum and the islands of Calleja.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18461604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 May 15;14(10):3002-10. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-4946. 
Epub 2008 Apr 29.

Translocations involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain gene locus predict better
survival in gastric diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Nakamura S(1), Ye H, Bacon CM, Goatly A, Liu H, Kerr L, Banham AH, Streubel B,
Yao T, Tsuneyoshi M, Savio A, Takeshita M, Dartigues P, Ruskoné-Fourmestraux A,
Matsumoto T, Iida M, Du MQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Histopathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. shonaka@intmed2.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: The pathogenesis and clinical heterogeneity of gastric diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) are poorly understood. We have comprehensively
investigated the incidence and clinical significance of lymphoma-associated
chromosomal translocations, particularly those involving the immunoglobulin heavy
chain (IGH) gene locus, in a large series of gastric DLBCL.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: One hundred forty-one cases of primary gastric DLBCL [58
with mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma and 83 without MALT
lymphoma] were enrolled. Translocations involving BCL6, c-MYC, FOXP1, MALT1, and 
IGH were investigated using interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization. In
positive cases, additional fluorescence in situ hybridization was done with
appropriate probes for potential partner genes. Cases were classified into
germinal center B-cell-like (GCB) or non-GCB subgroups by immunophenotyping with 
CD10, BCL6, and MUM1.
RESULTS: Translocations involving IGH were detected in 36 (32%) of 111 cases;
their partner genes included BCL6 (n = 10), c-MYC (n = 5), and FOXP1 (n = 3) but 
remained unknown in the remaining 18 cases. t(14;18)/IGH-BCL2,
t(14;18)/IGH-MALT1, and t(1;14)/BCL10-IGH were not detected in any case.
t(11;18)/API2-MALT1 was detected in none of the cases, except for one case of
DLBCL with MALT lymphoma, which showed positive signals only in MALT lymphoma
cells. IGH-involved translocation was associated with younger age but not with
any other clinicopathologic factors including GCB or non-GCB immunophenotypes.
Cox multivariate analysis revealed that IGH-involved translocation, in addition
to younger age and early stage, was an independent prognostic factor for better
overall and EFSs.
CONCLUSION: IGH-involved translocations are frequent in gastric DLBCL and seem to
identify cases with favorable prognosis.

PMID: 18445693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Genes Dev. 2008 Mar 15;22(6):740-5. doi: 10.1101/gad.1637108.

Cooperative regulation in development by SMRT and FOXP1.

Jepsen K(1), Gleiberman AS, Shi C, Simon DI, Rosenfeld MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
California at San Diego, School of Medicine, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.
jepsen@ucsd.edu

A critical aspect of mammalian development involves the actions of dedicated
repressors/corepressors to prevent unregulated gene activation programs that
would initiate specific cell determination events. While the role of NCoR/SMRT
corepressors in nuclear receptor actions is well documented, we here report that 
a previously unrecognized functional interaction between SMRT and a forkhead
protein, FOXP1, is required for cardiac growth and regulation of macrophage
differentiation. Our studies demonstrate that SMRT and FOXP1 define a functional 
biological unit required to orchestrate specific programs critical for mammalian 
organogenesis, linking developmental roles of FOX to a specific corepressor.

PMCID: PMC2275427
PMID: 18347093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008 May;294(5):H2268-75. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.91494.2007. Epub 2008 Mar 14.

Transcription repression and blocks in cell cycle progression in hypoplastic left
heart syndrome.

Gambetta K(1), Al-Ahdab MK, Ilbawi MN, Hassaniya N, Gupta M.

Author information: 
(1)The Heart Institute for Children, Hope Children's Hospital, Oak Lawn, IL, USA.

Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) is characterized by abnormally developed
atrial septum and a severe underdevelopment of the left side of the heart.
Despite significant advances in its surgical management, little is known about
the molecular abnormalities in this syndrome. To gain molecular insights into
HLHS, expression profiling by gene-chip microarray (Affymetrix U133 2.0) and by
real-time RT-PCR was performed in the atrial septum of patients diagnosed with
HLHS and compared with age-matched non-HLHS patients. Hierarchical clustering of 
all expressed genes with a P < 0.01 of all tissue samples showed two main
clusters, one of HLHS and the other of non-HLHS, suggesting different expression 
patterns by the two groups. Net affix followed by real-time RT-PCR analysis
identified the differentially expressed genes to be those involved in chromatin
remodeling, cell cycle regulation, and transcriptional regulation. These included
remodeling factors, histone deactylase 2 and SET and MYND domain containing 1;
transcription factors, FoxP1, and components of the calcineurin-nuclear factor of
activated T cells signaling pathway; and cell cycle regulators, cyclin-dependent 
kinase (CDK)-4, phosphatase and tensin homolog, and p18. Since these factors play
essential roles in heart growth and development, the abnormal expression pattern 
suggests that these molecules may contribute to the pathogenesis of HLHS.

PMID: 18344372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Reprod Sci. 2008 Apr;15(3):243-52. doi: 10.1177/1933719107312626. Epub 2008 Mar
10.

Expression of Fox head protein 1 in human eutopic endometrium and endometriosis.

Fu L(1), Girling JE, Rogers PA.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Women's Health Research, Monash University Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, Monash Medical Centre, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

The objective of this study is to examine the localization and expression of
FOXP1 in human endometrium during the menstrual cycle and in endometriotic
lesions and endometrial adenocarcinoma. FOXP1 protein expression was analyzed by 
immunohistochemistry and Western blot. FOXP1 expression was significantly
different between glandular epithelial and stromal nuclei and cytoplasm in both
endometrial functionalis and basalis. FOXP1 immunostaining was significantly
reduced in the early secretory stage in comparison to the mid proliferative stage
in the functionalis and the early proliferative stage in the basalis. FOXP1
expression was found in endometriotic lesions but not in endometrial
adenocarcinoma. Multiple protein bands of FOXP1 were identified, and their
presence varied considerably among patients. Protein expression levels were
significantly higher in the mid and late secretory stages in comparison to early 
proliferative and early secretory stages. FOXP1 protein is present in human
endometrium with evidence of cycle stage-dependent changes in expression.

PMID: 18332236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Haematologica. 2008 Apr;93(4):623-6. doi: 10.3324/haematol.12005. Epub 2008 Mar
6.

Primary extramedullary plasmacytoma: similarities with and differences from
multiple myeloma revealed by interphase cytogenetics.

Bink K(1), Haralambieva E, Kremer M, Ott G, Beham-Schmid C, de Leval L, Peh SC,
Laeng HR, Jütting U, Hutzler P, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Fend F.

Author information: 
(1)Institutes of Pathology, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for
Environmental Health, Neuherberg, Oberschleissheim, Germany.

Primary extramedullary plasmacytoma is an indolent neoplasm that infrequently
converts to multiple myeloma. Since cytogenetic data on extramedullary
plasmacytoma are lacking, we studied 38 cases of this type of neoplasm by
fluorescence in situ hybridization. Fourteen cases (37%) contained IGH breaks,
including six with a t(4;14) translocation. No translocations t(11;14), t(14;16),
t(8;14), nor breaks involving MALT1, BCL6 or FOXP1 were found. Loss of 13q (40%),
as well as chromosomal gains (82%) were common. There was no correlation between 
chromosomal alterations and clinical features or local relapse. Cytogenetically, 
extramedullary plasmacytoma and multiple myeloma are closely related. However,
the distribution of IGH translocation partners, with the notable absence of
t(11;14), is different. Key words: extramedullary plasmacytoma, multiple myeloma,
cytogenetics, IGH translocation, fluorescence in situ hybridization.

PMID: 18326524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Histopathology. 2008 Apr;52(5):632-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2008.02990.x. Epub
2008 Feb 23.

Characterization of human FOXP1 isoform 2, using monoclonal antibody 4E3-G11, and
intron retention as a tissue-specific mechanism generating a novel FOXP1 isoform.

Brown PJ, Kagaya R, Banham AH.

PMID: 18312343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Haematologica. 2008 Feb;93(2):319-20. doi: 10.3324/haematol.11950.

Rare occurrence of IgVH gene translocations and restricted IgVH gene repertoire
in ocular MALT-type lymphoma.

Adam P, Haralambieva E, Hartmann M, Mao Z, Ott G, Rosenwald A.

FISH studies on 37 ocular MALT-type lymphomas yielded chromosomal translocations 
affecting MAL andT1 BCL10 in 1 case each, no evidence for a break in the FOXP1
locus, and trisomy 3 in 14 out of 34 cases (41%). Three out of 8 cases analyzed
used the highly mutated VH3-23 gene and showed ongoing somatic hypermutations.

PMID: 18245662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Apr;37(4):696-707. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2007.12.015. Epub
2007 Dec 15.

Cre fate mapping reveals lineage specific defects in neuronal migration with loss
of Pitx2 function in the developing mouse hypothalamus and subthalamic nucleus.

Skidmore JM(1), Cramer JD, Martin JF, Martin DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Establishment of neuronal diversity is a central topic in developmental
neurobiology. Prior studies implicated Pitx2, a paired-like homeodomain
transcription factor, in mouse subthalamic nucleus neuronal development, but
precise stages of neuronal differentiation affected (migration, axon outgrowth,
fate specification) and underlying mechanisms were unknown. Here we report
lineage tracing experiments using Pitx2(cre/+), Pitx2(cre/null), and conditional 
nuclear lacZ reporter mice to track embryonic Pitx2 expressing neurons. Migration
of subthalamic nucleus and hypothalamic neurons was severely arrested in
Pitx2(cre/null) embryos, and subclasses of subthalamic nucleus neurons identified
by Lmx1b, Foxp1, and Foxp2-gene expression revealed differing sensitivities to
Pitx2 dosage. Interestingly, embryonic subthalamic nucleus development was
unaffected in Lmx1b null mice, suggesting that Pitx2 and Lmx1b act via
independent genetic pathways. These data provide the first direct evidence for
Pitx2-dependent neuronal migration in the developing hypothalamus, and
demonstrate that complex transcriptional networks regulate regional
specialization of distinct hypothalamic and subthalamic nucleus neurons.

PMCID: PMC2386145
PMID: 18206388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Neurosci. 2008 Jan 16;28(3):622-32. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2986-07.2008.

Ctip2 controls the differentiation of medium spiny neurons and the establishment 
of the cellular architecture of the striatum.

Arlotta P(1), Molyneaux BJ, Jabaudon D, Yoshida Y, Macklis JD.

Author information: 
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital-Harvard Medical School Center for Nervous
System Repair, Nayef Al-Rodhan Laboratories, Department of Neurosurgery, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Striatal medium spiny neurons (MSN) are critically involved in motor control, and
their degeneration is a principal component of Huntington's disease. We find that
the transcription factor Ctip2 (also known as Bcl11b) is central to MSN
differentiation and striatal development. Within the striatum, it is expressed by
all MSN, although it is excluded from essentially all striatal interneurons. In
the absence of Ctip2, MSN do not fully differentiate, as demonstrated by
dramatically reduced expression of a large number of MSN markers, including
DARPP-32, FOXP1, Chrm4, Reelin, MOR1 (mu-opioid receptor 1), glutamate receptor
1, and Plexin-D1. Furthermore, MSN fail to aggregate into patches, resulting in
severely disrupted patch-matrix organization within the striatum. Finally,
heterotopic cellular aggregates invade the Ctip2-/- striatum, suggesting a
failure by MSN to repel these cells in the absence of Ctip2. This is associated
with abnormal dopaminergic innervation of the mutant striatum and dramatic
changes in gene expression, including dysregulation of molecules involved in
cellular repulsion. Together, these data indicate that Ctip2 is a critical
regulator of MSN differentiation, striatal patch development, and the
establishment of the cellular architecture of the striatum.

PMID: 18199763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Blood. 2008 Mar 1;111(5):2816-24. Epub 2007 Dec 12.

Potentially oncogenic B-cell activation-induced smaller isoforms of FOXP1 are
highly expressed in the activated B cell-like subtype of DLBCL.

Brown PJ(1), Ashe SL, Leich E, Burek C, Barrans S, Fenton JA, Jack AS, Pulford K,
Rosenwald A, Banham AH.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Oxford,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford, United Kingdom.

The FOXP1 forkhead transcription factor is targeted by recurrent chromosome
translocations in several subtypes of B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas, where
high-level FOXP1 protein expression has been linked to a poor prognosis. Western 
blotting studies of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cell lines unexpectedly
identified the atypical high-level expression of 2 smaller, 60 to 65 kDa, FOXP1
isoforms in all 5 of those with the activated B cell (ABC)-like DLBCL subtype and
in a subgroup of primary DLBCL. The anti-FOXP1 (JC12) monoclonal antibody cannot 
distinguish FOXP1 isoforms by immunohistochemistry, a finding that may be
clinically relevant as high-level expression of the full-length FOXP1 protein was
observed in some germinal center-derived DLBCLs. ABC-like DLBCL-derived cell
lines were observed to express 2 novel, alternatively spliced FOXP1 mRNA
isoforms, encoding N-terminally truncated proteins. These transcripts and the
smaller protein isoforms were induced as a consequence of normal B-cell
activation, which thus represents an additional mechanism for up-regulating FOXP1
expression in lymphomas. The expression of potentially oncogenic smaller FOXP1
isoforms may resolve the previously contradictory findings that FOXP1 represents 
a favorable prognostic marker in breast cancer and an adverse risk factor in
B-cell lymphomas.

PMID: 18077790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Clin Exp Hematop. 2007 Nov;47(2):31-42.

MALT lymphoma : recent advances in aetiology and molecular genetics.

Du MQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
mqd20@cam.ac.uk

Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma is a common low grade B-cell
lymphoma arising from a background of chronic inflammatory disease at a number of
mucosal sites. Those originating in the stomach are causatively linked to
Helicobacter pylori infection and eradication of the bacterium with antibiotics
leads to long-term complete regression of the lymphoma in aproximately 70% of
cases. Now, there is further evidence of linking Campylobacter jejuni, Borrelia
burgdorferi and Chlamydia psittaci infection with immunoproliferative small
intestine disease, MALT lymphoma of the skin and ocular adnexa respectively.
t(11;18)/API2-MALT1, t(1;14)/IGH-BCL10, t(14;18)/IGH-MALT1 and t(3;14)/IGH-FOXP1 
occur at considerably variable incidences in MALT lymphomas of different sites.
The first three chromosome translocations are specifically associated with the
MALT lymphoma entity and the oncogenic products of these translocations have been
shown to target a common molecular pathway, i.e. the nuclear factor-kappaB
pathway. Here, I review the recent advances in our understanding of the
association of microbial pathogens with MALT lymphoma of various sites and the
molecular genetics underlying the lymphoma development.

PMID: 18040143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2008 Oct;111(3):453-9. Epub 2007 Nov 17.

Expression of the forkhead transcription factor FOXP1 is associated with that of 
estrogen receptor-beta in primary invasive breast carcinomas.

Bates GJ(1), Fox SB, Han C, Launchbury R, Leek RD, Harris AL, Banham AH.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.

We previously identified a correlation between estrogen receptor alpha (ERalpha) 
and the candidate tumour suppressor gene Forkhead Box P1 (FOXP1), whose nuclear
protein expression in breast tumours was associated with improved patient
survival. However, the expression pattern of FOXP1 in normal breast tissue is
more reminiscent of the second receptor, ERbeta, which has an emerging role as a 
tumour suppressor in breast cancer and critically may underlie the ability of
some ERalpha-negative tumours to respond to tamoxifen. In a series of 283 breast 
cancers, in which ERalpha-positive tumours were treated with tamoxifen, the
nuclear expression of ERbeta correlated significantly with ERalpha (p = 0.004),
low-tumour grade (p = 0.008) and nuclear FOXP1 (p = 0.01). High-grade tumours
exhibited significantly more cytoplasmic ERbeta than the low-grade tumours (p =
0.006). Regression analysis demonstrated that FOXP1 expression was most closely
related to nuclear ERbeta (p = 0.021). Neither, nuclear or cytoplasmic ERbeta
expression demonstrated prognostic significance. FOXP1 is not estrogen regulated 
and silencing FOXP1 expression, using siRNA, did not affect ERalpha, ERbeta or
progesterone receptor expression, suggesting ER and FOXP1 co-expression may
reflect a common regulatory mechanism.

PMID: 18026833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Dec;81(6):1144-57. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Identification of the transcriptional targets of FOXP2, a gene linked to speech
and language, in developing human brain.

Spiteri E(1), Konopka G, Coppola G, Bomar J, Oldham M, Ou J, Vernes SC, Fisher
SE, Ren B, Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, University of
California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Mutations in FOXP2, a member of the forkhead family of transcription factor
genes, are the only known cause of developmental speech and language disorders in
humans. To date, there are no known targets of human FOXP2 in the nervous system.
The identification of FOXP2 targets in the developing human brain, therefore,
provides a unique tool with which to explore the development of human language
and speech. Here, we define FOXP2 targets in human basal ganglia (BG) and
inferior frontal cortex (IFC) by use of chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
microarray analysis (ChIP-chip) and validate the functional regulation of targets
in vitro. ChIP-chip identified 285 FOXP2 targets in fetal human brain;
statistically significant overlap of targets in BG and IFC indicates a core set
of 34 transcriptional targets of FOXP2. We identified targets specific to IFC or 
BG that were not observed in lung, suggesting important regional and tissue
differences in FOXP2 activity. Many target genes are known to play critical roles
in specific aspects of central nervous system patterning or development, such as 
neurite outgrowth, as well as plasticity. Subsets of the FOXP2 transcriptional
targets are either under positive selection in humans or differentially expressed
between human and chimpanzee brain. This is the first ChIP-chip study to use
human brain tissue, making the FOXP2-target genes identified in these studies
important to understanding the pathways regulating speech and language in the
developing human brain. These data provide the first insight into the functional 
network of genes directly regulated by FOXP2 in human brain and by evolutionary
comparisons, highlighting genes likely to be involved in the development of human
higher-order cognitive processes.

PMCID: PMC2276350
PMID: 17999357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Arthritis Res Ther. 2007;9(5):R100.

Microarray gene expression profiling of osteoarthritic bone suggests altered bone
remodelling, WNT and transforming growth factor-beta/bone morphogenic protein
signalling.

Hopwood B(1), Tsykin A, Findlay DM, Fazzalari NL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tissue Pathology, Institute of Medical & Veterinary Science, Frome
Road, Adelaide, South Australia, 5000, Australia.

Osteoarthritis (OA) is characterized by alterations to subchondral bone as well
as articular cartilage. Changes to bone in OA have also been identified at sites 
distal to the affected joint, which include increased bone volume fraction and
reduced bone mineralization. Altered bone remodelling has been proposed to
underlie these bone changes in OA. To investigate the molecular basis for these
changes, we performed microarray gene expression profiling of bone obtained at
autopsy from individuals with no evidence of joint disease (control) and from
individuals undergoing joint replacement surgery for either degenerative hip OA, 
or fractured neck of femur (osteoporosis [OP]). The OP sample set was included
because an inverse association, with respect to bone density, has been observed
between OA and the low bone density disease OP. Compugen human 19K-oligo
microarray slides were used to compare the gene expression profiles of OA,
control and OP bone samples. Four sets of samples were analyzed, comprising 10
OA-control female, 10 OA-control male, 10 OA-OP female and 9 OP-control female
sample pairs. Print tip Lowess normalization and Bayesian statistical analyses
were carried out using linear models for microarray analysis, which identified
150 differentially expressed genes in OA bone with t scores above 4. Twenty-five 
of these genes were then confirmed to be differentially expressed (P < 0.01) by
real-time PCR analysis. A substantial number of the top-ranking differentially
expressed genes identified in OA bone are known to play roles in osteoblasts,
osteocytes and osteoclasts. Many of these genes are targets of either the WNT
(wingless MMTV integration) signalling pathway (TWIST1, IBSP, S100A4, MMP25,
RUNX2 and CD14) or the transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta/bone morphogenic
protein (BMP) signalling pathway (ADAMTS4, ADM, MEPE, GADD45B, COL4A1 and FST).
Other differentially expressed genes included WNT (WNT5B, NHERF1, CTNNB1 and
PTEN) and TGF-beta/BMP (TGFB1, SMAD3, BMP5 and INHBA) signalling pathway
component or modulating genes. In addition a subset of genes involved in
osteoclast function (GSN, PTK9, VCAM1, ITGB2, ANXA2, GRN, PDE4A and FOXP1) was
identified as being differentially expressed in OA bone between females and
males. Altered expression of these sets of genes suggests altered bone
remodelling and may in part explain the sex disparity observed in OA.

PMCID: PMC2212557
PMID: 17900349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Br J Haematol. 2007 Oct;139(2):269-74.

Identification of PML as novel PAX5 fusion partner in childhood acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia.

Nebral K(1), König M, Harder L, Siebert R, Haas OA, Strehl S.

Author information: 
(1)CCRI, Children's Cancer Research Institute, St. Anna Kinderkrebsforschung,
Vienna, Austria.

PAX5 encodes the B-cell lineage specific activator protein (BSAP) and is required
for B-cell development and maintenance. In B-cell precursor acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia (ALL), PAX5 is involved in several chromosome translocations that fuse 
the N-terminal paired DNA-binding domain of PAX5 with the C-terminal regulatory
sequences of ETV6, FOXP1, ZNF521 or ELN. Herein, we describe the identification
of a novel recurrent t(9;15)(p13;q24) in two cases of childhood ALL, which
results in an in-frame fusion of PAX5 to the promyelocytic leukaemia (PML) gene. 
The putative PAX5-PML fusion gene encodes a chimaeric protein that retains the
paired domain, the octapeptid and the partial homeodomain of PAX5, and virtually 
the whole PML protein. The steadily increasing number of PAX5 rearrangements
suggests that PAX5 is not only crucial for B-cell lymphopoiesis but also for the 
development of B-cell malignancies.

PMID: 17897302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Dev Genes Evol. 2007 Oct;217(10):699-707. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

Molecular cloning, characterization, and developmental expression of foxp1 in
zebrafish.

Cheng L(1), Chong M, Fan W, Guo X, Zhang W, Yang X, Liu F, Gui Y, Lu D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, School of 
Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200433, People's Republic of China.

The forkhead transcription factor gene family encodes a large group of proteins
that play critical roles in many developmental events. In this report, we
describe the isolation and characterization of foxp1 in zebrafish. The
full-length zebrafish foxp1 cDNA contains 2,440 bp encoding a protein of 659
amino acids which shares 72, 68, 68, 70, 65, and 62% overall identity with human,
mouse, rat, chicken, zebra finch, and frog Foxp1, respectively. Results of
whole-mount in situ hybridization showed that foxp1 exhibits very complex and
dynamic expression pattern during early embryonic development. Prominent foxp1
expression is detected in many regions of the developing central nervous system, 
especially in midbrain-hindbrain boundary, hindbrain, and spinal cord. Strong
expression is also observed in retina, ear, branchial arches, hatching gland,
heart, pronephric duct, gut, proctodeum, pectoral fin, and swim bladder. These
results provide evidence that foxp1 is likely to function as a very important
transcription factor in the development of the central nervous system and many
other organs in zebrafish.

PMID: 17876603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Int J Parasitol. 2008 Feb;38(2):229-38. Epub 2007 Jul 26.

Natural regulatory (CD4+CD25+FOXP+) T cells control the production of
pro-inflammatory cytokines during Plasmodium chabaudi adami infection and do not 
contribute to immune evasion.

Cambos M(1), Bélanger B, Jacques A, Roulet A, Scorza T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Université du Québec à Montréal, Case
postale 8888, Succursale centre-ville, Montréal, Que., Canada H3C 3P8.

Different functions have been attributed to natural regulatory CD4+CD25+FOXP+
(Treg) cells during malaria infection. Herein, we assessed the role for Treg
cells during infections with lethal (DS) and non-lethal (DK) Plasmodium chabaudi 
adami parasites, comparing the levels of parasitemia, inflammation and anaemia.
Independent of parasite virulence, the population of splenic Treg cells expanded 
during infection, and the absolute numbers of activated CD69+ Treg cells were
higher in DS-infected mice. In vivo depletion of CD25+ T cells, which eliminated 
80% of CD4+FOXP3+CD25+ T cells and 60-70% of CD4+FOXP3+ T cells, significantly
decreased the number of CD69+ Treg cells in mice with lethal malaria. As a
result, higher parasite burden and morbidity were measured in the latter, whereas
the kinetics of infection with non-lethal parasites remained unaffected. In the
absence of Treg cells, parasite-specific IFN-gamma responses by CD4+ T cells
increased significantly, both in mice with lethal and non-lethal infections,
whereas IL-2 production was only stimulated in mice with non-lethal malaria.
Following the depletion of CD25+ T cells, the production of IL-10 by CD90(-)
cells was also enhanced in infected mice. Interestingly, a potent induction of
TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma production by CD4+ and CD90(-) lymphocytes was measured
in DS-infected mice, which also suffered severe anaemia earlier than non-depleted
infected controls. Taken together, our data suggest that the expansion and
activation of natural Treg cells represent a counter-regulatory response to the
overwhelming inflammation associated with lethal P.c. adami. This response to
infection involves TH1 lymphocytes as well as cells from the innate immune
system.

PMID: 17868677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Jun 26;87(24):1709-12.

[Differentially expressed transcription factors in the cardiac outflow tract
tissue of connexin43 knockout mice].

[Article in Chinese]

Qi CH(1), Huang GY, Zhou GM.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Heart Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
200032, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the changes in the expression of cardiac transcription 
factors in the cardiac outflow tract (OFT) tissues in the connexin43 knockout
homozygotes (Cx43 KO), connexin43 heterozygotes, and connexin43 wild-type mice
(Cx43 WT).
METHODS: The cDNA was retrotranscribed from the RNA extracted from the OFT
tissues of 6 Cx43 KO, 6 Cx43 WT, and 6 Cx43 heterozygotes genotyped by PCR method
on the embryonic day (ED) 13.5 and ED 14.5. The biotin-labeled cRNA derived from 
the transcription of cDNA was fragmented as probes. The probes were hybridized
with Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 Array. Gene Array Scanner was used to screen
the signals of hybridization and detect the expression of genes. The mRNA
expression levels of 3 cardiac transcription factors: Sox11, Foxp1, and Tbx20
were measured by real time quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The ratios of the expression of the 6 genes, all cardiac transcription
factors: Gata4, Mef2C, Sox4, Sox11, Foxp1, and Tbx20 between the Cx43 KO and Cx43
WT groups were 1:1.41, 1:2.30, 1:3.25, 1:0.71, 1:0.66, and 1:0.54. The expression
levels of Sox11 and Foxp1 on ED13.5 in the Cx43 K group were 4.76 +/- 0.19 and
5.08 +/- 0.28 respectively, both significantly lower than those of the Cx43 WT
group (5.34 +/- 0.25 and 5.64 +/- 0.15 respectively, both P < 0.01), and
expression level of Tbx20 on ED 13.5 in the Cx43 K group was 7.18 +/- 0.16, not
significantly different from that of the Cx43 WT group (7.47 +/- 0.27, P > 0.05).
The expression levels of the genes Sox11, Foxp1, Tbx20 on ED 14,5 were 4.71 +/-
0.27, 5.25 +/- 0.31, and 7.05 +/- 0.17 respectively, all significantly lower than
those of the Cx43 WT group (5.00 +/- 0.19, 5.77 +/- 0.16,) and 7.43 +/- 0.25, all
P < 0.05). The results of the expression of these genes by real time PCR analysis
showed an excellent concordance with those indicated by the microarray analysis.
CONCLUSION: The cardiac transcription factors such as Sox11, Foxp1, and Tbx20
that are differently expressed in the Cx43 KO OFT tissue may be involved in the
pathogenesis of the OFT defects.

PMID: 17825156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2007 Jul;11(7):955-65.

FOXP1: a potential therapeutic target in cancer.

Koon HB(1), Ippolito GC, Banham AH, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard
Medical School, MA, USA.

Forkhead Box P1 (FOXP1) is a member of the FOX family of transcription factors
which have a broad range of functions. Foxp1 is widely expressed and has been
shown to have a role in cardiac, lung and lymphocyte development. FOXP1 is
targeted by recurrent chromosome translocations and its overexpression confers a 
poor prognosis in a number of types of lymphomas, suggesting it may function as
an oncogene. In contrast, FOXP1 localises to a tumour suppressor locus at 3p14.1 
and loss of FOXP1 expression in breast cancer is associated with a worse outcome,
suggesting FOXP1 may function as a tumour suppressor in other tissue types. These
data suggest that FOXP1 may not only be useful in prognosis but also may be used 
to develop FOXP1-directed therapeutic strategies.

PMCID: PMC4282158
PMID: 17614763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Histopathology. 2007 Jul;51(1):70-9.

Absence of cyclin-D2 and Bcl-2 expression within the germinal centre type of
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma identifies a very good prognostic subgroup of
patients.

Amen F(1), Horncastle D, Elderfield K, Banham AH, Bower M, Macdonald D, Kanfer E,
Naresh KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histopathology, Hammersmith Hospital & Imperial College, London,
UK.

AIMS: To validate and improve the existing algorithm (proposed by Hans et al.) to
classify diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Tissue microarrays constructed from 81 patients with DLBCL
were studied by immunohistochemistry for expression of CD10, Bcl-6, MUM1, Bcl-2, 
cyclin-D2, FOXP1 and PKC-gamma proteins. Cases were classified as either germinal
centre B-like (GCB) or non-GC according to Hans et al. An alternative
classification was also employed, in which cases positive for either CD10 or
Bcl-6 were considered as a GC subgroup and cases negative for both CD10 and Bcl-6
were considered as a non-GC subgroup. GC was further subdivided into favourable
GC (negative for both Bcl-2 and cyclin-D2) and unfavourable GC (positive for
either Bcl-2 or cyclin-D2). The 5-year event-free survival (EFS) amongst patients
classified as favourable GC versus 'others' was 49.5% and 7.3%, respectively (log
rank P < 0.0001). Similarly, the 5-year overall survival (OS) amongst patients
classified as favourable GC versus 'others' was 58.6% and 13.7%, respectively
(log rank P = 0.0001). The difference in survival was independent of the
international prognostic index.
CONCLUSIONS: In this group of patients the risk stratification based on the new
algorithm was better than that proposed by Hans et al.

PMID: 17593082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Int Immunol. 2007 Jul;19(7):825-35. Epub 2007 Jun 22.

FOXP3 is a homo-oligomer and a component of a supramolecular regulatory complex
disabled in the human XLAAD/IPEX autoimmune disease.

Li B(1), Samanta A, Song X, Iacono KT, Brennan P, Chatila TA, Roncador G, Banham 
AH, Riley JL, Wang Q, Shen Y, Saouaf SJ, Greene MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
252 John Morgan Building, 36th and Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6082,
USA.

We have found that FOXP3 is an oligomeric component of a large supramolecular
complex. Certain FOXP3 mutants with single amino acid deletions in the leucine
zipper domain of FOXP3 are associated with the X-linked autoimmunity-allergic
dysregulation (XLAAD) and immunodysregulation, polyendocrinopathy and
enteropathy, X-linked (IPEX) syndrome in humans. We report that the single amino 
acid deletion found in human XLAAD/IPEX patients within the leucine zipper domain
of FOXP3 does not disrupt its ability to join the larger protein complex, but
eliminates FOXP3 homo-oligomerization as well as heteromerization with FOXP1. We 
found that the zinc finger-leucine zipper domain region of FOXP3 is sufficient to
mediate both homodimerization and homotetramerization. However, the same domain
region from XLAAD/IPEX FOXP3 containing an E251 deletion prevents oligomerizaton 
and the protein remains monomeric. We also found that wild-type FOXP3 directly
binds to the human IL-2 promoter, but the E251 deletion in FOXP3 in XLAAD/IPEX
patient's T cells disrupts its association with the IL-2 promoter in vivo and in 
vitro, and limits repression of IL-2 transcription after T-cell activation. Our
results suggest that compromising FOXP3 homo-oligomerization and
hetero-oligomerization with the FOXP1 protein impairs DNA-binding properties
leading to distinct biochemical phenotypes in humans with the XLAAD/IPEX
autoimmune syndrome. This study explains some features of the pathogenesis of a
disease syndrome that arises as a consequence of specific assembly failure of a
transcriptional repressor due to certain mutations within the FOXP3 leucine
zipper.

PMID: 17586580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Haematologica. 2007 Jun;92(6):863-4.

Deregulated over expression of FOXP1 protein in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
does not occur as a result of gene rearrangement.

Barrans SL, Fenton JA, Ventura R, Smith A, Banham AH, Jack AS.

Strong uniform expression of FOXP1 protein occurs in a subgroup of non-germinal
centre (GC) diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL). We have investigated gene
rearrangement as a potential mechanism for deregulated expression of FOXP1
however, using FISH FOXP1 translocations were not found in any case with
over-expression of the protein.

PMID: 17550867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Gut. 2007 Oct;56(10):1358-63. Epub 2007 May 24.

Clinical impact of genetic aberrations in gastric MALT lymphoma: a comprehensive 
analysis using interphase fluorescence in situ hybridisation.

Nakamura S(1), Ye H, Bacon CM, Goatly A, Liu H, Banham AH, Ventura R, Matsumoto
T, Iida M, Ohji Y, Yao T, Tsuneyoshi M, Du MQ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Histopathology, Department of Pathology, University of
Cambridge, Box 231, Level 3 Lab Block, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK. sn330@cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: There is a need for genetic biomarkers to guide prognosis
and management of gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphomas. We 
assessed the incidence and clinical significance of the MALT lymphoma-associated 
genetic abnormalities t(11;18)/API2-MALT1, t(1;14)/BCL10-IGH, t(14;18)/IGH-MALT1,
t(3;14)/FOXP1-IGH, and extra copies of MALT1 and FOXP1 in gastric MALT lymphomas 
from Japan.
METHODS: The presence of translocations and copy number changes involving MALT1, 
IGH and FOXP1 were assessed in 90 cases of gastric MALT lymphoma using interphase
fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH). In cases carrying a MALT1
translocation, FISH for API2-MALT1 was performed, whereas in those carrying an
IGH translocation, FISH was performed for BCL10, BCL6, BCL2, c-MYC and/or CCND1.
RESULTS: t(11;18)/API2-MALT1 was detected in 18 of 87 (21%) cases and was
significantly associated with Helicobacter pylori-negativity, resistance to H
pylori eradication and Bcl10 nuclear expression. Four of 68 (6%) cases carried a 
translocation involving IGH and FOXP1 (n = 1), BCL2 (n = 1) or an unknown partner
(n = 2). Neither t(1;14)/BCL10-IGH nor t(14;18)/IGH-MALT1 was detected. Extra
copies of MALT1 and FOXP1 were detected in 18 of 71 (25%) cases and 10 of 59
(17%) cases, respectively. The presence of extra copies of MALT1 was
significantly associated with progression or relapse of lymphoma, and was an
independent adverse prognostic factor for event-free survival as determined by
multivariate analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: t(11;18)/API2-MALT1 is frequent, whereas IGH-involved translocations
are rare in gastric MALT lymphoma in Japan. The presence of extra copies of
MALT1, often suggestive of partial or complete trisomy 18, is a frequent genetic 
aberration in gastric MALT lymphoma, which appears to predict adverse clinical
behaviour.

PMCID: PMC2000261
PMID: 17525089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Prostate. 2007 Jul 1;67(10):1091-8.

Expression of the forkhead transcription factor FOXP1 is associated both with
hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) and the androgen receptor in prostate cancer but
is not directly regulated by androgens or hypoxia.

Banham AH(1), Boddy J, Launchbury R, Han C, Turley H, Malone PR, Harris AL, Fox
SB.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital,
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.

BACKGROUND: FOXP1 is a member of the winged helix or forkhead transcription
factors. Recent studies have indicated possible roles for FOXP1 as a candidate
tumor suppressor gene and a potential estrogen receptor (ER) co-regulator in the 
development of breast cancer. This study investigated whether FOXP1 has a similar
relationship to the androgen receptor (AR) in prostate cancer and how these
factors relate to the presence of hypoxia.
METHODS: FOXP1, the AR and various hypoxia-regulated proteins (HIF-1alpha,
HIF-2alpha, and VEGF) were measured with immunohistochemistry using a tissue
microarray constructed from 167 archival radical prostatectomies. Statistical
analyses compared the co-expression of these factors both with each other and
conventional parameters including patient age, pre-operative prostate specific
antigen (PSA), post-operative Gleason score, capsular invasion, surgical margin
status, tumor volume, and PSA recurrence. The influence of hypoxia,
dihydrotestosterone, and the AR blocker Casodex was investigated in prostate cell
lines VCaP and LNCaP in vitro.
RESULTS: Expression of nuclear FOXP1 was significantly positively correlated with
AR (P = 0.0001), hypoxia inducible factor 1alpha (HIF-1alpha) (P = 0.01),
HIF-2alpha (P = 0.0001), and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) (P =
0.007) expression. A positive significant relationship was also identified with
the post-operative Gleason score (P = 0.03) but not with the other variables,
including PSA recurrence (P > 0.05). There was no significant change in
expression in FOXP1 protein levels under conditions of hypoxia (0.1%),
dihydrotestosterone stimulation (10 or 100 nM), or androgen blockade with Casodex
(1, 10, or 50 microM).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that there may be a hormonal and hypoxia
independent regulatory mechanism coordinating the expression of HIFs, the AR, and
FOXP1 in prostate tumors.

PMID: 17477366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Development. 2007 May;134(10):1991-2000. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

Foxp2 and Foxp1 cooperatively regulate lung and esophagus development.

Shu W(1), Lu MM, Zhang Y, Tucker PW, Zhou D, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania, 956 BRB II/III, 421
Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The airways of the lung develop through a reiterative process of branching
morphogenesis that gives rise to the intricate and extensive surface area
required for postnatal respiration. The forkhead transcription factors Foxp2 and 
Foxp1 are expressed in multiple foregut-derived tissues including the lung and
intestine. In this report, we show that loss of Foxp2 in mouse leads to defective
postnatal lung alveolarization, contributing to postnatal lethality. Using in
vitro and in vivo assays, we show that T1alpha, a lung alveolar epithelial type 1
cell-restricted gene crucial for lung development and function, is a direct
target of Foxp2 and Foxp1. Remarkably, loss of a single Foxp1 allele in addition 
to complete loss of Foxp2 results in increased severity of morphological defects 
in mutant lungs and leads to perinatal loss of all Foxp2(-/-);Foxp1(+/-) mice.
Expression of N-myc and Hop, crucial regulators of lung development, is
compromised in Foxp2(-/-);Foxp1(+/-) mutants. In addition to the defects in lung 
development, esophageal muscle development is disrupted in Foxp2(-/-);Foxp1(+/-) 
embryos, a tissue where Foxp2 and Foxp1 are co-expressed. These data identify
Foxp2 and Foxp1 as crucial regulators of lung and esophageal development,
underscoring the necessity of these transcription factors in the development of
anterior foregut-derived tissues and demonstrating functional cooperativity
between members of the Foxp1/2/4 family in tissues where they are co-expressed.

PMID: 17428829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Apr 20;25(12):1581-7. Epub 2007 Mar 12.

Reclassification of 300 primary cutaneous B-Cell lymphomas according to the new
WHO-EORTC classification for cutaneous lymphomas: comparison with previous
classifications and identification of prognostic markers.

Senff NJ(1), Hoefnagel JJ, Jansen PM, Vermeer MH, van Baarlen J, Blokx WA,
Canninga-van Dijk MR, Geerts ML, Hebeda KM, Kluin PM, Lam KH, Meijer CJ, Willemze
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. N.J.Senff@LUMC.nl

PURPOSE: In the new WHO-European Organisation for Research and Treatment of
Cancer (WHO-EORTC) classification for cutaneous lymphomas three major groups of
primary cutaneous B-cell lymphoma (CBCL) are distinguished: primary cutaneous
marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (PCMZL) and primary cutaneous follicle center
lymphoma (PCFCL) with a good prognosis, and primary cutaneous large B-cell
lymphoma, leg type (PCLBCL-LT), with an intermediate-level prognosis. This study 
aimed to assess the clinical significance of the new classification compared with
previous classification schemes (EORTC 1997; WHO 2001) and to define prognostic
factors within the newly defined categories.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: In the present study clinical data and histologic sections 
of 300 patients with CBCL, formerly classified according to the EORTC
classification, were reviewed and reclassified according to the WHO and the new
WHO-EORTC classification schemes.
RESULTS: After reclassification, the study comprised 71 patients with PCMZL, 171 
patients with PCFCL, and 58 patients with PCLBCL-LT, showing 5-year
disease-specific survivals of 98%, 95%, and 50%, respectively. When compared with
the EORTC and WHO schemes, 5.3% and 36.3% of patients with CBCL were reclassified
into another prognostic category. Multivariate analysis of PCFCL revealed
localization on the leg and expression of FOXP1 as independent parameters
associated with a poor prognosis. Expression of Bcl-2 or MUM-1 had no significant
effect on survival in this group. In PCLBCL-LT, no independent prognostic
parameters were found.
CONCLUSION: These results emphasize the clinical significance of the WHO-EORTC
classification, but suggest that within the group of PCFCL, distinction should be
made between lymphomas presenting on the legs and lymphomas presenting at other
sites.

PMID: 17353548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Clin Oncol. 2007 Apr 10;25(11):1350-6. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Phase I study of intraventricular administration of rituximab in patients with
recurrent CNS and intraocular lymphoma.

Rubenstein JL(1), Fridlyand J, Abrey L, Shen A, Karch J, Wang E, Issa S, Damon L,
Prados M, McDermott M, O'Brien J, Haqq C, Shuman M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, and the Department of Epidemiology and
Biostatistics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, 
USA. jamesr@medicine.ucsf.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2007 Oct 1;25(28):4508-9; author reply 4509-11.

PURPOSE: We previously determined that intravenous administration of rituximab
results in limited penetration of this agent into the leptomeningeal space.
Systemic rituximab does not reduce the risk of CNS relapse or dissemination in
patients with large cell lymphoma. We therefore conducted a phase I
dose-escalation study of intrathecal rituximab monotherapy in patients with
recurrent CNS non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The protocol planned nine injections of rituximab (10 mg,
25 mg, or 50 mg dose levels) through an Ommaya reservoir over 5 weeks. The safety
profile of intraventricular rituximab was defined in 10 patients.
RESULTS: The maximum tolerated dose was determined to be 25 mg and rapid
craniospinal axis distribution was demonstrated. Cytologic responses were
detected in six patients; four patients exhibited complete response. Two patients
experienced improvement in intraocular NHL and one exhibited resolution of
parenchymal NHL. High RNA levels of Pim-2 and FoxP1 in meningeal lymphoma cells
were associated with disease refractory to rituximab monotherapy.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that intrathecal rituximab (10 to 25 mg) is
feasible and effective in NHL involving the CNS.

PMID: 17312328  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Curr Opin Immunol. 2007 Apr;19(2):129-36. Epub 2007 Feb 9.

Transcriptional regulation in early B cell development.

Fuxa M(1), Skok JA.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Immunology and Molecular Pathology, Division of Infection
and Immunity, University College London, London W1T 4JF, United Kingdom.

Transcription factors and signalling molecules are important for both lineage
commitment and lineage-specific regulation. The B cell specification factor Pax5 
plays a dual role in B lineage commitment. Simultaneously, it potentiates and
limits lineage choice by activating genes that are required for the B cell
program while repressing lineage-inappropriate genes; more than 100 of the latter
have now been identified. In this context, repression of the tyrosine kinase Flt3
has been shown to be essential for B lineage commitment. Regulation of antigen
receptor recombination constitutes another level at which lineage specificity is 
determined, and the identification of two factors, E47 and FOXP1, which regulate 
the activity of the recombinase enzymes in B lineage cells, provides insight into
the mechanisms that determine this. New information regarding the control of
ordered recombination and allelic exclusion comes from studies of cis-acting
elements within the Ig loci.

PMID: 17292598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2007 Apr;56(4):588-97. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

New prognostic relevant factors in primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell
lymphomas.

Hallermann C(1), Niermann C, Fischer RJ, Schulze HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Institute for Tumors of the Skin, Munster, Germany.
christian.hallermann@fachklinik-hornheide.de

BACKGROUND: There is a growing body of literature that has enhanced our
understanding of the biology of primary cutaneous diffuse large B-cell lymphoma
(PCDLBCL) including in the context of gene profiling studies. Recent studies have
demonstrated an activated proliferation profile associated with leg type lymphoma
including overexpression of proto-oncogenes PIM1, PIM2, and cMYC, and the
transcription factors MUM1 and OCT2. Although gene profiling is very useful in
understanding the molecular basis of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (LBCL), it is 
not practical from a routine diagnostic perspective. In this regard, the purpose 
of the study was to further define an armamentarium of easily applied
immunohistochemical stains to accurately prognosticate PCDLBCL.
METHODS: In all, 35 patients with PCDLBCL, 14 of follicle center and 21 of leg
type, were analyzed using antibodies against CD5, CD138, BCL2, BCL6, OCT2, MUM1, 
FOXP1, and cMYC. Findings were correlated with clinical data.
RESULTS: All cases stained negative for CD5 and CD138. Both subtypes differed in 
distinct staining patterns for BCL6, BCL2, OCT2, MUM1, and FOXP1. Staining for
BCL2, OCT2, and/or MUM1 was associated with poor, and BCL6 with a favorable
prognosis. Expression of cMYC was irrespective of prognosis or subtype, whereas
ulceration or primary manifestation on the leg or multiple lesions was indicative
for worse prognosis.
LIMITATIONS: Case number was a limitation.
CONCLUSION: Discriminating PCDLBCL supports the validity of the World Health
Organization/European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer
classification. To identify risk factors in patients with PCDLBCL we recommend
thorough evaluation of clinical presentation and exploratory staining pattern for
BCL2, BCL6, MUM1 and OCT2.

PMID: 17289214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Pathol Int. 2007 Jan;57(1):47-51.

MALT1, BCL10 and FOXP1 in salivary gland mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
lymphomas.

Borovecki A(1), Korac P, Ventura RA, Perisa MM, Banham AH, Dominis M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pathology and Cytology, Merkur University Hospital,
Zagreb, Croatia. anaborov@yahoo.com

In view of the certain anatomic site-dependent frequency of chromosomal
translocations involved in extranodal marginal zone B cell lymphoma of
mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma) pathogenesis, 17 salivary gland
MALT lymphoma cases were analyzed for MALT1 and FOXP1 translocations. B cell
CLL/lymphoma 10 (BCL10) and forkhead box PA (FOXP1) protein expression were
studied by immunohistochemistry and translocations identified using fluorescence 
in situ hybridization (FISH)-specific probes FOXP1, t(11;18)(q21;q21)/API2-MALT1 
and t(14;18)(q32;q21)/IgH-MALT1. None of the 11 analyzed cases showed FOXP1
rearrangement or amplification. The t(11;18) was present in five of 13 cases and 
the t(14;18) in three of 13 cases. MALT1 translocations were mostly mutually
exclusive except in a single case. FOXP1 protein expression showed differences in
the proportion of tumor cells with nuclear expression but not in their intensity,
with the exception of one case where very intense nuclear staining was noted.
BCL10 nuclear expression was present in four of 17 cases, two of which lacked
t(11;18). Our results suggest that MALT1-specific translocations and FOXP1
rearrangements are not commonly involved in pathogenesis. A case with strong
FOXP1 protein expression indicates the possibility that the upregulation of FOXP1
expression is significant in a small subset of salivary gland MALT lymphomas.
Also a single case in which both MALT1 translocations were present indicates that
these are not always mutually exclusive.

PMID: 17199743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Cancer Inform. 2007 Dec 12;3:399-420.

Germinal center B cell-like (GCB) and activated B cell-like (ABC) type of diffuse
large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL): analysis of molecular predictors, signatures, cell
cycle state and patient survival.

Blenk S(1), Engelmann J, Weniger M, Schultz J, Dittrich M, Rosenwald A,
Müller-Hermelink HK, Müller T, Dandekar T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, University of Würzburg, Biozentrum, Am Hubland
Universität Würzburg, Germany.

Aiming to find key genes and events, we analyze a large data set on diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) gene-expression (248 patients, 12196 spots). Applying the
loess normalization method on these raw data yields improved survival
predictions, in particular for the clinical important group of patients with
medium survival time. Furthermore, we identify a simplified prognosis predictor, 
which stratifies different risk groups similarly well as complex signatures. We
identify specific, activated B cell-like (ABC) and germinal center B cell-like
(GCB) distinguishing genes. These include early (e.g. CDKN3) and late (e.g.
CDKN2C) cell cycle genes. Independently from previous classification by marker
genes we confirm a clear binary class distinction between the ABC and GCB
subgroups. An earlier suggested third entity is not supported. A key regulatory
network, distinguishing marked over-expression in ABC from that in GCB, is built 
by: ASB13, BCL2, BCL6, BCL7A, CCND2, COL3A1, CTGF, FN1, FOXP1, IGHM, IRF4, LMO2, 
LRMP, MAPK10, MME, MYBL1, NEIL1 and SH3BP5. It predicts and supports the
aggressive behaviour of the ABC subgroup. These results help to understand target
interactions, improve subgroup diagnosis, risk prognosis as well as therapy in
the ABC and GCB DLBCL subgroups.

PMCID: PMC2675856
PMID: 19455257  [PubMed]


356. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Dec;64(12):2275-8.

[Current understanding of pathogenesis of Graves ophthalmopathy].

[Article in Japanese]

Ando T(1), Eguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Nagasaki University.

Graves ophthalmopathy most frequently develops in a patient suffering from Graves
disease in which autoantibodies to a target antigen, thyrotropin receptor,
activate the autoantigen leading to hyperthyroidism. It is well known that in
Graves ophthalmopathy inflammatory cells infiltrate and hydrophobic
glycosaminoglycan accumulates in the retro -occular tissues. However, in contrast
to Graves disease, little has been known as to how this eye disease develops.
Here we review recent advance in understanding of pathogenesis of Graves
ophthalmopathy.

PMID: 17154091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Am J Surg Pathol. 2006 Dec;30(12):1546-53.

The incidence and anatomic site specificity of chromosomal translocations in
primary extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid
tissue (MALT lymphoma) in North America.

Remstein ED(1), Dogan A, Einerson RR, Paternoster SF, Fink SR, Law M, Dewald GW, 
Kurtin PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester MN
55905, USA. remstein.ellen@mayo.edu

Several balanced translocations have been identified in extranodal marginal zone 
B-cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma) but there
are few data regarding their frequency in different anatomic sites or the
frequency of translocations involving BCL6 or kappa or lambda immunoglobulin
light chain genes (IGK or IGL), particularly in patients from geographic regions 
other than Europe and Japan. One hundred thirty-three paraffin-embedded North
American primary MALT lymphoma specimens from diverse anatomic sites were studied
by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) using probes for API2-MALT1,
IGH-MALT1, IGH-BCL10, IGH-FOXP1, IGH, +/- centromeres 3, 7, 12, and 18, and a
subset (n=74) were analyzed using FISH probes for IGK, IGL, and BCL6.
Translocations were mutually exclusive and were detected in 26% of cases (17%
API2-MALT1, 5% IGH-MALT1, 3% IGH-unknown translocation partner, and 1%
IGH-BCL10). Aneuploidy was associated with IGH-MALT1 and IGH-BCL10 but only
rarely with API2-MALT1. There was striking site specificity, with API2-MALT1
showing a marked predilection for lung and intestine, and IGH-MALT1 and IGH-BCL10
occurring almost exclusively in lung. Twenty-three percent of
translocation-negative primary MALT lymphomas from diverse sites showed
complete/partial trisomy 18. No MALT lymphomas with translocations involving IGK,
IGL, BCL6, or FOXP1 were identified. This FISH panel detected cytogenetic
abnormalities in half of all MALT lymphomas, and translocations arose
preferentially in MALT lymphomas of the lung and gastrointestinal tract.
Differences in incidence and anatomic site specificity of translocations between 
North American and non-North American cases may reflect geographic variability of
infectious or other etiologic factors.

PMID: 17122510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Curr Opin Ophthalmol. 2006 Dec;17(6):523-31.

Lymphomas involving the eye and the ocular adnexa.

Coupland SE(1), Damato B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Royal Liverpool Hospital, Liverpool, England, UK.
s.e.coupland@liverpool.ac.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To describe recent advances in the understanding of the
pathogenesis of the most common malignant lymphomas that occur as primary and
secondary tumors in ocular tissues.
RECENT FINDINGS: Advances have been made in the understanding of the genetic
alterations in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas, including various
chromosomal translocations, such as the most recently described
t(3;14)(p14.1;q32) involving the FOXP1 gene. Further, the development of ocular
adnexal mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas has been associated with
Chlamydia psittaci in some geographic areas. Subdivision of diffuse large B-cell 
lymphoma into clinically prognostic groups had been achieved on the basis of gene
expression profiles using complementary DNA microarrays. Tumor-infiltrating
cells, such as macrophages, have been demonstrated to be of prognostic
significance in follicular lymphoma.
SUMMARY: Understanding of the ocular adnexal and intraocular lymphomas has
advanced with progress in lymphoma classification systems, namely the World
Health Organization lymphoma classification. This knowledge is being fine tuned
with advances in technology, such as complementary DNA microarrays. The clinical 
significance of this scientific progress has yet to be determined.

PMID: 17065920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Thyroid. 2006 Oct;16(10):967-74.

Study of serum antibodies against three eye muscle antigens and the connective
tissue antigen collagen XIII in patients with Graves' disease with and without
ophthalmopathy: correlation with clinical features.

Gopinath B(1), Musselman R, Adams CL, Tani J, Beard N, Wall JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Sydney, Nepean Hospital, Penrith,
New South Wales 2751, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: The extraocular muscles are one of the primary tissues implicated in
the autoimmune-mediated inflammation of thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO). 
Our aim was to determine the prevalence and level of antibodies against three
candidate eye muscle antigens and the orbital fibroblast membrane antigen
collagen XIII, in well-characterized patient groups.
STUDY DESIGN AND PATIENTS: The study cohort consisted of patients with Graves'
hyperthyroidism with and without ophthalmopathy, controls patients with other
thyroid or other autoimmune disorders and healthy subjects. The presence of eye
muscle antibodies was determined using an optimized and standardized
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. We measured antibodies against (i) the 67-kDa 
flavoprotein (Fp) subunit of the mitochondrial enzyme succinate dehydrogenase;
(ii) G2s, a 141 amino acid fragment of the winged-helix transcription factor
FOXP1; (iii) calsequestrin, a 63-kDa calcium-binding protein; and (iv) collagen
XIII, a connective tissue protein that is closely linked to the congestive
ophthalmopathy subtype of TAO. Eye muscle antibody levels were correlated with
clinical diagnosis and presence or not of ophthalmopathy.
RESULTS: Prevalences of positive antibody tests to calsequestrin (75.0%) and
collagen XIII (43.8%) were significantly greater in Graves' disease (GD) patients
with ophthalmopathy than in healthy subjects, whereas modest significance was
demonstrated with antibodies against Fp, but not G2s. Significantly greater serum
levels of antibodies against calsequestrin, G2s, and collagen XIII, but not Fp,
were found in GD patients with ophthalmopathy compared to control patients
without eye disease and healthy subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Calsequestrin and collagen XIII antibodies are the most specific to 
TAO, whereas antibodies against G2s, and to a lesser extent Fp, are also markers 
of ophthalmopathy, but less reliable. These results are unique in that it is the 
first time the significance of a panel of three candidate eye muscle antibodies
and a connective tissue antibody have been evaluated in the same patients with
ophthalmopathy.

PMID: 17042681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Circulation. 2006 Sep 19;114(12):1269-76. Epub 2006 Sep 4.

Transcriptional genomics associates FOX transcription factors with human heart
failure.

Hannenhalli S(1), Putt ME, Gilmore JM, Wang J, Parmacek MS, Epstein JA, Morrisey 
EE, Margulies KB, Cappola TP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Penn Center for Bioinformatics, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Specific transcription factors (TFs) modulate cardiac gene expression
in murine models of heart failure, but their relevance in human subjects remains 
untested. We developed and applied a computational approach called
transcriptional genomics to test the hypothesis that a discrete set of cardiac
TFs is associated with human heart failure.
METHODS AND RESULTS: RNA isolates from failing (n=196) and nonfailing (n=16)
human hearts were hybridized with Affymetrix HU133A arrays, and differentially
expressed heart failure genes were determined. TF binding sites overrepresented
in the -5-kb promoter sequences of these heart failure genes were then determined
with the use of public genome sequence databases. Binding sites for TFs
identified in murine heart failure models (MEF2, NKX, NF-AT, and GATA) were
significantly overrepresented in promoters of human heart failure genes (P<0.002;
false discovery rate 2% to 4%). In addition, binding sites for FOX TFs showed
substantial overrepresentation in both advanced human and early murine heart
failure (P<0.002 and false discovery rate <4% for each). A role for FOX TFs was
supported further by expression of FOXC1, C2, P1, P4, and O1A in failing human
cardiac myocytes at levels similar to established hypertrophic TFs and by
abundant FOXP1 protein in failing human cardiac myocyte nuclei.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results provide the first evidence that specific TFs identified 
in murine models (MEF2, NKX, NFAT, and GATA) are associated with human heart
failure. Moreover, these data implicate specific members of the FOX family of TFs
(FOXC1, C2, P1, P4, and O1A) not previously suggested in heart failure
pathogenesis. These findings provide a crucial link between animal models and
human disease and suggest a specific role for FOX signaling in modulating the
hypertrophic response of the heart to stress in humans.

PMID: 16952980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Nat Immunol. 2006 Aug;7(8):819-26. Epub 2006 Jul 2.

Foxp1 is an essential transcriptional regulator of B cell development.

Hu H(1), Wang B, Borde M, Nardone J, Maika S, Allred L, Tucker PW, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, CBR Institute for Biomedical 
Research, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. hu@cbr.med.harvard.edu

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2006 Aug;7(8):793-4.

Forkhead transcription factors are key participants in development and immune
regulation. Here we demonstrate that absence of the gene encoding the forkhead
transcription factor Foxp1 resulted in a profound defect in early B cell
development. Foxp1 deficiency was associated with decreased expression of all B
lineage genes in B220+ fetal liver cells as well as with a block in the
transition from pro-B cell to pre-B cell involving diminished expression of
recombination-activating genes 1 and 2. Foxp1 bound to the Erag enhancer and was 
involved in controlling variable-(diversity)-joining recombination of the gene
encoding immunoglobulin heavy chain in a B cell lineage-specific way. Our results
identify Foxp1 as an essential participant in the transcriptional regulatory
network of B lymphopoiesis.

PMID: 16819554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Haematologica. 2006 Jun;91(6 Suppl):ECR28.

BCL10 gene amplification associated with strong nuclear BCL10 expression in a
diffuse large B cell lymphoma with IGH-BCL2 fusion.

Ye H(1), Gesk S, Martin-Subero JI, Nader A, Du MQ, Siebert R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Histopathology, Department of Pathology,University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Cytogenetic investigation of a nodal diffuse large B cell lymphoma carrying an
IGH-BCL2-fusion revealed a homogeneously staining region at chromosome 1p21-22.
Fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) demonstrated heterogeneous BCL10 gene
amplification in tumour cells. Immunohistochemistry showed heterogeneous
over-expression of the protein in the nuclei of tumour cells, similar to that
seen in MALT lymphoma cells with t(1;14)(p22;q32).

PMID: 16785131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2006 Jul;16(5):146-52.

Integrin signals, transcription factors, and monocyte differentiation.

Shi C(1), Simon DI.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division and Center for Excellence in Vascular Biology, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

The precise signals responsible for differentiation of circulating monocytes into
tissue macrophages are incompletely defined. "Outside-in" integrin signaling has 
been implicated in modulating gene expression that affects cellular
differentiation. This review highlights the role of transcription factors in
monocyte differentiation and describes how integrin engagement orchestrates
monocyte differentiation signals by regulating the expression of the forkhead
transcription factor Foxp1, which functions as a transcriptional repressor of the
macrophage colony-stimulating factor receptor c-fms. This represents a new
pathway for integrin-dependent modulation of gene expression and control of
cellular differentiation.

PMID: 16781947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mod Pathol. 2006 Sep;19(9):1270-6. Epub 2006 Jun 16.

Expression of B-cell transcription factors in primary cutaneous B-cell lymphoma.

Hoefnagel JJ(1), Mulder MM, Dreef E, Jansen PM, Pals ST, Meijer CJ, Willemze R,
Vermeer MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. j.j.hoefnagel@lumc.nl

Expression patterns of eight transcription factors involved in different stages
of B-cell development were investigated in a large group of primary cutaneous
B-cell lymphomas and compared with expression patterns during normal B-cell
development. The following transcription factors were investigated: Pax-5, PU.1, 
Oct2, BOB.1, Bcl-6, Mum1/IRF4, Blimp-1 and FOXP1. Primary cutaneous large B-cell 
lymphomas, leg type showed aberrant coexpression of Bcl-6 and Mum1/IRF4 and in
addition strong expression of FOXP1. Expression of FOXP1 and Mum1/IRF4 strongly
suggests an activated B-cell type of origin. In contrast, primary cutaneous
follicle center lymphomas showed expression of Bcl-6, Pax-5, PU.1, Oct2 and
BOB.1, but not of Mum1/IRF4, Blimp-1 and FOXP1. Primary cutaneous marginal zone
B-cell lymphoma showed expression of Pax-5, PU.1, Oct2 and BOB.1, but not Bcl-6
by the neoplastic B-cells, and Mum1/IRF4 and Blimp-1 by the neoplastic plasma
cells. In conclusion, in primary cutaneous follicle center lymphoma and primary
cutaneous marginal zone B-cell lymphoma expression patterns were observed similar
to their supposed benign counterparts, germinal center B-cells and postgerminal
center B-cells, respectively, which might reflect their indolent clinical
behaviour and excellent prognosis. In contrast, the activated B-cell expression
pattern in the group of primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphoma, leg type may
contribute to its poor prognosis and Mum1/IRF4 and FOXP1 may serve as additional 
diagnostic markers for this type of primary cutaneous B-cell lymphoma.

Published online 16 June 2006.

PMID: 16778825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Leukemia. 2006 Jul;20(7):1300-3. Epub 2006 May 4.

Genetic rearrangement of FOXP1 is predominantly detected in a subset of diffuse
large B-cell lymphomas with extranodal presentation.

Haralambieva E, Adam P, Ventura R, Katzenberger T, Kalla J, Höller S, Hartmann M,
Rosenwald A, Greiner A, Muller-Hermelink HK, Banham AH, Ott G.

Comment on
    Leukemia. 2005 Apr;19(4):652-8.

PMID: 16673020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Clin Oncol. 2006 Jun 1;24(16):2490-7. Epub 2006 Apr 24.

Forkhead box protein P1 expression in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphomas
predicts poor prognosis and transformation to diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Sagaert X(1), de Paepe P, Libbrecht L, Vanhentenrijk V, Verhoef G, Thomas J,
Wlodarska I, De Wolf-Peeters C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Morphology and Molecular Pathology, and the Centre for Human
Genetics, Catholic University Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
xavier.sagaert@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

PURPOSE: Gene expression profiling studies have reported upregulated mRNA
expression of forkhead box protein P1 (FOXP1) in response to normal B-cell
activation and high expression in a poor prognosis subtype of diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Recently, it was also found that FOXP1 rearrangements
and expression of its protein occur in mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT)
lymphomas. In this study, we investigated FOXP1 expression in its relationship to
morphology, genetic features, and prognosis in a series of 70 MALT lymphomas.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: All samples were morphologically reviewed and stained for
FOXP1. Presence of structural and/or numeric aberrations of the FOXP1, BCL10, and
MALT1 genes was investigated. For all patients, a complete clinical data set was 
collected.
RESULTS: We detected nuclear expression of FOXP1 in 20 of the 70 MALT lymphomas
(nine of them featuring structural or numeric aberrations of the FOXP1 locus).
FOXP1 positivity was confined to MALT lymphomas with poor clinical outcome (with 
impact of FOXP1 expression on relapse rate and disease-free survival). It was
also found that MALT lymphomas with strong FOXP1 expression are at risk of
transforming into an aggressive DLBCL of nongerminal center phenotype if they
feature, in addition, a polymorphic histology and the presence of trisomy 3 and
18.
CONCLUSION: The data presented show that FOXP1 expression is an independent
prognostic factor in MALT lymphomas. The data also support the hypothesis that a 
subgroup of nongerminal center DLBCLs (those marked by FOXP1 expression and
trisomy 3 and 18) might represent a large-cell variant of MALT lymphomas.

PMID: 16636337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Dev Genes Evol. 2006 Oct;216(10):641-6. Epub 2006 Apr 12.

The FoxP subclass in Xenopus laevis development.

Schön C(1), Wochnik A, Rössner A, Donow C, Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung Biochemie, Universität Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081, Ulm,
Germany.

We have investigated the sequences and the expression patterns of different
members of the Xenopus laevis FoxP gene subfamily during embryogenesis. Low
stringency hybridisation of a tadpole cDNA library with an xlFoxP2 fragment led
to the isolation of several splice variants of xlFoxP1, xlFoxP2 and xlFoxP4.
These variants do not only differ by utilisation of different leader exons, but
also by alternative usage of coding exons thereby leading to functional
alterations. For xlFoxP1b, we show that insertion of an additional exon disrupts 
binding to the co-repressor C-terminal binding protein1. Temporal and spatial
expression patterns of xlFoxP2 and xlFoxP4 were analysed by RT-PCR and by whole
mount in situ hybridisation. xlFoxP2 transcripts are detected from mid-gastrula
to late tadpole stages and are found to be localised to pronephros, branchial
arches and distinct structures of the hind-, mid- and forebrain, including the
ciliary marginal zone of the retina. xlFoxP4 RNA is already present in early
cleavage stage embryos and accumulates from midblastula until the end of
embryogenesis. Localised expression is found within the anterior neural fold, in 
the mid- and hindbrain, in the branchial arches as well as in the pancreas.

PMID: 16609867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Structure. 2006 Jan;14(1):159-66.

Structure of the forkhead domain of FOXP2 bound to DNA.

Stroud JC(1), Wu Y, Bates DL, Han A, Nowick K, Paabo S, Tong H, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder,
Colorado 80309, USA.

FOXP (FOXP1-4) is a newly defined subfamily of the forkhead box (FOX)
transcription factors. A mutation in the FOXP2 forkhead domain cosegregates with 
a severe speech disorder, whereas several mutations in the FOXP3 forkhead domain 
are linked to the IPEX syndrome in human and a similar autoimmune phenotype in
mice. Here we report a 1.9 A crystal structure of the forkhead domain of human
FOXP2 bound to DNA. This structure allows us to revise the previously proposed
DNA recognition mechanism and provide a unifying model of DNA binding for the FOX
family of proteins. Our studies also reveal that the FOXP2 forkhead domain can
form a domain-swapped dimer, made possible by a strategic substitution of a
highly conserved proline in conventional FOX proteins with alanine in the P
subfamily. Disease-causing mutations in FOXP2 and FOXP3 map either to the DNA
binding surface or the domain-swapping dimer interface, functionally
corroborating the crystal structure.

PMID: 16407075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mod Pathol. 2006 Jan;19(1):9-16.

Loss of expression and nuclear/cytoplasmic localization of the FOXP1 forkhead
transcription factor are common events in early endometrial cancer: relationship 
with estrogen receptors and HIF-1alpha expression.

Giatromanolaki A(1), Koukourakis MI, Sivridis E, Gatter KC, Harris AL, Banham AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Democritus University of Thrace, Alexandroupolis,
Greece. targ@her.forthnet.gr

The FOXP1 gene has been identified as a new member of the winged helix family of 
transcription factors that have important roles in cellular transformation,
differentiation and proliferation. In this study, we examined the expression of
FOXP1 in the normal and malignant endometrium (stage I endometrioid
adenocarcinoma cases), showing a frequent deregulation of its expression in
cancer. Proliferative endometrium showed predominantly nuclear localization of
FOXP1, while exclusively weak cytoplasmic staining was present in the secretory
phase. Loss of nuclear expression was the most striking event in endometrial
adenocarcinoma. Nuclear expression ranged from 0 to 20% (median 0%). Cytoplasmic 
expression was noted more frequently, ranging from 0 to 90% of cancer cells
(median 30%). Overall, 24/82 cases (29.3%) were observed to lack both nuclear and
cytoplasmic FOXP1 expression. Tumors with exclusively cytoplasmic expression of
FOXP1 were linked with deep myometrial invasion and hypoxia-inducible factors
1alpha (HIF-1alpha) expression. On the other hand, the presence of nuclear FOXP1 
expression was significantly linked with ER-alpha reactivity. Survival analysis
did not reveal significant differences among patients grouped by FOXP1
expression, presumably due to the high curability of stage I disease. This study 
provides evidence on pathways to be investigated to elucidate the interplay
between FOXP1, ER-alpha and HIF-1alpha in hormone dependent cancers.

PMID: 16258506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 Feb;45(2):164-8.

t(3;14)(p14;q32) results in aberrant expression of FOXP1 in a case of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.

Fenton JA(1), Schuuring E, Barrans SL, Banham AH, Rollinson SJ, Morgan GJ, Jack
AS, van Krieken JH, Kluin PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematological Oncology, University of Leeds, United Kingdom.
j.a.l.fenton@leeds.ac.uk

Strong expression of Forkhead box-P1 (FOXP1), a winged-helix transcription
factor, has been identified as an independent prognostic factor in diffuse large 
B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). However, possible mechanisms of deregulation of this
gene, on 3p14.1, have yet to be elucidated. We have identified a breakpoint at
the IGA1 gene in the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) locus at 14q32 that was
juxtaposed to the FOXP1 gene locus in a gastric DLBCL that showed strong
expression of FOXP1. This may be one possible mechanism of deregulating FOXP1
expression by placing it under the control of IGH enhancers.

PMID: 16252263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Mol Histol. 2005 May;36(4):249-56.

The FOXP1 transcription factor is expressed in the majority of follicular
lymphomas but is rarely expressed in classical and lymphocyte predominant
Hodgkin's lymphoma.

Brown P(1), Marafioti T, Kusec R, Banham AH.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, 
University of Oxford, Level 5, Room 5501, Oxford, OX3 9DU, UK.

The expression of the FOXP1 forkhead/winged helix transcription factor has been
investigated in normal and neoplastic lymphoid tissues using the FOXP1-specific
monoclonal antibody, JC12. Using single and double immunoenzymatic staining,
FOXP1 expression has been studied in a series of classical and lymphocyte
predominant Hodgkin's lymphomas, follicle centre lymphomas and Hodgkin's
lymphoma-derived cell lines. Neoplastic cells in the majority of classical and
lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's lymphoma were FOXP1-negative. In two cases of
classical Hodgkin's lymphoma, the tumour cells showed mislocalisation of FOXP1 to
the cytoplasm, while in one case of lymphocyte predominant Hodgkin's lymphoma,
and in the Hodgkin's lymphoma cell line KMH2, scattered tumour cells showed
nuclear expression of FOXP1. In contrast, the tumour cells in the majority of
follicle centre lymphomas showed strong nuclear FOXP1 reactivity. Double
labelling studies of lymphoid tissue indicated that a variable proportion of
CD20-positive germinal centre B cells express FOXP1 while the vast majority of
CD30-positive cells are FOXP1-negative. The heterogeneity of FOXP1 expression in 
germinal centre-derived lymphomas, may have more to do with the transforming
events underlying these distinct types of lymphoma than with their common origin.

PMID: 16200457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Clin Oncol. 2005 Sep 10;23(26):6370-8.

Molecular pathogenesis of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma.

Farinha P(1), Gascoyne RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, 600 W 10th Ave,
Vancouver, BC V5Z 4E6, Canada.

Extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphomas of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT) type occur in a number of anatomic sites, but share overlapping
morphologic and immunophenotypic features. Helicobacter pylori infection has been
identified as an etiologic factor in gastric MALT lymphoma, and a growing list of
other infectious organisms have recently been shown to be associated with MALT
lymphomas at other anatomic sites. Although cause and effect has not been
established for most of these infectious agents, our understanding of the biology
has significantly improved, in part through the application of standard
cytogenetic analyses. The common karyotypic alterations that characterize MALT
lymphomas include the trisomies 3 and 18, the translocations t(11;18)(q21;q21),
t(1;14)(p22;q32), t(14;18)(q32;q21), t(3;14)(q27;q32), and the recently described
t(3;14)(p14.1;q32). This apparent complexity of cytogenetic alterations that have
now been implicated in the pathogenesis of extranodal MALT lymphoma serves as a
paradigm for molecular cross talk in neoplastic disease. Recent data have shown
that at least three of the disparate translocations affect a common signaling
mechanism, and thus unify all three under a common pathogenesis, resulting in the
constitutive activation of the nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) pathway. It may
be that the new MALT-related translocation involving the FOXP1 gene and other as 
yet undiscovered translocations may all have in common increased NF-kappaB
signaling.

PMID: 16155022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Cancer Lett. 2006 May 18;236(2):186-90. Epub 2005 Jul 14.

Reduced expressions of Foxp1 and Rassf1a genes in lung adenocarcinomas induced by
N-nitrosobis(2-hydroxypropyl)amine in rats.

Shimizu K(1), Kato A, Hinotsume D, Shigemura M, Hanaoka M, Shimoichi Y, Honoki K,
Tsujiuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Biology and Bioinformatics, Department of Life Science,
Faculty of Science and Technology, Kinki University, 3-4-1, Kowakae,
Higashiosaka, Osaka 577-8502, Japan.

To clarify the involvement of the Foxp1 and Rassf1a genes in lung carcinogenesis,
we investigated their expressions in lung adenocarcinomas induced by
N-nitrosobis(2-hydroxypropyl)amine (BHP) in rats. Six week old male Wistar rats
were given 2000 ppm BHP in their drinking water for 12 weeks and maintained
without further treatment until they were sacrificed at 25 weeks. A total of 10
lung adenocarcinomas were obtained, along with the total RNA from each for
assessment of expression by reverse transcription (RT)-polymerase chain reaction 
(PCR). The reduced expressions of the Foxp1 and Rassf1a genes were observed in
some of the lung adenocarcinomas. These analyses were also confirmed by real-time
quantitative RT-PCR. These results suggest that reduced expressions of Foxp1 and 
Rassf1a genes may play a role in the development of lung adenocarcinomas induced 
by BHP in rats.

PMID: 16023287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Blood. 2005 Oct 1;106(7):2491-7. Epub 2005 Jun 9.

Primary cutaneous large B-cell lymphomas: clinicopathologic features,
classification, and prognostic factors in a large series of patients.

Kodama K(1), Massone C, Chott A, Metze D, Kerl H, Cerroni L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.

In the new World Health Organization/European Organization for Research and
Treatment of Cancer (WHO/EORTC) classification of cutaneous lymphomas, large
B-cell lymphomas (LBCLs) are divided into 3 groups: LBCL, leg-type (LBCLLT);
follicle center lymphoma, diffuse type (FCLDT); and LBCL, others (LBCLO). We
studied a large number of primary cutaneous LBCLs to test the validity of the
classification and to identify prognostic factors for these patients.
Ninety-three cases of primary cutaneous LBCL were analyzed for clinicopathologic 
features, expression of several markers including Bcl-2, Bcl-6, MUM-1, and
FOX-P1, in situ hybridization for Epstein-Barr virus, and molecular analyses of
IGH gene rearrangement and of Borrelia burgdorferi and human herpesvirus 8 DNA.
Patients were classified into the following categories: FCLDT, 44 cases; LBCLLT, 
40 cases; and LBCLO, 9 cases. Statistical analyses showed that the LBCLLT and
FCLDT groups were clearly distinct in terms of clinicopathologic features and
survival. The LBCLO group had features in between those of LBCLLT and FCLDT. Our 
study shows that accurate morphologic and phenotypic analyses allow us to
stratify most patients into the prognostically different categories of LBCLLT and
FCLDT. The definition of a third category of LBCLO requires further studies to
clarify whether these cases indeed show distinct clinicopathologic features.

PMID: 15947086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Leukemia. 2005 Aug;19(8):1299-305.

FOXP1, a gene highly expressed in a subset of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, is
recurrently targeted by genomic aberrations.

Wlodarska I(1), Veyt E, De Paepe P, Vandenberghe P, Nooijen P, Theate I, Michaux 
L, Sagaert X, Marynen P, Hagemeijer A, De Wolf-Peeters C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Iwona.Wlodarska@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

The transcription factor Forkhead box protein P1 (FOXP1) is highly expressed in a
proportion of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL). In this report, we provide
cytogenetic and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) data showing that FOXP1
(3p13) is recurrently targeted by chromosome translocations. The genomic
rearrangement of FOXP1 was identified by FISH in three cases with a
t(3;14)(p13;q32) involving the immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) locus, and in one
case with a variant t(2;3) affecting sequences at 2q36. These aberrations were
associated with strong expression of FOXP1 protein in tumor cells, as
demonstrated by immunohistochemistry (IHC). The cases with t(3p13) were diagnosed
as DLBCL ( x 1), gastric MALT lymphoma ( x 1) and B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, 
not otherwise specified ( x 2). Further IHC and FISH studies performed on 98
cases of DLBCL and 93 cases of extranodal marginal zone lymphoma showed a high
expression of FOXP1 in approximately 13 and 12% of cases, respectively. None of
these cases showed, however, FOXP1 rearrangements by FISH. However,
over-representation of the FOXP1 locus found in one additional case of DLBCL may 
represent another potential mechanism underlying an increased expression of this 
gene.

Leukemia (2005) 19, 1299-1305.

PMID: 15944719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mod Pathol. 2005 Oct;18(10):1377-84.

Expression of PKC-beta or cyclin D2 predicts for inferior survival in diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma.

Hans CP(1), Weisenburger DD, Greiner TC, Chan WC, Aoun P, Cochran GT, Pan Z,
Smith LM, Lynch JC, Bociek RG, Bierman PJ, Vose JM, Armitage JO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology, University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198-3135, USA. chans@unmc.edu

We sought to determine whether identification of poor-risk subgroups of diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) using immunohistochemical stains would have
practical utility with regard to prognosis and therapeutic decisions. Tissue
microarray blocks were created using replicate samples of formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue from 200 cases of de novo DLBCL. The sections were
stained with antibodies to proteins that are expressed by activated or
proliferating B cells including MUM1, FOXP1, bcl-2, survivin, protein kinase
C-beta (PKC-beta), cyclin D2, cyclin D3, and Ki-67. In univariate analysis, tumor
expression of cyclin D2 (P = 0.025) or PKC-beta (P = 0.015) was associated with a
worse overall survival, whereas none of the other markers was predictive of
overall survival. Patients with DLBCL that expressed either cyclin D2 or PKC-beta
had a 5-year overall survival of only 30% as compared to 52% for those who were
negative for both markers (P = 0.0019). In multivariate analysis, the expression 
of cyclin D2 or PKC-beta was an independent predictor of poor overall survival (P
= 0.035). Cyclin D2 and PKC-beta expression will be useful in designing a
'biological prognostic index' for patients with DLBCL.

PMID: 15920548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Clin Immunol. 2005 Apr;115(1):3-9.

In vitro expanded human CD4+CD25+ regulatory T cells suppress effector T cell
proliferation.

Earle KE(1), Tang Q, Zhou X, Liu W, Zhu S, Bonyhadi ML, Bluestone JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, UCSF Diabetes Center, University of California, Box
0540, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco, CA 94143-0540, USA.

Regulatory T cells (Tregs) have been shown to be critical in the balance between 
autoimmunity and tolerance and have been implicated in several human autoimmune
diseases. However, the small number of Tregs in peripheral blood limits their
therapeutic potential. Therefore, we developed a protocol that would allow for
the expansion of Tregs while retaining their suppressive activity. We isolated
CD4+CD25 hi cells from human peripheral blood and expanded them in vitro in the
presence of anti-CD3 and anti-CD28 magnetic Xcyte Dynabeads and high
concentrations of exogenous Interleukin (IL)-2. Tregs were effectively expanded
up to 200-fold while maintaining surface expression of CD25 and other markers of 
Tregs: CD62L, HLA-DR, CCR6, and FOXP3. The expanded Tregs suppressed
proliferation and cytokine secretion of responder PBMCs in co-cultures stimulated
with anti-CD3 or alloantigen. Treg expansion is a critical first step before
consideration of Tregs as a therapeutic intervention in patients with autoimmune 
or graft-versus-host disease.

PMID: 15870014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Apr 5;102(14):5138-43. Epub 2005 Mar 24.

Foxp3 interacts with nuclear factor of activated T cells and NF-kappa B to
repress cytokine gene expression and effector functions of T helper cells.

Bettelli E(1), Dastrange M, Oukka M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Scurfy mice, which are deficient in a functional Foxp3, exhibit a severe
lymphoproliferative disorder and display generalized over-production of
cytokines. Here, we show that, among the Foxp transcriptional factor family,
which includes Foxp1, Foxp2, and Foxp3, only Foxp3 has the ability to inhibit
IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-gamma production by primary T helper cells. We found that
Foxp3 physically associates with the Rel family transcription factors, nuclear
factor of activated T cells (NFAT) and NF-kappaB, and blocks their ability to
induce the endogenous expression of their target genes, including key cytokine
genes. More importantly, T cells derived from scurfy mice have a dramatic
increase in nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) and NF-kappa B
transcriptional activity compared with the T cells derived from WT mice.
Furthermore, complementation of Foxp3 in scurfy-derived T cells lowers the NFAT
and NF-kappa B transcriptional activity to the physiological level. Finally, we
show that myelin proteolipid protein-specific autoreactive T cells transduced
with Foxp3 cannot mediate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, providing
further support that Foxp3 suppresses the effector function of autoreactive T
cells. Foxp3 has already been associated with the generation of CD4(+)CD25+
regulatory T cells; our data additionally demonstrate that Foxp3 suppresses the
effector functions of T helper cells by directly inhibiting the activity of two
key transcription factors, NFAT and NF-kappa B, which are essential for cytokine 
gene expression and T cell functions.

PMCID: PMC555574
PMID: 15790681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(1):53-8.

The Fox gene family in Xenopus laevis:FoxI2, FoxM1 and FoxP1 in early
development.

Pohl BS(1), Rössner A, Knöchel W.

Author information: 
(1)Abt. Biochemie, Universität Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

We here describe the sequences and expression patterns of three new Fox (fork
head box) transcription factors in Xenopus laevis embryos. xlFoxI2, another
member of subclass I, is maternally transcribed. Zygotic transcripts are first
detected during neurulation and become localised to the dorsal part of
epibranchial placodes. xlFoxM1 like xlFoxP1 are the first members of subclasses M
and P described in Xenopus. Both genes are maternally expressed and transcripts
are found during early cleavage stages in the animal blastomeres. xlFoxM1 is
strongly upregulated during neurula stages and transcripts are localised in the
neuroectoderm. Later, expression is found in the spinal cord, the
rhombencephalon, the retina and in the branchial arches. xlFoxP1 is activated
during organogenesis and is mainly expressed in the brain, head mesenchyme and in
the splanchnic layer of the lateral plate mesoderm.

PMID: 15744668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2005 Feb;62(4):397-409.

Forkhead transcription factors in immunology.

Jonsson H(1), Peng SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The forkhead (Fox) gene family comprises a diverse group of "winged-helix"
transcription factors that play important roles in development, metabolism,
cancer and aging. Recently, several forkhead genes have been demonstrated to play
critical roles in lymphocyte development and effector function, including Foxp3
in the development of regulatory T cells, Foxj1 and Foxo3a in the regulation of
CD4+ T cell tolerance, and Foxn1 in thymic development. Roles for other forkhead 
genes have also been proposed, including Foxp1 in macrophage differentiation,
Foxq1 in natural killer cell effector function and Foxd2 in T cell activation.
Thus, forkhead genes promise insight into the mechanisms of immunoregulation in
several immune cell lineages, and their dysregulation likely contributes to the
pathogenesis of several immunological disorders, suggesting that their study will
lead to the development of novel therapeutic agents.

PMID: 15719167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Feb 1;11(3):1065-72.

Expression of the FOXP1 transcription factor is strongly associated with inferior
survival in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Banham AH(1), Connors JM, Brown PJ, Cordell JL, Ott G, Sreenivasan G, Farinha P, 
Horsman DE, Gascoyne RD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Research Fund Immunodiagnostics Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical
Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Headington,
Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom. alison.banham@ndcls.ox.ac.uk

Gene expression profiling studies have reported up-regulated mRNA expression of
the FOXP1 forkhead transcription factor in response to normal B-cell activation
and high expression in a poor prognosis subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
(DLBCL). The purpose of this study was to investigate the prognostic importance
of FOXP1 protein expression in an independent series of DLBCL.First, the
specificity of our FOXP1 monoclonal antibody was verified by confirming that it
did not recognize the closely related FOXP2, FOXP3, or FOXP4 proteins. FOXP1
protein expression was then analyzed by immunohistochemistry using a DLBCL tissue
microarray constructed from 101 previously untreated de novo cases from the
British Columbia Cancer Agency. FOXP1 expression was scored as either positive
(>30% positive nuclei) or negative (<30% positive nuclei). The overall survival
curves clearly showed that patients grouped as FOXP1-positive (40%) had a
significantly decreased overall survival (P = 0.0001). FOXP1-positive patients
had a median overall survival of 1.6 years compared with 12.2 years in
FOXP1-negative cases. In addition, FOXP1-positive patients showed a clear trend
to earlier progression in comparison to the FOXP1-negative patients. The analysis
of FOXP1 expression within low, medium, and high International Prognostic Index
groupings found that FOXP1-negative patients had better overall survival within
each group indicating that FOXP1 expression has predictive value independent of
the International Prognostic Index subgrouping, a finding that was confirmed in
multivariate analysis. These initial results suggest that FOXP1 expression may be
important in DLBCL pathogenesis.

PMID: 15709173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Leukemia. 2005 Apr;19(4):652-8.

T(3;14)(p14.1;q32) involving IGH and FOXP1 is a novel recurrent chromosomal
aberration in MALT lymphoma.

Streubel B(1), Vinatzer U, Lamprecht A, Raderer M, Chott A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vienna General Hospital, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna, Austria. berthold.streubel@meduniwien.ac.at

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2006 Jul;20(7):1300-3.

The three chromosomal translocations t(11;18)(q21;q21), t(14;18)(q32;q21), and
t(1;14)(p22;q32) are associated with MALT lymphoma. In a case of MALT lymphoma of
the thyroid, we observed t(3;14)(p14.1;q32) by cytogenetic analysis. Fluorescence
in situ hybridization studies showed that the immunoglobulin heavy chain locus
(IGH) was rearranged on chromosome 14. Long-distance inverse polymerase chain
reaction identified FOXP1 as the partner gene on chromosome 3. To determine the
frequency of the t(3;14)(p14.1;q32), two fluorescence in situ hybridization
assays were established to screen 91 MALT lymphomas, all of which were negative
for the above-mentioned three translocations, and eight splenic and six nodal
marginal zone lymphomas. Overall, nine MALT lymphomas (10%) harbored
t(3;14)(p14.1;q32) comprising tumors of the thyroid (three of six), ocular adnexa
(four of 20), and skin (two of 20), whereas those of the stomach (n = 20),
salivary gland (n = 20), and lung (n = 5) were negative as well as the splenic
and nodal marginal zone lymphomas. Most t(3;14)(p14.1;q32) + MALT lymphomas
harbored additional genetic abnormalities, such as trisomy 3. Further studies
revealed that the three known translocations and t(3;14)(p14.1;q32) are mutually 
exclusive. Real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
showed upregulation of FOXP1 in cases with t(3;14)(p14.1;q32) or trisomy 3. This 
study identifies FOXP1 as a new translocation partner of IGH in a site-dependent 
subset of MALT lymphomas.

PMID: 15703784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Clin Invest. 2004 Nov;114(9):1209-17.

CD4+ Tregs and immune control.

Fehérvari Z(1), Sakaguchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology, Institute for Frontier Medical Sciences,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. zed72@frontier.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Recent years have seen Tregs become a popular subject of immunological research. 
Abundant experimental data have now confirmed that naturally occurring CD25+CD4+ 
Tregs in particular play a key role in the maintenance of self tolerance, with
their dysfunction leading to severe or even fatal immunopathology. The sphere of 
influence of Tregs is now known to extend well beyond just the maintenance of
immunological tolerance and to impinge on a host of clinically important areas
from cancer to infectious diseases. The identification of specific molecular
markers in both human and murine immune systems has enabled the unprecedented
investigation of these cells and should prove key to ultimately unlocking their
clinical potential.

PMCID: PMC524236
PMID: 15520849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Development. 2004 Sep;131(18):4477-87.

Foxp1 regulates cardiac outflow tract, endocardial cushion morphogenesis and
myocyte proliferation and maturation.

Wang B(1), Weidenfeld J, Lu MM, Maika S, Kuziel WA, Morrisey EE, Tucker PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and The Institute for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

We have recently described a new subfamily of Fox genes, Foxp1/2/4, which are
transcriptional repressors and are thought to regulate important aspects of
development in several tissues, including the lung, brain, thymus and heart.
Here, we show that Foxp1 is expressed in the myocardium as well as the
endocardium of the developing heart. To further explore the role of Foxp1 in
cardiac development, we inactivated Foxp1 through gene targeting in embryonic
stem cells. Foxp1 mutant embryos have severe defects in cardiac morphogenesis,
including outflow tract septation and cushion defects, a thin ventricular
myocardial compact zone caused by defects in myocyte maturation and
proliferation, and lack of proper ventricular septation. These defects lead to
embryonic death at E14.5 and are similar to those observed in other mouse models 
of congenital heart disease, including Sox4 and Nfatc1 null embryos.
Interestingly, expression of Sox4 in the outflow tract and cushions of Foxp1 null
embryos is significantly reduced, while remodeling of the cushions is disrupted, 
as demonstrated by reduced apoptosis and persistent Nfatc1 expression in the
cushion mesenchyme. Our results reveal a crucial role for Foxp1 in three aspects 
of cardiac development: (1) outflow tract development and septation, (2) tissue
remodeling events required for cardiac cushion development, and (3) myocardial
maturation and proliferation.

PMID: 15342473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Intern Med J. 2004 Aug;34(8):482-91.

Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy: a practical guide to classification, natural
history and management.

El-Kaissi S(1), Frauman AG, Wall JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Biomedical Sciences, Barwon Health, The University 
of Melbourne, Geelong, Victoria, Australia.

Thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy (TAO) is an autoimmune disorder that can be
divided into three clinical subtypes: congestive, myopathic and mixed
ophthalmopathy. It is probably caused by immune cross-reactivity between orbital 
and thyroid antigens. The best candidate antigens are the thyrotropin receptor
and the novel protein, G2s, which is now identified as a fragment of the winged
helix transcription factor, FOXP1. The relationship between radioiodine therapy
and TAO is controversial, with two randomised controlled trials showing a
transient worsening of the eye disease after treatment. The diagnosis of TAO is a
clinical one, based on the presence of specific symptoms and signs. Orbital
imaging, preferably magnetic resonance imaging, is useful when the diagnosis is
in doubt and in patients with suspected optic neuropathy who may benefit from
early intervention. Despite their lack of specificity, orbital antibodies may add
weight to the diagnosis and may potentially be a useful tool in classifying the
different subtypes of TAO and in monitoring disease activity. While antibodies
against G2s and the thyrotropin receptor are seen in all subtypes, those against 
Fp and collagen XIII may be associated with the myopathic and congestive
subtypes, respectively, where Fp is the flavoprotein subunit of the mitochondrial
enzyme, succinate dehydrogenase. In most patients, TAO is self-limiting and no
specific treatment is required. When treatment is indicated, glucocorticoids are 
the mainstay of therapy. Orbital radiotherapy improves the efficacy of
glucocorticoids, but is probably less beneficial as monotherapy. Orbital surgery 
is best reserved for patients with 'burnt out' inactive disease, but urgent
orbital decompression may be required for optic neuropathy. The severity and
clinical activity of TAO are important in determining the need for specific
treatment and the likelihood of success with medical therapy, respectively.

PMID: 15317547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Jun;1016:325-47.

Genetic components of vocal learning.

Scharff C(1), White SA.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 73, 14195 Berlin,
Germany. scharff@molgen.mpg.de

Vocal learning is a rare trait. Humans depend on vocal learning to acquire spoken
language, but most species that communicate acoustically have an innate
repertoire of sounds that they use for information exchange. Among the few
non-human species that also rely on vocal learning, songbirds have provided by
far the most information for understanding this process. This article
concentrates on the genetic components of vocal learning in humans and birds. We 
summarize the existing evidence for a genetic predisposition towards acquiring
the species-specific human and avian vocal repertoires. We describe the
approaches used for finding genes involved in shaping the neural circuitry
required for vocal learning or in mediating the learning process itself. Special 
attention is given to a particular gene, FOXP2, which has been implicated in a
human speech and language disorder. We have studied FoxP2 in avian vocal learners
and non-learners and review evidence that links both the molecule and its close
homologue FoxP1 to the development of brain regions implicated in vocal learning 
and to their function. FoxP2 has a characteristic expression pattern in a brain
structure uniquely associated with learned vocal communication, Area X in
songbirds, or its analogue in parrots and hummingbirds. In both avian song
learners and non-learners FoxP2 expression predominates in sensory and
sensory-motor circuits. These latter regions also express FoxP2 in mammals and
reptiles. We conclude that FoxP2 is important for the building and function of
brain pathways including, but not limited to, those essential for learned vocal
communication.

PMID: 15313783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Clin Invest. 2004 Aug;114(3):408-18.

Integrin engagement regulates monocyte differentiation through the forkhead
transcription factor Foxp1.

Shi C(1), Zhang X, Chen Z, Sulaiman K, Feinberg MW, Ballantyne CM, Jain MK, Simon
DI.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

The precise signals responsible for differentiation of blood-borne monocytes into
tissue macrophages are incompletely defined. "Outside-in" signaling by integrins 
has been implicated in modulation of gene expression that affects cellular
differentiation. Herein, using differential display PCR, we have cloned an 85-kDa
forkhead transcription factor (termed Mac-1-regulated forkhead [MFH] and found
subsequently to be identical to Foxp1) that is downregulated in beta(2)-integrin 
Mac-1-clustered compared with Mac-1-nonclustered monocytic THP-1 cells. MFH/Foxp1
is expressed in untreated HL60 cells, and its expression was markedly reduced
during phorbol ester-induced monocyte differentiation, but not retinoic
acid-induced granulocyte differentiation. Overexpression of MFH/Foxp1 markedly
attenuated phorbol ester-induced expression of c-fms, which encodes the M-CSF
receptor and is obligatory for macrophage differentiation. This was accompanied
by decreased CD11b expression, cell adhesiveness, and phagocytosis. Using
electromobility shift and reporter assays, we have established that MFH/Foxp1
binds to previously uncharacterized sites within the c-fms promoter and functions
as a transcriptional repressor. Deficiency of Mac-1 is associated with altered
regulation of MFH/Foxp1 and monocyte maturation in vivo. Taken together, these
observations suggest that Mac-1 engagement orchestrates monocyte-differentiation 
signals by regulating the expression of the forkhead transcription repressor
MFH/Foxp1. This represents a new pathway for integrin-dependent modulation of
gene expression and control of cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC484980
PMID: 15286807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Blood. 2004 Nov 1;104(9):2933-5. Epub 2004 Jul 6.

Strong expression of FOXP1 identifies a distinct subset of diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma (DLBCL) patients with poor outcome.

Barrans SL(1), Fenton JA, Banham A, Owen RG, Jack AS.

Author information: 
(1)Haematological Malignancy Diagnostic Service, Academic Unit of Haematology and
Oncology, Leeds General Infirmary, Leeds, LS1 3EX, United Kingdom.
sharonb@hmds.org.uk

FOXP1 (Forkhead box-P1) is a winged-helix transcription factor that is
differentially expressed in resting and activated B cells. FOXP1 expression has
been demonstrated in a subset of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCLs) and is
more common in the nongerminal center (non-GC), activated B-cell type; however,
its prognostic significance is uncertain. We analyzed presentation lymph nodes
from 126 patients with nodal DLBCL, previously classified according to GC and
BCL2 status, for FOXP1 protein expression using standard immunocytochemistry.
Uniform high FOXP1 expression was demonstrated in 23 of 126 patients with DLBCL. 
This high level of expression was almost exclusively confined to patients who
lacked the GC phenotype, who expressed MUM-1 and BCL2 in the absence of t(14;
18), and who were identified as a subgroup of patients with particularly poor
outcomes in a group with already poor prognoses. The data presented suggest that 
high FOXP1 expression is an independent prognostic factor in DLBCL.

PMID: 15238418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Endocrinol Invest. 2004 Mar;27(3):221-9.

Eye muscle antibodies in Graves' ophthalmopathy: pathogenic or secondary
epiphenomenon?

Mizokami T(1), Salvi M, Wall JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Biomedical Sciences: Barwon Health, University of
Melbourne, The Geelong Hospital, Victoria, Australia.

The extra ocular (eye) muscles are one of the principal tissues involved in the
autoimmune-mediated inflammation of Graves' ophthalmopathy (GO). Several eye
muscle proteins are targeted by autoantibodies or sensitized T lymphocytes, or
both, and include: G2s, which is now identified as the terminal 141 amino acids
of the winged-helix transcription factor FOXP1, the flavoprotein (Fp) subunit of 
the mitochondrial enzyme succinate dehydrogenase, the so-called "64kDa protein", 
a non-tissue specific membrane protein called 1D and the calcium binding protein 
calsequestrin. Of these, antibodies against G2s and Fp are the most sensitive
markers of eye muscle damage in patients with thyroid autoimmunity even though
neither antigen is specific to eye muscle and neither antibody is specific to GO.
However, the recent finding that the calsequestrin gene is 4.7 times more
expressed in eye muscles than other skeletal muscles suggests that we should
reconsider the possible role of anti-calsequestrin autoantibodies in
ophthalmopathy. GO may comprise two main subtypes with different pathogenetic
mechanisms, namely ocular myopathy in which eye muscle inflammation predominates 
and congestive ophthalmopathy where inflammatory changes occur in the periorbital
connective tissues in the absence of eye muscle dysfunction. Anti-G2s and anti-Fp
antibodies are closely associated with the ocular myopathy subtype of GO while
antibodies targeting type XIII collagen, the only member of the collagen family
to have a transmembrane domain, are closely linked to congestive ophthalmopathy. 
Since both G2s and Fp are intracellular antigens it is unlikely that either
antibody causes eye muscle fiber damage in GO, although a role in the later
stages of the disease when the fiber has released its cellular contents has not
been excluded. Eye muscle antibodies that are cytotoxic to eye muscle cells in
antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity (ADCC) are more likely to play a
role in eye muscle fiber damage since they target a putative eye muscle cell
membrane antigen, the identity of which is currently being investigated. While
anti-G2s and anti-Fp antibodies are probably secondary to an underlying reaction,
such as cytotoxic T lymphocyte targeting of an eye muscle membrane antigen that
has yet to be identified, they are reliable markers of immunologically mediated
eye muscle fiber damage in patients with Graves' hyperthyroidism. In conclusion, 
while a pathogenic role for eye muscle antibodies has not been excluded, they are
most likely secondary to cytotoxic T cell reactions in GO and, as such, good
markers of this autoimmune disease.

PMID: 15164997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 May 15;10(10):3521-7.

Expression of the forkhead transcription factor FOXP1 is associated with estrogen
receptor alpha and improved survival in primary human breast carcinomas.

Fox SB(1), Brown P, Han C, Ashe S, Leek RD, Harris AL, Banham AH.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department Clinical Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital,
University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. stephen.fox@ndcls.ox.ac.uk

PURPOSE: The FOXP1 protein belongs to a functionally diverse family of
winged-helix or forkhead transcription factors that have diverse roles in
cellular proliferation, differentiation, and neoplastic transformation. The FOXP1
gene, which maps to 3p14, shows common loss of heterozygosity in breast tumors
and is a candidate tumor suppressor gene. However, its role in breast cancer is
unknown.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We have therefore investigated the pattern of FOXP1
expression in whole sections from normal (n = 16) and neoplastic (n = 90) breast 
tissues and correlated the level of expression in 283 invasive breast carcinomas 
on tissue microarrays with clinicopathological factors and survival. Because a
relationship with estrogen receptor (ER) was identified, estrogen
(17beta-estradiol) regulation and ER/FOXP1 colocalization was also investigated.
RESULTS: Expression of FOXP1 was significantly positively associated with ER (P =
0.03) and negatively with epidermal growth factor receptor (P = 0.01) but no
association with age (P = 0.91), lymph node status (P = 0.94), size (P = 0.76),
or grade (P = 0.22). In a multivariate analysis of survival, FOXP1 expression was
associated with a significantly improved relapse-free (P = 0.03) and borderline
overall (P = 0.09) survival. Unlike normal breast, there was common coexpression 
of FOXP1 and ER in cell lines and tumors, but no 17beta-estradiol (10(-9) m)
regulation of FOXP1 in MCF-7 cells was demonstrated.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support a role for FOXP1 as a potential ER coregulator 
in human breast carcinoma and suggest that it may also independently regulate
additional important pathways that control the progression of breast cancer.

PMID: 15161711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Neurosci. 2004 Mar 31;24(13):3164-75.

FoxP2 expression in avian vocal learners and non-learners.

Haesler S(1), Wada K, Nshdejan A, Morrisey EE, Lints T, Jarvis ED, Scharff C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Most vertebrates communicate acoustically, but few, among them humans, dolphins
and whales, bats, and three orders of birds, learn this trait. FOXP2 is the first
gene linked to human speech and has been the target of positive selection during 
recent primate evolution. To test whether the expression pattern of FOXP2 is
consistent with a role in learned vocal communication, we cloned zebra finch
FoxP2 and its close relative FoxP1 and compared mRNA and protein distribution in 
developing and adult brains of a variety of avian vocal learners and
non-learners, and a crocodile. We found that the protein sequence of zebra finch 
FoxP2 is 98% identical with mouse and human FOXP2. In the avian and crocodilian
forebrain, FoxP2 was expressed predominantly in the striatum, a basal ganglia
brain region affected in patients with FOXP2 mutations. Strikingly, in zebra
finches, the striatal nucleus Area X, necessary for vocal learning, expressed
more FoxP2 than the surrounding tissue at post-hatch days 35 and 50, when vocal
learning occurs. In adult canaries, FoxP2 expression in Area X differed
seasonally; more FoxP2 expression was associated with times when song becomes
unstable. In adult chickadees, strawberry finches, song sparrows, and Bengalese
finches, Area X expressed FoxP2 to different degrees. Non-telencephalic regions
in both vocal learning and non-learning birds, and in crocodiles, were less
variable in expression and comparable with regions that express FOXP2 in human
and rodent brains. We conclude that differential expression of FoxP2 in avian
vocal learners might be associated with vocal plasticity.

PMID: 15056696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Neurosci. 2004 Mar 31;24(13):3152-63.

Parallel FoxP1 and FoxP2 expression in songbird and human brain predicts
functional interaction.

Teramitsu I(1), Kudo LC, London SE, Geschwind DH, White SA.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Programs in Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Physiology,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA.

Humans and songbirds are two of the rare animal groups that modify their innate
vocalizations. The identification of FOXP2 as the monogenetic locus of a human
speech disorder exhibited by members of the family referred to as KE enables the 
first examination of whether molecular mechanisms for vocal learning are shared
between humans and songbirds. Here, in situ hybridization analyses for FoxP1 and 
FoxP2 in a songbird reveal a corticostriatal expression pattern congruent with
the abnormalities in brain structures of affected KE family members. The overlap 
in FoxP1 and FoxP2 expression observed in the songbird suggests that
combinatorial regulation by these molecules during neural development and within 
vocal control structures may occur. In support of this idea, we find that FOXP1
and FOXP2 expression patterns in human fetal brain are strikingly similar to
those in the songbird, including localization to subcortical structures that
function in sensorimotor integration and the control of skilled, coordinated
movement. The specific colocalization of FoxP1 and FoxP2 found in several
structures in the bird and human brain predicts that mutations in FOXP1 could
also be related to speech disorders.

PMID: 15056695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Neuroscience. 2004;124(2):261-7.

Foxp1 gene expression in projection neurons of the mouse striatum.

Tamura S(1), Morikawa Y, Iwanishi H, Hisaoka T, Senba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1
Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.

The developmental processes of maturation in the CNS are the result of specific
events including mitogenesis, differentiation, and cell death which occur in a
precise spatial and temporal manner. It has been reported that many transcription
factors, including forkhead transcription factors, play a key role in these
processes. First, we examined the expression pattern of the forkhead
transcription factor Foxp1 in the adult CNS. Foxp1 was highly expressed in the
striatum and moderately in the cerebral cortex, CA1/2 subfields of the
hippocampus, and several thalamic nuclei. In situ hybridization combined with
immunohistochemistry in the striatum of adult mice revealed that Foxp1 mRNA was
detected in a subset of projection neurons, not in interneurons. In addition, the
expression of Foxp1 mRNA was observed in the developing basal ganglia with the
exception of the globus pallidus. Thus, Foxp1 mRNA was expressed in a subset of
striatal projection neurons, probably the matrix neurons. The expression pattern 
of Foxp1 mRNA suggests that Foxp1 may play a role in the development and
formation of a circuit in the basal ganglia, which is involving the matrix
neurons.

PMID: 14980377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(2):809-22.

Transcriptional and DNA binding activity of the Foxp1/2/4 family is modulated by 
heterotypic and homotypic protein interactions.

Li S(1), Weidenfeld J, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Molecular Cardiology Research Center, University of
Pennsylvania, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Foxp1, Foxp2, and Foxp4 are large multidomain transcriptional regulators
belonging to the family of winged-helix DNA binding proteins known as the Fox
family. Foxp1 and Foxp2 have been shown to act as transcriptional repressors,
while regulatory activity of the recently identified Foxp4 has not been
determined. Given the importance of this Fox gene subfamily in neural and lung
development, we sought to elucidate the mechanisms by which Foxp1, Foxp2, and
Foxp4 repress gene transcription. We show that like Foxp1 and Foxp2, Foxp4
represses transcription. Analysis of the N-terminal repression domain in Foxp1,
Foxp2, and Foxp4 shows that this region contains two separate and distinct
repression subdomains that are highly homologous termed subdomain 1 and subdomain
2. However, subdomain 2 is not functional in Foxp4. Screening for proteins that
interact with subdomains 1 and 2 of Foxp2 using yeast two-hybrid analysis
revealed that subdomain 2 binds to C-terminal binding protein 1, which can
synergistically repress transcription with Foxp1 and Foxp2, but not Foxp4.
Subdomain 1 contains a highly conserved leucine zipper similar to that found in
N-myc and confers homo- and heterodimerization to the Foxp1/2/4 family members.
These interactions are dependent on the conserved leucine zipper motif. Finally, 
we show that the integrity of this subdomain is essential for DNA binding, making
Foxp1, Foxp2, and Foxp4 the first Fox proteins that require dimerization for DNA 
binding. These data reveal a complex regulatory mechanism underlying Foxp1,
Foxp2, and Foxp4 activity, demonstrating that Foxp1, Foxp2, and Foxp4 are the
first Fox proteins reported whose activity is regulated by homo- and
heterodimerization.

PMCID: PMC343786
PMID: 14701752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Mech Dev. 2002 Dec;119 Suppl 1:S197-202.

Foxp4: a novel member of the Foxp subfamily of winged-helix genes co-expressed
with Foxp1 and Foxp2 in pulmonary and gut tissues.

Lu MM(1), Li S, Yang H, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

In this study, we describe the isolation and characterization of Foxp4, a new
member of the Foxp subfamily of winged-helix transcription factors. The
full-length mouse Foxp4 cDNA encodes a 685-amino-acid protein that is similar to 
Foxp1 and Foxp2. Foxp4 gene expression is observed primarily in pulmonary,
neural, and gut tissues during embryonic development. To compare the protein
expression patterns of Foxp4 to Foxp1 and Foxp2, specific polyclonal antisera to 
each of these proteins was used in immunohistochemical analysis of mouse
embryonic tissues. All three proteins are expressed in lung epithelium with Foxp1
and Foxp4 expressed in both proximal and distal airway epithelium while Foxp2 is 
expressed primarily in distal epithelium. Foxp1 protein expression is also
observed in the mesenchyme and vascular endothelial cells of the lung. At
embryonic day 12.5, Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed in both the mucosal and
epithelial layers of the intestine. However, Foxp2 is expressed only in the outer
mucosal layer of the intestine and stomach later in development. Finally, Foxp4
is expressed exclusively in the epithelial cells of the developing intestine,
where, in late development, it is expressed in a gradient along the longitudinal 
axis of the villi.

PMID: 14516685  [PubMed - in process]


397. Blood. 2004 Jan 1;103(1):275-82. Epub 2003 Sep 22.

Confirmation of the molecular classification of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma by 
immunohistochemistry using a tissue microarray.

Hans CP(1), Weisenburger DD, Greiner TC, Gascoyne RD, Delabie J, Ott G,
Müller-Hermelink HK, Campo E, Braziel RM, Jaffe ES, Pan Z, Farinha P, Smith LM,
Falini B, Banham AH, Rosenwald A, Staudt LM, Connors JM, Armitage JO, Chan WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Microbiology,University of Nebraska Medical
Center, Omaha, NE 68198, USA.

Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) can be divided into prognostically
important subgroups with germinal center B-cell-like (GCB), activated B-cell-like
(ABC), and type 3 gene expression profiles using a cDNA microarray. Tissue
microarray (TMA) blocks were created from 152 cases of DLBCL, 142 of which had
been successfully evaluated by cDNA microarray (75 GCB, 41 ABC, and 26 type 3).
Sections were stained with antibodies to CD10, bcl-6, MUM1, FOXP1, cyclin D2, and
bcl-2. Expression of bcl-6 (P <.001) or CD10 (P =.019) was associated with better
overall survival (OS), whereas expression of MUM1 (P =.009) or cyclin D2 (P
<.001) was associated with worse OS. Cases were subclassified using CD10, bcl-6, 
and MUM1 expression, and 64 cases (42%) were considered GCB and 88 cases (58%)
non-GCB. The 5-year OS for the GCB group was 76% compared with only 34% for the
non-GCB group (P <.001), which is similar to that reported using the cDNA
microarray. Bcl-2 and cyclin D2 were adverse predictors in the non-GCB group. In 
multivariate analysis, a high International Prognostic Index score (3-5) and the 
non-GCB phenotype were independent adverse predictors (P <.0001). In summary,
immunostains can be used to determine the GCB and non-GCB subtypes of DLBCL and
predict survival similar to the cDNA microarray.

PMID: 14504078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. J Neurosci Res. 2003 Jul 1;73(1):61-72.

Expression of Foxp2, a gene involved in speech and language, in the developing
and adult striatum.

Takahashi K(1), Liu FC, Hirokawa K, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Group, Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life
Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.

Many members of the forkhead/winged helix transcriptional factors are known to be
regulators of embryogenesis. Mutations of the Fox gene family have been
implicated in a range of human developmental disorders. Foxp2, a member of the
Fox gene family, has recently been identified as the first gene that is linked to
an inherited form of language and speech disorder. To elucidate the anatomical
basis of language processing in the brain, we have examined the expression
pattern of Foxp2 gene and its homologous gene, Foxp1, in the rat brain through
development. Expression of Foxp2 mRNA was detected in the ventral telencephalon
as early as embryonic day 13. Foxp2 mRNA was expressed primarily in
differentiated cells of the lateral ganglionic eminence (striatal primordium). Of
particular interest was that the developmental expression of Foxp2 followed a
compartmental order in the striatum. Patches containing high levels of Foxp2 were
aligned with patches enriched in mu-opoid receptor, a marker for striosomal
cells, in the striatum through postnatal development. Conversely, Foxp2-positive 
patches were devoid of calbindin-D28k, a maker for striatal matrix cells.
Therefore, Foxp2 was preferentially expressed in striosomal compartment in the
striatum during development. In the mature striatum, Foxp2 expression was
maintained in striosomes, although its expression level was reduced. In contrast 
to Foxp2, Foxp1 was expressed in both the striosomal and matrix compartments in
the striatum through development. The striatum is known to be involved in the
process of procedural memory, and mutation of Foxp2 results in neurological
disorders of language and speech. Given the preferential expression of Foxp2 in
the striosomal compartment, the striatum, particularly the striosomal system, may
participate in neural information processing for language and speech. Our
suggestion is consistent with the declarative/procedural model proposed by Ullman
and colleagues (Ullman et al. [1997] J. Cogn. Neurosci. 9:266-276; Ullman [2001] 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2:717-726), in which the procedural memory-dependent mental
grammar is rooted in the basal ganglia and the frontal cortex and the declarative
memory-dependent mental lexicon is rooted in the temporal lobe.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12815709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Gene Expr Patterns. 2003 May;3(2):193-7.

Expression pattern of the winged-helix/forkhead transcription factor Foxp1 in the
developing central nervous system.

Tamura S(1), Morikawa Y, Iwanishi H, Hisaoka T, Senba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1
Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.

The winged-helix/forkhead transcription factor gene family has been shown to play
important roles in the development of the central nervous system (CNS) as well as
heart, lung, and liver. Recently, we have identified Foxp1, a novel subfamily of 
winged-helix/forkhead genes, which was abundant in the lung and brain of adult
mice. Here we analyzed the expression pattern of Foxp1 in the developing CNS
using in situ hybridization. The expression of Foxp1 mRNA was first detected in
the ventral horn of the spinal cord at 9.5 days postcoitum. During the late-stage
of development, its gene expression was not detectable in neuroepithelia, but was
clearly observed in the postmitotic neurons of various CNS regions, including
caudate-putamen, neocortex, several brainstem nuclei, and cerebellum. In
neonates, its gene expression was persisted in these motor-related regions.

PMID: 12711548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 4;278(27):24259-68. Epub 2003 Apr 10.

Multiple domains define the expression and regulatory properties of Foxp1
forkhead transcriptional repressors.

Wang B(1), Lin D, Li C, Tucker P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and the Institute for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology, University of Texas, Austin 78712-0162, USA.

The Foxp subfamily of forkhead/HNF3 transcription factors has recently been
recognized because of its involvement in autoimmune disease, speech and language 
disorders, and lung development. Domains unique to this subfamily include a
divergent DNA-binding winged helix, a leucine zipper, a zinc finger, and a
polyglutamine tract. Little is known about the properties of these proteins that 
are fundamental to their function as transcription factors nor how the Foxp
sequence motifs regulate their transcriptional regulatory properties. We report
here a structure/function analysis of the Foxp1 protein. We have analyzed the
alternative splice isoforms 1A and 1C and also report the cloning and
characterization of a novel isoform Foxp1D that lacks the polyglutamine domain.
We have isolated the preferred DNA-binding sites for Foxp1 transcription factors.
Foxp1A, C, and D isoforms and the related Foxp2 protein repress gene
transcription via binding to this consensus site or to a naturally occurring site
within the SV40 and the interleukin-2 promoters. In some cases the strength of
Foxp1 repression is mediated by the polyglutamine domain. Unlike previously
characterized forkhead factors, Foxp1 proteins can form homodimers or
heterodimers with subfamily members. The dimerization domain was localized to an 
evolutionarily conserved C2H2 zinc finger and leucine zipper motif. Finally, we
demonstrate that Foxp1, although broadly expressed, is further regulated by
tissue-specific alternative splicing of these functionally important sequence
domains. These results suggest that Foxp1 proteins have diverse functional roles 
in different cell and tissue types.

PMID: 12692134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Comp Neurol. 2003 May 26;460(2):266-79.

Characterization of Foxp2 and Foxp1 mRNA and protein in the developing and mature
brain.

Ferland RJ(1), Cherry TJ, Preware PO, Morrisey EE, Walsh CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Harvard Institutes of Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Foxp2 and Foxp1 are recently identified members of the Fox family of
winged-helix/forkhead transcription factor genes. A recent study has found that
mutations in human FOXP2 produce a severe language disorder. Since Foxp2 appears 
to be important in language, we wanted to explore the expression of this gene and
a homologous gene, Foxp1, in the developing brain. In the present study, we
investigated the time course and localization of Foxp2 and Foxp1 mRNA and protein
expression in the developing and adult mouse using in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry. Foxp2 and Foxp1 are expressed as early as E12.5 and persist
into adulthood. Foxp2 and Foxp1 were most highly expressed in the developing and 
mature basal ganglia. Expression of Foxp2 was also observed in the cerebral
cortex (layer 6), cerebellum (Purkinje neurons), and thalamus. Foxp1 expression
was observed in the cerebral cortex (layers 3-5), hippocampus (CA1), and
thalamus. Very little ventricular zone expression was observed for Foxp2 and
Foxp1 and the expression of both of these genes occurred following neuronal
migration, suggesting a role for these genes in postmigratory neuronal
differentiation. Furthermore, we demonstrated the expression of FOXP2 in human
fetal brain by RT-PCR, in the perisylvian area of the left and right cerebral
hemispheres, as well as in the frontal and occipital cortices. Overall, the
widespread expression of Foxp2 in the developing brain makes it difficult to draw
specific conclusions about which areas of Foxp2 expression are critical to human 
language function.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12687690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Gene Expr Patterns. 2002 Dec;2(3-4):223-8.

Foxp4: a novel member of the Foxp subfamily of winged-helix genes co-expressed
with Foxp1 and Foxp2 in pulmonary and gut tissues.

Lu MM(1), Li S, Yang H, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

In this study, we describe the isolation and characterization of Foxp4, a new
member of the Foxp subfamily of winged-helix transcription factors. The
full-length mouse Foxp4 cDNA encodes a 685-amino-acid protein that is similar to 
Foxp1 and Foxp2. Foxp4 gene expression is observed primarily in pulmonary,
neural, and gut tissues during embryonic development. To compare the protein
expression patterns of Foxp4 to Foxp1 and Foxp2, specific polyclonal antisera to 
each of these proteins was used in immunohistochemical analysis of mouse
embryonic tissues. All three proteins are expressed in lung epithelium with Foxp1
and Foxp4 expressed in both proximal and distal airway epithelium while Foxp2 is 
expressed primarily in distal epithelium. Foxp1 protein expression is also
observed in the mesenchyme and vascular endothelial cells of the lung. At
embryonic day 12.5, Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed in both the mucosal and
epithelial layers of the intestine. However, Foxp2 is expressed only in the outer
mucosal layer of the intestine and stomach later in development. Finally, Foxp4
is expressed exclusively in the epithelial cells of the developing intestine,
where, in late development, it is expressed in a gradient along the longitudinal 
axis of the villi.

PMID: 12617805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Autoimmunity. 2002 Sep;35(6):403-13.

Experimental model for ophthalmopathy in BALB/c and outbred (CD-1) mice
genetically immunized with G2s and the thyrotropin receptor.

Yamada M(1), Li AW, West KA, Chang CH, Wall JR.

Author information: 
(1)The Thyroid Research Laboratory, Sir Charles Tupper Medical Building,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada B3H 4H7.

In an attempt to develop an animal model for thyroid-associated ophthalmopathy
(TAO) we have genetically immunized BALB/c and outbred (CD-1) mice with cDNAs
encoding the thyroid and eye muscle shared protein G2s and full length human
thyrotropin receptor (TSHr). Firstly, BALB/c mice were immunized with cDNAs for
G2s and the TSHr, alone or in tandem with cDNAs for interleukin (IL)4 or IL12.
Control mice were immunized with empty vehicle only. Sera from the great majority
of experimental mice contained antibodies against a G2s fusion protein and the
flavoprotein (Fp) subunit of mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase, the "64 kDa
protein", with the greatest levels being found at sacrifice (17 wk). Antibody
levels in mice immunized with G2s + TSHr or G2s + IL12 were generally higher than
those in mice immunized with G2s only. TSHr antibodies (TRAb), measured as TSH
binding inhibition, were detected in only two mice. On histological examination
of the orbits, mild edema, eye muscle fiber separation and mast cell infiltration
in and around the eye muscles were found in the majority of experimental mice,
but not in control mice. Splenocytes were transferred from selected G2s-immunized
mice to normal syngeneic litter mates. None of the transfer mice had serum
antibodies against G2s, Fp or TSHr but their orbital tissue showed the same
degree of mast cell infiltration as primary mice. No major histological changes
were observed in the thyroid or other skeletal muscle in either primary or
transfer mice. Similar results were observed in CD-1 mice although, overall, the 
model was better expressed than in BALB/c mice. In these mice, serum anti-G2s
antibody levels were not significantly different between the various experimental
groups except at 16 wk, when they were slightly greater than in control animals. 
Anti-Fp antibodies were detected at 12, 14 and 16 wk, in all experimental groups,
including those immunized with G2s only, and were greatest in mice immunized with
TSHr alone. TRAb levels were greatest in mice immunized with both G2s and the
TSHr in the presence of TL4, but not IL12. The finding of negative anti-G2s but
positive anti-Fp antibodies in some CD-1 mice suggests that eye muscle damage and
Fp release must have been mediated by T lymphocytes, rather than antibodies,
targeting G2s or some other as yet unidentified cell membrane antigen.
Histological changes in the orbit were similar to those observed in BALB/c mice
although mast cell numbers were greater, in both primary and transfer mice.
Overall, the greatest histological changes were observed in CD-1 mice immunized
with both G2s + TSHr + IL4. None of the animals became overtly hyperthyroid or
hypothyroid during the course of the study although several of the CD-1 mice had 
abnormal TSH or T4 levels. These results indicate that we have established a
valid model for human ophthalmopathy using the novel thyroid and eye muscle
expressed protein G2s, now recognized as a fragment of the winged-helix
transcription factor Foxp1, and TSHr, and that G2s and the TSHr are both primary 
antigens in TAO. Reactivity against a TSHr-like protein may be the first event
leading to ophthalmopathy in humans with TAO and experimental mice and eye muscle
damage may result from autoimmunity against G2s and Fp as a result of "antigen
spreading".

PMID: 12568121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Cancer Res. 2001 Dec 15;61(24):8820-9.

The FOXP1 winged helix transcription factor is a novel candidate tumor suppressor
gene on chromosome 3p.

Banham AH(1), Beasley N, Campo E, Fernandez PL, Fidler C, Gatter K, Jones M,
Mason DY, Prime JE, Trougouboff P, Wood K, Cordell JL.

Author information: 
(1)University of Oxford, Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom.

The JC12 monoclonal antibody recognizes a previously unknown nuclear protein that
showed a restricted distribution in normal tonsil and was also overexpressed in a
subset of diffuse large B-cell lymphomas. Using this reagent, we expression
cloned cDNAs encoding its antigenic target and identified this protein as a novel
putative transcription factor, FOXP1. The FOXP1 protein sequence contains
predicted domains characteristic of transcription factors, including a winged
helix DNA-binding motif, a second potential DNA-binding motif, a C(2)H(2) zinc
finger, nuclear localization signals, coiled-coil regions, PEST sequences, and
potential transactivation domains. The FOXP1 gene has been mapped to chromosome
3p14.1, a region that commonly shows loss of heterozygosity in a wide range of
tumors and which is reported to contain a tumor suppressor gene(s). Using tissue 
arrays and immunohistochemistry, we demonstrate that both the FOXP1 mRNA and
protein are widely expressed in normal tissues. The levels of FOXP1 mRNA were
compared in paired normal and tumor tissues (from the same patient) using a
tissue array containing cDNAs extracted from 68 samples taken from kidney,
breast, prostate, uterus, ovary, cervix, colon, lung, stomach, rectum, small
intestine, and from nine cancer cell lines. Differences in FOXP1 mRNA expression 
between normal and tumor samples were observed in 51% of cases. Most striking was
the comparative loss of expression in 73% of colon tumors and comparative
overexpression of FOXP1 mRNA in 75% of stomach tumors. Analysis of the FOXP1 mRNA
expression in normal tissues (not taken from cancer patients) indicated that loss
of FOXP1 expression may occur in some histologically normal tissues adjacent to
tumors. Immunohistochemical analysis of FOXP1 protein expression was performed on
128 solid tumors, including 16 renal, 9 breast, 12 lung, 20 colon, 21 stomach, 10
head and neck, 35 prostate, and 5 pancreatic cases. Complete loss of expression, 
increased expression, and cytoplasmic mislocalization of the predominantly
nuclear FOXP1 protein were frequently observed in neoplastic cells. Our study
identifies FOXP1 as a new candidate tumor suppressor gene localized to the
chromosome 3p14.1 region.

PMID: 11751404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 20;276(29):27488-97. Epub 2001 May 17.

Characterization of a new subfamily of winged-helix/forkhead (Fox) genes that are
expressed in the lung and act as transcriptional repressors.

Shu W(1), Yang H, Zhang L, Lu MM, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

Epithelial gene expression in the lung is thought to be regulated by the
coordinate activity of several different families of transcription factors
including the Fox family of winged-helix/forkhead DNA-binding proteins. In this
report, we have identified and characterized two members of this Fox gene family,
Foxp1 and Foxp2, and show that they comprise a new subfamily of Fox genes
expressed in the lung. Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed at high levels in the lung
as early as E12.5 of mouse development with Foxp2 expression restricted to the
airway epithelium. In addition, Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed at lower levels in 
neural, intestinal, and cardiovascular tissues during development. Upon
differentiation of the airway epithelium along the proximal-distal axis, Foxp2
expression becomes restricted to the distal alveolar epithelium whereas Foxp1
expression is observed in the distal epithelium and mesenchyme. Foxp1 and Foxp2
can regulate epithelial lung gene transcription as was demonstrated by their
ability to dramatically repress the mouse CC10 promoter and, to a lesser extent, 
the human surfactant protein C promoter. In addition, GAL4 fusion proteins
encoding subdomains of Foxp1 and Foxp2 demonstrate that an independent and
homologous transcriptional repression domain lies within the N-terminal end of
the proteins. Together, these studies suggest that Foxp1 and Foxp2 are important 
regulators of lung epithelial gene transcription.

PMID: 11358962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


