
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 31;11(3):e0152034. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152034.

System-Wide Associations between DNA-Methylation, Gene Expression, and Humoral
Immune Response to Influenza Vaccination.

Zimmermann MT(1,)(2), Oberg AL(1,)(2), Grill DE(1,)(2), Ovsyannikova IG(2),
Haralambieva IH(2), Kennedy RB(2), Poland GA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Science Research, Division of Biomedical Statistics and
Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States of America. (2)Mayo
Clinic Vaccine Research Group, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, United States
of America.

Failure to achieve a protected state after influenza vaccination is poorly
understood but occurs commonly among aged populations experiencing greater
immunosenescence. In order to better understand immune response in the elderly,
we studied epigenetic and transcriptomic profiles and humoral immune response
outcomes in 50-74 year old healthy participants. Associations between DNA
methylation and gene expression reveal a system-wide regulation of
immune-relevant functions, likely playing a role in regulating a participant's
propensity to respond to vaccination. Our findings show that sites of methylation
regulation associated with humoral response to vaccination impact known cellular 
differentiation signaling and antigen presentation pathways. We performed our
analysis using per-site and regionally average methylation levels, in addition to
continuous or dichotomized outcome measures. The genes and molecular functions
implicated by each analysis were compared, highlighting different aspects of the 
biologic mechanisms of immune response affected by differential methylation. Both
cis-acting (within the gene or promoter) and trans-acting (enhancers and
transcription factor binding sites) sites show significant associations with
measures of humoral immunity. Specifically, we identified a group of CpGs that,
when coordinately hypo-methylated, are associated with lower humoral immune
response, and methylated with higher response. Additionally, CpGs that
individually predict humoral immune responses are enriched for polycomb-group and
FOXP2 transcription factor binding sites. The most robust associations implicate 
differential methylation affecting gene expression levels of genes with known
roles in immunity (e.g. HLA-B and HLA-DQB2) and immunosenescence. We believe our 
data and analysis strategy highlight new and interesting epigenetic trends
affecting humoral response to vaccination against influenza; one of the most
common and impactful viral pathogens.

PMID: 27031986  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Biol Psychiatry. 2016 Feb 13. pii: S0006-3223(16)00095-0. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.02.008. [Epub ahead of print]

Sumoylation of FOXP2 Regulates Motor Function and Vocal Communication Through
Purkinje Cell Development.

Usui N(1), Co M(1), Harper M(1), Rieger MA(2), Dougherty JD(2), Konopka G(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas. (2)Departments of Genetics and Psychiatry, Washington University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri. (3)Department of Neuroscience,
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas. Electronic
address: Genevieve.Konopka@utsouthwestern.edu.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor forkhead box 
P2 (FOXP2) result in brain developmental abnormalities, including reduced gray
matter in both human patients and rodent models and speech and language deficits.
However, neither the region-specific function of FOXP2 in the brain, in
particular the cerebellum, nor the effects of any posttranslational modifications
of FOXP2 in the brain and disorders have been explored.
METHODS: We characterized sumoylation of FOXP2 biochemically and analyzed the
region-specific function and sumoylation of FOXP2 in the developing mouse
cerebellum. Using in utero electroporation to manipulate the sumoylation state of
FOXP2 as well as Foxp2 expression levels in Purkinje cells of the cerebellum in
vivo, we reduced Foxp2 expression approximately 40% in the mouse cerebellum. Such
a reduction approximates the haploinsufficiency observed in human patients who
demonstrate speech and language impairments.
RESULTS: We identified sumoylation of FOXP2 at K674 (K673 in mice) in the
cerebellum of neonates. In vitro co-immunoprecipitation and in vivo
colocalization experiments suggest that PIAS3 acts as the small ubiquitin-like
modifier E3 ligase for FOXP2 sumoylation. This sumoylation modifies
transcriptional regulation by FOXP2. We demonstrated that FOXP2 sumoylation is
required for regulation of cerebellar motor function and vocal communication,
likely through dendritic outgrowth and arborization of Purkinje cells in the
mouse cerebellum.
CONCLUSIONS: Sumoylation of FOXP2 in neonatal mouse cerebellum regulates Purkinje
cell development and motor functions and vocal communication, demonstrating
evidence for sumoylation in regulating mammalian behaviors.

Copyright © 2016 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 27009683  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Sci Rep. 2016 Mar 16;6:23305. doi: 10.1038/srep23305.

Knockout of Foxp2 disrupts vocal development in mice.

Castellucci GA(1,)(2,)(3), McGinley MJ(1), McCormick DA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yale School of Medicine, Department of Neuroscience, New Haven, 06519, USA.
(2)Yale University, Department of Linguistics, New Haven, 06520, USA. (3)Haskins 
Laboratories, New Haven, 06511, USA.

The FOXP2 gene is important for the development of proper speech motor control in
humans. However, the role of the gene in general vocal behavior in other mammals,
including mice, is unclear. Here, we track the vocal development of Foxp2
heterozygous knockout (Foxp2+/-) mice and their wildtype (WT) littermates from
juvenile to adult ages, and observe severe abnormalities in the courtship song of
Foxp2+/- mice. In comparison to their WT littermates, Foxp2+/- mice vocalized
less, produced shorter syllable sequences, and possessed an abnormal syllable
inventory. In addition, Foxp2+/- song also exhibited irregular rhythmic
structure, and its development did not follow the consistent trajectories
observed in WT vocalizations. These results demonstrate that the Foxp2 gene is
critical for normal vocal behavior in juvenile and adult mice, and that Foxp2
mutant mice may provide a tractable model system for the study of the gene's role
in general vocal motor control.

PMCID: PMC4793191
PMID: 26980647  [PubMed - in process]


4. Gene Expr Patterns. 2016 Mar 9. pii: S1567-133X(16)30005-9. doi:
10.1016/j.gep.2016.03.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Expression of forkhead box transcription factor genes Foxp1 and Foxp2 during jaw 
development.

Cesario JM(1), Almaidhan AA(2), Jeong J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science and Craniofacial Biology, New York University
College of Dentistry, 345 East 24th Street, New York, NY 10010 United States.
(2)Department of Orthodontics, New York University College of Dentistry, 345 East
24th Street, New York, NY 10010 United States. (3)Department of Basic Science and
Craniofacial Biology, New York University College of Dentistry, 345 East 24th
Street, New York, NY 10010 United States. Electronic address: jj78@nyu.edu.

Development of the face is regulated by a large number of genes that are
expressed in temporally and spatially specific patterns. While significant
progress has been made on characterizing the genes that operate in the oral
region of the face, those regulating development of the aboral (lateral) region
remain largely unknown. Recently, we discovered that transcription factors LIM
homeobox (LHX) 6 and LHX8, which are key regulators of oral development,
repressed the expression of the genes encoding forkhead box transcription
factors, Foxp1 and Foxp2, in the oral region. To gain insights into the potential
role of the Foxp genes in region-specific development of the face, we examined
their expression patterns in the first pharyngeal arch (primordium for the jaw)
of mouse embryos at a high spatial and temporal resolution. Foxp1 and Foxp2 were 
preferentially expressed in the aboral and posterior parts of the first
pharyngeal arch, including the developing temporomandibular joint. Through double
immunofluorescence and double fluorescent RNA in situ hybridization, we found
that Foxp1 was expressed in the progenitor cells for the muscle, bone, and
connective tissue. Foxp2 was expressed in subsets of bone and connective tissue
progenitors but not in the myoblasts. Neither gene was expressed in the dental
mesenchyme nor in the oral half of the palatal shelf undergoing extensive growth 
and morphogenesis. Together, we demonstrated for the first time that Foxp1 and
Foxp2 are expressed during craniofacial development. Our data suggest that the
Foxp genes may regulate development of the aboral and posterior regions of the
jaw.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26969076  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Cell. 2016 Mar 10;164(6):1269-76. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2016.02.039.

Insights into the Neural and Genetic Basis of Vocal Communication.

Konopka G(1), Roberts TF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-9111, USA. Electronic address: genevieve.konopka@utsouthwestern.edu.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, TX
75390-9111, USA. Electronic address: todd.roberts@utsouthwestern.edu.

The use of vocalizations to communicate information and elaborate social bonds is
an adaptation seen in many vertebrate species. Human speech is an extreme version
of this pervasive form of communication. Unlike the vocalizations exhibited by
the majority of land vertebrates, speech is a learned behavior requiring early
sensory exposure and auditory feedback for its development and maintenance.
Studies in humans and a small number of other species have provided insights into
the neural and genetic basis for learned vocal communication and are helping to
delineate the roles of brain circuits across the cortex, basal ganglia, and
cerebellum in generating vocal behaviors. This Review provides an outline of the 
current knowledge about these circuits and the genes implicated in vocal
communication, as well as a perspective on future research directions in this
field.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4788808 [Available on 2017-03-10]
PMID: 26967292  [PubMed - in process]


6. Biochemistry. 2016 Mar 18. [Epub ahead of print]

A Key Evolutionary Mutation Enhances DNA Binding of the FOXP2 Forkhead Domain.

Morris G(1), Fanucchi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Protein Structure-Function Research Unit, School of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of the Witwatersrand , 1 Jan Smuts Avenue, Braamfontein,
2050, Johannesburg, Gauteng, South Africa.

Forkhead box (FOX) transcription factors share a conserved forkhead DNA binding
domain (FHD) and are key role players in the development of many eukaryotic
species. Their involvement in various congenital disorders and cancers makes them
clinically relevant targets for novel therapeutic strategies. Among them, the
FOXP subfamily of multidomain transcriptional repressors is unique in its ability
to form DNA binding homo and heterodimers. The truncated FOXP2 FHD, in the
absence of the leucine zipper, exists in equilibrium between monomeric and
domain-swapped dimeric states in vitro. As a consequence, determining the DNA
binding properties of the FOXP2 FHD becomes inherently difficult. In this work,
two FOXP2 FHD hinge loop mutants have been generated to successfully prevent both
the formation (A539P) and the dissociation (F541C) of the homodimers. This allows
for the separation of the two species for downstream DNA binding studies.
Comparison of DNA binding of the different species using electrophoretic mobility
shift assay, fluorescence anisotropy and isothermal titration calorimetry
indicates that the wild-type FOXP2 FHD binds DNA as a monomer. However,
comparison of the DNA-binding energetics of the monomer and wild-type FHD,
reveals that there is a difference in the mechanism of binding between the two
species. We conclude that the naturally occurring reverse mutation (P539A) seen
in the FOXP subfamily increases DNA binding affinity and may increase the
potential for nonspecific binding compared to other FOX family members.

PMID: 26950495  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Cell Adh Migr. 2016 Mar 3:0. [Epub ahead of print]

Developmental role of the cell adhesion molecule Contactin-6 in the cerebral
cortex and hippocampus.

Zuko A(1), Oguro-Ando A(1), Van Dijk R(1), Gregorio-Jordan S(1), Van Der Zwaag
B(2), Burbach JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)a Brain Center Rudolf Magnus, Department of Translational Neuroscience ,
University Medical Center Utrecht , Utrecht , The Netherlands. (2)b Department of
Genetics , University Medical Center Utrecht , Utrecht , The Netherlands.

The gene encoding the neural cell adhesion molecule Contactin-6 (Cntn6 a.k.a.
NB-3) has been implicated as an autism risk gene, suggesting that its mutation is
deleterious to brain development. Due to its GPI-anchoring at Cntn6 may exert
cell adhesion/receptor functions in complex with other membrane proteins, or
serve as a ligand. We aimed to uncover novel phenotypes related to Cntn6
functions during development in the cerebral cortex of adult Cntn6(-/-) mice. We 
first determined Cntn6 protein and mRNA expression in the cortex, thalamic nuclei
and the hippocampus at P14, which decreased specifically in the cortex at adult
stages. Neuroanatomical analysis demonstrated a significant decrease of Cux1+
projection neurons in layers II-IV and an increase of FoxP2+ projection neurons
in layer VI in the visual cortex of adult Cntn6(-/-) mice compared to wild-type
controls. Furthermore, the number of parvalbumin+ (PV) interneurons was decreased
in Cntn6(-/-) mice, while the amount of NPY+ interneurons remained unchanged. In 
the hippocampus the delineation and outgrowth of mossy fibers remained largely
unchanged, except for the observation of a larger suprapyramidal bundle. The
observed abnormalities in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of Cntn6(-/-) mice 
suggests that Cntn6 serves developmental functions involving cell survival,
migration and fasciculation. Furthermore, hese data suggest that Cntn6 engages in
both trans- and cis-interactions and may be involved in larger protein
interaction networks.

PMID: 26939565  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 25;6:22157. doi: 10.1038/srep22157.

The evolutionary history of genes involved in spoken and written language: beyond
FOXP2.

Mozzi A(1), Forni D(1), Clerici M(2,)(3), Pozzoli U(1), Mascheretti S(4), Guerini
FR(3), Riva S(1), Bresolin N(1,)(5), Cagliani R(1), Sironi M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics, Scientific Institute IRCCS E. MEDEA, 23842 Bosisio Parini,
Italy. (2)Department of Physiopathology and Transplantation, University of Milan,
20090 Milan, Italy. (3)Don C. Gnocchi Foundation ONLUS, IRCCS, 20100 Milan,
Italy. (4)Child Psychopathology Unit, Scientific Institute IRCCS E. MEDEA, 23842 
Bosisio Parini, Lecco, Italy. (5)Dino Ferrari Centre, Department of
Physiopathology and Transplantation, University of Milan, Fondazione Ca' Granda
IRCCS Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 20122 Milan, Italy.

Humans possess a communication system based on spoken and written language. Other
animals can learn vocalization by imitation, but this is not equivalent to human 
language. Many genes were described to be implicated in language impairment (LI) 
and developmental dyslexia (DD), but their evolutionary history has not been
thoroughly analyzed. Herein we analyzed the evolution of ten genes involved in DD
and LI. Results show that the evolutionary history of LI genes for mammals and
aves was comparable in vocal-learner species and non-learners. For the human
lineage, several sites showing evidence of positive selection were identified in 
KIAA0319 and were already present in Neanderthals and Denisovans, suggesting that
any phenotypic change they entailed was shared with archaic hominins. Conversely,
in FOXP2, ROBO1, ROBO2, and CNTNAP2 non-coding changes rose to high frequency
after the separation from archaic hominins. These variants are promising
candidates for association studies in LI and DD.

PMCID: PMC4766443
PMID: 26912479  [PubMed - in process]


9. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2016 Jan 30;34(2):287-95. doi: 10.3233/RNN-150583.

Ultrasonic vocalization in murine experimental stroke: A mechanistic model of
aphasia.

Palmateer J(1), Pan J(1,)(2), Pandya A(3), Martin L(3), Kumar S(3), Ofomata A(3),
Jones TA(3), Gore AC(4), Schallert T(3), Hurn PD(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA.
(2)Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, PR, China. (3)Departments of
Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. (4)School of
Pharmacy, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA. (5)University of Texas 
System, Austin, TX, USA.

PURPOSE: Approximately one-fourth of stroke survivors are aphasic. Speech therapy
is the main treatment approach but leaves most patients with chronic disability. 
Attempts to improve this situation are hampered by a lack of mechanistic
understanding of the disability and treatments, reflecting the neglect of this
impairment modality in pre-clinical research. Accordingly, we devised a novel
murine model of speech-related impairment after stroke to investigate the role of
language- and plasticity-associated molecules. Rodents communicate socially with 
ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs), conveying semantic and semiotic information with
complex frequency modulated "songs" and alarm calls.
METHODS: Transient focal cerebral ischemia was induced in male C57BL6 mice via
either 30 or 45 minutes of reversible right MCAO using the intraluminal filament 
technique. Nine days post-operatively brains are stained with TTC and analyzed
for infarct volume. For behavioral measures health scores are taken (days 1-4),
cylinder tests and USV recordings performed at days 3 and 7 post operatively.
Real time PCR was performed at 24 and 48 hour and 7 day time points to quantify
mRNA expression of communication-related genes (Foxp2, Foxp1, Srpx2, Cntnap2 and 
Gapdh). Immunohistochemistry was performed to localize FOXP2 protein.
RESULTS: After middle cerebral artery occlusion of either 30 or 45 minutes
duration, mice demonstrate profoundly impaired socially evoked USVs. In addition,
there is suppression of the language-associated transcription factor, Forkhead
box protein 2 (Foxp2), and its downstream binding partner, contactin-associated
protein 2 (Cntnap2).
CONCLUSION: These findings set a foundation for further studies of mechanisms and
novel treatment strategies for post-stroke vocalization impairments.

PMID: 26889967  [PubMed - in process]


10. BMC Genet. 2016 Feb 11;17(1):39. doi: 10.1186/s12863-016-0345-x.

Discovery of candidate genes for nonsyndromic cleft lip palate through
genome-wide linkage analysis of large extended families in the Malay population.

Mohamad Shah NS(1), Salahshourifar I(2), Sulong S(3), Wan Sulaiman WA(4), Halim
AS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Reconstructive Science Unit, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains
Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia. sya_escoe@yahoo.co.uk. (2)Department of Biology,
School of Basic Sciences, Science and Research Branch, Islamic Azad University,
Isfahan, Iran. isalahshouri@gmail.com. (3)Human Genome Center, School of Medical 
Sciences, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia. ssarina@usm.my.
(4)Reconstructive Science Unit, School of Medical Sciences, Universiti Sains
Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia. wazman@usm.my. (5)School of Medical Sciences,
Health Campus, Universiti Sains Malaysia, Kelantan, Malaysia. ashalim@usm.my.

BACKGROUND: Nonsyndromic orofacial clefts are one of the most common birth
defects worldwide. It occurs as a result of genetic or environmental factors.
This study investigates the genetic contribution to nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or
palate through the analysis of family pedigrees. Candidate genes associated with 
the condition were identified from large extended families from the Malay
population.
RESULTS: A significant nonparametric linkage (NPL) score was detected in family
100. Other suggestive NPL and logarithm of the odds (LOD) scores were attained
from families 50, 58, 99 and 100 under autosomal recessive mode. Heterogeneity
LOD (HLOD) score<U+2009>=<U+2009>1 was determined for all families, confirming genetic
heterogeneity of the population and indicating that a proportion of families
might be linked to each other. Several candidate genes in linkage intervals were 
determined; LPHN2 at 1p31, SATB2 at 2q33.1-q35, PVRL3 at 3q13.3, COL21A1 at
6p12.1, FOXP2 at 7q22.3-q33, FOXG1 and HECTD1 at 14q12 and TOX3 at 16q12.1.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified several novel and known candidate genes for
nonsyndromic cleft lip and/or palate through genome-wide linkage analysis.
Further analysis of the involvement of these genes in the condition will shed
light on the disease mechanism. Comprehensive genetic testing of the candidate
genes is warranted.

PMCID: PMC4751652
PMID: 26868259  [PubMed - in process]


11. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 12;6:20911. doi: 10.1038/srep20911.

The language-related transcription factor FOXP2 is post-translationally modified 
with small ubiquitin-like modifiers.

Estruch SB(1), Graham SA(1), Deriziotis P(1), Fisher SE(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Wundtlaan 1, 6525 XD, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (2)Donders Institute for Brain, 
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, 6525 EN, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

Mutations affecting the transcription factor FOXP2 cause a rare form of severe
speech and language disorder. Although it is clear that sufficient FOXP2
expression is crucial for normal brain development, little is known about how
this transcription factor is regulated. To investigate post-translational
mechanisms for FOXP2 regulation, we searched for protein interaction partners of 
FOXP2, and identified members of the PIAS family as novel FOXP2 interactors. PIAS
proteins mediate post-translational modification of a range of target proteins
with small ubiquitin-like modifiers (SUMOs). We found that FOXP2 can be modified 
with all three human SUMO proteins and that PIAS1 promotes this process. An
aetiological FOXP2 mutation found in a family with speech and language disorder
markedly reduced FOXP2 SUMOylation. We demonstrate that FOXP2 is SUMOylated at a 
single major site, which is conserved in all FOXP2 vertebrate orthologues and in 
the paralogues FOXP1 and FOXP4. Abolishing this site did not lead to detectable
changes in FOXP2 subcellular localization, stability, dimerization or
transcriptional repression in cellular assays, but the conservation of this site 
suggests a potential role for SUMOylation in regulating FOXP2 activity in vivo.

PMCID: PMC4751435
PMID: 26867680  [PubMed - in process]


12. J Comp Neurol. 2015 Dec 29. doi: 10.1002/cne.23937. [Epub ahead of print]

Human-specific increase of dopaminergic innervation in a striatal region
associated with speech and language: A comparative analysis of the primate basal 
ganglia.

Raghanti MA(1,)(2), Edler MK(2), Stephenson AR(1), Wilson LJ(1), Hopkins WD(3),
Ely JJ(4), Erwin JM(5,)(6), Jacobs B(7), Hof PR(8,)(9), Sherwood CC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio, 44242.
(2)School of Biomedical Sciences, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio, 44242.
(3)Neuroscience Institute and Language Research Center, Georgia State University,
Atlanta, GA, 30322. (4)MAEBIOS, Alamogordo, New Mexico, 88310. (5)Department of
Anthropology and Center for the Advanced Study of Human Paleobiology, The George 
Washington University, Washington, DC, 20052. (6)California National Primate
Research Center, University of California, Davis, California, 95616.
(7)Laboratory of Quantitative Neuromorphology, Psychology, Colorado College,
Colorado Springs, Colorado, 80903. (8)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience and
Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New 
York, 10029. (9)New York Consortium in Evolutionary Primatology, New York, New
York, 10024.

The dopaminergic innervation of the striatum has been implicated in learning
processes and in the development of human speech and language. Several lines of
evidence suggest that evolutionary changes in dopaminergic afferents of the
striatum may be associated with uniquely human cognitive and behavioral
abilities, including the association of the human-specific sequence of the FOXP2 
gene with decreased dopamine in the dorsomedial striatum of mice. To examine this
possibility, we quantified the density of tyrosine hydroxylase-immunoreactive
axons as a measure of dopaminergic innervation within five basal ganglia regions 
in humans, great apes, and New and Old World monkeys. Our results indicate that
humans differ from nonhuman primate species in having a significant increase in
dopaminergic innervation selectively localized to the medial caudate nucleus.
This region of the striatum is highly interconnected, receiving afferents from
multiple neocortical regions, and supports behavioral and cognitive flexibility. 
The medial caudate nucleus also shows hyperactivity in humans lacking a
functional FOXP2 allele and exhibits altered dopamine concentrations in humanized
Foxp2 mice. Additionally, striatal dopaminergic input was not altered in
chimpanzees that used socially learned attention-getting sounds versus those that
did not. This evidence indicates that the increase in dopamine innervation of the
medial caudate nucleus in humans is a species-typical characteristic not
associated with experience-dependent plasticity. The specificity of this increase
may be related to the degree of convergence from cortical areas within this
region of the striatum and may also be involved in human speech and language. J. 
Comp. Neurol., 2015. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26715195  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Hum Mol Genet. 2016 Feb 1;25(3):546-57. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv495. Epub 2015 Dec 8.

Identification and functional characterization of de novo FOXP1 variants provides
novel insights into the etiology of neurodevelopmental disorder.

Sollis E(1), Graham SA(1), Vino A(1), Froehlich H(2), Vreeburg M(3),
Dimitropoulou D(1), Gilissen C(4), Pfundt R(4), Rappold GA(5), Brunner HG(6),
Deriziotis P(7), Fisher SE(8).

Author information: 
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen 6525 XD, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Human Molecular Genetics,
Heidelberg University, Heidelberg 69120, Germany. (3)Department of Clinical
Genetics and School for Oncology & Developmental Biology (GROW), Maastricht UMC, 
Maastricht 6202 AZ, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg
69120, Germany, Interdisciplinary Center of Neurosciences (IZN), Heidelberg
University, Heidelberg 69120, Germany and. (6)Department of Clinical Genetics and
School for Oncology & Developmental Biology (GROW), Maastricht UMC, Maastricht
6202 AZ, The Netherlands, Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Nijmegen 6500 HB, The Netherlands. (7)Language and
Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen 6525
XD, The Netherlands, pelagia.derizioti@mpi.nl simon.fisher@mpi.nl. (8)Language
and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen
6525 XD, The Netherlands, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Nijmegen 6525 EN, The Netherlands pelagia.derizioti@mpi.nl simon.fisher@mpi.nl.

De novo disruptions of the neural transcription factor FOXP1 are a recently
discovered, rare cause of sporadic intellectual disability (ID). We report three 
new cases of FOXP1-related disorder identified through clinical whole-exome
sequencing. Detailed phenotypic assessment confirmed that global developmental
delay, autistic features, speech/language deficits, hypotonia and mild dysmorphic
features are core features of the disorder. We expand the phenotypic spectrum to 
include sensory integration disorder and hypertelorism. Notably, the etiological 
variants in these cases include two missense variants within the DNA-binding
domain of FOXP1. Only one such variant has been reported previously. The third
patient carries a stop-gain variant. We performed functional characterization of 
the three missense variants alongside our stop-gain and two previously described 
truncating/frameshift variants. All variants severely disrupted multiple aspects 
of protein function. Strikingly, the missense variants had similarly severe
effects on protein function as the truncating/frameshift variants. Our findings
indicate that a loss of transcriptional repression activity of FOXP1 underlies
the neurodevelopmental phenotype in FOXP1-related disorder. Interestingly, the
three novel variants retained the ability to interact with wild-type FOXP1,
suggesting these variants could exert a dominant-negative effect by interfering
with the normal FOXP1 protein. These variants also retained the ability to
interact with FOXP2, a paralogous transcription factor disrupted in rare cases of
speech and language disorder. Thus, speech/language deficits in these individuals
might be worsened through deleterious effects on FOXP2 function. Our findings
highlight that de novo FOXP1 variants are a cause of sporadic ID and emphasize
the importance of this transcription factor in neurodevelopment.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26647308  [PubMed - in process]


14. Front Psychol. 2015 Nov 26;6:1816. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01816. eCollection
2015.

Retinoic Acid Signaling: A New Piece in the Spoken Language Puzzle.

van Rhijn JR(1), Vernes SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Language and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics Nijmegen, Netherlands ; Molecular Neurophysiology Group,
Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Radboud University Medical Center Nijmegen,
Netherlands. (2)Department of Language and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics Nijmegen, Netherlands ; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen, Netherlands.

Speech requires precise motor control and rapid sequencing of highly complex
vocal musculature. Despite its complexity, most people produce spoken language
effortlessly. This is due to activity in distributed neuronal circuitry including
cortico-striato-thalamic loops that control speech-motor output. Understanding
the neuro-genetic mechanisms involved in the correct development and function of 
these pathways will shed light on how humans can effortlessly and innately use
spoken language and help to elucidate what goes wrong in speech-language
disorders. FOXP2 was the first single gene identified to cause speech and
language disorder. Individuals with FOXP2 mutations display a severe speech
deficit that includes receptive and expressive language impairments. The
neuro-molecular mechanisms controlled by FOXP2 will give insight into our
capacity for speech-motor control, but are only beginning to be unraveled.
Recently FOXP2 was found to regulate genes involved in retinoic acid (RA)
signaling and to modify the cellular response to RA, a key regulator of brain
development. Here we explore evidence that FOXP2 and RA function in overlapping
pathways. We summate evidence at molecular, cellular, and behavioral levels that 
suggest an interplay between FOXP2 and RA that may be important for fine motor
control and speech-motor output. We propose RA signaling is an exciting new angle
from which to investigate how neuro-genetic mechanisms can contribute to the
(spoken) language ready brain.

PMCID: PMC4660430
PMID: 26635706  [PubMed]


15. Genes Brain Behav. 2016 Feb;15(2):243-59. doi: 10.1111/gbb.12274. Epub 2016 Jan
13.

Ultrasonic vocalizations of adult male Foxp2-mutant mice: behavioral contexts of 
arousal and emotion.

Gaub S(1), Fisher SE(2,)(3), Ehret G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology, University of Ulm, Germany. (2)Department of
Language and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics. (3)Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Adult mouse ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs) occur in multiple behavioral and
stimulus contexts associated with various levels of arousal, emotion and social
interaction. Here, in three experiments of increasing stimulus intensity (water; 
female urine; male interacting with adult female), we tested the hypothesis that 
USVs of adult males express the strength of arousal and emotion via different USV
parameters (18 parameters analyzed). Furthermore, we analyzed two mouse lines
with heterozygous Foxp2 mutations (R552H missense, S321X nonsense), known to
produce severe speech and language disorders in humans. These experiments allowed
us to test whether intact Foxp2 function is necessary for developing full adult
USV repertoires, and whether mutations of this gene influence instinctive vocal
expressions based on arousal and emotion. The results suggest that USV calling
rate characterizes the arousal level, while sound pressure and spectrotemporal
call complexity (overtones/harmonics, type of frequency jumps) may provide
indices of levels of positive emotion. The presence of Foxp2 mutations did not
qualitatively affect the USVs; all USV types that were found in wild-type animals
also occurred in heterozygous mutants. However, mice with Foxp2 mutations
displayed quantitative differences in USVs as compared to wild-types, and these
changes were context dependent. Compared to wild-type animals, heterozygous
mutants emitted mainly longer and louder USVs at higher minimum frequencies with 
a higher occurrence rate of overtones/harmonics and complex frequency jump types.
We discuss possible hypotheses about Foxp2 influence on emotional vocal
expressions, which can be investigated in future experiments using selective
knockdown of Foxp2 in specific brain circuits.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd and International Behavioural and Neural Genetics
Society.

PMID: 26566793  [PubMed - in process]


16. Sci Rep. 2015 Nov 10;5:16300. doi: 10.1038/srep16300.

Risperidone and NAP protect cognition and normalize gene expression in a
schizophrenia mouse model.

Vaisburd S(1), Shemer Z(1), Yeheskel A(2), Giladi E(1), Gozes I(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Lily and Avraham Gildor Chair for the Investigation of Growth Factors, The
Elton Laboratory for Neuroendocrinology, Department of Human Molecular Genetics
and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Sagol School of Neuroscience and
Adams Super Center for Brain Studies, Tel Aviv University 69978, Israel. (2)The
Bioinformatics Unit, George S. Wise Faculty of Life Sciences, Tel Aviv University
69978, Israel.

Mutated disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DISC1), a microtubule regulating protein,
leads to schizophrenia and other psychiatric illnesses. It is hypothesized that
microtubule stabilization may provide neuroprotection in schizophrenia. The NAP
(NAPVSIPQ) sequence of activity-dependent neuroprotective protein (ADNP) contains
the SxIP motif, microtubule end binding (EB) protein target, which is critical
for microtubule dynamics leading to synaptic plasticity and neuroprotection.
Bioinformatics prediction for FDA approved drugs mimicking SxIP-like motif which 
displace NAP-EB binding identified Risperidone. Risperidone or NAP effectively
ameliorated object recognition deficits in the mutated DISC1 mouse model. NAP but
not Risperidone, reduced anxiety in the mutated mice. Doxycycline, which blocked 
the expression of the mutated DISC1, did not reverse the phenotype. Transcripts
of Forkhead-BOX P2 (Foxp2), a gene regulating DISC1 and associated with human
ability to acquire a spoken language, were increased in the hippocampus of the
DISC1 mutated mice and were significantly lowered after treatment with NAP,
Risperidone, or the combination of both. Thus, the combination of NAP and
standard of care Risperidone in humans may protect against language disturbances 
associated with negative and cognitive impairments in schizophrenia.

PMCID: PMC4639790
PMID: 26553741  [PubMed - in process]


17. Acta Crystallogr F Struct Biol Commun. 2015 Nov;71(Pt 11):1437-41. doi:
10.1107/S2053230X1501969X. Epub 2015 Oct 30.

Crystallization and X-ray diffraction analysis of the HMG domain of the
chondrogenesis master regulator Sox9 in complex with a ChIP-Seq-identified DNA
element.

Vivekanandan S(1), Moovarkumudalvan B(1), Lescar J(2), Kolatkar PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Structural Biochemistry, Genome Institute of Singapore, Genome,
60 Biopolis Street, Singapore 138672, Singapore. (2)School of Biological Science,
Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551, Singapore.

Sox9 is a fundamental sex-determining gene and the master regulator of
chondrogenesis, and is involved in the development of various vital organs such
as testes, kidney, heart and brain, and in skeletal development. Similar to other
known Sox transcription factors, Sox9 recognizes and binds DNA with the consensus
sequence C(T/A)TTG(T/A)(T/A) through the highly conserved HMG domain.
Nonetheless, the molecular basis of the functional specificity of Sox9 in key
developmental processes is still unclear. As an initial step towards a
mechanistic understanding of Sox9 transcriptional regulation, the current work
describes the details of the purification of the mouse Sox9 HMG domain
(mSox9HMG), its crystallization in complex with a ChIP-Seq-identified FOXP2
promoter DNA element and the X-ray diffraction data analysis of this complex. The
mSox9HMG-FOXP2 promoter DNA complex was crystallized by the hanging-drop
vapour-diffusion method using 20% PEG 3350 in 200 mM sodium/potassium phosphate
with 100 mM bis-tris propane at pH 8.5. The crystals diffracted to 2.7 Å
resolution and the complex crystallized in the tetragonal space group P41212,
with unit-cell parameters a = b = 99.49, c = 45.89 Å. Crystal-packing parameters 
revealed that asymmetric unit contained one mSox9HMG-FOXP2 promoter DNA complex
with an estimated solvent content of 64%.

PMID: 26527273  [PubMed - in process]


18. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Dec;12(6):8162-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4483. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

Contactin-associated protein-like 2 expression in SH-SY5Y cells is upregulated by
a FOXP2 mutant with a shortened poly-glutamine tract.

Zhao Y(1), Liu X(2), Sun H(3), Wang Y(2), Yang W(1), Ma H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, Liaoning 110004, P.R. China. (2)Department of Clinical
Genetics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, Liaoning
110004, P.R. China. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Central Hospital Affiliated to
Shenyang Medical College, Shenyang, Liaoning 110024, P.R. China.

The forkhead box protein P2 (FOXP2) gene encodes an important transcription
factor that contains a polyglutamine (poly-Q) tract and a forkhead DNA binding
domain. It has been observed that FOXP2 is associated with speech sound disorder 
(SSD), and mutations that decrease the length of the poly-Q tract were identified
in the FOXP2 gene of SSD patients. However, the exact role of poly-Q reduction is
not well understood. In the present study, constructs expressing wild-type and
poly-Q reduction mutants of FOXP2 were generated by polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) using lentiviral vectors and transfected into the SH-SY5Y neuronal cell
line. Quantitative reverse transcription (qRT)-PCR and western blotting indicated
that infected cells stably expressed high levels of FOXP2. Using this cell model,
the impact of FOXP2 on the expression of contactin-associated protein-like 2
(CNTNAP2) were investigated, and CNTNAP2 mRNA expression levels were observed to 
be significantly higher in cells expressing poly-Q-reduced FOXP2. In addition,
the expression level of CASPR2, a mammalian homolog of Drosophila Neurexin IV,
was increased in cells expressing the FOXP2 mutant. Demonstration of regulation
by FOXP2 indicates that CNTNAP2 may also be involved in SSD.

PMID: 26497390  [PubMed - in process]


19. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2016 Jan 1;310(1):R41-54. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00094.2015. Epub 2015 Oct 21.

Genetic identity of thermosensory relay neurons in the lateral parabrachial
nucleus.

Geerling JC(1), Kim M(2), Mahoney CE(2), Abbott SB(2), Agostinelli LJ(2),
Garfield AS(3), Krashes MJ(4), Lowell BB(5), Scammell TE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center; Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts; jgeerlin@bidmc.harvard.edu. (2)Department of
Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center; Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
Massachusetts; (3)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel 
Deaconess Medical Center; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Centre
for Integrative Physiology, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Scotland;
(4)Diabetes, Endocrinology and Obesity Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland;
and National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland. (5)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, Beth Israel
Deaconess Medical Center; Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts;

The parabrachial nucleus is important for thermoregulation because it relays skin
temperature information from the spinal cord to the hypothalamus. Prior work in
rats localized thermosensory relay neurons to its lateral subdivision (LPB), but 
the genetic and neurochemical identity of these neurons remains unknown. To
determine the identity of LPB thermosensory neurons, we exposed mice to a warm
(36°C) or cool (4°C) ambient temperature. Each condition activated neurons in
distinct LPB subregions that receive input from the spinal cord. Most c-Fos+
neurons in these LPB subregions expressed the transcription factor marker FoxP2. 
Consistent with prior evidence that LPB thermosensory relay neurons are
glutamatergic, all FoxP2+ neurons in these subregions colocalized with green
fluorescent protein (GFP) in reporter mice for Vglut2, but not for Vgat.
Prodynorphin (Pdyn)-expressing neurons were identified using a GFP reporter mouse
and formed a caudal subset of LPB FoxP2+ neurons, primarily in the dorsal lateral
subnucleus (PBdL). Warm exposure activated many FoxP2+ neurons within PBdL. Half 
of the c-Fos+ neurons in PBdL were Pdyn+, and most of these project into the
preoptic area. Cool exposure activated a separate FoxP2+ cluster of neurons in
the far-rostral LPB, which we named the rostral-to-external lateral subnucleus
(PBreL). These findings improve our understanding of LPB organization and reveal 
that Pdyn-IRES-Cre mice provide genetic access to warm-activated, FoxP2+
glutamatergic neurons in PBdL, many of which project to the hypothalamus.

PMCID: PMC4747895 [Available on 2017-01-01]
PMID: 26491097  [PubMed - in process]


20. Comput Biol Chem. 2015 Dec;59 Pt A:117-25. doi:
10.1016/j.compbiolchem.2015.09.002. Epub 2015 Sep 9.

Predicting functional regulatory SNPs in the human antimicrobial peptide genes
DEFB1 and CAMP in tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS.

Flores Saiffe Farías A(1), Jaime Herrera López E(2), Moreno Vázquez CJ(3), Li
W(4), Prado Montes de Oca E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Personalized Medicine Laboratory (LAMPER), Medical and Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology, Guadalajara Unit, Research Center of Technology and Design
Assistance of Jalisco State, National Council of Science and Technology (CIATEJ
AC, CONACYT), Av. Normalistas 800, Col. Colinas de la Normal, CP 44270
Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic address: adolfo.flores.saiffe@gmail.com.
(2)Industrial Biotechnology, CIATEJ AC, Zapopan Unit, CONACYT, Camino Arenero
1227, Col. El Bajío del Arenal, CP 45019 Zapopan, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic
address: eherrera@ciatej.mx. (3)Personalized Medicine Laboratory (LAMPER),
Medical and Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Guadalajara Unit, Research Center of
Technology and Design Assistance of Jalisco State, National Council of Science
and Technology (CIATEJ AC, CONACYT), Av. Normalistas 800, Col. Colinas de la
Normal, CP 44270 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic address:
ing_cjmv@hotmail.com. (4)The Robert S. Boas Center for Genomics and Human
Genetics, Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, 350 Community Dr. Manhasset, 
NY 11030, USA. Electronic address: wtli2012@gmail.com. (5)Personalized Medicine
Laboratory (LAMPER), Medical and Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Guadalajara Unit, 
Research Center of Technology and Design Assistance of Jalisco State, National
Council of Science and Technology (CIATEJ AC, CONACYT), Av. Normalistas 800, Col.
Colinas de la Normal, CP 44270 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico; Molecular Biology
Laboratory, Biosafety Area, Medical and Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Guadalajara
Unit, CIATEJ AC, CONACYT, Av. Normalistas 800, Col. Colinas de la Normal, CP
44270 Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico. Electronic address: eprado@ciatej.mx.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in transcription factor binding sites
(TFBSs) within gene promoter region or enhancers can modify the transcription
rate of genes related to complex diseases. These SNPs can be called regulatory
SNPs (rSNPs). Data compiled from recent projects, such as the 1000 Genomes
Project and ENCODE, has revealed essential information used to perform in silico 
prediction of the molecular and biological repercussions of SNPs within TFBS.
However, most of these studies are very limited, as they only analyze SNPs in
coding regions or when applied to promoters, and do not integrate essential
biological data like TFBSs, expression profiles, pathway analysis, homotypic
redundancy (number of TFBSs for the same TF in a region), chromatin accessibility
and others, which could lead to a more accurate prediction. Our aim was to
integrate different data in a biologically coherent method to analyze the
proximal promoter regions of two antimicrobial peptide genes, DEFB1 and CAMP,
that are associated with tuberculosis (TB) and HIV/AIDS. We predicted SNPs within
the promoter regions that are more likely to interact with transcription factors 
(TFs). We also assessed the impact of homotypic redundancy using a novel approach
called the homotypic redundancy weight factor (HWF). Our results identified 10
SNPs, which putatively modify the binding affinity of 24 TFs previously
identified as related to TB and HIV/AIDS expression profiles (e.g. KLF5, CEBPA
and NFKB1 for TB; FOXP2, BRCA1, CEBPB, CREB1, EBF1 and ZNF354C for HIV/AIDS; and 
RUNX2, HIF1A, JUN/AP-1, NR4A2, EGR1 for both diseases). Validating with the
OregAnno database and cell-specific functional/non functional SNPs from
additional 13 genes, our algorithm performed 53% sensitivity and 84.6%
specificity to detect functional rSNPs using the DNAseI-HUP database. We are
proposing our algorithm as a novel in silico method to detect true functional
rSNPs in antimicrobial peptide genes. With further improvement, this novel method
could be applied to other promoters in order to design probes and to discover new
drug targets for complex diseases.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26447748  [PubMed - in process]


21. Annu Rev Genet. 2015;49:131-60. doi: 10.1146/annurev-genet-120213-092236. Epub
2015 Oct 5.

Understanding Language from a Genomic Perspective.

Graham SA(1), Fisher SE(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
6525 XD Nijmegen, The Netherlands; email: sarah.graham@mpi.nl. (2)Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University, 6525 EN
Nijmegen, The Netherlands; email: simon.fisher@mpi.nl.

Language is a defining characteristic of the human species, but its foundations
remain mysterious. Heritable disorders offer a gateway into biological
underpinnings, as illustrated by the discovery that FOXP2 disruptions cause a
rare form of speech and language impairment. The genetic architecture underlying 
language-related disorders is complex, and although some progress has been made, 
it has proved challenging to pinpoint additional relevant genes with confidence. 
Next-generation sequencing and genome-wide association studies are
revolutionizing understanding of the genetic bases of other neurodevelopmental
disorders, like autism and schizophrenia, and providing fundamental insights into
the molecular networks crucial for typical brain development. We discuss how a
similar genomic perspective, brought to the investigation of language-related
phenotypes, promises to yield equally informative discoveries. Moreover, we
outline how follow-up studies of genetic findings using cellular systems and
animal models can help to elucidate the biological mechanisms involved in the
development of brain circuits supporting language.

PMID: 26442845  [PubMed - in process]


22. Mol Cytogenet. 2015 Aug 20;8:69. doi: 10.1186/s13039-015-0173-0. eCollection
2015.

A chromosomal rearrangement in a child with severe speech and language disorder
separates FOXP2 from a functional enhancer.

Becker M(1), Devanna P(1), Fisher SE(2), Vernes SC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, PO Box 310, Nijmegen, 6500 AH The 
Netherlands. (2)Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, PO Box 310, Nijmegen,
6500 AH The Netherlands ; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Geert Grootplein Noord 21, Nijmegen, 6525 EZ The Netherlands.

Mutations of FOXP2 in 7q31 cause a rare disorder involving speech apraxia,
accompanied by expressive and receptive language impairments. A recent report
described a child with speech and language deficits, and a genomic rearrangement 
affecting chromosomes 7 and 11. One breakpoint mapped to 7q31 and, although
outside its coding region, was hypothesised to disrupt FOXP2 expression. We
identified an element 2 kb downstream of this breakpoint with epigenetic
characteristics of an enhancer. We show that this element drives reporter gene
expression in human cell-lines. Thus, displacement of this element by
translocation may disturb gene expression, contributing to the observed language 
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4546047
PMID: 26300977  [PubMed]


23. Genes Brain Behav. 2015 Nov;14(8):583-90. doi: 10.1111/gbb.12237. Epub 2015 Aug
25.

A humanized version of Foxp2 does not affect ultrasonic vocalization in adult
mice.

Hammerschmidt K(1), Schreiweis C(2), Minge C(1), Pääbo S(3), Fischer J(1), Enard 
W(4).

Author information: 
(1)Cognitive Ethology Laboratory, German Primate Center, Göttingen, Germany.
(2)Institut Necker-Enfants Malades (INEM), Centre de Médecine Moléculaire, CS
Paris, France. (3)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for
Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. (4)Department of Biology II, Ludwig 
Maximilian University Munich, Martinsried, Germany.

The transcription factor FOXP2 has been linked to severe speech and language
impairments in humans. An analysis of the evolution of the FOXP2 gene has
identified two amino acid substitutions that became fixed after the split of the 
human and chimpanzee lineages. Studying the functional consequences of these two 
substitutions in the endogenous Foxp2 gene of mice showed alterations in dopamine
levels, striatal synaptic plasticity, neuronal morphology and
cortico-striatal-dependent learning. In addition, ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs)
of pups had a significantly lower average pitch than control littermates. To
which degree adult USVs would be affected in mice carrying the 'humanized' Foxp2 
variant remained unclear. In this study, we analyzed USVs of 68 adult male mice
uttered during repeated courtship encounters with different females. Mice
carrying the Foxp2(hum/hum) allele did not differ significantly in the number of 
call elements, their element structure or in their element composition from
control littermates. We conclude that neither the structure nor the usage of USVs
in adult mice is affected by the two amino acid substitutions that occurred in
FOXP2 during human evolution. The reported effect for pup vocalization thus
appears to be transient. These results are in line with accumulating evidence
that mouse USVs are hardly influenced by vocal learning. Hence, the function and 
evolution of genes that are necessary, but not sufficient for vocal learning in
humans, must be either studied at a different phenotypic level in mice or in
other organisms.

© 2015 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior published by International
Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26250064  [PubMed - in process]


24. J Neurosci. 2015 Aug 5;35(31):10911-26. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0601-15.2015.

Thalamic WNT3 Secretion Spatiotemporally Regulates the Neocortical Ribosome
Signature and mRNA Translation to Specify Neocortical Cell Subtypes.

Kraushar ML(1), Viljetic B(1), Wijeratne HR(1), Thompson K(1), Jiao X(2), Pike
JW(1), Medvedeva V(3), Groszer M(3), Kiledjian M(2), Hart RP(2), Rasin MR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience & Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School 
and. (2)Department of Cell Biology & Neuroscience, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, and. (3)Inserm, UMR-S839, Sorbonne Universités,
Pierre et Marie Curie Université Paris 06, Institut du Fer à Moulin, Paris 75005,
France. (4)Department of Neuroscience & Cell Biology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School and roko.rasin@rutgers.edu.

Neocortical development requires tightly controlled spatiotemporal gene
expression. However, the mechanisms regulating ribosomal complexes and the timed 
specificity of neocortical mRNA translation are poorly understood. We show that
active mRNA translation complexes (polysomes) contain ribosomal protein subsets
that undergo dynamic spatiotemporal rearrangements during mouse neocortical
development. Ribosomal protein specificity within polysome complexes is regulated
by the arrival of in-growing thalamic axons, which secrete the morphogen
Wingless-related MMTV (mouse mammary tumor virus) integration site 3 (WNT3).
Thalamic WNT3 release during midneurogenesis promotes a change in the levels of
Ribosomal protein L7 in polysomes, thereby regulating neocortical translation
machinery specificity. Furthermore, we present an RNA sequencing dataset
analyzing mRNAs that dynamically associate with polysome complexes as neocortical
development progresses, and thus may be regulated spatiotemporally at the level
of translation. Thalamic WNT3 regulates neocortical translation of two such
mRNAs, Foxp2 and Apc, to promote FOXP2 expression while inhibiting APC
expression, thereby driving neocortical neuronal differentiation and suppressing 
oligodendrocyte maturation, respectively. This mechanism may enable targeted and 
rapid spatiotemporal control of ribosome composition and selective mRNA
translation in complex developing systems like the neocortex.SIGNIFICANCE
STATEMENT: The neocortex is a highly complex circuit generating the most
evolutionarily advanced complex cognitive and sensorimotor functions. An
intricate progression of molecular and cellular steps during neocortical
development determines its structure and function. Our goal is to study the steps
regulating spatiotemporal specificity of mRNA translation that govern neocortical
development. In this work, we show that the timed secretion of Wingless-related
MMTV (mouse mammary tumor virus) integration site 3 (WNT3) by ingrowing axons
from the thalamus regulates the combinatorial composition of ribosomal proteins
in developing neocortex, which we term the "neocortical ribosome signature."
Thalamic WNT3 further regulates the specificity of mRNA translation and
development of neurons and oligodendrocytes in the neocortex. This study advances
our overall understanding of WNT signaling and the spatiotemporal regulation of
mRNA translation in highly complex developing systems.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/3510912-16$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4524969
PMID: 26245956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Cell Biochem. 2016 Feb;117(2):426-38. doi: 10.1002/jcb.25288.

The Key Regulator for Language and Speech Development, FOXP2, is a Novel
Substrate for SUMOylation.

Meredith LJ(1), Wang CM(1), Nascimento L(1), Liu R(2), Wang L(2), Yang WH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Mercer University School of Medicine,
Savannah, Georgia 30404. (2)Department of Genetics and Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama 35294.

Transcription factor forkhead box protein P2 (FOXP2) plays an essential role in
the development of language and speech. However, the transcriptional activity of 
FOXP2 regulated by the post-translational modifications remains unknown. Here, we
demonstrated that FOXP2 is clearly defined as a SUMO target protein at the
cellular levels as FOXP2 is covalently modified by both SUMO1 and SUMO3.
Furthermore, SUMOylation of FOXP2 was significantly decreased by SENP2 (a
specific SUMOylation protease). We further showed that FOXP2 is selectively
SUMOylated in vivo on a phylogenetically conserved lysine 674 but the SUMOylation
does not alter subcellular localization and stability of FOXP2. Interestingly, we
observed that human etiological FOXP2 R553H mutation robustly reduces its
SUMOylation potential as compared to wild-type FOXP2. In addition, the acidic
residues downstream the core SUMO motif on FOXP2 are required for its full
SUMOylation capacity. Finally, our functional analysis using reporter gene assays
showed that SUMOylation may modulate transcriptional activity of FOXP2 in
regulating downstream target genes (DISC1, SRPX2, and MiR200c). Altogether, we
provide the first evidence that FOXP2 is a substrate for SUMOylation and
SUMOylation of FOXP2 plays a functional role in regulating its transcriptional
activity. J. Cell. Biochem. 117: 426-438, 2016. © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26212494  [PubMed - in process]


26. Brain Struct Funct. 2015 Jul 11. [Epub ahead of print]

FoxP2 protein levels regulate cell morphology changes and migration patterns in
the vertebrate developing telencephalon.

Garcia-Calero E(1), Botella-Lopez A, Bahamonde O, Perez-Balaguer A, Martinez S.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Neurociencias (UMH-CSIC), San Juan, 03550, Alicante, Spain,
ecalero@um.es.

In the mammalian telencephalon, part of the progenitor cells transition from
multipolar to bipolar morphology as they invade the mantle zone. This associates 
with changing patterns of radial migration. However, the molecules implicated in 
these morphology transitions are not well known. In the present work, we analyzed
the function of FoxP2 protein in this process during telencephalic development in
vertebrates. We analyzed the expression of FoxP2 protein and its relation with
cell morphology and migratory patterns in mouse and chicken developing striatum. 
We observed FoxP2 protein expressed in a gradient from the subventricular zone to
the mantle layer in mice embryos. In the FoxP2 low domain cells showed multipolar
migration. In the striatal mantle layer where FoxP2 protein expression is higher,
cells showed locomoting migration and bipolar morphology. In contrast, FoxP2
showed a high and homogenous expression pattern in chicken striatum, thus bipolar
morphology predominated. Elevation of FoxP2 in the striatal subventricular zone
by in utero electroporation promoted bipolar morphology and impaired multipolar
radial migration. In mouse cerebral cortex we obtained similar results. FoxP2
promotes transition from multipolar to bipolar morphology by means of gradiental 
expression in mouse striatum and cortex. Together these results indicate a role
of FoxP2 differential expression in cell morphology control of the vertebrate
telencephalon.

PMID: 26163006  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


27. BMC Cancer. 2015 Jul 10;15:514. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1463-y.

Acquired genetic alterations in tumor cells dictate the development of high-risk 
neuroblastoma and clinical outcomes.

Khan FH(1), Pandian V(2), Ramraj S(3), Natarajan M(4), Aravindan S(5), Herman
TS(6,)(7), Aravindan N(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences
Science Center, 940 Stanton L. Young Blvd., BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104,
USA. Faizan-Khan@ouhsc.edu. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Science Center, 940 Stanton L. Young Blvd., BMSB 737,
Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. Vijayabaskar-Pandian@ouhsc.edu. (3)Department of
Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Science Center, 940
Stanton L. Young Blvd., BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
Satish-Ramraj@ouhsc.edu. (4)Department of Pathology, University of Texas Health
Sciences Center, San Antonio, TX, USA. natarajan@uthscsa.edu. (5)Stephenson
Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA. Sheeja-Aravindan@ouhsc.edu. (6)Department 
of Radiation Oncology, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Science Center, 940
Stanton L. Young Blvd., BMSB 737, Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA.
Terence-Herman@ouhsc.edu. (7)Stephenson Cancer Center, Oklahoma City, OK, USA.
Terence-Herman@ouhsc.edu. (8)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
Oklahoma Health Sciences Science Center, 940 Stanton L. Young Blvd., BMSB 737,
Oklahoma City, OK, 73104, USA. naravind@ouhsc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Determining the driving factors and molecular flow-through that
define the switch from favorable to aggressive high-risk disease is critical to
the betterment of neuroblastoma cure.
METHODS: In this study, we examined the cytogenetic and tumorigenic physiognomies
of distinct population of metastatic site- derived aggressive cells (MSDACs) from
high-risk tumors, and showed the influence of acquired genetic rearrangements on 
poor patient outcomes.
RESULTS: Karyotyping in SH-SY5Y and MSDACs revealed trisomy of 1q, with
additional non-random chromosomal rearrangements on 1q32, 8p23, 9q34, 15q24,
22q13 (additions), and 7q32 (deletion). Array CGH analysis of individual clones
of MSDACs revealed genetic alterations in chromosomes 1, 7, 8, and 22,
corresponding to a gain in the copy numbers of LOC100288142, CD1C, CFHR3, FOXP2, 
MDFIC, RALYL, CSMD3, SAMD12-AS1, and MAL2, and a loss in ADAM5, LOC400927,
APOBEC3B, RPL3, MGAT3, SLC25A17, EP300, L3MBTL2, SERHL, POLDIP3, A4GALT, and
TTLL1. QPCR analysis and immunoblotting showed a definite association between
DNA-copy number changes and matching transcriptional/translational expression in 
clones of MSDACs. Further, MSDACs exert a stem-like phenotype. Under serum-free
conditions, MSDACs demonstrated profound tumorosphere formation ex vivo.
Moreover, MSDACs exhibited high tumorigenic capacity in vivo and prompted
aggressive metastatic disease. Tissue microarray analysis coupled with automated 
IHC revealed significant association of RALYL to the tumor grade in a cohort of
25 neuroblastoma patients. Clinical outcome association analysis showed a strong 
correlation between the expression of CFHR3, CSMD3, MDFIC, FOXP2, RALYL, POLDIP3,
SLC25A17, SERHL, MGAT3, TTLL1, or LOC400927 and overall and relapse-free survival
in patients with neuroblastoma.
CONCLUSION: Together, these data highlight the ongoing acquired genetic
rearrangements in undifferentiated tumor-forming neural crest cells, and suggest 
that these alterations could switch favorable neuroblastoma to high-risk
aggressive disease, promoting poor clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4496850
PMID: 26159519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Tumour Biol. 2015 Dec;36(12):9611-9. doi: 10.1007/s13277-015-3701-y. Epub 2015
Jul 6.

Downregulation of FOXP2 promoter human hepatocellular carcinoma cell invasion.

Yan X(1,)(2), Zhou H(2,)(3), Zhang T(1,)(2,)(3), Xu P(2,)(3), Zhang S(2,)(3),
Huang W(2,)(3), Yang L(1,)(2,)(3), Gu X(1,)(2,)(3), Ni R(3), Zhang T(4,)(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, 226001,
Jiangsu, China. (2)Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory for Inflammation and Molecular
Drug Target, Nantong University, Nantong, 226019, Jiangsu, People's Republic of
China. (3)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, Nantong, 226001, Jiangsu, China. (4)Key Laboratory of
Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, 226001, Jiangsu, China.
ntdxzty@126.com. (5)Jiangsu Province Key Laboratory for Inflammation and
Molecular Drug Target, Nantong University, Nantong, 226019, Jiangsu, People's
Republic of China. ntdxzty@126.com. (6)Department of Gastroenterology, Affiliated
Hospital of Nantong University, Nantong, 226001, Jiangsu, China. ntdxzty@126.com.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a major health concern with a high morbidity
and mortality rate worldwide. However, the mechanism underlying
hepatocarcinogenesis remains unclear. Forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) has been implicated
in various human cancer types. However, the role of FOXP2 in HCC remains unknown.
Western blot and immunohistochemistry were used to measure the expression of
FOXP2 protein in HCC and adjacent normal tissues in 50 patients. Wound healing
and transwell assays were used to determine the cell invasion ability. We showed 
that the level of FOXP2 was significantly reduced in HCC compared with the
adjacent non-tumorous tissue. There was statistical significance between the
expression of FOXP2 and vein invasion (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.017), number of tumor nodes
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.028), and AFP (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.033). Low expression of FOXP2 correlated with poor
survival. Moreover, wound healing and transwell assays showed that FOXP2 could
decrease cell invasion and affect the expression of vimentin and E-cadherin. Our 
results suggested that FOXP2 expression was downregulated in HCC tumor tissues,
and reduced FOXP2 expression was associated with poor overall survival. In
addition, downregulation of FOXP2 significantly enhanced cell invasiveness. These
findings uncover that FOXP2 might be a new prognostic factor and be closely
correlated with HCC cell invasion.

PMID: 26142732  [PubMed - in process]


29. J Med Genet. 2015 Nov;52(11):719-29. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2015-103161. Epub
2015 Jul 2.

Monogenic and chromosomal causes of isolated speech and language impairment.

Barnett CP(1), van Bon BW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric & Reproductive Genetics, SA Clinical Genetics Service, Women's and 
Children's Hospital/SA Pathology, North Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(2)Paediatric & Reproductive Genetics, SA Clinical Genetics Service, Women's and 
Children's Hospital/SA Pathology, North Adelaide, South Australia, Australia
Department of Human Genetics, Radboud Institute for molecular Life Sciences,
Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The importance of a precise molecular diagnosis for children with intellectual
disability, autism spectrum disorder and epilepsy has become widely accepted and 
genetic testing is an integral part of the diagnostic evaluation of these
children. In contrast, children with an isolated speech or language disorder are 
not often genetically evaluated, despite recent evidence supporting a role for
genetic factors in the aetiology of these disorders. Several chromosomal copy
number variants and single gene disorders associated with abnormalities of speech
and language have been identified. Individuals without a precise genetic
diagnosis will not receive optimal management including interventions such as
early testosterone replacement in Klinefelter syndrome, otorhinolaryngological
and audiometric evaluation in 22q11.2 deletion syndrome, cardiovascular
surveillance in 7q11.23 duplications and early dietary management to prevent
obesity in proximal 16p11.2 deletions. This review summarises the clinical
features, aetiology and management options of known chromosomal and single gene
disorders that are associated with speech and language pathology in the setting
of normal or only mildly impaired cognitive function.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 26139234  [PubMed - in process]


30. Front Psychol. 2015 Jun 16;6:794. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00794. eCollection
2015.

Possible functional links among brain- and skull-related genes selected in modern
humans.

Benítez-Burraco A(1), Boeckx C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Spanish Philology and its Didactics, University of Huelva ,
Huelva, Spain. (2)Catalan Institute for Research and Advanced Studies ,
Barcelona, Spain ; Department of Linguistics, Universitat de Barcelona ,
Barcelona, Spain.

The sequencing of the genomes from extinct hominins has revealed that changes in 
some brain-related genes have been selected after the split between
anatomically-modern humans and Neanderthals/Denisovans. To date, no coherent view
of these changes has been provided. Following a line of research we initiated in 
Boeckx and Benítez-Burraco (2014a), we hypothesize functional links among most of
these genes and their products, based on the existing literature for each of the 
gene discussed. The genes we focus on are found mutated in different cognitive
disorders affecting modern populations and their products are involved in skull
and brain morphology, and neural connectivity. If our hypothesis turns out to be 
on the right track, it means that the changes affecting most of these proteins
resulted in a more globular brain and ultimately brought about modern cognition, 
with its characteristic generativity and capacity to form and exploit
cross-modular concepts, properties most clearly manifested in language.

PMCID: PMC4468360
PMID: 26136701  [PubMed]


31. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Oct;12(4):5049-57. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4010. Epub 2015 Jul 1.

Substrate-specific gene expression profiles in different kidney cell types are
associated with Fabry disease.

Shin YJ(1), Jeon YJ(1), Jung N(1), Park JW(1), Park HY(1), Jung SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 
158-710, Republic of Korea.

Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutations in
the gene encoding the a-galactosidase A (a-Gal A) lysosomal enzyme, which results
in globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) storage in vascular endothelial cells and
different cell types throughout the body. Involvement of the kidney and heart is 
life threatening, and fibrosis of these organs is considered to be involved in
the pathogenesis of Fabry disease. An increased concentration of deacylated Gb3
(lyso-Gb3) in the plasma of symptomatic patients has also been suggested as a
causative molecular event. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved in
renal fibrosis in Fabry disease, the present analyzed the changes in global gene 
expression prior to and following Gb3 or lyso-Gb3 treatment in two types of
kidney cell lines, human proximal renal tubular epithelial (HK-2) and mouse renal
glomerular mesangial (SV40 MES 13) cells. Gb3 and lyso-Gb3 treatment regulated
the expression of 199 and 328 genes in each cell type, demonstrating a >2.0-fold 
change. The majority of the biological functions of the regulated genes were
associated with fibrogenesis or epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The gene
expression patterns of sphingolipid-treated HK-2 cells were distinguishable from 
the patterns in the SV40 MES 13 cells. Several genes associated with the EMT were
selected and evaluated further in kidney cells and in Fabry mouse kidney tissues.
In the SV40 MES 13 cells, the DLL1, F8, and HOXA11 genes were downregulated, and 
FOXP2 was upregulated by treatment with Gb3 or lyso-Gb3. In the HK-2 cells, the
ADAMTS6, BEST1, IL4, and MYH11 genes were upregulated. Upregulation of the FOXP2,
COL15A1, IL4, and MYH11 genes was also observed in the Fabry mouse kidney
tissues. The gene expression profiles in kidney cells following the addition of
Gb3 or lyso-Gb3 revealed substrate-specific and cell-specific patterns. These
findings suggested that Gb3 and lyso-Gb3 lead to renal fibrosis in Fabry disease 
through different biochemical modulations.

PMCID: PMC4581816
PMID: 26135632  [PubMed - in process]


32. Mol Cytogenet. 2015 Jun 10;8:36. doi: 10.1186/s13039-015-0148-1. eCollection
2015.

Language impairment in a case of a complex chromosomal rearrangement with a
breakpoint downstream of FOXP2.

Moralli D(1), Nudel R(1), Chan MT(2), Green CM(1), Volpi EV(3), Benítez-Burraco
A(4), Newbury DF(1), García-Bellido P(5).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Headington, Oxford,
OX3 7BN UK. (2)Faculty of Linguistics, Philology and Phonetics, University of
Oxford, Walton Street, Oxford, OX1 2HG UK ; Worcester College, University of
Oxford, Oxford, OX1 2HB, UK. (3)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
Roosevelt Drive, Headington, Oxford, OX3 7BN UK ; Department of Biomedical
Sciences, University of Westminster, 115 New Cavendish Street, London, W1W 6UW
UK. (4)Faculty of Modern languages, University of Oxford, 47 Wellington Square,
Oxford, OX1 2JF UK ; Department of Spanish Philology and its Didactics,
University of Huelva, Huelva, Spain. (5)Faculty of Linguistics, Philology and
Phonetics, University of Oxford, Walton Street, Oxford, OX1 2HG UK ; Faculty of
Modern languages, University of Oxford, 47 Wellington Square, Oxford, OX1 2JF UK.

BACKGROUND: We report on a young female, who presents with a severe speech and
language disorder and a balanced de novo complex chromosomal rearrangement,
likely to have resulted from a chromosome 7 pericentromeric inversion, followed
by a chromosome 7 and 11 translocation.
RESULTS: Using molecular cytogenetics, we mapped the four breakpoints to
7p21.1-15.3 (chromosome position: 20,954,043-21,001,537, hg19), 7q31 (chromosome 
position: 114,528,369-114,556,605, hg19), 7q21.3 (chromosome position:
93,884,065-93,933,453, hg19) and 11p12 (chromosome position:
38,601,145-38,621,572, hg19). These regions contain only non-coding transcripts
(ENSG00000232790 on 7p21.1 and TCONS_00013886, TCONS_00013887, TCONS_00014353,
TCONS_00013888 on 7q21) indicating that no coding sequences are directly
disrupted. The breakpoint on 7q31 mapped 200 kb downstream of FOXP2, a well-known
language gene. No splice site or non-synonymous coding variants were found in the
FOXP2 coding sequence. We were unable to detect any changes in the expression
level of FOXP2 in fibroblast cells derived from the proband, although this may be
the result of the low expression level of FOXP2 in these cells.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the phenotype observed in this patient either
arises from a subtle change in FOXP2 regulation due to the disruption of a
downstream element controlling its expression, or from the direct disruption of
non-coding RNAs.

PMCID: PMC4460787
PMID: 26060509  [PubMed]


33. Biochemistry. 2015 Jun 30;54(25):4001-7. doi: 10.1021/acs.biochem.5b00155. Epub
2015 Jun 17.

Effect of pH on the Structure and DNA Binding of the FOXP2 Forkhead Domain.

Blane A(1), Fanucchi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Protein Structure-Function Research Unit, School of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 2050, South Africa.

Forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) is a transcription factor expressed in cardiovascular,
intestinal, and neural tissues during embryonic development and is implicated in 
language development. FOXP2 like other FOX proteins contains a DNA binding domain
known as the forkhead domain (FHD). The FHD interacts with DNA by inserting helix
3 into the major groove. One of these DNA-protein interactions is a direct
hydrogen bond that is formed with His554. FOXP2 is localized in the nuclear
compartment that has a pH of 7.5. Histidine contains an imidazole side chain in
which the amino group typically has a pKa of ~6.5. It seems possible that pH
fluctuations around 6.5 may result in changes in the protonation state of His554 
and thus the ability of the FOXP2 FHD to bind DNA. To investigate the effect of
pH on the FHD, both the structure and the binding affinity were studied in the pH
range of 5-9. This was done in the presence and absence of DNA. The structure was
assessed using size exclusion chromatography, far-UV circular dichroism, and
intrinsic and extrinsic fluorescence. The results indicated that while pH did not
affect the secondary structure in the presence or absence of DNA, the tertiary
structure was pH sensitive and the protein was less compact at low pH.
Furthermore, the presence of DNA caused the protein to become more compact at low
pH and also had the potential to increase the dimerization propensity.
Fluorescence anisotropy was used to investigate the effect of pH on the FOXP2 FHD
DNA binding affinity. It was found that pH had a direct effect on binding
affinity. This was attributed to the altered hydrogen bonding patterns upon
protonation or deprotonation of His554. These results could implicate pH as a
means of regulating transcription by the FOXP2 FHD, which may also have
repercussions for the behavior of this protein in cancer cells.

PMID: 26055196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 2;10(6):e0128513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128513.
eCollection 2015.

The Forkhead Transcription Factor FOXP2 Is Required for Regulation of
p21WAF1/CIP1 in 143B Osteosarcoma Cell Growth Arrest.

Gascoyne DM(1), Spearman H(1), Lyne L(1), Puliyadi R(2), Perez-Alcantara M(1),
Coulton L(3), Fisher SE(4), Croucher PI(5), Banham AH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Division of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, Radcliffe Department of
Medicine, Oxford University, Oxford, OX3 9DU United Kingdom. (2)Wellcome Trust
Centre for Human Genetics, Oxford, OX3 7BN United Kingdom. (3)Academic Unit of
Bone Biology, Dept of Human Metabolism, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, S10
2RX United Kingdom. (4)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, and Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (5)Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney,
Australia.

Mutations of the forkhead transcription factor FOXP2 gene have been implicated in
inherited speech-and-language disorders, and specific Foxp2 expression patterns
in neuronal populations and neuronal phenotypes arising from Foxp2 disruption
have been described. However, molecular functions of FOXP2 are not completely
understood. Here we report a requirement for FOXP2 in growth arrest of the
osteosarcoma cell line 143B. We observed endogenous expression of this
transcription factor both transiently in normally developing murine osteoblasts
and constitutively in human SAOS-2 osteosarcoma cells blocked in early osteoblast
development. Critically, we demonstrate that in 143B osteosarcoma cells with
minimal endogenous expression, FOXP2 induced by growth arrest is required for
up-regulation of p21WAF1/CIP1. Upon growth factor withdrawal, FOXP2 induction
occurs rapidly and precedes p21WAF1/CIP1 activation. Additionally, FOXP2
expression could be induced by MAPK pathway inhibition in growth-arrested 143B
cells, but not in traditional cell line models of osteoblast differentiation
(MG-63, C2C12, MC3T3-E1). Our data are consistent with a model in which transient
upregulation of Foxp2 in pre-osteoblast mesenchymal cells regulates a
p21-dependent growth arrest checkpoint, which may have implications for normal
mesenchymal and osteosarcoma biology.

PMCID: PMC4452790
PMID: 26034982  [PubMed - in process]


35. Diabetologia. 2015 Aug;58(8):1836-44. doi: 10.1007/s00125-015-3635-3. Epub 2015
May 29.

The FOXP1, FOXP2 and FOXP4 transcription factors are required for islet alpha
cell proliferation and function in mice.

Spaeth JM(1), Hunter CS, Bonatakis L, Guo M, French CA, Slack I, Hara M, Fisher
SE, Ferrer J, Morrisey EE, Stanger BZ, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, 723 Light Hall, 2215 Garland Avenue, Nashville, TN, 37232, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Several forkhead box (FOX) transcription factor family members
have important roles in controlling pancreatic cell fates and maintaining beta
cell mass and function, including FOXA1, FOXA2 and FOXM1. In this study we have
examined the importance of FOXP1, FOXP2 and FOXP4 of the FOXP subfamily in islet 
cell development and function.
METHODS: Mice harbouring floxed alleles for Foxp1, Foxp2 and Foxp4 were crossed
with pan-endocrine Pax6-Cre transgenic mice to generate single and compound Foxp 
mutant mice. Mice were monitored for changes in glucose tolerance by IPGTT, serum
insulin and glucagon levels by radioimmunoassay, and endocrine cell development
and proliferation by immunohistochemistry. Gene expression and glucose-stimulated
hormone secretion experiments were performed with isolated islets.
RESULTS: Only the triple-compound Foxp1/2/4 conditional knockout (cKO) mutant had
an overt islet phenotype, manifested physiologically by hypoglycaemia and
hypoglucagonaemia. This resulted from the reduction in glucagon-secreting alpha
cell mass and function. The proliferation of alpha cells was profoundly reduced
in Foxp1/2/4 cKO islets through the effects on mediators of replication (i.e.
decreased Ccna2, Ccnb1 and Ccnd2 activators, and increased Cdkn1a inhibitor).
Adult islet Foxp1/2/4 cKO beta cells secrete insulin normally while the remaining
alpha cells have impaired glucagon secretion.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Collectively, these findings reveal an important role
for the FOXP1, 2, and 4 proteins in governing postnatal alpha cell expansion and 
function.

PMCID: PMC4785827
PMID: 26021489  [PubMed - in process]


36. J Neurosci. 2015 May 20;35(20):7808-12. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4706-14.2015.

Enhanced procedural learning of speech sound categories in a genetic variant of
FOXP2.

Chandrasekaran B(1), Yi HG(2), Blanco NJ(3), McGeary JE(4), Maddox WT(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Department of Psychology, 
Department of Linguistics, Institute for Neuroscience, Institute for Mental
Health Research, and bchandra@utexas.edu. (2)Department of Communication Sciences
and Disorders, Department of Psychology. (3)Department of Psychology.
(4)Providence Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Providence, Rhode Island 02908,
Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Brown University, Providence, Rhode 
Island 02912, and Division of Behavioral Genetics, Rhode Island Hospital,
Providence, Rhode Island 02903. (5)Department of Psychology, Institute for
Neuroscience, Institute for Mental Health Research, and Center for Perceptual
Systems, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712.

A mutation of the forkhead box protein P2 (FOXP2) gene is associated with severe 
deficits in human speech and language acquisition. In rodents, the humanized form
of FOXP2 promotes faster switching from declarative to procedural learning
strategies when the two learning systems compete. Here, we examined a
polymorphism of FOXP2 (rs6980093) in humans (214 adults; 111 females) for
associations with non-native speech category learning success. Neurocomputational
modeling results showed that individuals with the GG genotype shifted faster to
procedural learning strategies, which are optimal for the task. These findings
support an adaptive role for the FOXP2 gene in modulating the function of neural 
learning systems that have a direct bearing on human speech category learning.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/357808-05$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4438127
PMID: 25995468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Neurosci. 2015 Apr 29;35(17):6667-88. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4662-14.2015.

Prototypic and arkypallidal neurons in the dopamine-intact external globus
pallidus.

Abdi A(1), Mallet N(2), Mohamed FY(3), Sharott A(3), Dodson PD(4), Nakamura
KC(3), Suri S(3), Avery SV(3), Larvin JT(3), Garas FN(3), Garas SN(3), Vinciati
F(3), Morin S(1), Bezard E(1), Baufreton J(5), Magill PJ(6).

Author information: 
(1)Université de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, F-33000
Bordeaux, France, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de
Recherche 5293, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, F-33000 Bordeaux,
France. (2)Université de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives,
F-33000 Bordeaux, France, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité
Mixte de Recherche 5293, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, F-33000
Bordeaux, France, Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics Unit,
Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, United Kingdom,
and. (3)Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics Unit, Department of
Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, United Kingdom, and.
(4)Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics Unit, Department of
Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, United Kingdom, and Oxford
Parkinson's Disease Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, United Kingdom.
(5)Université de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, F-33000
Bordeaux, France, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Mixte de
Recherche 5293, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, F-33000 Bordeaux,
France, peter.magill@pharm.ox.ac.uk jerome.baufreton@u-bordeaux2.fr. (6)Medical
Research Council Brain Network Dynamics Unit, Department of Pharmacology,
University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, United Kingdom, and Oxford Parkinson's
Disease Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, United Kingdom
peter.magill@pharm.ox.ac.uk jerome.baufreton@u-bordeaux2.fr.

Studies in dopamine-depleted rats indicate that the external globus pallidus
(GPe) contains two main types of GABAergic projection cell; so-called
"prototypic" and "arkypallidal" neurons. Here, we used correlative anatomical and
electrophysiological approaches in rats to determine whether and how this
dichotomous organization applies to the dopamine-intact GPe. Prototypic neurons
coexpressed the transcription factors Nkx2-1 and Lhx6, comprised approximately
two-thirds of all GPe neurons, and were the major GPe cell type innervating the
subthalamic nucleus (STN). In contrast, arkypallidal neurons expressed the
transcription factor FoxP2, constituted just over one-fourth of GPe neurons, and 
innervated the striatum but not STN. In anesthetized dopamine-intact rats,
molecularly identified prototypic neurons fired at relatively high rates and with
high regularity, regardless of brain state (slow-wave activity or spontaneous
activation). On average, arkypallidal neurons fired at lower rates and
regularities than prototypic neurons, and the two cell types could be further
distinguished by the temporal coupling of their firing to ongoing cortical
oscillations. Complementing the activity differences observed in vivo, the
autonomous firing of identified arkypallidal neurons in vitro was slower and more
variable than that of prototypic neurons, which tallied with arkypallidal neurons
displaying lower amplitudes of a "persistent" sodium current important for such
pacemaking. Arkypallidal neurons also exhibited weaker driven and rebound firing 
compared with prototypic neurons. In conclusion, our data support the concept
that a dichotomous functional organization, as actioned by arkypallidal and
prototypic neurons with specialized molecular, structural, and physiological
properties, is fundamental to the operations of the dopamine-intact GPe.

Copyright © 2015 Abdi et al.

PMCID: PMC4412890
PMID: 25926446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Neuron. 2015 Apr 22;86(2):501-13. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.03.007. Epub 2015
Apr 2.

Distinct developmental origins manifest in the specialized encoding of movement
by adult neurons of the external globus pallidus.

Dodson PD(1), Larvin JT(2), Duffell JM(2), Garas FN(2), Doig NM(2), Kessaris
N(3), Duguid IC(4), Bogacz R(5), Butt SJ(6), Magill PJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics Unit, Department of
Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, UK; Oxford Parkinson's
Disease Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK. Electronic address:
paul.dodson@pharm.ox.ac.uk. (2)Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics
Unit, Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, UK.
(3)Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University College London, London WC1E 6BT, UK. (4)Centre 
for Integrative Physiology, School of Biomedical Sciences, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH8 9XD, UK. (5)Medical Research Council Brain Network
Dynamics Unit, Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, 
UK; Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford
OX3 9DU, UK. (6)Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK. (7)Medical Research Council Brain Network Dynamics
Unit, Department of Pharmacology, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QT, UK;
Oxford Parkinson's Disease Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3QX, UK.
Electronic address: peter.magill@pharm.ox.ac.uk.

Transcriptional codes initiated during brain development are ultimately realized 
in adulthood as distinct cell types performing specialized roles in behavior.
Focusing on the mouse external globus pallidus (GPe), we demonstrate that the
potential contributions of two GABAergic GPe cell types to voluntary action are
fated from early life to be distinct. Prototypic GPe neurons derive from the
medial ganglionic eminence of the embryonic subpallium and express the
transcription factor Nkx2-1. These neurons fire at high rates during alert rest, 
and encode movements through heterogeneous firing rate changes, with many neurons
decreasing their activity. In contrast, arkypallidal GPe neurons originate from
lateral/caudal ganglionic eminences, express the transcription factor FoxP2, fire
at low rates during rest, and encode movements with robust increases in firing.
We conclude that developmental diversity positions prototypic and arkypallidal
neurons to fulfil distinct roles in behavior via their disparate regulation of
GABA release onto different basal ganglia targets.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4416107
PMID: 25843402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Development. 2015 Apr 1;142(7):1375-86. doi: 10.1242/dev.117093.

Activin A directs striatal projection neuron differentiation of human pluripotent
stem cells.

Arber C(1), Precious SV(2), Cambray S(3), Risner-Janiczek JR(1), Kelly C(2),
Noakes Z(4), Fjodorova M(4), Heuer A(2), Ungless MA(1), Rodríguez TA(3), Rosser
AE(2), Dunnett SB(2), Li M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College London,
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12 ONN, UK. (2)Brain Repair
Group, Neuroscience and Mental Health Research Institute, School of Bioscience,
Cardiff University, Cardiff CF10 3AX, UK. (3)National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12
ONN, UK. (4)Stem Cell Neurogenesis Group, Neuroscience and Mental Health Research
Institute, School of Medicine and School of Bioscience, Cardiff University,
Cardiff CF24 4HQ, UK. (5)Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre,
Imperial College London, Hammersmith Hospital Campus, Du Cane Road, London W12
ONN, UK Stem Cell Neurogenesis Group, Neuroscience and Mental Health Research
Institute, School of Medicine and School of Bioscience, Cardiff University,
Cardiff CF24 4HQ, UK lim26@cf.ac.uk.

The efficient generation of striatal neurons from human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) is fundamental for realising 
their promise in disease modelling, pharmaceutical drug screening and cell
therapy for Huntington's disease. GABAergic medium-sized spiny neurons (MSNs) are
the principal projection neurons of the striatum and specifically degenerate in
the early phase of Huntington's disease. Here we report that activin A induces
lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) characteristics in nascent neural progenitors
derived from hESCs and hiPSCs in a sonic hedgehog-independent manner. Correct
specification of striatal phenotype was further demonstrated by the induction of 
the striatal transcription factors CTIP2, GSX2 and FOXP2. Crucially, these human 
LGE progenitors readily differentiate into postmitotic neurons expressing the
striatal projection neuron signature marker DARPP32, both in culture and
following transplantation in the adult striatum in a rat model of Huntington's
disease. Activin-induced neurons also exhibit appropriate striatal-like
electrophysiology in vitro. Together, our findings demonstrate a novel route for 
efficient differentiation of GABAergic striatal MSNs from human pluripotent stem 
cells.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4378247
PMID: 25804741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Jul 15;24(14):1680-90. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0512. Epub 2015
Apr 15.

Generation of Distal Airway Epithelium from Multipotent Human Foregut Stem Cells.

Hannan NR(1), Sampaziotis F(1), Segeritz CP(1), Hanley NA(2), Vallier L(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery,
Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of
Cambridge , Cambridge, United Kingdom . (2)2 Faculty of Medical and Human
Sciences, Centre for Endocrinology and Diabetes, Manchester Academic Health
Sciences Centre, Institute of Human Development, University of Manchester ,
Manchester, United Kingdom . (3)3 Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute , Hinxton,
United Kingdom .

Collectively, lung diseases are one of the largest causes of premature death
worldwide and represent a major focus in the field of regenerative medicine.
Despite significant progress, only few stem cell platforms are currently
available for cell-based therapy, disease modeling, and drug screening in the
context of pulmonary disorders. Human foregut stem cells (hFSCs) represent an
advantageous progenitor cell type that can be used to amplify large quantities of
cells for regenerative medicine applications and can be derived from any human
pluripotent stem cell line. Here, we further demonstrate the application of hFSCs
by generating a near homogeneous population of early pulmonary endoderm cells
coexpressing NKX2.1 and FOXP2. These progenitors are then able to form cells that
are representative of distal airway epithelium that express NKX2.1, GATA6, and
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and secrete SFTPC.
This culture system can be applied to hFSCs carrying the CFTR mutation <U+0394>f508,
enabling the development of an in vitro model for cystic fibrosis. This platform 
is compatible with drug screening and functional validations of small molecules, 
which can reverse the phenotype associated with CFTR mutation. This is the first 
demonstration that multipotent endoderm stem cells can differentiate not only
into both liver and pancreatic cells but also into lung endoderm. Furthermore,
our study establishes a new approach for the generation of functional lung cells 
that can be used for disease modeling as well as for drug screening and the study
of lung development.

PMCID: PMC4499787
PMID: 25758640  [PubMed - in process]


41. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Jun 1;286:192-200. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.03.008. Epub
2015 Mar 7.

Maternal vitamin D deficiency alters fetal brain development in the BALB/c mouse.

Hawes JE(1), Tesic D(1), Whitehouse AJ(2), Zosky GR(3), Smith JT(1), Wyrwoll
CS(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Anatomy, Physiology and Human Biology, The University of Western
Australia, Perth 6009, Australia. (2)Telethon Kids Institute, The University of
Western Australia, Perth 6009, Australia. (3)School of Medicine, University of
Tasmania, Hobart 7000, Australia. (4)School of Anatomy, Physiology and Human
Biology, The University of Western Australia, Perth 6009, Australia. Electronic
address: caitlin.wyrwoll@uwa.edu.au.

Prenatal exposure to vitamin D is thought to be critical for optimal fetal
neurodevelopment, yet vitamin D deficiency is apparent in a growing proportion of
pregnant women. The aim of this study was to determine whether a mouse model of
vitamin D-deficiency alters fetal neurodevelopment. Female BALB/c mice were
placed on either a vitamin D control (2,195 IU/kg) or deficient (0 IU/kg) diet
for 5 weeks prior to and during pregnancy. Fetal brains were collected at
embryonic day (E) 14.5 or E17.5 for morphological and gene expression analysis.
Vitamin D deficiency during pregnancy reduced fetal crown-rump length and head
size. Moreover, lateral ventricle volume was reduced in vitamin D-deficient
foetuses. Expression of neurotrophin genes brain-derived neurotrophic factor
(Bdnf) and transforming growth factor-ß1 (Tgf-ß1) was altered, with Bdnf reduced 
at E14.5 and increased at E17.5 following vitamin D deficiency. Brain expression 
of forkhead box protein P2 (Foxp2), a gene known to be important in human speech 
and language, was also altered. Importantly, Foxp2 immunoreactive cells in the
developing cortex were reduced in vitamin D-deficient female foetuses. At E17.5, 
brain tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) gene expression was reduced in females, as was TH
protein localization (to identify dopamine neurons) in the substantia nigra of
vitamin D-deficient female foetuses. Overall, we show that prenatal vitamin
D-deficiency leads to alterations in fetal mouse brain morphology and genes
related to neuronal survival, speech and language development, and dopamine
synthesis. Vitamin D appears to play an important role in mouse neurodevelopment.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25753408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Comp Neurol. 2015 Sep 1;523(13):1886-912. doi: 10.1002/cne.23769. Epub 2015 Apr
30.

Compartmentalization of the chick cerebellar cortex based on the link between the
striped expression pattern of aldolase C and the topographic olivocerebellar
projection.

Vibulyaseck S(1), Luo Y(1), Fujita H(1,)(2), Oh-Nishi A(3), Ohki-Hamazaki H(4),
Sugihara I(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Neurophysiology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical and
Dental University, Tokyo, 113-8519, Japan. (2)Department of Otolaryngology-Head
and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, 21205, USA. (3)Molecular Neuroimaging Program, Molecular Imaging
Center, National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, 263-8555, Japan.
(4)Division of Biology, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Kitasato
University, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0373, Japan. (5)Center for Brain
Integration Research, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Tokyo, 113-8519,
Japan.

The avian cerebellum is organized into multiple longitudinal stripes defined by
expression profiles of aldolase C (zebrin II) in Purkinje cells. The relationship
between the aldolase C striped pattern and the olivocerebellar projection pattern
is crucial in understanding cerebellar functional compartmentalization. We
identified all aldolase C stripes across all lobules with the serial section
alignment analysis method and then looked at this relationship by anterograde and
retrograde labeling of olivocerebellar axons in the chick cerebellum. Aldolase C 
stripes were generally consistent and continuous from lobule I through VII and to
the medial part of lobules VIII-IXb. The dorsal and ventral lamellas (DL, VL) of 
the inferior olive projected to the stripes in these areas with a simple
mediolateral topographic relation. A few aldolase C stripes appeared at the
lateral edge of lobules VI-VIII. Several more stripes were added in the lateral
parts of lobules IXa-IXb and IXc-X. The medial column (MC) of the inferior olive 
projected to the stripes in lobules VIII-X, including the added lateral stripes, 
with a complex topographic relation. Sharp boundaries between aldolase C-positive
and -negative stripes often accompanied a gap in the Purkinje cell layer and
bordered topographically distinct groups of axons. Although the compartmental
organization of the chick cerebellum is comparable to that of the mammalian
cerebellum, several significant differences in the organization suggest partly
separate evolutionary lineages of the mammalian and avian cerebella. We propose
that rostral lobules may be evolved by rostral extension of medial stripes from
caudal lobules in the avian cerebellum.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25732420  [PubMed - in process]


43. Protein J. 2015 Apr;34(2):111-21. doi: 10.1007/s10930-015-9603-4.

A Single Amino Acid in the Hinge Loop Region of the FOXP Forkhead Domain is
Significant for Dimerisation.

Perumal K(1), Dirr HW, Fanucchi S.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Structure-Function Research Unit, School of Molecular and Cell
Biology, University of the Witwatersrand, 1 Jan Smuts Ave, Johannesburg, 2050,
South Africa.

The forkhead box (FOX) proteins are a family of transcription factors that
interact with DNA via a winged helix motif that forms part of the forkhead
domain. The FOXP (FOXP1-4) subfamily is unique in the family in that the forkhead
domains of these proteins are able to dimerise via domain swapping. In this
event, structural elements are exchanged via extension of the hinge loop region. 
Despite the high sequence homology among the FOXP subfamily members, the
stability of their forkhead domain dimers varies, with FOXP3 forming the most
stable dimer. An amino acid difference is observed in the hinge region of the
FOXP subfamily where a tyrosine in all members is replaced with a phenylalanine
in FOXP3. In this work, the role of phenylalanine at this position in the hinge
region was investigated. This was done by creating the Y540F variant of the FOXP2
forkhead domain. The effect of the Y540F mutation on the structure, dimerisation 
propensity and DNA binding ability of the FOXP subfamily was investigated. The
mutation altered the structure of the protein by decreasing the disorder of the
backbone as measured by circular dichroism spectroscopy and by altering the local
environment of the hinge region as measured by tryptophan fluorescence. The
propensity of the forkhead domain to form a dimer was improved ~9.5 fold by the
mutation. This was attributed to increased hydrophobicity at the dimer interface 
as well as altered tension in the hinge loop region. DNA binding assays indicated
that the affinity for DNA was decreased by the mutation. Taken together, these
findings suggest that domain swapping may modulate DNA binding.

PMID: 25724387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Neurosci. 2015 Feb 18;35(7):2885-94. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3715-14.2015.

Behavior-linked FoxP2 regulation enables zebra finch vocal learning.

Heston JB(1), White SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Neuroscience, and Department of Integrative
Biology and Physiology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
California 90095. (2)Interdepartmental Program in Neuroscience, and Department of
Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of California, Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California 90095 sawhite@ucla.edu.

Mutations in the FOXP2 transcription factor cause an inherited speech and
language disorder, but how FoxP2 contributes to learning of these vocal
communication signals remains unclear. FoxP2 is enriched in corticostriatal
circuits of both human and songbird brains. Experimental knockdown of this
enrichment in song control neurons of the zebra finch basal ganglia impairs tutor
song imitation, indicating that adequate FoxP2 levels are necessary for normal
vocal learning. In unmanipulated birds, vocal practice acutely downregulates
FoxP2, leading to increased vocal variability and dynamic regulation of FoxP2
target genes. To determine whether this behavioral regulation is important for
song learning, here, we used viral-driven overexpression of FoxP2 to counteract
its downregulation. This manipulation disrupted the acute effects of song
practice on vocal variability and caused inaccurate song imitation. Together,
these findings indicate that dynamic behavior-linked regulation of FoxP2, rather 
than absolute levels, is critical for vocal learning.

Copyright © 2015 the authors 0270-6474/15/352885-10$15.00/0.

PMCID: PMC4331621
PMID: 25698728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Neuroscientist. 2016 Apr;22(2):119-31. doi: 10.1177/1073858415572078. Epub 2015
Feb 16.

Genetic and Developmental Perspective of Language Abnormality in Autism and
Schizophrenia: One Disease Occurring at Different Ages in Humans?

Wang HG(1), Jeffries JJ(2), Wang TF(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Centre 
for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario, Canada ghrwang@gmail.com
Joel.Jeffries@camh.ca. (2)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Molecular Genetics, Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Language and communication through it are two of the defining features of
normally developed human beings. However, both these functions are often impaired
in autism and schizophrenia. In the former disorder, the problem usually emerges 
in early childhood (~2 years old) and typically includes a lack of communication.
In the latter condition, the language problems usually occur in adolescence and
adulthood and presents as disorganized speech. What are the fundamental
mechanisms underlying these two disorders? Is there a shared genetic basis? Are
the traditional beliefs about them true? Are there any common strategies for
their prevention and management? To answer these questions, we searched PubMed by
using autism, schizophrenia, gene, and language abnormality as keywords, and we
reconsidered the basic concepts about these two diseases or syndromes. We found
many functional genes, for example, FOXP2, COMT, GABRB3, and DISC1, are actually 
implicated in both of them. After observing the symptoms, genetic correlates, and
temporal progression of these two disorders as well as their relationships more
carefully, we now infer that the occurrence of these two diseases is likely
developmentally regulated via interaction between the genome and the environment.
Furthermore, we propose a unified view of autism and schizophrenia: a single
age-dependently occurred disease that is newly named as Systemic Integral
Disorder: if occurring in children before age 2, it is called autism; if in
adolescence or a later age, it is called schizophrenia.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25686622  [PubMed - in process]


46. Genome Biol. 2015 Jan 22;16:8. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0569-x.

An analysis of DNA methylation in human adipose tissue reveals differential
modification of obesity genes before and after gastric bypass and weight loss.

Benton MC, Johnstone A, Eccles D, Harmon B, Hayes MT, Lea RA, Griffiths L,
Hoffman EP, Stubbs RS, Macartney-Coxson D.

BACKGROUND: Environmental factors can influence obesity by epigenetic mechanisms.
Adipose tissue plays a key role in obesity-related metabolic dysfunction, and
gastric bypass provides a model to investigate obesity and weight loss in humans.
RESULTS: Here, we investigate DNA methylation in adipose tissue from obese women 
before and after gastric bypass and significant weight loss. In total, 485,577
CpG sites were profiled in matched, before and after weight loss, subcutaneous
and omental adipose tissue. A paired analysis revealed significant differential
methylation in omental and subcutaneous adipose tissue. A greater proportion of
CpGs are hypermethylated before weight loss and increased methylation is observed
in the 3' untranslated region and gene bodies relative to promoter regions.
Differential methylation is found within genes associated with obesity,
epigenetic regulation and development, such as CETP, FOXP2, HDAC4, DNMT3B, KCNQ1 
and HOX clusters. We identify robust correlations between changes in methylation 
and clinical trait, including associations between fasting glucose and HDAC4,
SLC37A3 and DENND1C in subcutaneous adipose. Genes investigated with differential
promoter methylation all show significantly different levels of mRNA before and
after gastric bypass.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study reporting global DNA methylation profiling
of adipose tissue before and after gastric bypass and associated weight loss. It 
provides a strong basis for future work and offers additional evidence for the
role of DNA methylation of adipose tissue in obesity.

PMCID: PMC4301800
PMID: 25651499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Apr 15;283:154-61. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.01.035. Epub
2015 Jan 31.

Ultrasonic vocalization changes and FOXP2 expression after experimental stroke.

Doran SJ(1), Trammel C(1), Benashaski SE(1), Venna VR(1), McCullough LD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT 06030. (2)Departments of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut
Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030; Departments of Neurology, University of
Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT 06030. Electronic address:
lmcullough@uchc.edu.

Speech impairments affect one in four stroke survivors. However, animal models of
post-ischemic vocalization deficits are limited. Male mice vocalize at ultrasonic
frequencies when exposed to an estrous female mouse. In this study we assessed
vocalization patterns and quantity in male mice after cerebral ischemia. FOXP2, a
gene associated with verbal dyspraxia in humans, with known roles in neurogenesis
and synaptic plasticity, was also examined after injury. Using a transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion (MCAO) model, we assessed correlates of vocal
impairment at several time-points after stroke. Further, to identify possible
lateralization of vocalization deficits induced by left and right hemispheric
strokes were compared. Significant differences in vocalization quantity were
observed between stroke and sham animals that persisted for a month after injury.
Injury to the left hemisphere reduced early vocalizations more profoundly than
those to the right hemisphere. Nuclear expression of Foxp2 was elevated early
after stroke (at 6h), but significantly decreased 24h after injury in both the
nucleus and the cytoplasm. Neuronal Foxp2 expression increased in stroke mice
compared to sham animals 4 weeks after injury. This study demonstrates that
quantifiable deficits in ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs) are seen after stroke.
USV may be a useful tool to assess chronic behavioral recovery in murine models
of stroke.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4581731 [Available on 2016-04-15]
PMID: 25644653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Apr 15;283:22-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.01.017. Epub 2015 
Jan 16.

Neural FoxP2 and FoxP1 expression in the budgerigar, an avian species with adult 
vocal learning.

Hara E(1), Perez JM(2), Whitney O(2), Chen Q(3), White SA(4), Wright TF(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003,
United States. Electronic address: harae@janelia.hhmi.org. (2)Department of
Biology, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003, United States.
(3)Interdepartment Program of Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Physiology,
UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, United States. (4)Interdepartment Program of
Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Physiology, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
United States; Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, United States.

Vocal learning underlies acquisition of both language in humans and vocal signals
in some avian taxa. These bird groups and humans exhibit convergent developmental
phases and associated brain pathways for vocal communication. The transcription
factor FoxP2 plays critical roles in vocal learning in humans and songbirds.
Another member of the forkhead box gene family, FoxP1 also shows high expression 
in brain areas involved in vocal learning and production. Here, we investigate
FoxP2 and FoxP1 mRNA and protein in adult male budgerigars (Melopsittacus
undulatus), a parrot species that exhibits vocal learning as both juveniles and
adults. To examine these molecules in adult vocal learners, we compared their
expression patterns in the budgerigar striatal nucleus involved in vocal
learning, magnocellular nucleus of the medial striatum (MMSt), across birds with 
different vocal states, such as vocalizing to a female (directed), vocalizing
alone (undirected), and non-vocalizing. We found that both FoxP2 mRNA and protein
expressions were consistently lower in MMSt than in the adjacent striatum
regardless of the vocal states, whereas previous work has shown that songbirds
exhibit down-regulation in the homologous region, Area X, only after singing
alone. In contrast, FoxP1 levels were high in MMSt compared to the adjacent
striatum in all groups. Taken together these results strengthen the general
hypothesis that FoxP2 and FoxP1 have specialized expression in vocal nuclei
across a range of taxa, and suggest that the adult vocal plasticity seen in
budgerigars may be a product of persistent down-regulation of FoxP2 in MMSt.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4351178 [Available on 2016-04-15]
PMID: 25601574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Neuropsychol Rev. 2015 Mar;25(1):3-26. doi: 10.1007/s11065-014-9277-2. Epub 2015 
Jan 18.

Insights into the genetic foundations of human communication.

Graham SA(1), Deriziotis P, Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen, 6525XD, The Netherlands.

The human capacity to acquire sophisticated language is unmatched in the animal
kingdom. Despite the discontinuity in communicative abilities between humans and 
other primates, language is built on ancient genetic foundations, which are being
illuminated by comparative genomics. The genetic architecture of the language
faculty is also being uncovered by research into neurodevelopmental disorders
that disrupt the normally effortless process of language acquisition. In this
article, we discuss the strategies that researchers are using to reveal genetic
factors contributing to communicative abilities, and review progress in
identifying the relevant genes and genetic variants. The first gene directly
implicated in a speech and language disorder was FOXP2. Using this gene as a case
study, we illustrate how evidence from genetics, molecular cell biology, animal
models and human neuroimaging has converged to build a picture of the role of
FOXP2 in neurodevelopment, providing a framework for future endeavors to bridge
the gaps between genes, brains and behavior.

PMID: 25597031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Brain Res. 2015 Mar 19;1601:40-51. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.12.048. Epub 2014
Dec 31.

Blockade of ENaCs by amiloride induces c-Fos activation of the area postrema.

Miller RL(1), Denny GO(1), Knuepfer MM(2), Kleyman TR(3), Jackson EK(4), Salkoff 
LB(1), Loewy AD(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Box 8108, 660 S. Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (2)Department
of Pharmacological & Physiological Science, St. Louis University School of
Medicine, 1402 S. Grand Blvd., St. Louis, MO 63104, USA. (3)Renal-Electrolyte
Division, Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. (4)Department of Pharmacology and Chemical Biology,
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.
(5)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Box 8108, 660 S. Euclid Ave., St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic
address: loewya@pcg.wustl.edu.

Epithelial sodium channels (ENaCs) are strongly expressed in the
circumventricular organs (CVOs), and these structures may play an important role 
in sensing plasma sodium levels. Here, the potent ENaC blocker amiloride was
injected intraperitoneally in rats and 2h later, the c-Fos activation pattern in 
the CVOs was studied. Amiloride elicited dose-related activation in the area
postrema (AP) but only ~10% of the rats showed c-Fos activity in the organum
vasculosum of the lamina terminalis (OVLT) and subfornical organ (SFO). Tyrosine 
hydroxylase-immunoreactive (catecholamine) AP neurons were activated, but
tryptophan hydroxylase-immunoreactive (serotonin) neurons were unaffected. The AP
projects to FoxP2-expressing neurons in the dorsolateral pons which include the
pre-locus coeruleus nucleus and external lateral part of the parabrachial
nucleus; both cell groups were c-Fos activated following systemic injections of
amiloride. In contrast, another AP projection target--the aldosterone-sensitive
neurons of the nucleus tractus solitarius which express the enzyme
11-ß-hydroxysteriod dehydrogenase type 2 (HSD2) were not activated. As shown
here, plasma concentrations of amiloride used in these experiments were near or
below the IC50 level for ENaCs. Amiloride did not induce changes in blood
pressure, heart rate, or regional vascular resistance, so sensory feedback from
the cardiovascular system was probably not a causal factor for the c-Fos activity
seen in the CVOs. In summary, amiloride may have a dual effect on sodium
homeostasis causing a loss of sodium via the kidney and inhibiting sodium
appetite by activating the central satiety pathway arising from the AP.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4346418
PMID: 25557402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. J Comp Neurol. 2015 Jun 15;523(9):1318-40. doi: 10.1002/cne.23731. Epub 2015 Apr 
2.

Differential coexpression of FoxP1, FoxP2, and FoxP4 in the Zebra Finch
(Taeniopygia guttata) song system.

Mendoza E(1), Tokarev K, Düring DN, Retamosa EC, Weiss M, Arpenik N, Scharff C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Verhaltensbiologie, Freie Universität Berlin, 14195, Berlin,
Germany.

Heterozygous disruptions of the Forkhead transcription factor FoxP2 impair
acquisition of speech and language. Experimental downregulation in brain region
Area X of the avian ortholog FoxP2 disrupts song learning in juvenile male zebra 
finches. In vitro, transcriptional activity of FoxP2 requires dimerization with
itself or with paralogs FoxP1 and FoxP4. Whether this is the case in vivo is
unknown. To provide the means for future functional studies we cloned FoxP4 from 
zebra finches and compared regional and cellular coexpression of FoxP1, FoxP2,
and FoxP4 mRNA and protein in brains of juvenile and adult male zebra finches. In
the telencephalic song nuclei HVC, RA, and Area X, the three investigated FoxPs
were either expressed alone or occurred in specific combinations with each other,
as shown by double in situ hybridization and triple immunohistochemistry. FoxP1
and FoxP4 but not FoxP2 were expressed in RA and in the HVCRA and HVCX projection
neurons. In Area X and the surrounding striatum the density of neurons expressing
all three FoxPs together or FoxP1 and FoxP4 together was significantly higher
than the density of neurons expressing other combinations. Interestingly, the
proportions of Area X neurons expressing particular combinations of FoxPs
remained constant at all ages. In addition, FoxP-expressing neurons in adult Area
X express dopamine receptors 1A, 1B, and 2. Together, these data provide the
first evidence that Area X neurons can coexpress all avian FoxP subfamily
members, thus allowing for a variety of regulatory possibilities via
heterodimerization that could impact song behavior in zebra finches.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25556631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Jan 13;4(1):16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.12.001.
Epub 2014 Dec 31.

Restoration of progranulin expression rescues cortical neuron generation in an
induced pluripotent stem cell model of frontotemporal dementia.

Raitano S(1), Ordovàs L(1), De Muynck L(2), Guo W(2), Espuny-Camacho I(3),
Geraerts M(1), Khurana S(1), Vanuytsel K(1), Tóth BI(4), Voets T(4), Vandenberghe
R(5), Cathomen T(6), Van Den Bosch L(2), Vanderhaeghen P(7), Van Damme P(8),
Verfaillie CM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Institute, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Stem Cell Biology and
Embryology Unit, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000
Leuven, Belgium. (2)Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience and Disease
(LIND), KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Research Group Experimental Neurology,
Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Laboratory of
Neurobiology, VIB Vesalius Research Center, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (3)Institute
for Interdisciplinary Research (IRIBHM), Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB),
1070 Brussels, Belgium; Institute of Neuroscience (UNI), ULB, 1070 Brussels,
Belgium; VIB Center for the Biology of Disease, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Center of
Human Genetics, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (4)Laboratory of Ion Channel
Research, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (5)Leuven Research Institute for
Neuroscience and Disease (LIND), KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Research Group 
Experimental Neurology, Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium; Department of Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. (6)Institute for Cell and Gene Therapy, University Medical Center, 79108
Freiburg, Germany; Center for Chronic Immunodeficiency, University Medical
Center, 79108 Freiburg, Germany. (7)Institute for Interdisciplinary Research
(IRIBHM), Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), 1070 Brussels, Belgium; Institute 
of Neuroscience (UNI), ULB, 1070 Brussels, Belgium; VIB Center for the Biology of
Disease, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Center of Human Genetics, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, 
Belgium; Walloon Excellence in Life Sciences and Biotechnology (WELBIO), 1070
Brussels, Belgium. (8)Leuven Research Institute for Neuroscience and Disease
(LIND), KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Research Group Experimental Neurology,
Department of Neurosciences, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Laboratory of
Neurobiology, VIB Vesalius Research Center, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Department of
Neurology, University Hospitals Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium. (9)Stem Cell
Institute, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven, Belgium; Stem Cell Biology and Embryology
Unit, Department of Development and Regeneration, KU Leuven, 3000 Leuven,
Belgium. Electronic address: catherine.verfaillie@med.kuleuven.be.

To understand how haploinsufficiency of progranulin (PGRN) causes frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD), we created induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) from patients
carrying the GRN(IVS1+5G > C) mutation (FTD-iPSCs). FTD-iPSCs were fated to
cortical neurons, the cells most affected in FTD. Although generation of
neuroprogenitors was unaffected, their further differentiation into CTIP2-,
FOXP2-, or TBR1-TUJ1 double-positive cortical neurons, but not motorneurons, was 
significantly decreased in FTD-neural progeny. Zinc finger nuclease-mediated
introduction of GRN cDNA into the AAVS1 locus corrected defects in cortical
neurogenesis, demonstrating that PGRN haploinsufficiency causes inefficient
cortical neuron generation. RNA sequencing analysis confirmed reversal of the
altered gene expression profile following genetic correction. We identified the
Wnt signaling pathway as one of the top defective pathways in FTD-iPSC-derived
neurons, which was reversed following genetic correction. Differentiation of
FTD-iPSCs in the presence of a WNT inhibitor mitigated defective corticogenesis. 
Therefore, we demonstrate that PGRN haploinsufficiency hampers corticogenesis in 
vitro.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4297877
PMID: 25556567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Biol. 2015 Feb 15;398(2):242-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.12.007. Epub 2014 
Dec 17.

Foxp1/2/4 regulate endochondral ossification as a suppresser complex.

Zhao H(1), Zhou W(1), Yao Z(1), Wan Y(1), Cao J(1), Zhang L(1), Zhao J(1), Li
H(1), Zhou R(1), Li B(1), Wei G(2), Zhang Z(3), French CA(4), Dekker JD(5), Yang 
Y(6), Fisher SE(7), Tucker HO(5), Guo X(8).

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200240, China. (2)Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Shanghai 200032, China.
(3)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated the
Sixth People<U+05F3>s Hospital, Shanghai, China. (4)Champalimaud Neuroscience Programme,
Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, Lisbon, Portugal. (5)Institute for Cellular 
and Molecular Biology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.
(6)Developmental Genetics Section, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH,
MD 20892, USA. (7)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (8)Bio-X 
Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric
Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai
200240, China. Electronic address: xzguo2005@sjtu.edu.cn.

Osteoblast induction and differentiation in developing long bones is dynamically 
controlled by the opposing action of transcriptional activators and repressors.
In contrast to the long list of activators that have been discovered over past
decades, the network of repressors is not well-defined. Here we identify the
expression of Foxp1/2/4 proteins, comprised of Forkhead-box (Fox) transcription
factors of the Foxp subfamily, in both perichondrial skeletal progenitors and
proliferating chondrocytes during endochondral ossification. Mice carrying
loss-of-function and gain-of-function Foxp mutations had gross defects in
appendicular skeleton formation. At the cellular level, over-expression of
Foxp1/2/4 in chondroctyes abrogated osteoblast formation and chondrocyte
hypertrophy. Conversely, single or compound deficiency of Foxp1/2/4 in skeletal
progenitors or chondrocytes resulted in premature osteoblast differentiation in
the perichondrium, coupled with impaired proliferation, survival, and hypertrophy
of chondrocytes in the growth plate. Foxp1/2/4 and Runx2 proteins interacted in
vitro and in vivo, and Foxp1/2/4 repressed Runx2 transactivation function in
heterologous cells. This study establishes Foxp1/2/4 proteins as coordinators of 
osteogenesis and chondrocyte hypertrophy in developing long bones and suggests
that a novel transcriptional repressor network involving Foxp1/2/4 may regulate
Runx2 during endochondral ossification.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4342236
PMID: 25527076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Dec 4;15(6):762-74. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.10.001. Epub
2014 Oct 16.

MSC-regulated microRNAs converge on the transcription factor FOXP2 and promote
breast cancer metastasis.

Cuiffo BG(1), Campagne A(2), Bell GW(3), Lembo A(4), Orso F(4), Lien EC(1),
Bhasin MK(5), Raimo M(4), Hanson SE(6), Marusyk A(7), El-Ashry D(8), Hematti
P(6), Polyak K(7), Mechta-Grigoriou F(9), Mariani O(9), Volinia S(10),
Vincent-Salomon A(9), Taverna D(4), Karnoub AE(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA; Institut Curie,
75248 Paris Cedex 05, France. (3)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (4)Department of Molecular Biotechnology and Health
Sciences, University of Turin and MBC, 10126 Torino, Italy. (5)Department of
Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
MA 02215, USA. (6)Carbone Cancer Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, School 
of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53792, USA. (7)Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and Department of Medicine, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (8)Department of Medicine, Sylvester
Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL 33136, USA. (9)Institut Curie, 75248 Paris Cedex 05, France.
(10)Department of Morphology, Surgery and Experimental Medicine, Human Anatomy
Branch, University of Ferrara, 44121 Ferrara, Italy. (11)Department of Pathology,
Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215,
USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. Electronic address:
akarnoub@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) are progenitor cells shown to participate
in breast tumor stroma formation and to promote metastasis. Despite expanding
knowledge of their contributions to breast malignancy, the underlying molecular
responses of breast cancer cells (BCCs) to MSC influences remain incompletely
understood. Here, we show that MSCs cause aberrant expression of microRNAs,
which, led by microRNA-199a, provide BCCs with enhanced cancer stem cell (CSC)
properties. We demonstrate that such MSC-deregulated microRNAs constitute a
network that converges on and represses the expression of FOXP2, a forkhead
transcription factor tightly associated with speech and language development.
FOXP2 knockdown in BCCs was sufficient in promoting CSC propagation, tumor
initiation, and metastasis. Importantly, elevated microRNA-199a and depressed
FOXP2 expression levels are prominent features of malignant clinical breast
cancer and are associated significantly with poor survival. Our results identify 
molecular determinants of cancer progression of potential utility in the
prognosis and therapy of breast cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25515522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):561-2; discussion 577-604. doi:
10.1017/S0140525X13004093.

Why we can talk, debate, and change our minds: neural circuits, basal ganglia
operations, and transcriptional factors.

Lieberman P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cognitive,Linguistic and Psychological Sciences,Brown
University,Providence,RI 02912.Philip.Lieberman@gmail.comwww.Brown.edu.

Comment on
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):529-46.

Ackermann et al. disregard attested knowledge concerning aphasia, Parkinson
disease, cortical-to-striatal circuits, basal ganglia, laryngeal phonation, and
other matters. Their dual-pathway model cannot account for "what is special about
the human brain." Their human cortical-to-laryngeal neural circuit does not
exist. Basal ganglia operations, enhanced by mutations on FOXP2, confer human
motor-control, linguistic, and cognitive capabilities.

PMID: 25514951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):558-9; discussion 577-604. doi:
10.1017/S0140525X13004068.

Neanderthals did speak, but FOXP2 doesn't prove it.

Johansson S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dalarna University,Falun,SE-791 88,Sweden.sja@du.sehttp://users.du.se/~sja/

Comment on
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):529-46.

Ackermann et al. treat both genetic and paleoanthropological data too
superficially to support their conclusions. The case of FOXP2 and Neanderthals is
a prime example, which I will comment on in some detail; the issues are much more
complex than they appear in Ackermann et al.

PMID: 25514948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):550-1; discussion 577-604. doi:
10.1017/S0140525X13003981.

Environments organize the verbal brain.

Catania AC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology,University of Maryland,Baltimore County
(UMBC),Baltimore, MD 21250.catania@umbc.edu.

Comment on
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):529-46.

FOXP2 expression in the evolution of language derives from its role in allowing
vocal articulation that is sensitive to its consequences. The discrete verbal
discourse it allows must have evolved recently relative to affective features of 
vocal behavior such as tone of voice. Because all organ systems must have evolved
in the service of behavior, attention is given to ways in which environments may 
have driven brain organization.

PMID: 25514940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):546-7; discussion 577-604. doi:
10.1017/S0140525X13003944.

The sound of one hand clapping: overdetermination and the pansensory nature of
communication.

Aitken KJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Psychology Department,Hillside School,Aberdour,Fife KY3 0RH,Scotland,United
Kingdom.aitken_k@hillsideschool.co.ukdrken.aitken@btinternet.com.

Comment on
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):529-46.

Two substantive issues are relevant to discussions of the evolution of acoustic
communication and merit further consideration here. The first is the importance
of communicative ontogeny and the impact of the proximal social environment on
the early development of communication and language. The second is the emerging
evidence for a number of non-linguistic roles of FOXP2 and its orthologs.

PMID: 25514936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Front Psychol. 2014 Nov 25;5:1324. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01324. eCollection
2014.

Globularity and language-readiness: generating new predictions by expanding the
set of genes of interest.

Boeckx C(1), Benítez-Burraco A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Catalan Institute for Advanced Studies and Research (ICREA) Barcelona, Spain ;
Department of Linguistics, Universitat de Barcelona Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Department of Spanish Philology and its Didactics, University of Huelva
Huelva, Spain.

This study builds on the hypothesis put forth in Boeckx and Benítez-Burraco
(2014), according to which the developmental changes expressed at the levels of
brain morphology and neural connectivity that resulted in a more globular
braincase in our species were crucial to understand the origins of our
language-ready brain. Specifically, this paper explores the links between two
well-known 'language-related' genes like FOXP2 and ROBO1 implicated in vocal
learning and the initial set of genes of interest put forth in Boeckx and
Benítez-Burraco (2014), with RUNX2 as focal point. Relying on the existing
literature, we uncover potential molecular links that could be of interest to
future experimental inquiries into the biological foundations of language and the
testing of our initial hypothesis. Our discussion could also be relevant for
clinical linguistics and for the interpretation of results from paleogenomics.

PMCID: PMC4243498
PMID: 25505436  [PubMed]


60. Nat Genet. 2015 Jan;47(1):47-56. doi: 10.1038/ng.3164. Epub 2014 Dec 8.

A conditional piggyBac transposition system for genetic screening in mice
identifies oncogenic networks in pancreatic cancer.

Rad R(1), Rad L(2), Wang W(2), Strong A(2), Ponstingl H(2), Bronner IF(2), Mayho 
M(2), Steiger K(3), Weber J(4), Hieber M(5), Veltkamp C(5), Eser S(5), Geumann
U(4), Öllinger R(5), Zukowska M(5), Barenboim M(4), Maresch R(4), Cadiñanos J(6),
Friedrich M(2), Varela I(7), Constantino-Casas F(8), Sarver A(9), Ten Hoeve
J(10), Prosser H(2), Seidler B(5), Bauer J(11), Heikenwälder M(11), Metzakopian
E(2), Krug A(5), Ehmer U(5), Schneider G(5), Knösel T(12), Rümmele P(13), Aust
D(14), Grützmann R(15), Pilarsky C(15), Ning Z(2), Wessels L(10), Schmid RM(5),
Quail MA(2), Vassiliou G(2), Esposito I(16), Liu P(2), Saur D(4), Bradley A(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medicine II, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, München, Germany. [2] German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. [3] The Wellcome Trust Sanger
Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, UK. (2)The Wellcome Trust
Sanger Institute, Genome Campus, Hinxton, Cambridgeshire, UK. (3)Department of
Pathology, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, München,
Germany. (4)1] Department of Medicine II, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische
Universität München, München, Germany. [2] German Cancer Consortium (DKTK),
German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Department of
Medicine II, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, München,
Germany. (6)Instituto de Medicina Oncológica y Molecular de Asturias (IMOMA),
Oviedo, Spain. (7)Instituto de Biomedicina y Biotecnología de Cantabria
(UC-CSIC-SODERCAN), Santander, Spain. (8)Department of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. (9)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics
Masonic Cancer Center, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA.
(10)Bioinformatics and Statistics, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam,
the Netherlands. (11)Institute of Virology, Technische Universität München,
Munich, Germany. (12)Institute of Pathology, Ludwig Maximilians Universität
München, München, Germany. (13)Institute of Pathology, Universität Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany. (14)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany. (15)Department of Surgery, Technische Universität Dresden,
Dresden, Germany. (16)Institute of Pathology, Medizinische Universität Insbruck, 
Insbruck, Austria.

Here we describe a conditional piggyBac transposition system in mice and report
the discovery of large sets of new cancer genes through a pancreatic insertional 
mutagenesis screen. We identify Foxp1 as an oncogenic transcription factor that
drives pancreatic cancer invasion and spread in a mouse model and correlates with
lymph node metastasis in human patients with pancreatic cancer. The propensity of
piggyBac for open chromatin also enabled genome-wide screening for
cancer-relevant noncoding DNA, which pinpointed a Cdkn2a cis-regulatory region.
Histologically, we observed different tumor subentities and discovered associated
genetic events, including Fign insertions in hepatoid pancreatic cancer. Our
studies demonstrate the power of genetic screening to discover cancer drivers
that are difficult to identify by other approaches to cancer genome analysis,
such as downstream targets of commonly mutated human cancer genes. These piggyBac
resources are universally applicable in any tissue context and provide unique
experimental access to the genetic complexity of cancer.

PMID: 25485836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Nov 13;8:387. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00387.
eCollection 2014.

FOXP2, retinoic acid, and language: a promising direction.

Benítez-Burraco A(1), Boeckx C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Spanish Philology and its Didactics, University of Huelva
Huelva, Spain. (2)Catalan Institute for Advanced Studies and Research (ICREA)
Barcelona, Spain ; Department of Linguistics, Universitat de Barcelona Barcelona,
Spain.

PMCID: PMC4230053
PMID: 25431551  [PubMed]


62. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jun 2;112(22):6848-54. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1411270111. Epub 2014 Nov 24.

Monoallelic expression of the human FOXP2 speech gene.

Adegbola AA(1), Cox GF(2), Bradshaw EM(3), Hafler DA(4), Gimelbrant A(5), Chess
A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, NY 10029; Center for Autism, Philadelphia, PA 19131;
(2)Division of Genetics and Department of Pediatrics, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, MA 02115; Department of Clinical Development, Genzyme, a Sanofi Company, 
Cambridge, MA 02142; (3)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; (4)Departments of Neurology
and Immunobiology, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520; (5)Department of
Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA 02215; Department of
Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115; and. (6)Department of
Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York,
NY 10029; Fishberg Department of Neuroscience, Department of Genetics and Genomic
Sciences, Friedman Brain Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 
10029 andrew.chess@mssm.edu.

The recent descriptions of widespread random monoallelic expression (RMAE) of
genes distributed throughout the autosomal genome indicate that there are more
genes subject to RMAE on autosomes than the number of genes on the X chromosome
where X-inactivation dictates RMAE of X-linked genes. Several of the autosomal
genes that undergo RMAE have independently been implicated in human Mendelian
disorders. Thus, parsing the relationship between allele-specific expression of
these genes and disease is of interest. Mutations in the human forkhead box P2
gene, FOXP2, cause developmental verbal dyspraxia with profound speech and
language deficits. Here, we show that the human FOXP2 gene undergoes RMAE.
Studying an individual with developmental verbal dyspraxia, we identify a
deletion 3 Mb away from the FOXP2 gene, which impacts FOXP2 gene expression in
cis. Together these data suggest the intriguing possibility that RMAE impacts the
haploinsufficiency phenotypes observed for FOXP2 mutations.

PMCID: PMC4460484
PMID: 25422445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Jul;75(7):778-90. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22247. Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Differential FoxP2 and FoxP1 expression in a vocal learning nucleus of the
developing budgerigar.

Whitney O(1), Voyles T(1), Hara E(1), Chen Q(2), White SA(2,)(3), Wright TF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, New Mexico,
88003. (2)Interdepartmental Program of Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative
Physiology, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, 90095. (3)Department of Integrative
Biology and Physiology, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, 90095.

The forkhead domain FOXP2 and FOXP1 transcription factors are implicated in
several cognitive disorders with language deficits, notably autism, and thus play
a central role in learned vocal motor behavior in humans. Although a similar role
for FoxP2 and FoxP1 is proposed for other vertebrate species, including
songbirds, the neurodevelopmental expression of these genes are unknown in a
species with lifelong vocal learning abilities. Like humans, budgerigars
(Melopsittacus undulatus) learn new vocalizations throughout their entire
lifetime. Like songbirds, budgerigars have distinct brain nuclei for vocal
learning, which include the magnocellular nucleus of the medial striatum (MMSt), 
a basal ganglia region that is considered developmentally and functionally
analogous to Area X in songbirds. Here, we used in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry to investigate FoxP2 and FoxP1 expression in the MMSt of
juvenile and adult budgerigars. We found FoxP2 mRNA and protein expression levels
in the MMSt that were lower than the surrounding striatum throughout development 
and adulthood. In contrast, FoxP1 mRNA and protein had an elevated MMSt/striatum 
expression ratio as birds matured, regardless of their sex. These results show
that life-long vocal plasticity in budgerigars is associated with persistent
low-level FoxP2 expression in the budgerigar MMSt, and suggests the possibility
that FoxP1 plays an organizational role in the neurodevelopment of vocal motor
circuitry. Thus, developmental regulation of the FoxP2 and FoxP1 genes in the
basal ganglia appears essential for vocal mimicry in a range of species that
possess this relatively rare trait.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4437895
PMID: 25407828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Brain Pathol. 2015 Sep;25(5):587-97. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12225. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Homozygous Deletion of the LGI1 Gene in Mice Leads to Developmental Abnormalities
Resulting in Cortical Dysplasia.

Silva J(1), Sharma S(1,)(2), Cowell JK(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA. (2)Department of
Pathology, Georgia Regents University, Augusta, GA.

LGI1 mutations lead to an autosomal dominant form of epilepsy. Lgi1 mutant null
mice develop seizures and show abnormal neuronal excitability. A fine structure
analysis of the cortex in these mice demonstrated a subtle cortical dysplasia,
preferentially affecting layers II-IV, associated with increased Foxp2 and
Cux1-expressing neurons leading to blurring of the cortical layers. The
hypercellularity observed in the null cortex resulted from an admixture of highly
branched mature pyramidal neurons with short and poorly aligned axons as revealed
by Golgi staining and immature small neurons with branched disoriented dendrites 
with reduced spine density and undersized, morphologically altered and
round-headed spines. In vitro, hippocampal neurons revealed poor neurite
outgrowth in null mice as well as reduced synapse formation. Electron microscopy 
demonstrated reduced spine-localized asymmetric (axospinous) synapses with
postsynaptic densities and vesicle-loaded synapses in the mutant null cortex. The
overall pathology in the null mice suggested cortical dyslamination most likely
because of mislocalization of late-born neurons, with an admixture of those
carrying suboptimally developed axons and dendrites with reduced functional
synapses with normal neurons. Our study suggests that LGI1 has a role in
regulating cortical development, which is increasingly becoming recognized as one
of the causes of idiopathic epilepsy.

© 2014 International Society of Neuropathology.

PMID: 25346110  [PubMed - in process]


65. Front Cell Neurosci. 2014 Sep 26;8:305. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2014.00305.
eCollection 2014.

FOXP2 drives neuronal differentiation by interacting with retinoic acid signaling
pathways.

Devanna P(1), Middelbeek J(2), Vernes SC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics
Nijmegen, Netherlands. (2)Laboratory of Pediatric Oncology, Radboud Institute for
Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Netherlands. (3)Language
and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics Nijmegen,
Netherlands ; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University Nijmegen, Netherlands.

FOXP2 was the first gene shown to cause a Mendelian form of speech and language
disorder. Although developmentally expressed in many organs, loss of a single
copy of FOXP2 leads to a phenotype that is largely restricted to orofacial
impairment during articulation and linguistic processing deficits. Why perturbed 
FOXP2 function affects specific aspects of the developing brain remains elusive. 
We investigated the role of FOXP2 in neuronal differentiation and found that
FOXP2 drives molecular changes consistent with neuronal differentiation in a
human model system. We identified a network of FOXP2 regulated genes related to
retinoic acid signaling and neuronal differentiation. FOXP2 also produced
phenotypic changes associated with neuronal differentiation including increased
neurite outgrowth and reduced migration. Crucially, cells expressing FOXP2
displayed increased sensitivity to retinoic acid exposure. This suggests a
mechanism by which FOXP2 may be able to increase the cellular differentiation
response to environmental retinoic acid cues for specific subsets of neurons in
the brain. These data demonstrate that FOXP2 promotes neuronal differentiation by
interacting with the retinoic acid signaling pathway and regulates key processes 
required for normal circuit formation such as neuronal migration and neurite
outgrowth. In this way, FOXP2, which is found only in specific subpopulations of 
neurons in the brain, may drive precise neuronal differentiation patterns and/or 
control localization and connectivity of these FOXP2 positive cells.

PMCID: PMC4176457
PMID: 25309332  [PubMed]


66. Mol Brain. 2014 Oct 1;7:71. doi: 10.1186/s13041-014-0071-0.

Multiple microRNAs regulate human FOXP2 gene expression by targeting sequences in
its 3' untranslated region.

Fu L, Shi Z, Luo G, Tu W, Wang X, Fang Z, Li X.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the human FOXP2 gene cause speech and language
impairments. The FOXP2 protein is a transcription factor that regulates the
expression of many downstream genes, which may have important roles in nervous
system development and function. An adequate amount of functional FOXP2 protein
is thought to be critical for the proper development of the neural circuitry
underlying speech and language. However, how FOXP2 gene expression is regulated
is not clearly understood. The FOXP2 mRNA has an approximately 4-kb-long 3'
untranslated region (3' UTR), twice as long as its protein coding region,
indicating that FOXP2 can be regulated by microRNAs (miRNAs).
FINDINGS: We identified multiple miRNAs that regulate the expression of the human
FOXP2 gene using sequence analysis and in vitro cell systems. Focusing on let-7a,
miR-9, and miR-129-5p, three brain-enriched miRNAs, we show that these miRNAs
regulate human FOXP2 expression in a dosage-dependent manner and target specific 
sequences in the FOXP2 3' UTR. We further show that these three miRNAs are
expressed in the cerebellum of the human fetal brain, where FOXP2 is known to be 
expressed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results reveal novel regulatory functions of the human FOXP2 3' 
UTR sequence and regulatory interactions between multiple miRNAs and the human
FOXP2 gene. The expression of let-7a, miR-9, and miR-129-5p in the human fetal
cerebellum is consistent with their roles in regulating FOXP2 expression during
early cerebellum development. These results suggest that various genetic and
environmental factors may contribute to speech and language development and
related neural developmental disorders via the miRNA-FOXP2 regulatory network.

PMCID: PMC4189591
PMID: 25269856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Brain Behav Evol. 2014;84(2):103-16. doi: 10.1159/000365182. Epub 2014 Sep 20.

Decoding the molecular evolution of human cognition using comparative genomics.

Usui N(1), Co M, Konopka G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Tex., USA.

Identification of genetic and molecular factors responsible for the specialized
cognitive abilities of humans is expected to provide important insights into the 
mechanisms responsible for disorders of cognition such as autism, schizophrenia
and Alzheimer's disease. Here, we discuss the use of comparative genomics for
identifying salient genes and gene networks that may underlie cognition. We focus
on the comparison of human and non-human primate brain gene expression and the
utility of building gene coexpression networks for prioritizing hundreds of genes
that differ in expression among the species queried. We also discuss the
importance of and methods for functional studies of the individual genes
identified. Together, this integration of comparative genomics with cellular and 
animal models should provide improved systems for developing effective
therapeutics for disorders of cognition.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC4174362
PMID: 25247723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Endocrinology. 2014 Dec;155(12):4881-94. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1486. Epub 2014 Sep
23.

Androgen modulation of Foxp1 and Foxp2 in the developing rat brain: impact on sex
specific vocalization.

Bowers JM(1), Perez-Pouchoulen M, Roby CR, Ryan TE, McCarthy MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology (J.M.B., M.P.-P., C.R.R., M.M.M.), University of
Maryland School of Medicine and Programs in Neuroscience (M.M.M.) and Medicine
(T.E.R.), University of Maryland School of Medicine, University of Maryland,
Baltimore, Baltimore, Maryland 21201.

Sex differences in vocal communication are prevalent in both the animals and
humans. The mechanism(s) mediating gender differences in human language are
unknown, although, sex hormones, principally androgens, play a central role in
the development of vocalizations in a wide variety of animal species. The
discovery of FOXP2 has added an additional avenue for exploring the origins of
language and animal communication. The FOXP2 gene is a member of the forkhead box
P (FOXP) family of transcription factors. Prior to the prenatal androgen surge in
male fetuses, we observed no sex difference for Foxp2 protein levels in cultured 
cells. In contrast, 24 hours after the onset of the androgen surge, we found a
sex difference for Foxp2 protein levels in cultured cortical cells with males
having higher levels than females. Furthermore, we observed the potent
nonaromatizable androgen dihydrotestosterone altered not only Foxp2 mRNA and
protein levels but also Foxp1. Androgen effects on both Foxp2 and Foxp1 were
found to occur in the striatum, cerebellar vermis, and cortex. Immunofluorescence
microscopy and coimmunoprecipitation demonstrate Foxp2 and the androgen receptor 
protein interact. Databases for transcription factor binding sites predict a
consensus binding motif for androgen receptor on the Foxp2 promoter regions. We
also observed a sex difference in rat pup vocalization with males vocalizing more
than females and treatment of females with dihydrotestosterone eliminated the sex
difference. We propose that androgens might be an upstream regulator of both
Foxp2 and Foxp1 expression and signaling. This has important implications for
language and communication as well as neuropsychiatric developmental disorders
involving impairments in communication.

PMCID: PMC4239422
PMID: 25247470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 18;5:4954. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5954.

De novo TBR1 mutations in sporadic autism disrupt protein functions.

Deriziotis P(1), O'Roak BJ(2), Graham SA(1), Estruch SB(1), Dimitropoulou D(1),
Bernier RA(3), Gerdts J(3), Shendure J(4), Eichler EE(5), Fisher SE(6).

Author information: 
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen 6525XD, The Netherlands. (2)1] Department of Genome Sciences, University
of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA [2] Department
of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health &Science University, Portland,
Oregon 97239, USA. (3)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Sciences,
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. (4)Department of Genome
Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195,
USA. (5)1] Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington School of
Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA [2] Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Seattle, Washington 98195, USA. (6)1] Language and Genetics Department, Max
Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen 6525XD, The Netherlands [2]
Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen 6525EN, The
Netherlands.

Next-generation sequencing recently revealed that recurrent disruptive mutations 
in a few genes may account for 1% of sporadic autism cases. Coupling these novel 
genetic data to empirical assays of protein function can illuminate crucial
molecular networks. Here we demonstrate the power of the approach, performing the
first functional analyses of TBR1 variants identified in sporadic autism. De novo
truncating and missense mutations disrupt multiple aspects of TBR1 function,
including subcellular localization, interactions with co-regulators and
transcriptional repression. Missense mutations inherited from unaffected parents 
did not disturb function in our assays. We show that TBR1 homodimerizes, that it 
interacts with FOXP2, a transcription factor implicated in speech/language
disorders, and that this interaction is disrupted by pathogenic mutations
affecting either protein. These findings support the hypothesis that de novo
mutations in sporadic autism have severe functional consequences. Moreover, they 
uncover neurogenetic mechanisms that bridge different neurodevelopmental
disorders involving language deficits.

PMCID: PMC4212638
PMID: 25232744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 30;111(39):14253-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1414542111. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

Humanized Foxp2 accelerates learning by enhancing transitions from declarative to
procedural performance.

Schreiweis C(1), Bornschein U(2), Burguière E(3), Kerimoglu C(4), Schreiter S(5),
Dannemann M(2), Goyal S(6), Rea E(7), French CA(8), Puliyadi R(9), Groszer M(10),
Fisher SE(11), Mundry R(12), Winter C(7), Hevers W(2), Pääbo S(13), Enard W(14), 
Graybiel AM(15).

Author information: 
(1)McGovern Institute for Brain Research and Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; Department 
of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology,
04103 Leipzig, Germany; (2)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck
Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, 04103 Leipzig, Germany; (3)McGovern
Institute for Brain Research and Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139; Institut National de 
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U 1127, Centre National de Recherche
Scientifique Unité Mixte de Recherche 7225, Sorbonne Universités, Université
Pierre et Marie Curie, Université Paris 06 Unité Mixte de Recherche S 1127,
Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière, F-75013 Paris, France;
(4)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology, 04103 Leipzig, Germany; Laboratory of Anthropology and Human
Genetics, Department of Biology II, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, 82152
Martinsried, Germany; (5)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck
Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, 04103 Leipzig, Germany; DFG Research
Center for Regenerative Therapies, Technical University Dresden, 01307 Dresden,
Germany; (6)McGovern Institute for Brain Research and Department of Brain and
Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139;
(7)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Faculty of Medicine Carl Gustav
Carus, Technical University Dresden, 01187 Dresden, Germany; (8)Champalimaud
Neuroscience Programme, Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, 1400-038 Lisbon,
Portugal; Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford 
OX3 7BN, United Kingdom; (9)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University 
of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom; (10)Institut du Fer à Moulin, Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité Mixte de Recherche S839, 
Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris, France; (11)Department of Language
and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 6525 XD, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
University, 6525 EN, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; and. (12)Departments of
Developmental and Comparative Psychology and Primatology, Max Planck Institute
for Evolutionary Anthropology, 04103 Leipzig, Germany. (13)Department of
Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, 04103 
Leipzig, Germany; paabo@eva.mpg.de enard@bio.lmu.de graybiel@mit.edu.
(14)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology, 04103 Leipzig, Germany; Laboratory of Anthropology and Human
Genetics, Department of Biology II, Ludwig-Maximilians University Munich, 82152
Martinsried, Germany; paabo@eva.mpg.de enard@bio.lmu.de graybiel@mit.edu.
(15)McGovern Institute for Brain Research and Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139;
paabo@eva.mpg.de enard@bio.lmu.de graybiel@mit.edu.

The acquisition of language and speech is uniquely human, but how genetic changes
might have adapted the nervous system to this capacity is not well understood.
Two human-specific amino acid substitutions in the transcription factor forkhead 
box P2 (FOXP2) are outstanding mechanistic candidates, as they could have been
positively selected during human evolution and as FOXP2 is the sole gene to date 
firmly linked to speech and language development. When these two substitutions
are introduced into the endogenous Foxp2 gene of mice (Foxp2(hum)), cortico-basal
ganglia circuits are specifically affected. Here we demonstrate marked effects of
this humanization of Foxp2 on learning and striatal neuroplasticity.
Foxp2(hum/hum) mice learn stimulus-response associations faster than their WT
littermates in situations in which declarative (i.e., place-based) and procedural
(i.e., response-based) forms of learning could compete during transitions toward 
proceduralization of action sequences. Striatal districts known to be differently
related to these two modes of learning are affected differently in the
Foxp2(hum/hum) mice, as judged by measures of dopamine levels, gene expression
patterns, and synaptic plasticity, including an NMDA receptor-dependent form of
long-term depression. These findings raise the possibility that the humanized
Foxp2 phenotype reflects a different tuning of corticostriatal systems involved
in declarative and procedural learning, a capacity potentially contributing to
adapting the human brain for speech and language acquisition.

PMCID: PMC4191787
PMID: 25225386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Dev Neurobiol. 2015 Feb;75(2):203-16. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22220. Epub 2014 Aug 7.

Effects of sex and seasonality on the song control system and FoxP2 protein
expression in black-capped chickadees (Poecile atricapillus).

Phillmore LS(1), MacGillivray HL, Wilson KR, Martin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, B3R 4H2, Canada.

Plasticity in behavior is mirrored by corresponding plasticity in the brain in
many songbird species. In some species, song system nuclei (Phillmore et al.
[2006]: J Neurobiol 66:1002-1010) are larger in birds in breeding condition than 
birds in nonbreeding condition, possibly due to increased vocal output in spring.
FOXP2, a transcription factor associated with language expression and
comprehension in humans and song learning in songbirds, also shows plasticity.
FoxP2 expression in songbird Area X, a region important for sensorimotor
integration, is related to developmental and adult vocal plasticity (Teramitsu et
al. [2010]: J Neurosci 24:3152-3163, Chen et al. [2013], J Exp Biol
216:3682-3692). In this study, we examined whether sex and breeding condition
affects both song control system volume (HVC, X) and FoxP2 protein expression in 
black-capped chickadees (Poecile atricapillus). HVC volume was larger in males in
breeding condition than males in nonbreeding condition, but there were no sex
differences. In contrast, Area X volume was larger in males than females,
regardless of breeding condition, likely reflecting that male and female
chickadees produce learned chick-a-dee calls year round, but output of the
learned song increases in breeding males. FoxP2 protein levels did not differ
between sexes or breeding condition when calculated as a ratio of labeled cells
in Area X to labeled cells in the surrounding striato-pallium, however, absolute 
density of FoxP2 in both regions was higher in males than in females. This may
indicate that chickadees maintain a level of FoxP2 necessary for plasticity
year-round, but males have greater potential for plasticity compared to females.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25081094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2014 Oct;28:86-93. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2014.06.009. Epub
2014 Jul 19.

FoxP2 in songbirds.

Wohlgemuth S(1), Adam I(1), Scharff C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department Animal Behavior, Freie Universität Berlin, Takustr. 6, 14195
Berlin, Germany. (2)Department Animal Behavior, Freie Universität Berlin,
Takustr. 6, 14195 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
constance.scharff@fu-berlin.de.

Humans with mutations in the transcription factor FOXP2 display a severe speech
disorder. Songbirds are a powerful model system to study FoxP2. Like humans,
songbirds communicate via vocalizations that are imitatively learned during
critical periods and this learning is influenced by social factors and relies on 
functionally lateralized neural circuits. During the past five years significant 
progress has been made moving from a descriptive to a more mechanistic
understanding of how FoxP2 functions in songbirds. Current evidence from
molecular and electrophysiological studies indicates that FoxP2 is important for 
shaping synaptic plasticity of specific neuron populations. One future goal will 
be to identify the transcriptional regulation orchestrated by FoxP2 and its
associated molecular network that brings about these physiological effects. This 
will be key to further unravel how FoxP2 influences synaptic function and thereby
contributes to auditory guided vocal motor behavior in the songbird model.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25048597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2014 Oct;28:72-9. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2014.07.003. Epub 2014
Jul 19.

What can mice tell us about Foxp2 function?

French CA(1), Fisher SE(2).

Author information: 
(1)Champalimaud Neuroscience Programme, Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown,
Lisbon, Portugal. (2)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Electronic address: simon.fisher@mpi.nl.

Disruptions of the FOXP2 gene cause a rare speech and language disorder, a
discovery that has opened up novel avenues for investigating the relevant neural 
pathways. FOXP2 shows remarkably high conservation of sequence and neural
expression in diverse vertebrates, suggesting that studies in other species are
useful in elucidating its functions. Here we describe how investigations of mice 
that carry disruptions of Foxp2 provide insights at multiple levels: molecules,
cells, circuits and behaviour. Work thus far has implicated the gene in key
processes including neurite outgrowth, synaptic plasticity, sensorimotor
integration and motor-skill learning.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25048596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 Feb;55(2):437-48. doi: 10.1007/s12031-014-0359-7. Epub 2014 
Jul 16.

Transcriptional regulation by FOXP1, FOXP2, and FOXP4 dimerization.

Sin C(1), Li H, Crawford DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

FOXP1, FOXP2, and FOXP4 are three members of the FOXP gene subfamily of
transcription factors involved in the development of the central nervous system. 
Previous studies have shown that the transcriptional activity of FOXP1/2/4 is
regulated by homo- and heterodimerization. However, their transcriptional gene
targets in the developing brain are still largely unknown. FOXP2 regulates the
expression of many genes important in embryonic development, including WNT and
Notch signaling pathways. In this study, we investigate whether dimerization of
FOXP1/2/4 leads to differential expression of ten known FOXP2 target genes (CER1,
SFRP4, WISP2, PRICKLE1, NCOR2, SNW1, NEUROD2, PAX3, EFNB3, and SLIT1). FOXP1/2/4 
open-reading frames were stably transfected into HEK293 cells, and the expression
level of these FOXP2 target genes was quantified using real-time polymerase chain
reaction. Our results revealed that the specific combination of FOXP1/2/4 dimers 
regulates transcription of various FOXP2 target genes involved in early neuronal 
development.

PMID: 25027557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Front Hum Neurosci. 2014 Jul 1;8:473. doi: 10.3389/fnhum.2014.00473. eCollection 
2014.

Assessing the effects of common variation in the FOXP2 gene on human brain
structure.

Hoogman M(1), Guadalupe T(1), Zwiers MP(2), Klarenbeek P(2), Francks C(3), Fisher
SE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Language and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics Nijmegen, Netherlands. (2)Donders Institute for Brain,
Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Nijmegen, Netherlands.
(3)Department of Language and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics Nijmegen, Netherlands ; Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition 
and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Nijmegen, Netherlands.

The FOXP2 transcription factor is one of the most well-known genes to have been
implicated in developmental speech and language disorders. Rare mutations
disrupting the function of this gene have been described in different families
and cases. In a large three-generation family carrying a missense mutation,
neuroimaging studies revealed significant effects on brain structure and
function, most notably in the inferior frontal gyrus, caudate nucleus, and
cerebellum. After the identification of rare disruptive FOXP2 variants impacting 
on brain structure, several reports proposed that common variants at this locus
may also have detectable effects on the brain, extending beyond disorder into
normal phenotypic variation. These neuroimaging genetics studies used groups of
between 14 and 96 participants. The current study assessed effects of common
FOXP2 variants on neuroanatomy using voxel-based morphometry (VBM) and volumetric
techniques in a sample of >1300 people from the general population. In a first
targeted stage we analyzed single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) claimed to have
effects in prior smaller studies (rs2253478, rs12533005, rs2396753, rs6980093,
rs7784315, rs17137124, rs10230558, rs7782412, rs1456031), beginning with regions 
proposed in the relevant papers, then assessing impact across the entire brain.
In the second gene-wide stage, we tested all common FOXP2 variation, focusing on 
volumetry of those regions most strongly implicated from analyses of rare
disruptive mutations. Despite using a sample that is more than 10 times that used
for prior studies of common FOXP2 variation, we found no evidence for effects of 
SNPs on variability in neuroanatomy in the general population. Thus, the impact
of this gene on brain structure may be largely limited to extreme cases of rare
disruptive alleles. Alternatively, effects of common variants at this gene exist 
but are too subtle to be detected with standard volumetric techniques.

PMCID: PMC4076884
PMID: 25013396  [PubMed]


76. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 25;9(6):e100648. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100648.
eCollection 2014.

Drosophila FoxP mutants are deficient in operant self-learning.

Mendoza E(1), Colomb J(2), Rybak J(3), Pflüger HJ(2), Zars T(4), Scharff C(1),
Brembs B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Inst. Biol. - Behavioral Biology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(2)Inst. Biol. - Neurobiology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(3)Neuroethology, Max-Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology, Jena, Germany.
(4)Biological Sciences, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri, United States
of America. (5)Inst. Biol. - Neurobiology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin,
Germany; Institut für Zoologie - Neurogenetik, Universität Regensburg,
Regensburg, Germany.

Intact function of the Forkhead Box P2 (FOXP2) gene is necessary for normal
development of speech and language. This important role has recently been
extended, first to other forms of vocal learning in animals and then also to
other forms of motor learning. The homology in structure and in function among
the FoxP gene members raises the possibility that the ancestral FoxP gene may
have evolved as a crucial component of the neural circuitry mediating motor
learning. Here we report that genetic manipulations of the single Drosophila
orthologue, dFoxP, disrupt operant self-learning, a form of motor learning
sharing several conceptually analogous features with language acquisition.
Structural alterations of the dFoxP locus uncovered the role of dFoxP in operant 
self-learning and habit formation, as well as the dispensability of dFoxP for
operant world-learning, in which no motor learning occurs. These manipulations
also led to subtle alterations in the brain anatomy, including a reduced volume
of the optic glomeruli. RNAi-mediated interference with dFoxP expression levels
copied the behavioral phenotype of the mutant flies, even in the absence of mRNA 
degradation. Our results provide evidence that motor learning and language
acquisition share a common ancestral trait still present in extant invertebrates,
manifest in operant self-learning. This 'deep' homology probably traces back to
before the split between vertebrate and invertebrate animals.

PMCID: PMC4070984
PMID: 24964149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 13;9(6):e99678. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099678. eCollection
2014.

Reference genes for quantitative gene expression studies in multiple avian
species.

Olias P(1), Adam I(2), Meyer A(1), Scharff C(2), Gruber AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Pathology, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 
(2)Institute of Biology, Department of Animal Behavior, Freie Universität Berlin,
Berlin, Germany.

Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) rapidly and reliably quantifies gene expression
levels across different experimental conditions. Selection of suitable reference 
genes is essential for meaningful normalization and thus correct interpretation
of data. In recent years, an increasing number of avian species other than the
chicken has been investigated molecularly, highlighting the need for an
experimentally validated pan-avian primer set for reference genes. Here we report
testing a set for 14 candidate reference genes (18S, ABL, GAPDH, GUSB, HMBS,
HPRT, PGK1, RPL13, RPL19, RPS7, SDHA, TFRC, VIM, YWHAZ) on different tissues of
the mallard (Anas platyrhynchos), domestic chicken (Gallus gallus domesticus),
common crane (Grus grus), white-tailed eagle (Haliaeetus albicilla), domestic
turkey (Meleagris gallopavo f. domestica), cockatiel (Nymphicus hollandicus),
Humboldt penguin (Sphenicus humboldti), ostrich (Struthio camelus) and zebra
finch (Taeniopygia guttata), spanning a broad range of the phylogenetic tree of
birds. Primer pairs for six to 11 genes were successfully established for each of
the nine species. As a proof of principle, we analyzed expression levels of 10
candidate reference genes as well as FOXP2 and the immediate early genes, EGR1
and CFOS, known to be rapidly induced by singing in the avian basal ganglia. We
extracted RNA from microbiopsies of the striatal song nucleus Area X of adult
male zebra finches after they had sang or remained silent. Using three different 
statistical algorithms, we identified five genes (18S, PGK1, RPS7, TFRC, YWHAZ)
that were stably expressed within each group and also between the singing and
silent conditions, establishing them as suitable reference genes. In conclusion, 
the newly developed pan-avian primer set allows accurate normalization and
quantification of gene expression levels in multiple avian species.

PMCID: PMC4057121
PMID: 24926893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):529-46. doi: 10.1017/S0140525X13003099. Epub 2014
May 15.

Brain mechanisms of acoustic communication in humans and nonhuman primates: an
evolutionary perspective.

Ackermann H(1), Hage SR(2), Ziegler W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Neurophonetics Group, Centre for Neurology - General Neurology, Hertie
Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University of Tuebingen,D-72076
Tuebingen,Germany.hermann.ackermann@uni-tuebingen.dewww.hih-tuebingen.de/neuropho
netik. (2)Neurobiology of Vocal Communication Research Group, Werner Reichardt
Centre for Integrative Neuroscience, and Institute for Neurobiology,Department of
Biology,University of Tuebingen,D-72076
Tuebingen,Germany.steffen.hage@uni-tuebingen.dewww.vocalcommunication.de.
(3)Clinical Neuropsychology Research Group, City Hospital
Munich-Bogenhausen,D-80992 Munich, andInstitute of Phonetics and Speech
Processing, Ludwig-Maximilians-University,D-80799
Munich,Germany.wolfram.ziegler@extern.lrz-muenchen.dewww.ekn.mwn.de.

Comment in
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):567-8; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):566-7; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):546-7; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):548-9; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):552-3; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):553-4; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):554-5; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):556-7; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):557-8; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):559-60; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):561-2; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):565-6; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):570-1; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):571-2; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):574-6; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):576; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):549-50; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):550-1; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):555-6; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):558-9; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):560-1; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):562-3; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):563-4; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):564-5; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):568-9; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):569-70; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):573-4; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):547-8; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):551-2; discussion 577-604.
    Behav Brain Sci. 2014 Dec;37(6):572-3; discussion 577-604.

Any account of "what is special about the human brain" (Passingham 2008) must
specify the neural basis of our unique ability to produce speech and delineate
how these remarkable motor capabilities could have emerged in our hominin
ancestors. Clinical data suggest that the basal ganglia provide a platform for
the integration of primate-general mechanisms of acoustic communication with the 
faculty of articulate speech in humans. Furthermore, neurobiological and
paleoanthropological data point at a two-stage model of the phylogenetic
evolution of this crucial prerequisite of spoken language: (i) monosynaptic
refinement of the projections of motor cortex to the brainstem nuclei that steer 
laryngeal muscles, presumably, as part of a "phylogenetic trend" associated with 
increasing brain size during hominin evolution; (ii) subsequent vocal-laryngeal
elaboration of cortico-basal ganglia circuitries, driven by human-specific FOXP2 
mutations.;>This concept implies vocal continuity of spoken language evolution at
the motor level, elucidating the deep entrenchment of articulate speech into a
"nonverbal matrix" (Ingold 1994), which is not accounted for by gestural-origin
theories. Moreover, it provides a solution to the question for the adaptive value
of the "first word" (Bickerton 2009) since even the earliest and most simple
verbal utterances must have increased the versatility of vocal displays afforded 
by the preceding elaboration of monosynaptic corticobulbar tracts, giving rise to
enhanced social cooperation and prestige. At the ontogenetic level, the proposed 
model assumes age-dependent interactions between the basal ganglia and their
cortical targets, similar to vocal learning in some songbirds. In this view, the 
emergence of articulate speech builds on the "renaissance" of an ancient
organizational principle and, hence, may represent an example of "evolutionary
tinkering" (Jacob 1977).

PMID: 24827156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Sep;69:23-31. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.04.019. Epub 2014 May
5.

A study of the role of the FOXP2 and CNTNAP2 genes in persistent developmental
stuttering.

Han TU(1), Park J(2), Domingues CF(3), Moretti-Ferreira D(4), Paris E(1), Sainz
E(1), Gutierrez J(1), Drayna D(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, NIH,
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (2)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. (3)National Institute on Deafness and Other
Communication Disorders, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA; Department of Genetics,
Institute of Bioscience, São Paulo State University (UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo 
18618-000, Brazil. (4)Department of Genetics, Institute of Bioscience, São Paulo 
State University (UNESP), Botucatu, São Paulo 18618-000, Brazil. (5)National
Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892,
USA. Electronic address: drayna@nidcd.nih.gov.

A number of speech disorders including stuttering have been shown to have
important genetic contributions, as indicated by high heritability estimates from
twin and other studies. We studied the potential contribution to stuttering from 
variants in the FOXP2 gene, which have previously been associated with
developmental verbal dyspraxia, and from variants in the CNTNAP2 gene, which have
been associated with specific language impairment (SLI). DNA sequence analysis of
these two genes in a group of 602 unrelated cases, all with familial persistent
developmental stuttering, revealed no excess of potentially deleterious coding
sequence variants in the cases compared to a matched group of 487 well
characterized neurologically normal controls. This was compared to the
distribution of variants in the GNPTAB, GNPTG, and NAGPA genes which have
previously been associated with persistent stuttering. Using an expanded subject 
data set, we again found that NAGPA showed significantly different mutation
frequencies in North Americans of European descent (p=0.0091) and a significant
difference existed in the mutation frequency of GNPTAB in Brazilians (p=0.00050).
No significant differences in mutation frequency in the FOXP2 and CNTNAP2 genes
were observed between cases and controls. To examine the pattern of expression of
these five genes in the human brain, real time quantitative reverse transcription
PCR was performed on RNA purified from 27 different human brain regions. The
expression patterns of FOXP2 and CNTNAP2 were generally different from those of
GNPTAB, GNPTG and NAPGA in terms of relatively lower expression in the
cerebellum. This study provides an improved estimate of the contribution of
mutations in GNPTAB, GNPTG and NAGPA to persistent stuttering, and suggests that 
variants in FOXP2 and CNTNAP2 are not involved in the genesis of familial
persistent stuttering. This, together with the different brain expression
patterns of GNPTAB, GNPTG, and NAGPA compared to that of FOXP2 and CNTNAP2,
suggests that the genetic neuropathological origins of stuttering differ from
those of verbal dyspraxia and SLI.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC4099264
PMID: 24807205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2014 Apr 25;66(2):135-44.

The plateau zokors' learning and memory ability is related to the high expression
levels of foxP2 in the brain.

Ma BY(1), Wei L, Sun SZ, Wang DW, Wei DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Qinghai University, Xining 810016, China.
weidengbang@163.com.

Plateau zokor (Myospalax baileyi) is a subterranean mammal. Plateau zokor has
high learning and memory ability, and can determine the location of blocking
obstacles in their tunnels. Forkhead box p2 (FOXP2) is a transcription factor
implicated in the neural control of orofacial coordination and sensory-motor
integration, particularly with respect to learning, memory and vocalization. To
explore the association of foxP2 with the high learning and memory ability of
plateau zokor, the cDNA of foxP2 of plateau zokor was sequenced; by using plateau
pika as control, the expression levels of foxP2 mRNA and FOXP2 protein in brain
of plateau zokor were determined by real-time PCR and Western blot, respectively;
and the location of FOXP2 protein in the brain of plateau zokor was determined by
immunohistochemistry. The result showed that the cDNA sequence of plateau zokor
foxP2 was similar to that of other mammals and the amino acid sequences showed a 
relatively high degree of conservation, with the exception of two particular
amino acid substitutions [a Gln (Q)-to-His (H) change at position 231 and a Ser
(S)-to-Ile (I) change at position 235]. Higher expression levels of foxP2 mRNA
(3-fold higher) and FOXP2 protein (>2-fold higher) were detected in plateau zokor
brain relative to plateau pika brain. In plateau zokor brain, FOXP2 protein was
highly expressed in the cerebral cortex, thalamus and the striatum (a basal
ganglia brain region). The results suggest that the high learning and memory
ability of plateau zokor is related to the high expression levels of foxP2 in the
brain.

PMID: 24777403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Brain Lang. 2014 Jun;133:26-38. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2014.03.007. Epub 2014 Apr
24.

Human speech- and reading-related genes display partially overlapping expression 
patterns in the marmoset brain.

Kato M(1), Okanoya K(2), Koike T(3), Sasaki E(4), Okano H(5), Watanabe S(6),
Iriki A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Symbolic Cognitive Development, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 
2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan; Laboratory for Biolinguistics, RIKEN
Brain Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan; Center for 
Advanced Research on Logic and Sensibility (CARLS), Keio University, 2-15-45
Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan. Electronic address:
makatou@brain.riken.jp. (2)Laboratory for Biolinguistics, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (3)Laboratory for
Symbolic Cognitive Development, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa,
Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (4)Department of Applied Developmental Biology,
Central Institute for Experimental Animals, 3-25-12 Tonomachi, Kawasaki, Kanagawa
210-0821, Japan; Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35
Shinanomachi, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; KEIO-RIKEN Research Center for 
Human Cognition, Keio University, 2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan.
(5)Department of Physiology, Keio University School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi,
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan; KEIO-RIKEN Research Center for Human
Cognition, Keio University, 2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan; Keio 
University Joint Research Laboratory, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1
Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama 351-0198, Japan. (6)KEIO-RIKEN Research Center for Human 
Cognition, Keio University, 2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan;
Center for Advanced Research on Logic and Sensibility (CARLS), Keio University,
2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan. (7)Laboratory for Symbolic
Cognitive Development, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama
351-0198, Japan; KEIO-RIKEN Research Center for Human Cognition, Keio University,
2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8345, Japan; Center for Advanced Research on
Logic and Sensibility (CARLS), Keio University, 2-15-45 Mita, Minato-ku, Tokyo
108-8345, Japan. Electronic address: iriki@brain.riken.jp.

Language is a characteristic feature of human communication. Several familial
language impairments have been identified, and candidate genes for language
impairments already isolated. Studies comparing expression patterns of these
genes in human brain are necessary to further understanding of these genes.
However, it is difficult to examine gene expression in human brain. In this
study, we used a non-human primate (common marmoset; Callithrix jacchus) as a
biological model of the human brain to investigate expression patterns of human
speech- and reading-related genes. Expression patterns of speech disorder-
(FoxP2, FoxP1, CNTNAP2, and CMIP) and dyslexia- (ROBO1, DCDC2, and KIAA0319)
related genes were analyzed. We found the genes displayed overlapping expression 
patterns in the ocular, auditory, and motor systems. Our results enhance
understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying language impairments.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24769279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Wiley Interdiscip Rev Cogn Sci. 2013 Sep;4(5):547-560.

FOXP2.

Nudel R(1), Newbury DF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford Oxford, UK.

The forkhead box P2 gene, designated FOXP2, is the first gene implicated in a
speech and language disorder. Since its discovery, many studies have been carried
out in an attempt to explain the mechanism by which it influences these
characteristically human traits. This review presents the story of the discovery 
of the FOXP2 gene, including early studies of the phenotypic implications of a
disruption in the gene. We then discuss recent investigations into the molecular 
function of the FOXP2 gene, including functional and gene expression studies. We 
conclude this review by presenting the fascinating results of recent studies of
the FOXP2 ortholog in other species that are capable of vocal communication.
WIREs Cogn Sci 2013, 4:547-560. doi: 10.1002/wcs.1247.

PMCID: PMC3992897
PMID: 24765219  [PubMed]


83. Behav Brain Res. 2014 Jul 15;268:213-21. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.04.009. Epub
2014 Apr 18.

Conserved role of Drosophila melanogaster FoxP in motor coordination and
courtship song.

Lawton KJ(1), Wassmer TL(2), Deitcher DL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Cornell University, 215 Tower Rd.,
Mudd Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. Electronic address: kjl76@cornell.edu.
(2)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, Cornell University, 215 Tower Rd.,
Mudd Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA.

FoxP2 is a highly conserved vertebrate transcription factor known for its
importance in human speech and language production. Disruption of FoxP2 in
several vertebrate models indicates a conserved functional role for this gene in 
both sound production and motor coordination. Although FoxP2 is known to be
strongly expressed in brain regions important for motor coordination, little is
known about FoxP2's role in the nervous system. The recent discovery of the
well-conserved Drosophila melanogaster homolog, FoxP, provides an opportunity to 
study the role of this crucial gene in an invertebrate model. We hypothesized
that, like FoxP2, Drosophila FoxP is important for behaviors requiring fine motor
coordination. We used targeted RNA interference to reduce expression of FoxP and 
assayed the effects on a variety of adult behaviors. Male flies with reduced FoxP
expression exhibit decreased levels of courtship behavior, altered pulse-song
structure, and sex-specific motor impairments in walking and flight. Acute
disruption of synaptic activity in FoxP expressing neurons using a
temperature-sensitive shibire allele dramatically impaired motor coordination.
Utilizing a GFP reporter to visualize FoxP in the fly brain reveals expression in
relatively few neurons in distributed clusters within the larval and adult CNS,
including distinct labeling of the adult protocerebral bridge - a section of the 
insect central complex known to be important for motor coordination and thought
to be homologous to areas of the vertebrate basal ganglia. Our results establish 
the necessity of this gene in motor coordination in an invertebrate model and
suggest a functional homology with vertebrate FoxP2.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24747661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 3;9(4):e91742. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0091742. eCollection 
2014.

Over-expression of either MECP2_e1 or MECP2_e2 in neuronally differentiated cells
results in different patterns of gene expression.

Orlic-Milacic M(1), Kaufman L(1), Mikhailov A(1), Cheung AY(2), Mahmood H(1),
Ellis J(2), Gianakopoulos PJ(1), Minassian BA(3), Vincent JB(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neuropsychiatry & Development Lab, Campbell Family Mental Health
Research Institute, The Centre for Addiction & Mental Health, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (2)Developmental & Stem Cell Biology Program, The Hospital for Sick
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (3)Program in Genetics & Genomic Biology, The
Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Division of Neurology,
Department of Paediatrics, The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada. (4)Molecular Neuropsychiatry & Development Lab, Campbell Family Mental
Health Research Institute, The Centre for Addiction & Mental Health, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada; Institute of Medical Science, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

Mutations in MECP2 are responsible for the majority of Rett syndrome cases. MECP2
is a regulator of transcription, and has two isoforms, MECP2_e1 and MECP2_e2.
There is accumulating evidence that MECP2_e1 is the etiologically relevant
variant for Rett. In this study we aim to detect genes that are differentially
transcribed in neuronal cells over-expressing either of these two MECP2 isoforms.
The human neuroblastoma cell line SK-N-SH was stably infected by lentiviral
vectors over-expressing MECP2_e1, MECP2_e2, or eGFP, and were then differentiated
into neurons. The same lentiviral constructs were also used to infect mouse Mecp2
knockout (Mecp2(tm1.1Bird)) fibroblasts. RNA from these cells was used for
microarray gene expression analysis. For the human neuronal cells, ~ 800 genes
showed >three-fold change in expression level with the MECP2_e1 construct, and ~ 
230 with MECP2_e2 (unpaired t-test, uncorrected p value <0.05). We used
quantitative RT-PCR to verify microarray results for 41 of these genes. We found 
significant up-regulation of several genes resulting from over-expression of
MECP2_e1 including SRPX2, NAV3, NPY1R, SYN3, and SEMA3D. DOCK8 was shown via
microarray and qRT-PCR to be upregulated in both SK-N-SH cells and mouse
fibroblasts. Both isoforms up-regulated GABRA2, KCNA1, FOXG1 and FOXP2.
Down-regulation of expression in the presence of MECP2_e1 was seen with UNC5C and
RPH3A. Understanding the biology of these differentially transcribed genes and
their role in neurodevelopment may help us to understand the relative functions
of the two MECP2 isoforms, and ultimately develop a better understanding of RTT
etiology and determine the clinical relevance of isoform-specific mutations.

PMCID: PMC3974668
PMID: 24699272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2013 Dec;44(6):453-7.

[FOXP2 and its relevance to language].

[Article in Chinese]

Li H.

PMID: 24665748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Apr 30;566:162-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.02.062. Epub
2014 Mar 6.

Specific expression of FOXP2 in cerebellum improves ultrasonic vocalization in
heterozygous but not in homozygous Foxp2 (R552H) knock-in pups.

Fujita-Jimbo E(1), Momoi T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Science, International University, Kitakanemaru, Ohtawara
3248501, Tochigi, Japan; Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical University,
Yakushiji, Shimotsukeshi 3290498, Tochigi, Japan. (2)Center for Medical Science, 
International University, Kitakanemaru, Ohtawara 3248501, Tochigi, Japan.
Electronic address: momoi@iuhw.ac.jp.

The R553H mutation has been found in the FOXP2 gene of patients with
speech-language disorder. Foxp2(R552H) knock-in (KI) mice exhibit poor dendritic 
development of Purkinje cells in the cerebellum and impaired ultrasonic
vocalization (USV), which is related to human speech and language; compared with 
wild-type mice, heterozygous Foxp2(R552H)-KI pups exhibit the reduced number of
whistle-type USVs and the increased short-type ones, while homozygous pups
exhibit only click-type USVs but no whistle-type or short-type ones. To make
clear the relationship between the role of Foxp2 in the cerebellum and
whistle-type USVs activity, we prepared transgenic (Tg) mice specifically
expressing human FOXP2-myc in cerebellum (Pcp2-FOXP2-myc-Tg mice) by using
purkinje cell protein-2 (Pcp2) promoter. FOXP2-myc expression in the cerebellum
increased the relative numbers of whistle-type USVs in the heterozygous
Foxp2(R552H)-KI pups and recovered their USVs but did not in the homozygous ones.
Foxp2 in the cerebellum may pertain to the brain network engaged in whistle-type 
USVs activities including modification, but not their production. There may be
common molecular contribution of Purkinje cells to human FOXP2-mediated
speech-language and mouse Foxp2-mediated USVs.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24607928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2014 May;18(3):327-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2014.01.004.
Epub 2014 Jan 25.

Etiological yield of SNP microarrays in idiopathic intellectual disability.

Utine GE(1), Haliloglu G(2), Volkan-Salanci B(3), Çetinkaya A(4), Kiper PÖ(3),
Alanay Y(3), Aktas D(4), Anlar B(2), Topçu M(2), Boduroglu K(3), Alikasifoglu
M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey; Hacettepe
University, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara, Turkey. Electronic address:
geutine@hacettepe.edu.tr. (2)Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics,
Ankara, Turkey; Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatric Neurology, Ankara, 
Turkey. (3)Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatrics, Ankara, Turkey;
Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.
(4)Hacettepe University, Department of Pediatric Genetics, Ankara, Turkey;
Hacettepe University, Department of Medical Genetics, Ankara, Turkey.

Intellectual disability (ID) has a prevalence of 3% and is classified according
to its severity. An underlying etiology cannot be determined in 75-80% in mild
ID, and in 20-50% of severe ID. After it has been shown that copy number
variations involving short DNA segments may cause ID, genome-wide SNP microarrays
are being used as a tool for detecting submicroscopic copy number changes and
uniparental disomy. This study was performed to investigate the presence of copy 
number changes in patients with ID of unidentified etiology. Affymetrix(®) 6.0
SNP microarray platform was used for analysis of 100 patients and their healthy
parents, and data were evaluated using various databases and literature.
Etiological diagnoses were made in 12 patients (12%). Homozygous deletion in
NRXN1 gene and duplication in IL1RAPL1 gene were detected for the first time. Two
separate patients had deletions in FOXP2 and UBE2A genes, respectively, for which
only few patients have recently been reported. Interstitial and subtelomeric copy
number changes were described in 6 patients, in whom routine cytogenetic tools
revealed normal results. In one patient uniparental disomy type of Angelman
syndrome was diagnosed. SNP microarrays constitute a screening test able to
detect very small genomic changes, with a high etiological yield even in patients
already evaluated using traditional cytogenetic tools, offer analysis for
uniparental disomy and homozygosity, and thereby are helpful in finding novel
disease-causing genes: for these reasons they should be considered as a
first-tier genetic screening test in the evaluation of patients with ID and
autism.

Copyright © 2014 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24508361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Gene. 2014 Apr 1;538(2):373-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.01.050. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Variable phenotype in 17q12 microdeletions: clinical and molecular
characterization of a new case.

Palumbo P(1), Antona V(2), Palumbo O(3), Piccione M(2), Nardello R(2), Fontana
A(2), Carella M(4), Corsello G(2).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni
Rotondo, FG, Italy; Department of Biology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.
(2)Dipartimento di Scienze per la Promozione della Salute e Materno Infantile "G.
D'ALESSANDRO", Universita' Degli Studi di Palermo, Palermo, Italy. (3)Medical
Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, FG,
Italy. (4)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San
Giovanni Rotondo, FG, Italy. Electronic address: m.carella@operapadrepio.it.

Microdeletions of 17q12 including the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta (HNF1B)
gene, as well as point mutations of this gene, are associated with the Renal
Cysts and Diabetes syndrome (RCAD, OMIM 137920) and genitourinary alterations.
Also, microdeletions encompassing HNF1B were identified as a cause of
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser Syndrome (MRKH, OMIM 277000) in females and,
recently, were associated with intellectual disability, autistic features,
cerebral anomaly and facial dysmorphisms. In this report, we describe a boy with 
a deletion in 17q12 region detected by SNP array, encompassing the HNF1B gene,
that showed dysmorphic features, intellectual disability (ID), serious speech
delay and autistic features. In addition, obesity was observed. In order to study
the parental origin of the rearrangement, we analyzed selected SNPs in the
deleted area in the patient and his parents, showing Mendelian incompatibilities 
suggesting a de novo deletion on the chromosome of maternal origin. Our case
confirms the incomplete penetrance and variable expressivity of this deletion,
its complex clinical variability, and strengthens the evidence that ID and
stereotyped behaviors may be part of the phenotypic spectrum characterizing the
affected patients. Also, it is useful to further delineate the phenotypes
associated to the deletion being the first case in which obesity has been
documented. We present a genotype-phenotype correlation discussing the possible
role of some genes, encompassed by the deletion, in the etiology of the observed 
phenotypes.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24487052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Vis Neurosci. 2014 May;31(3):253-61. doi: 10.1017/S0952523813000643. Epub 2014
Jan 30.

Shrinkage of X cells in the lateral geniculate nucleus after monocular
deprivation revealed by FoxP2 labeling.

Duffy KR(1), Holman KD(1), Mitchell DE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology and Neuroscience,Dalhousie University,Life Sciences
Center,Halifax,Nova Scotia,Canada.

The parallel processing of visual features by distinct neuron populations is a
central characteristic of the mammalian visual system. In the A laminae of the
cat dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN), parallel processing streams
originate from two principal neuron types, called X and Y cells. Disruption of
visual experience early in life by monocular deprivation has been shown to alter 
the structure and function of Y cells, but the extent to which deprivation
influences X cells remains less clear. A transcription factor, FoxP2, has
recently been shown to selectively label X cells in the ferret dLGN and thus
provides an opportunity to examine whether monocular deprivation alters the soma 
size of X cells. In this study, FoxP2 labeling was examined in the dLGN of normal
and monocularly deprived cats. The characteristics of neurons labeled for FoxP2
were consistent with FoxP2 being a marker for X cells in the cat dLGN. Monocular 
deprivation for either a short (7 days) or long (7 weeks) duration did not alter 
the density of FoxP2-positive neurons between nondeprived and deprived dLGN
layers. However, for each deprived animal examined, measurement of the
cross-sectional area of FoxP2-positive neurons (X cells) revealed that within
deprived layers, X cells were smaller by approximately 20% after 7 days of
deprivation, and by approximately 28% after 7 weeks of deprivation. The observed 
alteration to the cross-sectional area of X cells indicates that perturbation of 
this major pathway contributes to the functional impairments that develop from
monocular deprivation.

PMID: 24480423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. PLoS Biol. 2014 Jan;12(1):e1001767. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001767. Epub 2014 
Jan 21.

Left brain, right brain: facts and fantasies.

Corballis MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Handedness and brain asymmetry are widely regarded as unique to humans, and
associated with complementary functions such as a left-brain specialization for
language and logic and a right-brain specialization for creativity and intuition.
In fact, asymmetries are widespread among animals, and support the gradual
evolution of asymmetrical functions such as language and tool use. Handedness and
brain asymmetry are inborn and under partial genetic control, although the gene
or genes responsible are not well established. Cognitive and emotional
difficulties are sometimes associated with departures from the "norm" of
right-handedness and left-brain language dominance, more often with the absence
of these asymmetries than their reversal.

PMCID: PMC3897366
PMID: 24465175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Dev Neurobiol. 2014 Jul;74(7):723-38. doi: 10.1002/dneu.22166. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Foxp2 regulates neuronal differentiation and neuronal subtype specification.

Chiu YC(1), Li MY, Liu YH, Ding JY, Yu JY, Wang TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science, National Taiwan Normal University, Taipei, 116,
Taiwan.

Mutations of the transcription factor FOXP2 in humans cause a severe speech and
language disorder. Disruption of Foxp2 in songbirds or mice also leads to
deficits in song learning or ultrasonic vocalization, respectively. These data
suggest that Foxp2 plays important roles in the developing nervous system.
However, the mechanism of Foxp2 in regulating neural development remains elusive.
In the current study, we found that Foxp2 increased neuronal differentiation
without affecting cell proliferation and cell survival in primary neural
progenitors from embryonic forebrains. Foxp2 induced the expression of
platelet-derived growth factor receptor a, which mediated the neurognic effect of
Foxp2. In addition, Foxp2 positively regulated the differentiation of medium
spiny neurons derived from the lateral ganglionic eminence and negatively
regulated the formation of interneurons derived from dorsal medial ganglionic
eminence by interacting with the Sonic hedgehog pathway. Taken together, our
results suggest that Foxp2 regulates multiple aspects of neuronal development in 
the embryonic forebrain.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24453072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Ovarian Res. 2014 Jan 21;7:9. doi: 10.1186/1757-2215-7-9.

Risk miRNA screening of ovarian cancer based on miRNA functional synergistic
network.

Ying H(1), Lyu J, Ying T, Li J, Jin S, Shao J, Wang L, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, No,36, Sanhao Street, Heping District, Shenyang, Liaoning Province
110004, China. huanchunying2@hotmail.com.

Retraction in
    J Ovarian Res. 2015;8(1):17.

BACKGROUND: miRNAs are proved to have causal roles in tumorgenesis involving
various types of human cancers, but the mechanism is not clear. We aimed to
explore the effect of miRNAs on the development of ovarian cancer and the
underlying mechanism.
METHODS: The miRNA expression profile GSE31801 was downloaded from GEO (Gene
Expression Omnibus) database. Firstly, the differentially expressed miRNAs were
screened. Target genes of the miRNAs were collected from TargetScan, PicTar,
miRanda, and DIANA-microT database, then the miRNA-miRNA co-regulating network
was constructed using miRNA pairs with common regulated target genes. Next, the
functional modules in the network were studied, the miRNA pairs regulated at
least one modules were enriched to form the miRNA functional synergistic network 
(MFSN).
RESULTS: Risk miRNA were selected in MFSN according to the topological structure.
Transcript factors (TFs) in MFSN were identified, followed by the
miRNA-transcript factor networks construction. Totally, 42 up- and 61
down-regulated differentially expressed miRNAs were identified, of which 68
formed 2292 miRNA pairs in the miRNA-miRNA co-regulating network. GO: 0007268
(synaptic transmission) and GO: 0019226 (transmission of nerve impulse) were the 
two common functions of miRNAs in MFSN, and hsa-miR-579 (36), hsa-miR-942 (31),
hsa-miR-105 (31), hsa-miR-150 (34), and hsa-miR-27a* (32) were selected as the
hub nodes in MFSN.
CONCLUSIONS: In all, 17 TFs, including CREM, ERG, and CREB1 were screened as the 
cancer related TFs in MFSN. Other TFs, such as BIN1, FOXN3, FOXK1, FOXP2, and
ESRRG with high degrees may be inhibited in ovarian cancer. MFSN gave us a new
shed light on the mechanism studies in ovarian cancer.

PMCID: PMC3902002
PMID: 24444095  [PubMed]


93. Comp Cogn Behav Rev. 2014;9:75-98.

Recent Advances in the Genetics of Vocal Learning.

Condro MC(1), White SA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular and Integrative Physiology Interdepartmental Program,
University of California, Los Angeles. (2)Department of Integrative Biology and
Physiology, University of California, Los Angeles.

Language is a complex communicative behavior unique to humans, and its genetic
basis is poorly understood. Genes associated with human speech and language
disorders provide some insights, originating with the FOXP2 transcription factor,
a mutation in which is the source of an inherited form of developmental verbal
dyspraxia. Subsequently, targets of FOXP2 regulation have been associated with
speech and language disorders, along with other genes. Here, we review these
recent findings that implicate genetic factors in human speech. Due to the
exclusivity of language to humans, no single animal model is sufficient to study 
the complete behavioral effects of these genes. Fortunately, some animals possess
subcomponents of language. One such subcomponent is vocal learning, which though 
rare in the animal kingdom, is shared with songbirds. We therefore discuss how
songbird studies have contributed to the current understanding of genetic factors
that impact human speech, and support the continued use of this animal model for 
such studies in the future.

PMCID: PMC4457475
PMID: 26052371  [PubMed]


94. Neuron. 2013 Dec 18;80(6):1341-4. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.12.001.

A variability-generating circuit goes awry in a songbird model of the FOXP2
speech disorder.

Gadagkar V(1), Goldberg JH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, W121 Corson Mudd Hall, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. (2)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior,
W121 Corson Mudd Hall, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. Electronic
address: jesse.goldberg@cornell.edu.

Comment on
    Neuron. 2013 Dec 18;80(6):1464-76.

FOXP2 mutations cause a monogenic speech disorder in humans. In this issue of
Neuron, Murugan et al. (2013) show that knockdown of FoxP2 in the songbird basal 
ganglia causes abnormal vocal variability and excess bursting in a frontal
cortical nucleus.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4119750
PMID: 24360538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Psychiatr Res. 2014 Mar;50:66-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2013.11.012. Epub
2013 Dec 7.

Preliminary evidence of an interaction between the FOXP2 gene and childhood
emotional abuse predicting likelihood of auditory verbal hallucinations in
schizophrenia.

McCarthy-Jones S(1), Green MJ(2), Scott RJ(3), Tooney PA(4), Cairns MJ(4), Wu
JQ(4), Oldmeadow C(5), Carr V(6); Australian Schizophrenia Research Bank.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its Disorders, Department of
Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, NSW, Australia. Electronic address:
s.mccarthyjones@gmail.com. (2)ARC Centre of Excellence in Cognition and its
Disorders, Department of Cognitive Science, Macquarie University, NSW, Australia;
School of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, NSW,
Australia; Schizophrenia Research Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(3)Schizophrenia Research Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia; School of Biomedical
Sciences and Pharmacy, Faculty of Health, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan,
NSW 2308, Australia; Centre for Brain and Mental Health and Centre for
Information-Based Medicine, University of Newcastle, Newcastle, NSW, Australia;
Hunter Medical Research Institute, NSW, Australia; Hunter Area Pathology Service,
Newcastle, NSW, Australia. (4)Schizophrenia Research Institute, Sydney, NSW,
Australia; School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, Faculty of Health, The
University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW 2308, Australia; Centre for Brain and
Mental Health and Centre for Information-Based Medicine, University of Newcastle,
Newcastle, NSW, Australia; Hunter Medical Research Institute, NSW, Australia.
(5)Hunter Medical Research Institute, NSW, Australia; Faculty of Health,
University of Newcastle, NSW, Australia. (6)School of Psychiatry, Faculty of
Medicine, University of New South Wales, NSW, Australia; Schizophrenia Research
Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: The FOXP2 gene is involved in the development of speech and language. 
As some single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of FOXP2 have been found to be
associated with auditory verbal hallucinations (AVHs) at trend levels, this study
set out to undertake the first examination into whether interactions between
candidate FOXP2 SNPs and environmental factors (specifically, child abuse)
predict the likelihood of AVHs.
METHOD: Data on parental child abuse and FOXP2 SNPs previously linked to AVHs
(rs1456031, rs2396753, rs2253478) were obtained from the Australian Schizophrenia
Research Bank for people with schizophrenia-spectrum disorders, both with
(n = 211) and without (n = 122) a lifetime history of AVHs.
RESULTS: Genotypic frequencies did not differ between the two groups; however,
logistic regression found that childhood parental emotional abuse (CPEA)
interacted with rs1456031 to predict lifetime experience of AVH. CPEA was only
associated with significantly higher levels of AVHs in people with CC genotypes
(odds ratio = 4.25), yet in the absence of CPEA, people with TT genotypes had
significantly higher levels of AVHs than people with CC genotypes (odds
ratio = 4.90). This interaction was specific to auditory verbal hallucinations,
and did not predict the likelihood of non-verbal auditory hallucinations.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings offer tentative evidence that FOXP2 may be a
susceptibility gene for AVHs, influencing the probability people experience AVHs 
in the presence and absence of CPEA. However, these findings are in need of
replication in a larger study that addresses the methodological limitations of
the present investigation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24360035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Autism Open Access. 2012 Dec 5;Suppl 1(10). pii: 10082.

ASD-relevant Animal Models of the Foxp Family of Transcription Factors.

Bowers JM(1), Konopka G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, Dallas, TX 75390-9111, USA.

Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder with a multifaceted association between
genes and the environment. Currently, in the majority of patients, the etiology
of autism is not known and coupled with increasing prevalence rates, along with
the high degree of heritability of autism, the development of animal models is
crucial for studying and developing therapies for autism. A key characteristic of
autism is marked abnormalities in the acquisition and use of language. Thus, to
understand and ultimately treat autism is an especially difficult task because no
animal produces language, as it is defined in humans. In this review, we will
discuss the FOXP family of genes, which are a group of transcription factors that
have been linked to both autism, as well as language in humans. Due to the
association of language/communication and the Foxp family of transcription
factors, animal models with targeted disruptions of Foxp functioning are powerful
tools for understanding the developmental signaling pathways that may be
vulnerable in autism.

PMCID: PMC3865282
PMID: 24358452  [PubMed]


97. J Child Neurol. 2014 Dec;29(12):NP207-11. doi: 10.1177/0883073813511301. Epub
2013 Dec 18.

Interaction between MAOA and FOXP2 in association with autism and verbal
communication in a Korean population.

Park Y(1), Won S(1), Nam M(2), Chung JH(3), Kwack K(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, College of Life Science, CHA University,
Seongnam, Korea. (2)Seoul Metropolitan Children's Hospital, Heolleungno,
Seocho-gu, Seoul, Korea. (3)Kohwang Medical Research Institute, School of
Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Biomedical
Science, College of Life Science, CHA University, Seongnam, Korea
kbkwack@cha.ac.kr.

Expression levels of monoamine oxidase A (MAOA), the enzyme that related to
monoamine neurotransmitters metabolism such as serotonin, are related to
schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder. Forkhead box protein P2 (FOXP2), a
transcription factor, is associated with abnormal language development and is
expressed in several areas of the central nervous system in response to
serotonin. For this reason, we undertook interaction analysis between MAOA and
FOXP2 in autism spectrum disorder, including testing the verbal communication
score of the childhood autism rating scale. In interaction analysis, the
FOXP2-TCGC (rs12531289-rs1350135-rs10230087-rs2061183) diplotype and MAOA-TCG
(rs6323-rs1801291-rs3027407) haplotype were significantly associated with autism 
spectrum disorder in males. However, when the interaction term was omitted,
neither MAOA nor FOXP2 was associated with autism spectrum disorder or verbal
communication. These results indicate that language and speech ability is
affected by an interaction between FOXP2 and MAOA, but not by either gene
separately.

© The Author(s) 2013.

PMID: 24356376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 9;8(12):e83858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083858. eCollection
2013.

Rapid diversification of FoxP2 in teleosts through gene duplication in the
teleost-specific whole genome duplication event.

Song X(1), Wang Y(2), Tang Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Herpetology, Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Chengdu, Sichuan, China ; College of Life Science, Sichuan University, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, China ; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China. (2)College of Life Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.
(3)Department of Herpetology, Chengdu Institute of Biology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

As one of the most conserved genes in vertebrates, FoxP2 is widely involved in a 
number of important physiological and developmental processes. We systematically 
studied the evolutionary history and functional adaptations of FoxP2 in teleosts.
The duplicated FoxP2 genes (FoxP2a and FoxP2b), which were identified in teleosts
using synteny and paralogon analysis on genome databases of eight organisms, were
probably generated in the teleost-specific whole genome duplication event. A
credible classification with FoxP2, FoxP2a and FoxP2b in phylogenetic
reconstructions confirmed the teleost-specific FoxP2 duplication. The
unavailability of FoxP2b in Danio rerio suggests that the gene was deleted
through nonfunctionalization of the redundant copy after the
Otocephala-Euteleostei split. Heterogeneity in evolutionary rates among clusters 
consisting of FoxP2 in Sarcopterygii (Cluster 1), FoxP2a in Teleostei (Cluster 2)
and FoxP2b in Teleostei (Cluster 3), particularly between Clusters 2 and 3,
reveals asymmetric functional divergence after the gene duplication. Hierarchical
cluster analyses of hydrophobicity profiles demonstrated significant structural
divergence among the three clusters with verification of subsequent stepwise
discriminant analysis, in which FoxP2 of Leucoraja erinacea and Lepisosteus
oculatus were classified into Cluster 1, whereas FoxP2b of Salmo salar was
grouped into Cluster 2 rather than Cluster 3. The simulated thermodynamic
stability variations of the forkhead box domain (monomer and homodimer) showed
remarkable divergence in FoxP2, FoxP2a and FoxP2b clusters. Relaxed purifying
selection and positive Darwinian selection probably were complementary driving
forces for the accelerated evolution of FoxP2 in ray-finned fishes, especially
for the adaptive evolution of FoxP2a and FoxP2b in teleosts subsequent to the
teleost-specific gene duplication.

PMCID: PMC3857310
PMID: 24349554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Psychiatr Genet. 2014 Apr;24(2):75-80. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0000000000000021.

Sequencing of five left-right cerebral asymmetry genes in a cohort of
schizophrenia and schizotypal disorder patients from Russia.

Levchenko A(1), Davtian S, Petrova N, Malashichev Y.

Author information: 
(1)aDepartment of Embryology, Faculty of Biology bDepartment of Psychiatry and
Narcology, Faculty of Medicine, Saint Petersburg State University, Saint
Petersburg, Russia.

OBJECTIVE: Schizophrenia is a severe psychiatric disorder, affecting ~1% of the
human population. The genetic contribution to schizophrenia is significant, but
the genetics are complex and many aspects of brain functioning, from neural
development to synapse structure, seem to be involved in the pathogenesis. A
novel way to study the molecular causes of schizophrenia is to study the genetics
of left-right (LR) brain asymmetry, the disease feature often observed in
schizophrenic patients.
METHODS: In this study, we analyzed by sequencing five candidate LR cerebral
asymmetry genes in a cohort of 95 schizophrenia and schizotypal disorder patients
from Saint Petersburg, Russia. The gene list included LMO4, LRRTM1, FOXP2, the
PCDH11X/Y gene pair, and SRY.
RESULTS: We found 17 previously unreported variants in the genes LRRTM1, FOXP2,
LMO4, and PCDH11X in the 3'-UTR and 5'-UTR. The variants might contribute toward 
an altered mRNA processing, which could lead to altered mRNA amounts in
developing neurons of the brain and establishment of an incorrect LR asymmetry
profile.
CONCLUSION: This is the first study in which multiple candidate genes for
cerebral LR asymmetry and schizophrenia have been analyzed by sequencing. The
approach to study the genetics of schizophrenia from the perspective of an LR
cerebral asymmetry disturbance deserves more attention.

PMID: 24322325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Acta Biol Hung. 2013 Dec;64(4):426-37. doi: 10.1556/ABiol.64.2013.4.3.

FoxP2 and olfaction: divergence of FoxP2 expression in olfactory tubercle between
different feeding habit bats.

Chen Q(1), Wang L, Jones G, Metzner W, Xuan FJ, Yin J, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)East China Normal University Laboratory of Molecular Ecology and Evolution,
Institute for Advanced Studies in Multidisciplinary Science and Technology
Shanghai 200062 China.

Erratum in
    Acta Biol Hung. 2014 Mar;65(1):119.

FoxP2 is a member of the winged helix/forkhead class of transcription factors.
Despite FoxP2 is found to have particular relevance to speech and language, the
role of this gene is broader and not yet fully elucidated. In this study, we
investigated the expression of FoxP2 in the brains of bats with different feeding
habits (two frugivorous species and three insectivorous species). We found FoxP2 
expression in the olfactory tubercle of frugivorous species is significantly
higher than that in insectivorous species. Difference of FoxP2 expression was not
observed within each of the frugivorous or insectivorous group. The diverse
expression patterns in olfactory tubercle between two kinds of bats indicate
FoxP2 has a close relation with olfactory tubercle associated functions,
suggesting its important role in sensory integration within the olfactory
tubercle and such a discrepancy of FoxP2 expression in olfactory tubercle may
take responsibility for the different feeding behaviors of frugivorous and
insectivorous bats.

PMID: 24275589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Neuron. 2013 Dec 18;80(6):1464-76. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.09.021. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

Diminished FoxP2 levels affect dopaminergic modulation of corticostriatal
signaling important to song variability.

Murugan M(1), Harward S(1), Scharff C(2), Mooney R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University School of Medicine, Durham, NC
27710, USA. (2)Department of Animal Behavior, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin
14195, Germany. (3)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University School of
Medicine, Durham, NC 27710, USA. Electronic address: mooney@neuro.duke.edu.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2013 Dec 18;80(6):1341-4.

Mutations of the FOXP2 gene impair speech and language development in humans and 
shRNA-mediated suppression of the avian ortholog FoxP2 disrupts song learning in 
juvenile zebra finches. How diminished FoxP2 levels affect vocal control and
alter the function of neural circuits important to learned vocalizations remains 
unclear. Here we show that FoxP2 knockdown in the songbird striatum disrupts
developmental and social modulation of song variability. Recordings in
anesthetized birds show that FoxP2 knockdown interferes with D1R-dependent
modulation of activity propagation in a corticostriatal pathway important to song
variability, an effect that may be partly attributable to reduced D1R and
DARPP-32 protein levels. Furthermore, recordings in singing birds reveal that
FoxP2 knockdown prevents social modulation of singing-related activity in this
pathway. These findings show that reduced FoxP2 levels interfere with the
dopaminergic modulation of vocal variability, which may impede song and speech
development by disrupting reinforcement learning mechanisms.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3881289
PMID: 24268418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Science. 2013 Nov 22;342(6161):944-5. doi: 10.1126/science.1247515.

Neuroscience. Synapses, language, and being human.

Lieberman P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences, Brown University, 190 Thayer Street,
Providence, RI 02912, USA.

Comment on
    Science. 2013 Nov 22;342(6161):987-91.

PMID: 24264985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Dec;161A(12):3166-75. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36174. Epub 2013
Sep 24.

FOXP1 mutations cause intellectual disability and a recognizable phenotype.

Le Fevre AK(1), Taylor S, Malek NH, Horn D, Carr CW, Abdul-Rahman OA, O'Donnell
S, Burgess T, Shaw M, Gecz J, Bain N, Fagan K, Hunter MF.

Author information: 
(1)Hunter Genetics, Newcastle, NSW, Australia; John Hunter Children's Hospital,
Newcastle, NSW, Australia.

Mutations in FOXP1, located at 3p13, have been reported in patients with global
developmental delay (GDD), intellectual disability (ID), and speech defects.
Mutations in FOXP2, located at 7q31, are well known to cause developmental speech
and language disorders, particularly developmental verbal dyspraxia (DVD). FOXP2 
has been shown to work co-operatively with FOXP1 in mouse development. An overlap
in FOXP1 and FOXP2 expression, both in the songbird and human fetal brain, has
suggested that FOXP1 may also have a role in speech and language disorders. We
report on a male child with a 0.19 MB intragenic deletion that is predicted to
result in haploinsufficiency of FOXP1. Review of our patient and others reported 
in the literature reveals an emerging phenotype of GDD/ID with moderate to severe
speech delay where expressive speech is most severely affected. DVD appears not
to be a distinct feature in this group. Facial features include a broad forehead,
downslanting palpebral fissures, a short nose with broad tip, relative or true
macrocephaly, a frontal hair upsweep and prominent digit pads. Autistic traits
and other behavioral problems are likely to be associated with haploinsufficiency
of FOXP1. Congenital malformations may be associated.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24214399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Science. 2013 Nov 22;342(6161):987-91. doi: 10.1126/science.1245079. Epub 2013
Oct 31.

The human language-associated gene SRPX2 regulates synapse formation and
vocalization in mice.

Sia GM(1), Clem RL, Huganir RL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 
725 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2013 Nov 22;342(6161):944-5.

Synapse formation in the developing brain depends on the coordinated activity of 
synaptogenic proteins, some of which have been implicated in a number of
neurodevelopmental disorders. Here, we show that the sushi repeat-containing
protein X-linked 2 (SRPX2) gene encodes a protein that promotes synaptogenesis in
the cerebral cortex. In humans, SRPX2 is an epilepsy- and language-associated
gene that is a target of the foxhead box protein P2 (FoxP2) transcription factor.
We also show that FoxP2 modulates synapse formation through regulating SRPX2
levels and that SRPX2 reduction impairs development of ultrasonic vocalization in
mice. Our results suggest FoxP2 modulates the development of neural circuits
through regulating synaptogenesis and that SRPX2 is a synaptogenic factor that
plays a role in the pathogenesis of language disorders.

PMCID: PMC3903157
PMID: 24179158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Stem Cell Res. 2014 Jan;12(1):101-18. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2013.09.014. Epub 2013
Oct 3.

Patch-clamp recordings and calcium imaging followed by single-cell PCR reveal the
developmental profile of 13 genes in iPSC-derived human neurons.

Belinsky GS(1), Rich MT(1), Sirois CL(1), Short SM(1), Pedrosa E(2), Lachman
HM(2), Antic SD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center,
Farmington, CT, USA. (2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert 
Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA. (3)Department of
Neuroscience, University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington, CT, USA.
Electronic address: antic@neuron.uchc.edu.

Molecular genetic studies are typically performed on homogenized biological
samples, resulting in contamination from non-neuronal cells. To improve
expression profiling of neurons we combined patch recordings with single-cell
PCR. Two iPSC lines (healthy subject and 22q11.2 deletion) were differentiated
into neurons. Patch electrode recordings were performed on 229 human cells from
Day-13 to Day-88, followed by capture and single-cell PCR for 13 genes: ACTB,
HPRT, vGLUT1, ßTUBIII, COMT, DISC1, GAD1, PAX6, DTNBP1, ERBB4, FOXP1, FOXP2, and 
GIRK2. Neurons derived from both iPSC lines expressed ßTUBIII, fired action
potentials, and experienced spontaneous depolarizations (UP states) ~2 weeks
before vGLUT1, GAD1 and GIRK2 appeared. Multisite calcium imaging revealed that
these UP states were not synchronized among hESC-H9-derived neurons. The
expression of FOXP1, FOXP2 and vGLUT1 was lost after 50 days in culture, in
contrast to other continuously expressed genes. When gene expression was combined
with electrophysiology, two subsets of genes were apparent; those irrelevant to
spontaneous depolarizations (including vGLUT1, GIRK2, FOXP2 and DISC1) and those 
associated with spontaneous depolarizations (GAD1 and ERBB4). The results
demonstrate that in the earliest stages of neuron development, it is useful to
combine genetic analysis with physiological characterizations, on a cell-to-cell 
basis.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3947234
PMID: 24157591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Neurosci. 2013 Oct 16;33(42):16510-21. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0838-13.2013.

miR-9 and miR-140-5p target FoxP2 and are regulated as a function of the social
context of singing behavior in zebra finches.

Shi Z(1), Luo G, Fu L, Fang Z, Wang X, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Center of Excellence, Louisiana State University Health Sciences 
Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112, Institute of Genetics and Developmental
Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China, and Biostatistics
Program, School of Public Health, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center, New Orleans, Louisiana 70112.

Mutations in the FOXP2 gene cause speech and language impairments, accompanied by
structural and functional abnormalities in brain regions underlying
speech-related sensory-motor processing, including the striatum and cerebellum.
The sequence and expression patterns of FOXP2 are highly conserved among higher
vertebrates. In the zebra finch brain, FoxP2 is expressed in Area X, a striatal
nucleus required for vocal learning, and reduced FoxP2 expression impairs
dendritic development and vocal learning. The FoxP2 gene encodes a transcription 
factor that controls the expression of many downstream genes. However, how FOXP2 
gene expression is regulated is not clearly understood. miRNAs regulate gene
expression post-transcriptionally by targeting the 3'-untranslated regions (UTRs)
of mRNAs, leading to translational suppression or mRNA degradation. In this
study, we identified miR-9 and miR-140-5p as potential regulators of the FoxP2
gene. We show that both miR-9 and miR-140-5p target specific sequences in the
FoxP2 3'-UTR and downregulate FoxP2 protein and mRNA expression in vitro. We also
show that the expression of miR-9 and miR-140-5p in Area X of the zebra finch
brain is regulated during song development in juvenile zebra finches. We further 
show that in adult zebra finches the expression of miR-9 and miR-140-5p in Area X
is regulated as a function of the social context of song behavior in males
singing undirected songs. Our findings reveal a post-transcriptional mechanism
that regulates FoxP2 expression and suggest that social vocal behavior can
influence the basal ganglia circuit controlling vocal learning via a miRNA-FoxP2 
gene regulatory network.

PMCID: PMC3797373
PMID: 24133256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 3;8(10):e75682. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0075682. eCollection
2013.

Transcriptome comparison of human neurons generated using induced pluripotent
stem cells derived from dental pulp and skin fibroblasts.

Chen J(1), Lin M, Foxe JJ, Pedrosa E, Hrabovsky A, Carroll R, Zheng D, Lachman
HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.

Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology is providing an opportunity to
study neuropsychiatric disorders through the capacity to grow patient-specific
neurons in vitro. Skin fibroblasts obtained by biopsy have been the most reliable
source of cells for reprogramming. However, using other somatic cells obtained by
less invasive means would be ideal, especially in children with autism spectrum
disorders (ASD) and other neurodevelopmental conditions. In addition to
fibroblasts, iPSCs have been developed from cord blood, lymphocytes, hair
keratinocytes, and dental pulp from deciduous teeth. Of these, dental pulp would 
be a good source for neurodevelopmental disorders in children because obtaining
material is non-invasive. We investigated its suitability for disease modeling by
carrying out gene expression profiling, using RNA-seq, on differentiated neurons 
derived from iPSCs made from dental pulp extracted from deciduous teeth (T-iPSCs)
and fibroblasts (F-iPSCs). This is the first RNA-seq analysis comparing gene
expression profiles in neurons derived from iPSCs made from different somatic
cells. For the most part, gene expression profiles were quite similar with only
329 genes showing differential expression at a nominally significant p-value
(p<0.05), of which 63 remained significant after correcting for genome-wide
analysis (FDR <0.05). The most striking difference was the lower level of
expression detected for numerous members of the all four HOX gene families in
neurons derived from T-iPSCs. In addition, an increased level of expression was
seen for several transcription factors expressed in the developing forebrain
(FOXP2, OTX1, and LHX2, for example). Overall, pathway analysis revealed that
differentially expressed genes that showed higher levels of expression in neurons
derived from T-iPSCs were enriched for genes implicated in schizophrenia (SZ).
The findings suggest that neurons derived from T-iPSCs are suitable for
disease-modeling neuropsychiatric disorder and may have some advantages over
those derived from F-iPSCs.

PMCID: PMC3789755
PMID: 24098394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Neurodev Disord. 2013 Oct 2;5(1):29. doi: 10.1186/1866-1955-5-29.

Whole-exome sequencing supports genetic heterogeneity in childhood apraxia of
speech.

Worthey EA(1), Raca G, Laffin JJ, Wilk BM, Harris JM, Jakielski KJ, Dimmock DP,
Strand EA, Shriberg LD.

Author information: 
(1)Waisman Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1500 Highland Avenue,
Madison, WI, 53705, USA. shriberg@waisman.wisc.edu.

BACKGROUND: Childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) is a rare, severe, persistent
pediatric motor speech disorder with associated deficits in sensorimotor,
cognitive, language, learning and affective processes. Among other neurogenetic
origins, CAS is the disorder segregating with a mutation in FOXP2 in a widely
studied, multigenerational London family. We report the first whole-exome
sequencing (WES) findings from a cohort of 10 unrelated participants, ages 3 to
19 years, with well-characterized CAS.
METHODS: As part of a larger study of children and youth with motor speech sound 
disorders, 32 participants were classified as positive for CAS on the basis of a 
behavioral classification marker using auditory-perceptual and acoustic methods
that quantify the competence, precision and stability of a speaker's speech,
prosody and voice. WES of 10 randomly selected participants was completed using
the Illumina Genome Analyzer IIx Sequencing System. Image analysis, base calling,
demultiplexing, read mapping, and variant calling were performed using Illumina
software. Software developed in-house was used for variant annotation,
prioritization and interpretation to identify those variants likely to be
deleterious to neurodevelopmental substrates of speech-language development.
RESULTS: Among potentially deleterious variants, clinically reportable findings
of interest occurred on a total of five chromosomes (Chr3, Chr6, Chr7, Chr9 and
Chr17), which included six genes either strongly associated with CAS (FOXP1 and
CNTNAP2) or associated with disorders with phenotypes overlapping CAS (ATP13A4,
CNTNAP1, KIAA0319 and SETX). A total of 8 (80%) of the 10 participants had
clinically reportable variants in one or two of the six genes, with variants in
ATP13A4, KIAA0319 and CNTNAP2 being the most prevalent.
CONCLUSIONS: Similar to the results reported in emerging WES studies of other
complex neurodevelopmental disorders, our findings from this first WES study of
CAS are interpreted as support for heterogeneous genetic origins of this
pediatric motor speech disorder with multiple genes, pathways and complex
interactions. We also submit that our findings illustrate the potential use of
WES for both gene identification and case-by-case clinical diagnostics in
pediatric motor speech disorders.

PMCID: PMC3851280
PMID: 24083349  [PubMed]


109. Front Physiol. 2013 Sep 11;4:248. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00248. eCollection
2013.

It's not black or white-on the range of vision and echolocation in echolocating
bats.

Boonman A(1), Bar-On Y, Cvikel N, Yovel Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Faculty of Life sciences, Tel Aviv University Tel Aviv,
Israel.

Around 1000 species of bats in the world use echolocation to navigate, orient,
and detect insect prey. Many of these bats emerge from their roost at dusk and
start foraging when there is still light available. It is however unclear in what
way and to which extent navigation, or even prey detection in these bats is aided
by vision. Here we compare the echolocation and visual detection ranges of two
such species of bats which rely on different foraging strategies (Rhinopoma
microphyllum and Pipistrellus kuhlii). We find that echolocation is better than
vision for detecting small insects even in intermediate light levels (1-10 lux), 
while vision is advantageous for monitoring far-away landscape elements in both
species. We thus hypothesize that, bats constantly integrate information acquired
by the two sensory modalities. We suggest that during evolution, echolocation was
refined to detect increasingly small targets in conjunction with using vision. To
do so, the ability to hear ultrasonic sound is a prerequisite which was readily
available in small mammals, but absent in many other animal groups. The ability
to exploit ultrasound to detect very small targets, such as insects, has opened
up a large nocturnal niche to bats and may have spurred diversification in both
echolocation and foraging tactics.

PMCID: PMC3769648
PMID: 24065924  [PubMed]


110. J Exp Biol. 2013 Oct 1;216(Pt 19):3682-92. doi: 10.1242/jeb.085886.

Expression analysis of the speech-related genes FoxP1 and FoxP2 and their
relation to singing behavior in two songbird species.

Chen Q(1), Heston JB, Burkett ZD, White SA.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Molecular, Cellular and Integrative Physiology,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Humans and songbirds are among the rare animal groups that exhibit socially
learned vocalizations: speech and song, respectively. These vocal-learning
capacities share a reliance on audition and cortico-basal ganglia circuitry, as
well as neurogenetic mechanisms. Notably, the transcription factors Forkhead box 
proteins 1 and 2 (FoxP1, FoxP2) exhibit similar expression patterns in the cortex
and basal ganglia of humans and the zebra finch species of songbird, among other 
brain regions. Mutations in either gene are associated with language disorders in
humans. Experimental knock-down of FoxP2 in the basal ganglia song control region
Area X during song development leads to imprecise copying of tutor songs.
Moreover, FoxP2 levels decrease naturally within Area X when zebra finches sing. 
Here, we examined neural expression patterns of FoxP1 and FoxP2 mRNA in adult
Bengalese finches, a songbird species whose songs exhibit greater sequence
complexity and increased reliance on audition for maintaining their quality. We
found that FoxP1 and FoxP2 expression in Bengalese finches is similar to that in 
zebra finches, including strong mRNA signals for both factors in multiple song
control nuclei and enhancement of FoxP1 in these regions relative to surrounding 
brain tissue. As with zebra finches, when Bengalese finches sing, FoxP2 is
behaviorally downregulated within basal ganglia Area X over a similar time
course, and expression negatively correlates with the amount of singing. This
study confirms that in multiple songbird species, FoxP1 expression highlights
song control regions, and regulation of FoxP2 is associated with motor control of
song.

PMCID: PMC3763803
PMID: 24006346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Front Behav Neurosci. 2013 Aug 5;7:99. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00099. eCollection
2013.

FOXP2 gene and language development: the molecular substrate of the
gestural-origin theory of speech?

Vicario CM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Psychology, The University of Queensland Brisbane, QLD, Australia.

PMCID: PMC3733005
PMID: 23935570  [PubMed]


112. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Sep;161A(9):2321-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36055. Epub 2013
Aug 5.

Small intragenic deletion in FOXP2 associated with childhood apraxia of speech
and dysarthria.

Turner SJ(1), Hildebrand MS, Block S, Damiano J, Fahey M, Reilly S, Bahlo M,
Scheffer IE, Morgan AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, The Royal Children's Hospital, The University of
Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, Australia.

Relatively little is known about the neurobiological basis of speech disorders
although genetic determinants are increasingly recognized. The first gene for
primary speech disorder was FOXP2, identified in a large, informative family with
verbal and oral dyspraxia. Subsequently, many de novo and familial cases with a
severe speech disorder associated with FOXP2 mutations have been reported. These 
mutations include sequencing alterations, translocations, uniparental disomy, and
genomic copy number variants. We studied eight probands with speech disorder and 
their families. Family members were phenotyped using a comprehensive assessment
of speech, oral motor function, language, literacy skills, and cognition. Coding 
regions of FOXP2 were screened to identify novel variants. Segregation of the
variant was determined in the probands' families. Variants were identified in two
probands. One child with severe motor speech disorder had a small de novo
intragenic FOXP2 deletion. His phenotype included features of childhood apraxia
of speech and dysarthria, oral motor dyspraxia, receptive and expressive language
disorder, and literacy difficulties. The other variant was found in a family in
two of three family members with stuttering, and also in the mother with oral
motor impairment. This variant was considered a benign polymorphism as it was
predicted to be non-pathogenic with in silico tools and found in database
controls. This is the first report of a small intragenic deletion of FOXP2 that
is likely to be the cause of severe motor speech disorder associated with
language and literacy problems.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23918746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Brain Lang. 2013 Sep;126(3):279-84. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2013.07.001. Epub 2013
Aug 2.

FOXP2 variation modulates functional hemispheric asymmetries for speech
perception.

Ocklenburg S(1), Arning L, Gerding WM, Epplen JT, Güntürkün O, Beste C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience, Biopsychology, Department of Psychology, 
Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany. Electronic address: sebastian.ocklenburg@rub.de.

Left-hemispheric language dominance is a well-known characteristic of the human
language system, but the molecular mechanisms underlying this crucial feature of 
vocal communication are still far from being understood. The forkhead box P2 gene
FOXP2, which has been related to speech development, constitutes an interesting
candidate gene in this regard. Therefore, the present study was aimed at
investigating effects of variation in FOXP2 on individual language dominance. To 
this end, we used a dichotic listening and a visual half-field task in a sample
of 456 healthy adults. The FOXP2 SNPs rs2396753 and rs12533005 were found to be
significantly associated with the distribution of correct answers on the dichotic
listening task. These results show that variation in FOXP2 may contribute to the 
inter-individual variability in hemispheric asymmetries for speech perception.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23911943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Mar;22(3):338-43. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2013.147. Epub 2013 Jul
17.

The strength of combined cytogenetic and mate-pair sequencing techniques
illustrated by a germline chromothripsis rearrangement involving FOXP2.

Nazaryan L(1), Stefanou EG(2), Hansen C(1), Kosyakova N(3), Bak M(1), Sharkey
FH(4), Mantziou T(5), Papanastasiou AD(6), Velissariou V(7), Liehr T(3), Syrrou
M(5), Tommerup N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wilhelm Johannsen Centre for Functional Genome Research, Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Health Science, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Cytogenetics 
Unit, Department of Pediatrics, University General Hospital of Patras, Patras,
Greece. (3)Institute of Human Genetics, Jena University Hospital, Friedrich
Schiller University, Jena, Germany. (4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Western 
General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK. (5)Laboratory of General Biology, University of 
Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece. (6)Laboratory of General Biology, School of Medicine,
University of Patras, Rio, Greece. (7)Department of Genetics and Molecular
Biology, 'Mitera' General Maternity/Gynecology and Children's Hospital, Hygeia
Group, Athens, Greece.

Next-generation mate-pair sequencing (MPS) has revealed that many constitutional 
complex chromosomal rearrangements (CCRs) are associated with local shattering of
chromosomal regions (chromothripsis). Although MPS promises to identify the
molecular basis of the abnormal phenotypes associated with many CCRs, none of the
reported mate-pair sequenced complex rearrangements have been simultaneously
studied with state-of-the art molecular cytogenetic techniques. Here, we studied 
chromothripsis-associated CCR involving chromosomes 2, 5 and 7, associated with
global developmental and psychomotor delay and severe speech disorder. We
identified three truncated genes: CDH12, DGKB and FOXP2, confirming the role of
FOXP2 in severe speech disorder, and suggestive roles of CDH12 and/or DGKB for
the global developmental and psychomotor delay. Our study confirmes the power of 
MPS for detecting breakpoints and truncated genes at near nucleotide resolution
in chromothripsis. However, only by combining MPS data with conventional
G-banding and extensive fluorescence in situ hybridizations could we delineate
the precise structure of the derivative chromosomes.

PMCID: PMC3925275
PMID: 23860044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2013 Oct;37(10):1657-67. doi: 10.1111/acer.12139. Epub 2013
Jun 25.

Suppression and epigenetic regulation of MiR-9 contributes to ethanol teratology:
evidence from zebrafish and murine fetal neural stem cell models.

Pappalardo-Carter DL(1), Balaraman S, Sathyan P, Carter ES, Chen WJ, Miranda RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Experimental Therapeutics, Texas A&M Health
Science Center, College of Medicine, Bryan, Texas.

BACKGROUND: Fetal alcohol exposure produces multiorgan defects, making it
difficult to identify underlying etiological mechanisms. However, recent evidence
for ethanol (EtOH) sensitivity of the miRNA miR-9 suggests one mechanism, whereby
EtOH broadly influences development. We hypothesized that loss of miR-9 function 
recapitulates aspects of EtOH teratology.
METHODS: Zebrafish embryos were exposed to EtOH during gastrulation, or injected 
with anti-miR-9 or nonsense control morpholinos during the 2-cell stage of
development and collected between 24 and 72 hours postfertilization (hpf). We
also assessed the expression of developmentally important, and known miR-9
targets, FGFR-1, FOXP2, and the nontargeted transcript, MECP2. Methylation at CpG
islands of mammalian miR-9 genes was assessed in fetal murine neural stem cells
(mNSCs) by methylation-specific PCR, and miRNA processing assessed by qRT-PCR for
pre-miR-9 transcripts.
RESULTS: EtOH treatment and miR-9 knockdown resulted in similar cranial defects
including microcephaly. Additionally, EtOH transiently suppressed miR-9, as well 
as FGFR-1 and FOXP2, and alterations in miR-9 expression were correlated with
severity of EtOH-induced teratology. In mNSCs, EtOH increased CpG dinucleotide
methylation at the miR-9-2 locus and accumulation of pre-miR-9-3.
CONCLUSIONS: EtOH exerts regulatory control at multiple levels of miR-9
biogenesis. Moreover, early embryonic loss of miR-9 function recapitulated the
severe range of teratology associated with developmental EtOH exposure. EtOH also
disrupts the relationship between miR-9 and target gene expression, suggesting a 
nuanced relationship between EtOH and miRNA regulatory networks in the developing
embryo. The implications of these data for the expression and function of mature 
miR-9 warrant further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMCID: PMC3785568
PMID: 23800254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Science. 2013 Jun 14;340(6138):1230531. doi: 10.1126/science.1230531.

Cerebral asymmetry and language development: cause, correlate, or consequence?

Bishop DV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, 9 South Parks
Road, Oxford OX1 3UD, UK. dorothy.bishop@psy.ox.ac.uk

In most people, language is processed predominantly by the left hemisphere of the
brain, but we do not know how or why. A popular view is that developmental
language disorders result from a poorly lateralized brain, but until recently,
evidence has been weak and indirect. Modern neuroimaging methods have made it
possible to study normal and abnormal development of lateralized function in the 
developing brain and have confirmed links with language and literacy impairments.
However, there is little evidence that weak cerebral lateralization has common
genetic origins with language and literacy impairments. Our understanding of the 
association between atypical language lateralization and developmental disorders 
may benefit if we reconceptualize the nature of cerebral asymmetry to recognize
its multidimensionality and consider variation in lateralization over
developmental time. Contrary to popular belief, cerebral lateralization may not
be a highly heritable, stable characteristic of individuals; rather, weak
lateralization may be a consequence of impaired language learning.

PMCID: PMC4031634
PMID: 23766329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Front Physiol. 2013 May 30;4:117. doi: 10.3389/fphys.2013.00117. eCollection
2013.

From the ultrasonic to the infrared: molecular evolution and the sensory biology 
of bats.

Jones G(1), Teeling EC, Rossiter SJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, University of Bristol Bristol, UK.

Great advances have been made recently in understanding the genetic basis of the 
sensory biology of bats. Research has focused on the molecular evolution of
candidate sensory genes, genes with known functions [e.g., olfactory receptor
(OR) genes] and genes identified from mutations associated with sensory deficits 
(e.g., blindness and deafness). For example, the FoxP2 gene, underpinning vocal
behavior and sensorimotor coordination, has undergone diversification in bats,
while several genes associated with audition show parallel amino acid
substitutions in unrelated lineages of echolocating bats and, in some cases, in
echolocating dolphins, representing a classic case of convergent molecular
evolution. Vision genes encoding the photopigments rhodopsin and the long-wave
sensitive opsin are functional in bats, while that encoding the short-wave
sensitive opsin has lost functionality in rhinolophoid bats using high-duty cycle
laryngeal echolocation, suggesting a sensory trade-off between investment in
vision and echolocation. In terms of olfaction, bats appear to have a distinctive
OR repertoire compared with other mammals, and a gene involved in signal
transduction in the vomeronasal system has become non-functional in most bat
species. Bitter taste receptors appear to have undergone a "birth-and death"
evolution involving extensive gene duplication and loss, unlike genes coding for 
sweet and umami tastes that show conservation across most lineages but loss in
vampire bats. Common vampire bats have also undergone adaptations for
thermoperception, via alternative splicing resulting in the evolution of a novel 
heat-sensitive channel. The future for understanding the molecular basis of
sensory biology is promising, with great potential for comparative genomic
analyses, studies on gene regulation and expression, exploration of the role of
alternative splicing in the generation of proteomic diversity, and linking
genetic mechanisms to behavioral consequences.

PMCID: PMC3667242
PMID: 23755015  [PubMed]


118. Biores Open Access. 2013 Jun;2(3):217-21. doi: 10.1089/biores.2012.0298.

Human skin keratinocytes can be reprogrammed to express neuronal genes and
proteins after a single treatment with decitabine.

Bickenbach JR(1), Tomanek-Chalkley A, Wiechert S, Winter MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Carver College of Medicine, The
University of Iowa , Iowa City, Iowa.

Patient-specific cell replacement therapy is fast becoming the future of
medicine, requiring safe, effective methods for reprogramming a patient's own
cells. Previously, we showed that a single transient transfection with a plasmid 
encoding Oct4 was sufficient to reprogram human skin keratinocytes (HSKs), and
that this transfection resulted in a decrease in global DNA methylation. In more 
recent work we showed that decreasing global DNA methylation using the U.S. Food 
and Drug Administration-approved cancer treatment drug decitabine was sufficient 
to induce expression of endogenous Oct4. Here we report that a single treatment
with decitabine, followed by 5 days in a defined neuronal transformation medium, 
then 7 days in a neuronal maintenance medium is sufficient to convert HSKs into
cells that change their morphology substantially, gain expression of neuronal
markers, and lose expression of keratinocyte markers. Within 1 week of treatment 
the cells express mRNA for ß3-tubulin and doublecortin, and at the end of 2 weeks
express mRNA for NeuN, FOXP2, and NCAM1. Additionally, at the end of this
protocol, neurofilament-1, nestin, synapsin, FOXP2, and GluR1 proteins are
detectable by immunostaining. Thus, we demonstrate a simple method that begins
the process for producing cells for cell replacement therapies without using
exogenously introduced DNA.

PMCID: PMC3666219
PMID: 23741634  [PubMed]


119. J Neurosci. 2013 May 29;33(22):9546-62. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2977-12.2013.

Mature Purkinje cells require the retinoic acid-related orphan receptor-a (RORa) 
to maintain climbing fiber mono-innervation and other adult characteristics.

Chen XR(1), Heck N, Lohof AM, Rochefort C, Morel MP, Wehrlé R, Doulazmi M, Marty 
S, Cannaya V, Avci HX, Mariani J, Rondi-Reig L, Vodjdani G, Sherrard RM, Sotelo
C, Dusart I.

Author information: 
(1)UPMC Université Paris 06, UMR 7102, 75005 Paris, France.

Neuronal maturation during development is a multistep process regulated by
transcription factors. The transcription factor RORa (retinoic acid-related
orphan receptor a) is necessary for early Purkinje cell (PC) maturation but is
also expressed throughout adulthood. To identify the role of RORa in mature PCs, 
we used Cre-lox mouse genetic tools in vivo that delete it specifically from PCs 
between postnatal days 10-21. Up to 14 d of age, differences between mutant and
control PCs were not detectable: both were mono-innervated by climbing fibers
(CFs) extending along their well-developed dendrites with spiny branchlets. By
week 4, mutant mice were ataxic, some PCs had died, and remaining PC soma and
dendrites were atrophic, with almost complete disappearance of spiny branchlets. 
The innervation pattern of surviving RORa-deleted PCs was abnormal with several
immature characteristics. Notably, multiple functional CF innervation was
reestablished on these mature PCs, simultaneously with the relocation of CF
contacts to the PC soma and their stem dendrite. This morphological modification 
of CF contacts could be induced even later, using lentivirus-mediated depletion
of rora from adult PCs. These data show that the late postnatal expression of
RORa cell-autonomously regulates the maintenance of PC dendritic complexity, and 
the CF innervation status of the PC (dendritic vs somatic contacts, and
mono-innervation vs multi-innervation). Thus, the differentiation state of adult 
neurons is under the control of transcription factors; and in their absence,
adult neurons lose their mature characteristics and acquire some characteristics 
of an earlier developmental stage.

PMID: 23719821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Science. 2013 May 24;340(6135):929-30. doi: 10.1126/science.1236171.

Evolution. Culture, genes, and the human revolution.

Fisher SE(1), Ridley M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Language and Genetics, Max Planck Institute for
Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen, Netherlands. imon.fi sher@mpi.nl

PMID: 23704558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Aug 26;548:44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.05.020. Epub 2013
May 16.

Cell type-selective expression of the zinc finger-containing gene Nolz-1/Zfp503
in the developing mouse striatum.

Ko HA(1), Chen SY, Chen HY, Hao HJ, Liu FC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, National Yang-Ming University, Taipei 11221,
Taiwan, ROC.

The zinc finger-containing gene Nolz-1/Zfp503 is a developmentally regulated
striatum-enriched gene. In the present study, we characterized the cell
type-selective expression pattern of Nolz-1 protein in the developing mouse
striatum. Nolz-1 immunoreactivity was present in Isl-1-positive ventral LGE
(vLGE, striatal primordia), but absent in Pax6-positive dorsal LGE (dLGE,
non-striatal primordia). In the vLGE, Nolz-1 immunoreactivity was detected in
early differentiating TuJ1-positive neurons, but not in Ki67-positive
proliferating progenitor cells. Moreover, many Nolz-1-immunoreactive cells
co-expressed Foxp1 or Foxp2, markers for striatal projection neurons. To further 
characterize Nolz-1 expression with respect to D1R-containing striatonigral and
D2R-containing striatopallidal projection neurons, we used the Drd1-EGFP and
Drd2-EGFP transgenic mice. Nolz-1 and EGFP double labeled neurons were found in
the developing striatum of Drd1-EGFP and Drd2-EGFP mice, indicating Nolz-1
expression in both populations of striatal projection neurons. Notably, Nolz-1
protein was not expressed in Nkx2.1-positive interneuron progenitors,
Lhx8-positive cholinergic interneuron progenitors, nNOS and calretinin-positive
interneurons in E18.5 striatum. In the developing nucleus accumbens and olfactory
tubercles of ventral striatum, many Nolz-1-positive cells co-expressed Sox1, an
important transcriptional regulator for ventral striatum, suggesting a role of
Nolz-1 in regulating development of the ventral striatum. Finally, in contrast to
postnatal down-regulation of Nolz-1 in the dorsal striatum, Nolz-1 protein was
persistently expressed in the olfactory tubercle from E15.5 to adulthood. Taken
together, our study suggests that Nolz-1 serves as a marker for early
differentiating striatal projection neurons and that Nolz-1 may regulate
development of striatal projection neurons.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23684982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1785. doi: 10.1038/srep01785.

Dating human cultural capacity using phylogenetic principles.

Lind J(1), Lindenfors P, Ghirlanda S, Lidén K, Enquist M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for the Study of Cultural Evolution, Stockholm University, Stockholm,
Sweden. johan.lind@zoologi.su.se

Humans have genetically based unique abilities making complex culture possible;
an assemblage of traits which we term "cultural capacity". The age of this
capacity has for long been subject to controversy. We apply phylogenetic
principles to date this capacity, integrating evidence from archaeology,
genetics, paleoanthropology, and linguistics. We show that cultural capacity is
older than the first split in the modern human lineage, and at least 170,000
years old, based on data on hyoid bone morphology, FOXP2 alleles, agreement
between genetic and language trees, fire use, burials, and the early appearance
of tools comparable to those of modern hunter-gatherers. We cannot exclude that
Neanderthals had cultural capacity some 500,000 years ago. A capacity for complex
culture, therefore, must have existed before complex culture itself. It may even 
originated long before. This seeming paradox is resolved by theoretical models
suggesting that cultural evolution is exceedingly slow in its initial stages.

PMCID: PMC3646280
PMID: 23648831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jul;41(12):5991-6004. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt259. Epub 2013 
Apr 26.

Microfluidic affinity and ChIP-seq analyses converge on a conserved FOXP2-binding
motif in chimp and human, which enables the detection of evolutionarily novel
targets.

Nelson CS(1), Fuller CK, Fordyce PM, Greninger AL, Li H, DeRisi JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of California San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94131, USA. Christopher.nelson@derisilab.ucsf.edu

The transcription factor forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) is believed to be important in
the evolution of human speech. A mutation in its DNA-binding domain causes severe
speech impairment. Humans have acquired two coding changes relative to the
conserved mammalian sequence. Despite intense interest in FOXP2, it has remained 
an open question whether the human protein's DNA-binding specificity and
chromatin localization are conserved. Previous in vitro and ChIP-chip studies
have provided conflicting consensus sequences for the FOXP2-binding site. Using
MITOMI 2.0 microfluidic affinity assays, we describe the binding site of FOXP2
and its affinity profile in base-specific detail for all substitutions of the
strongest binding site. We find that human and chimp FOXP2 have similar binding
sites that are distinct from previously suggested consensus binding sites.
Additionally, through analysis of FOXP2 ChIP-seq data from cultured neurons, we
find strong overrepresentation of a motif that matches our in vitro results and
identifies a set of genes with FOXP2 binding sites. The FOXP2-binding sites tend 
to be conserved, yet we identified 38 instances of evolutionarily novel sites in 
humans. Combined, these data present a comprehensive portrait of FOXP2's-binding 
properties and imply that although its sequence specificity has been conserved,
some of its genomic binding sites are newly evolved.

PMCID: PMC3695516
PMID: 23625967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Stem Cell Rev. 2013 Aug;9(4):461-74. doi: 10.1007/s12015-013-9441-8.

Human pluripotent stem cell differentiation into authentic striatal projection
neurons.

Delli Carri A(1), Onorati M, Castiglioni V, Faedo A, Camnasio S, Toselli M,
Biella G, Cattaneo E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences and Center for Stem Cell Research, Università degli 
Studi di Milano, 20133 Milan, Italy.

Here we present the principles and steps of a protocol that we have recently
developed for the differentiation of hES/iPS cells into the authentic human
striatal projection medium spiny neurons (MSNs) that die in Huntington's Disease 
(HD). Authenticity is judged by the convergence of multiple features within
individual cells. Our procedure lasts 80 days and couples neural induction via
BMP/TGF-ß inhibition with exposure to the developmental factors sonic hedgehog
(SHH) and dickkopf1 (DKK-1) to drive ventral telencephalic specification,
followed by terminal differentiation [1]. Authenticity of the resulting neuronal 
population is monitored by the appearance of FOXG1(+)/GSX2(+) progenitor cells of
the lateral ganglionic eminence (LGE) at day 15-25 of differentiation, followed
by appearance of CTIP2-, FOXP1- and FOXP2-positive cells at day 45. These
precursor cells then mature into MAP2(+)/GABA(+) neurons with 20 % of them
ultimately co-expressing the DARPP-32 and CTIP2 diagnostic markers and carrying
electrophysiological properties expected for fully functional MSNs.The protocol
is characterized by its replicability in at least three human pluripotent cell
lines. Altogether this protocol defines a useful platform for in vitro
developmental neurobiology studies, drug screening, and regenerative medicine
approaches.

PMID: 23625190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Am J Hum Genet. 2013 May 2;92(5):696-706. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2013.03.019. Epub
2013 Apr 18.

FOXP2 targets show evidence of positive selection in European populations.

Ayub Q(1), Yngvadottir B, Chen Y, Xue Y, Hu M, Vernes SC, Fisher SE, Tyler-Smith 
C.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Wellcome Trust Genome Campus, Hinxton,
Cambridge CB10 1SA, UK. qa1@sanger.ac.uk

Forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) is a highly conserved transcription factor that has been 
implicated in human speech and language disorders and plays important roles in
the plasticity of the developing brain. The pattern of nucleotide polymorphisms
in FOXP2 in modern populations suggests that it has been the target of positive
(Darwinian) selection during recent human evolution. In our study, we searched
for evidence of selection that might have followed FOXP2 adaptations in modern
humans. We examined whether or not putative FOXP2 targets identified by
chromatin-immunoprecipitation genomic screening show evidence of positive
selection. We developed an algorithm that, for any given gene list,
systematically generates matched lists of control genes from the Ensembl
database, collates summary statistics for three frequency-spectrum-based
neutrality tests from the low-coverage resequencing data of the 1000 Genomes
Project, and determines whether these statistics are significantly different
between the given gene targets and the set of controls. Overall, there was strong
evidence of selection of FOXP2 targets in Europeans, but not in the Han Chinese, 
Japanese, or Yoruba populations. Significant outliers included several genes
linked to cellular movement, reproduction, development, and immune cell
trafficking, and 13 of these constituted a significant network associated with
cardiac arteriopathy. Strong signals of selection were observed for CNTNAP2 and
RBFOX1, key neurally expressed genes that have been consistently identified as
direct FOXP2 targets in multiple studies and that have themselves been associated
with neurodevelopmental disorders involving language dysfunction.

Copyright © 2013 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3644635
PMID: 23602712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Int J Speech Lang Pathol. 2013 Jun;15(3):245-54. doi:
10.3109/17549507.2013.777786. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

Speech-language pathology insights into genetics and neuroscience: beyond surface
behaviour.

Morgan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Melbourne, Australia.
angela.morgan@mcri.edu.au

For almost a century, speech-language pathologists (SLPs) have worked at refining
communication disorder phenotypes. Yet a hundred years of mastering the
characterization of surface behaviours has provided only limited understanding of
the neurobiological underpinnings of communication disorder. Arguably, the most
momentous aetiological findings in speech-language pathology have been made
relatively recently and by cross-disciplinary colleagues in the fields of
molecular genetics and neuroimaging. Such findings include discovery of FOXP2,
for example, the first gene found to be associated with a primary speech
disorder. New gene-brain-behaviour discoveries in communication disorder are
occurring on an almost weekly basis and it is challenging for clinical SLPs to
engage with, interpret, and keep abreast of this literature. This paper aims to
provide a brief overview of genetic and neuroimaging approaches to the study of
communication disorders. Further examples of key findings in these fields are
presented, with a discussion of the impacts on core SLP practice. Future research
directions for further illuminating gene-brain-behaviour relationships in
communication disorder are identified.

PMID: 23586582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Clin Pathol. 2013 Jul;66(7):563-8. doi: 10.1136/jclinpath-2012-201335. Epub
2013 Apr 4.

Strong expression of the neuronal transcription factor FOXP2 is linked to an
increased risk of early PSA recurrence in ERG fusion-negative cancers.

Stumm L(1), Burkhardt L, Steurer S, Simon R, Adam M, Becker A, Sauter G, Minner
S, Schlomm T, Sirma H, Michl U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Medical Center, Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Transcription factors of the forkhead box P (FOXP1-4) family
have been implicated in various human cancer types before. The relevance and role
of neuronal transcription factor FOXP2 in prostate cancer is unknown.
METHODS: A tissue microarray containing samples from more than 11 000 prostate
cancers from radical prostatectomy specimens with clinical follow-up data was
analysed for FOXP2 expression by immunohistochemistry. FOXP2 data were also
compared with pre-existing ERG fusion (by fluorescence in situ hybridisation and 
immunohistochemistry) and cell proliferation (Ki67 labelling index) data.
RESULTS: There was a moderate to strong FOXP2 protein expression in basal and
secretory cells of normal prostatic glands. As compared with normal cells, FOXP2 
expression was lost or reduced in 25% of cancers. Strong FOXP2 expression was
linked to advanced tumour stage, high Gleason score, presence of lymph node
metastases and early tumour recurrence (p<0.0001; each) in ERG fusion-negative,
but not in ERG fusion-positive cancers. High FOXP2 expression was linked to high 
Ki67 labelling index (p<0.0001) in all cancers irrespective of ERG fusion status.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that similar high FOXP2 protein levels as in 
normal prostate epithelium exert a 'paradoxical' oncogenic role in 'non
fusion-type' prostate cancer. It may be speculated that interaction of FOXP2 with
members of pathways that are specifically activated in 'non fusion-type' cancers 
may be responsible for this phenomenon.

PMID: 23559350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2013 Jun;59:196-204. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2013.03.016. Epub
2013 Apr 1.

Spatial transcriptional profile of the chick and mouse endocardial cushions
identify novel regulators of endocardial EMT in vitro.

DeLaughter DM(1), Christodoulou DC, Robinson JY, Seidman CE, Baldwin HS, Seidman 
JG, Barnett JV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical
Center, Nashville, TN, USA.

Valvular Interstitial Cells (VICs) are a common substrate for congenital and
adult heart disease yet the signaling mechanisms governing their formation during
early valvulogenesis are incompletely understood. We developed an unbiased
strategy to identify genes important in endocardial epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transformation (EMT) using a spatial transcriptional profile. Endocardial cells
overlaying the cushions of the atrioventricular canal (AVC) and outflow tract
(OFT) undergo an EMT to yield VICs. RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) analysis of gene
expression between AVC, OFT, and ventricles (VEN) isolated from chick and mouse
embryos at comparable stages of development (chick HH18; mouse E11.0) was
performed. EMT occurs in the AVC and OFT cushions, but not VEN at this time. 198 
genes in the chick (n=1) and 105 genes in the mouse (n=2) were enriched 2-fold in
the cushions. Gene regulatory networks (GRN) generated from cushion-enriched gene
lists confirmed TGFß as a nodal point and identified NF-<U+03BA>B as a potential node.
To reveal previously unrecognized regulators of EMT four candidate genes, Hapln1,
Id1, Foxp2, and Meis2, and a candidate pathway, NF-<U+03BA>B, were selected. In vivo
spatial expression of each gene was confirmed by in situ hybridization and a
functional role for each in endocardial EMT was determined by siRNA knockdown in 
a collagen gel assay. Our spatial-transcriptional profiling strategy yielded gene
lists which reflected the known biology of the system. Further analysis
accurately identified and validated previously unrecognized novel candidate genes
and the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway as regulators of endocardial cell EMT in vitro.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3659811
PMID: 23557753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e58048. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0058048. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Rare genomic structural variants in complex disease: lessons from the replication
of associations with obesity.

Walters RG(1), Coin LJ, Ruokonen A, de Smith AJ, El-Sayed Moustafa JS, Jacquemont
S, Elliott P, Esko T, Hartikainen AL, Laitinen J, Männik K, Martinet D, Meyre D, 
Nauck M, Schurmann C, Sladek R, Thorleifsson G, Thorsteinsdóttir U, Valsesia A,
Waeber G, Zufferey F, Balkau B, Pattou F, Metspalu A, Völzke H, Vollenweider P,
Stefansson K, Järvelin MR, Beckmann JS, Froguel P, Blakemore AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genomics of Common Disease, Imperial College London, London,
United Kingdom.

The limited ability of common variants to account for the genetic contribution to
complex disease has prompted searches for rare variants of large effect, to
partly explain the 'missing heritability'. Analyses of genome-wide genotyping
data have identified genomic structural variants (GSVs) as a source of such rare 
causal variants. Recent studies have reported multiple GSV loci associated with
risk of obesity. We attempted to replicate these associations by similar analysis
of two familial-obesity case-control cohorts and a population cohort, and
detected GSVs at 11 out of 18 loci, at frequencies similar to those previously
reported. Based on their reported frequencies and effect sizes (OR=25), we had
sufficient statistical power to detect the large majority (80%) of genuine
associations at these loci. However, only one obesity association was replicated.
Deletion of a 220 kb region on chromosome 16p11.2 has a carrier population
frequency of 2×10(-4) (95% confidence interval [9.6×10(-5)-3.1×10(-4)]); accounts
overall for 0.5% [0.19%-0.82%] of severe childhood obesity cases (P =
3.8×10(-10); odds ratio = 25.0 [9.9-60.6]); and results in a mean body mass index
(BMI) increase of 5.8 kg.m(-2) [1.8-10.3] in adults from the general population. 
We also attempted replication using BMI as a quantitative trait in our population
cohort; associations with BMI at or near nominal significance were detected at
two further loci near KIF2B and within FOXP2, but these did not survive
correction for multiple testing. These findings emphasise several issues of
importance when conducting rare GSV association, including the need for careful
cohort selection and replication strategy, accurate GSV identification, and
appropriate correction for multiple testing and/or control of false discovery
rate. Moreover, they highlight the potential difficulty in replicating rare CNV
associations across different populations. Nevertheless, we show that such
studies are potentially valuable for the identification of variants making an
appreciable contribution to complex disease.

PMCID: PMC3595275
PMID: 23554873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Neural Dev. 2013 Mar 7;8:4. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-8-4.

Histamine up-regulates fibroblast growth factor receptor 1 and increases FOXP2
neurons in cultured neural precursors by histamine type 1 receptor activation:
conceivable role of histamine in neurogenesis during cortical development in
vivo.

Molina-Hernández A(1), Rodríguez-Martínez G, Escobedo-Ávila I, Velasco I.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Fisiología Celular - Neurociencias, Universidad Nacional Autónoma
de México, México, D.F. 04510, México.

BACKGROUND: During rat development, histamine (HA) is one of the first
neuroactive molecules to appear in the brain, reaching its maximal value at
embryonic day 14, a period when neurogenesis of deep layers is occurring in the
cerebral cortex, suggesting a role of this amine in neuronal specification. We
previously reported, using high-density cerebrocortical neural precursor
cultures, that micromolar HA enhanced the effect of fibroblast growth factor
(FGF)-2 on proliferation, and that HA increased neuronal differentiation, due to 
HA type 1 receptor (H(1)R) activation.
RESULTS: Clonal experiments performed here showed that HA decreased colony size
and caused a significant increase in the percentage of clones containing mature
neurons through H(1)R stimulation. In proliferating precursors, we studied
whether HA activates G protein-coupled receptors linked to intracellular calcium 
increases. Neural cells presented an increase in cytoplasmic calcium even in the 
absence of extracellular calcium, a response mediated by H(1)R. Since FGF
receptors (FGFRs) are known to be key players in cell proliferation and
differentiation, we determined whether HA modifies the expression of FGFRs1-4 by 
using RT-PCR. An important transcriptional increase in FGFR1 was elicited after
H(1)R activation. We also tested whether HA promotes differentiation specifically
to neurons with molecular markers of different cortical layers by
immunocytochemistry. HA caused significant increases in cells expressing the deep
layer neuronal marker FOXP2; this induction of FOXP2-positive neurons elicited by
HA was blocked by the H(1)R antagonist chlorpheniramine in vitro. Finally, we
found a notable decrease in FOXP2+ cortical neurons in vivo, when
chlorpheniramine was infused in the cerebral ventricles through intrauterine
injection.
CONCLUSION: These results show that HA, by activating H(1)R, has a neurogenic
effect in clonal conditions and suggest that intracellular calcium elevation and 
transcriptional up-regulation of FGFR1 participate in HA-induced neuronal
differentiation to FOXP2 cells in vitro; furthermore, H(1)R blockade in vivo
resulted in decreased cortical FOXP2+ neurons.

PMCID: PMC3601999
PMID: 23497494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Neurosci. 2013 Mar 13;33(11):4642-56. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5187-12.2013.

Diverse visual features encoded in mouse lateral geniculate nucleus.

Piscopo DM(1), El-Danaf RN, Huberman AD, Niell CM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Department of Biology, University of Oregon,
Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA.

The thalamus is crucial in determining the sensory information conveyed to
cortex. In the visual system, the thalamic lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) is
generally thought to encode simple center-surround receptive fields, which are
combined into more sophisticated features in cortex, such as orientation and
direction selectivity. However, recent evidence suggests that a more diverse set 
of retinal ganglion cells projects to the LGN. We therefore used multisite
extracellular recordings to define the repertoire of visual features represented 
in the LGN of mouse, an emerging model for visual processing. In addition to
center-surround cells, we discovered a substantial population with more selective
coding properties, including direction and orientation selectivity, as well as
neurons that signal absence of contrast in a visual scene. The direction and
orientation selective neurons were enriched in regions that match the termination
zones of direction selective ganglion cells from the retina, suggesting a source 
for their tuning. Together, these data demonstrate that the mouse LGN contains a 
far more elaborate representation of the visual scene than current models posit. 
These findings should therefore have a significant impact on our understanding of
the computations performed in mouse visual cortex.

PMCID: PMC3665609
PMID: 23486939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Int J Dev Neurosci. 2013 Oct;31(6):424-33. doi: 10.1016/j.ijdevneu.2013.02.006.
Epub 2013 Mar 4.

Epigenetic regulation of neural stem cell fate during corticogenesis.

MuhChyi C(1), Juliandi B, Matsuda T, Nakashima K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Biological Sciences, 
Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Takayama 8916-5, Ikoma, Nara 630-0192, 
Japan.

The cerebral cortex comprises over three quarters of the brain, and serves as
structural basis for the sophisticated perceptual and cognitive functions. It
develops from common multipotent neural stem cells (NSCs) that line the neural
tube. Development of the NSCs encompasses sequential phases of progenitor
expansion, neurogenesis, and gliogenesis along with the progression of
developmental stages. Interestingly, NSCs steadfastly march through all of these 
phases and give rise to specific neural cell types in a temporally defined and
highly predictable manner. Herein, we delineate the intrinsic and extrinsic
factors that dictate the progression and tempo of NSC differentiation during
cerebral cortex development, and how epigenetic modifications contribute to the
dynamic properties of NSCs.

Copyright © 2013 ISDN. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23466416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57695. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057695. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

Hypoxia inducible factor 3a plays a critical role in alveolarization and distal
epithelial cell differentiation during mouse lung development.

Huang Y(1), Kapere Ochieng J, Kempen MB, Munck AB, Swagemakers S, van Ijcken W,
Grosveld F, Tibboel D, Rottier RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's Hospital,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0119359.

Lung development occurs under relative hypoxia and the most important
oxygen-sensitive response pathway is driven by Hypoxia Inducible Factors (HIF).
HIFs are heterodimeric transcription factors of an oxygen-sensitive subunit,
HIFa, and a constitutively expressed subunit, HIF1ß. HIF1a and HIF2a, encoded by 
two separate genes, contribute to the activation of hypoxia inducible genes. A
third HIFa gene, HIF3a, is subject to alternative promoter usage and splicing,
leading to three major isoforms, HIF3a, NEPAS and IPAS. HIF3a gene products add
to the complexity of the hypoxia response as they function as dominant negative
inhibitors (IPAS) or weak transcriptional activators (HIF3a/NEPAS). Previously,
we and others have shown the importance of the Hif1a and Hif2a factors in lung
development, and here we investigated the role of Hif3a during pulmonary
development. Therefore, HIF3a was conditionally expressed in airway epithelial
cells during gestation and although HIF3a transgenic mice were born alive and
appeared normal, their lungs showed clear abnormalities, including a
post-pseudoglandular branching defect and a decreased number of alveoli. The
HIF3a expressing lungs displayed reduced numbers of Clara cells, alveolar
epithelial type I and type II cells. As a result of HIF3a expression, the level
of Hif2a was reduced, but that of Hif1a was not affected. Two regulatory genes,
Rarß, involved in alveologenesis, and Foxp2, a transcriptional repressor of the
Clara cell specific Ccsp gene, were significantly upregulated in the HIF3a
expressing lungs. In addition, aberrant basal cells were observed distally as
determined by the expression of Sox2 and p63. We show that Hif3a binds a
conserved HRE site in the Sox2 promoter and weakly transactivated a reporter
construct containing the Sox2 promoter region. Moreover, Hif3a affected the
expression of genes not typically involved in the hypoxia response, providing
evidence for a novel function of Hif3a beyond the hypoxia response.

PMCID: PMC3581546
PMID: 23451260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Front Neural Circuits. 2013 Feb 28;7:24. doi: 10.3389/fncir.2013.00024.
eCollection 2013.

Young and intense: FoxP2 immunoreactivity in Area X varies with age, song
stereotypy, and singing in male zebra finches.

Thompson CK(1), Schwabe F, Schoof A, Mendoza E, Gampe J, Rochefort C, Scharff C.

Author information: 
(1)Verhaltensbiologie, Institut für Biologie, Freie Universität Berlin, Germany.

FOXP2 is a transcription factor functionally relevant for learned vocalizations
in humans and songbirds. In songbirds, FoxP2 mRNA expression in the medium spiny 
neurons of the basal ganglia song nucleus Area X is developmentally regulated and
varies with singing conditions in different social contexts. How individual
neurons in Area X change FoxP2 expression across development and in social
contexts is not known, however. Here we address this critical gap in our
understanding of FoxP2 as a link between neuronal networks and behavior. We used 
a statistically unbiased analysis of FoxP2-immunoreactivity (FoxP2-IR) on a
neuron-by-neuron basis and found a bimodal distribution of FoxP2-IR neurons in
Area X: weakly-stained and intensely-stained. The density of intensely-stained
FoxP2-IR neurons was 10 times higher in juveniles than in adults, exponentially
decreased with age, and was negatively correlated with adult song stability.
Three-week old neurons labeled with BrdU were more than five times as likely to
be intensely-stained than weakly-stained. The density of FoxP2-IR putative
migratory neurons with fusiform-shaped nuclei substantially decreased as birds
aged. The density of intensely-stained FoxP2-IR neurons was not affected by
singing whereas the density of weakly-stained FoxP2-IR neurons was. Together,
these data indicate that young Area X medium spiny neurons express FoxP2 at high 
levels and decrease expression as they become integrated into existing neural
circuits. Once integrated, levels of FoxP2 expression correlate with singing
behavior. Together, these findings raise the possibility that FoxP2 levels may
orchestrate song learning and song stereotypy in adults by a common mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3584353
PMID: 23450800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Neurosci. 2013 Feb 20;33(8):3276-83. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0425-12.2013.

Foxp2 mediates sex differences in ultrasonic vocalization by rat pups and directs
order of maternal retrieval.

Bowers JM(1), Perez-Pouchoulen M, Edwards NS, McCarthy MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21201, USA. mbowe006@umaryland.edu

The FOXP2 gene is central to acquisition of speech and language in humans and
vocal production in birds and mammals. Rodents communicate via ultrasonic
vocalizations (USVs) and newborn pups emit distress USVs when separated from
their dam, thereby facilitating their retrieval. We observed that isolated male
rat pups emitted substantially more USV calls and these were characterized by a
significantly lower frequency and amplitude compared with female rat pups.
Moreover, the dam was more likely to first retrieve male pups back to the nest,
then females. The amount of Foxp2 protein was significantly higher in multiple
regions of the developing male brain compared with females and a reduction of
brain Foxp2 by siRNA eliminated the sex differences in USVs and altered the order
of pup retrieval. Our results implicate Foxp2 as a component of the
neurobiological basis of sex differences in vocal communication in mammals. We
extended these observations to humans, a species reported to have gender
differences in language acquisition, and found the amount of FOXP2 protein in the
left hemisphere cortex of 4-year-old boys was significantly lower than in
age-matched girls.

PMCID: PMC3727442
PMID: 23426656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cerebellum. 2013 Jun;12(3):325-7. doi: 10.1007/s12311-013-0450-6.

Peri- and postnatal development of cerebellar compartments in the mouse.

Sugihara I(1), Fujita H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Neurophysiology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 
Japan. isugihara.phy1@tmd.ac.jp

The adult cerebellar cortex is compartmentalized into longitudinal stripes, in
which Purkinje cells (PCs) have compartment-specific molecular expression
profiles. Since the striped compartments have specific afferent and efferent
projection patterns, they underlie the functional localization of the cerebellum.
How these compartments form during development is generally not understood. Our
recent study focuses on development of the cerebellar compartmentalization from
embryonic day 17.5 (E17.5), when embryonic clustered compartmentalization is
evidently observed, to postnatal day 6 (P6), when adult-type striped
compartmentalization begins to be established, in mouse. FoxP2, one of the marker
molecules for immature PCs, has been used to identify E17.5 PCs. PC subsets or
clusters have been distinguished from each other by using different expression
profiles of several marker molecules (PLCß4, EphA4, Pcdh10, and a reporter
molecule of the 1NM13 transgenic mouse strain). Analysis of spatial organization 
of PC clusters by three-dimensional reconstruction from multiple-stained serial
sections has indicated 54 PC clusters in the E17.5 cerebellum. Individual
clusters are spatially rearranged into stripes in the period from E17.5 to P6. In
summary, the clustered compartments in the E17.5 cerebellum are basically direct 
origin of the adult-type striped compartments in the cerebellar cortex.

PMID: 23335119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Cereb Cortex. 2014 May;24(5):1216-29. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs400. Epub 2013 Jan
2.

Zbtb20 defines a hippocampal neuronal identity through direct repression of genes
that control projection neuron development in the isocortex.

Nielsen JV(1), Thomassen M, Møllgård K, Noraberg J, Jensen NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology Research, Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Southern Denmark, DK-5000 Odense C, Denmark.

Hippocampal pyramidal neurons are important for encoding and retrieval of spatial
maps and episodic memories. While previous work has shown that Zbtb20 is a cell
fate determinant for CA1 pyramidal neurons, the regulatory mechanisms governing
this process are not known. In this study, we demonstrate that Zbtb20 binds to
genes that control neuronal subtype specification in the developing isocortex,
including Cux1, Cux2, Fezf2, Foxp2, Mef2c, Rorb, Satb2, Sox5, Tbr1, Tle4, and
Zfpm2. We show that Zbtb20 represses these genes during ectopic CA1 pyramidal
neuron development in transgenic mice. These data reveal a novel regulatory
mechanism by which Zbtb20 suppresses the acquisition of an isocortical fate
during archicortical neurogenesis to ensure commitment to a CA1 pyramidal neuron 
fate. We further show that the expression pattern of Zbtb20 is evolutionary
conserved in the fetal human hippocampus, where it is complementary to the
expression pattern of the Zbtb20 target gene Tbr1. Therefore, the disclosed
Zbtb20-mediated transcriptional repressor mechanism may be involved in
development of the human archicortex.

PMID: 23283686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Neurosci. 2013 Jan 2;33(1):244-58. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1665-12.2013.

FoxP2 regulates neurogenesis during embryonic cortical development.

Tsui D(1), Vessey JP, Tomita H, Kaplan DR, Miller FD.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children,
Toronto, Canada M5G 1L7.

The transcription factor FoxP2 has been associated with the development of human 
speech but the underlying cellular function of FoxP2 is still unclear. Here we
provide evidence that FoxP2 regulates genesis of some intermediate progenitors
and neurons in the mammalian cortex, one of the key centers for human speech.
Specifically, knockdown of FoxP2 in embryonic cortical precursors inhibits
neurogenesis, at least in part by inhibiting the transition from radial glial
precursors to neurogenic intermediate progenitors. Moreover, overexpression of
human, but not mouse, FoxP2 enhances the genesis of intermediate progenitors and 
neurons. In contrast, expression of a human FoxP2 mutant that causes vocalization
deficits decreases neurogenesis, suggesting that in the murine system human FoxP2
acts as a gain-of-function protein, while a human FoxP2 mutant acts as a
dominant-inhibitory protein. These results support the idea that FoxP2 regulates 
the transition from neural precursors to transit-amplifying progenitors and
ultimately neurons, and shed light upon the molecular changes that might
contribute to evolution of the mammalian cortex.

PMID: 23283338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Psychiatr Genet. 2013 Apr;23(2):82-5. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e32835d6fc6.

Analysis of two language-related genes in autism: a case-control association
study of FOXP2 and CNTNAP2.

Toma C(1), Hervás A, Torrico B, Balmaña N, Salgado M, Maristany M, Vilella E,
Martínez-Leal R, Planelles MI, Cuscó I, del Campo M, Pérez-Jurado LA,
Caballero-Andaluz R, de Diego-Otero Y, Pérez-Costillas L, Ramos-Quiroga JA,
Ribasés M, Bayés M, Cormand B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

Impairment of language abilities is a common feature in autistic individuals.
Heterozygous mutations in the Forkhead Box P2 (FOXP2) gene lead to a severe
spoken language disorder. Recently, several studies have pinpointed the
involvement of common variants of the Contactin-Associated Protein-Like 2
(CNTNAP2) gene, whose transcription is regulated by the product of FOXP2, in
several disorders characterized by language impairments such as autism, specific 
language impairment (SLI), and selective mutism (SM). In the present study,
common variants of the FOXP2 and the CNTNAP2 genes were analyzed through a
case-control association study in 322 Spanish autistic patients and 524 controls.
The results of this study suggest that common variants of FOXP2 are unlikely to
contribute to autism susceptibility, in agreement with previous findings.
Furthermore, we failed to replicate in our sample a previous association finding 
of two single nucleotide polymorphisms (rs2710102 and rs7794745) in the CNTNAP2
gene with autism. No evidence for the association of these genes with language
traits was observed in our analysis.

PMID: 23277129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Development. 2013 Jan 15;140(2):301-12. doi: 10.1242/dev.084608.

Developmentally coordinated extrinsic signals drive human pluripotent stem cell
differentiation toward authentic DARPP-32+ medium-sized spiny neurons.

Delli Carri A(1), Onorati M, Lelos MJ, Castiglioni V, Faedo A, Menon R, Camnasio 
S, Vuono R, Spaiardi P, Talpo F, Toselli M, Martino G, Barker RA, Dunnett SB,
Biella G, Cattaneo E.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Research, Università degli Studi di Milano, 20133 Milan, 
Italy.

Medium-sized spiny neurons (MSNs) are the only neostriatum projection neurons,
and their degeneration underlies some of the clinical features of Huntington's
disease. Using knowledge of human developmental biology and exposure to key
neurodevelopmental molecules, human pluripotent stem (hPS) cells were induced to 
differentiate into MSNs. In a feeder-free adherent culture, ventral telencephalic
specification is induced by BMP/TGFß inhibition and subsequent SHH/DKK1
treatment. The emerging FOXG1(+)/GSX2(+) telencephalic progenitors are then
terminally differentiated, resulting in the systematic line-independent
generation of FOXP1(+)/FOXP2(+)/CTIP2(+)/calbindin(+)/DARPP-32(+) MSNs. Similar
to mature MSNs, these neurons carry dopamine and A2a receptors, elicit a typical 
firing pattern and show inhibitory postsynaptic currents, as well as dopamine
neuromodulation and synaptic integration ability in vivo. When transplanted into 
the striatum of quinolinic acid-lesioned rats, hPS-derived neurons survive and
differentiate into DARPP-32(+) neurons, leading to a restoration of
apomorphine-induced rotation behavior. In summary, hPS cells can be efficiently
driven to acquire a functional striatal fate using an ontogeny-recapitulating
stepwise method that represents a platform for in vitro human developmental
neurobiology studies and drug screening approaches.

PMID: 23250204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2013 Feb;23(1):43-51. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2012.11.006. Epub 
2012 Dec 7.

Decoding the genetics of speech and language.

Graham SA(1), Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Language and Genetics Department, Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, 
Nijmegen 6525 XD, The Netherlands.

Researchers are beginning to uncover the neurogenetic pathways that underlie our 
unparalleled capacity for spoken language. Initial clues come from identification
of genetic risk factors implicated in developmental language disorders. The
underlying genetic architecture is complex, involving a range of molecular
mechanisms. For example, rare protein-coding mutations of the FOXP2 transcription
factor cause severe problems with sequencing of speech sounds, while common
genetic risk variants of small effect size in genes like CNTNAP2, ATP2C2 and CMIP
are associated with typical forms of language impairment. In this article, we
describe how investigations of these and other candidate genes, in humans,
animals and cellular models, are unravelling the connections between genes and
cognition. This depends on interdisciplinary research at multiple levels, from
determining molecular interactions and functional roles in neural cell-biology
all the way through to effects on brain structure and activity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23228431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Biol Evol. 2013 Apr;30(4):844-52. doi: 10.1093/molbev/mss271. Epub 2012 Nov
28.

A recent evolutionary change affects a regulatory element in the human FOXP2
gene.

Maricic T(1), Günther V, Georgiev O, Gehre S, Curlin M, Schreiweis C, Naumann R, 
Burbano HA, Meyer M, Lalueza-Fox C, de la Rasilla M, Rosas A, Gajovic S, Kelso J,
Enard W, Schaffner W, Pääbo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. tomislav_maricic@eva.mpg.de

The FOXP2 gene is required for normal development of speech and language. By
isolating and sequencing FOXP2 genomic DNA fragments from a 49,000-year-old
Iberian Neandertal and 50 present-day humans, we have identified substitutions in
the gene shared by all or nearly all present-day humans but absent or polymorphic
in Neandertals. One such substitution is localized in intron 8 and affects a
binding site for the transcription factor POU3F2, which is highly conserved among
vertebrates. We find that the derived allele of this site is less efficient than 
the ancestral allele in activating transcription from a reporter construct. The
derived allele also binds less POU3F2 dimers than POU3F2 monomers compared with
the ancestral allele. Because the substitution in the POU3F2 binding site is
likely to alter the regulation of FOXP2 expression, and because it is localized
in a region of the gene associated with a previously described signal of positive
selection, it is a plausible candidate for having caused a recent selective sweep
in the FOXP2 gene.

PMID: 23197593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. J Neurosci. 2012 Nov 7;32(45):15688-703. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1710-12.2012.

Clustered fine compartmentalization of the mouse embryonic cerebellar cortex and 
its rearrangement into the postnatal striped configuration.

Fujita H(1), Morita N, Furuichi T, Sugihara I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Neurophysiology, Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Tokyo 113-8519,
Japan.

Compartmentalization is essential for a brain area to be involved in different
functions through topographic afferent and efferent connections that reflect this
organization. The adult cerebellar cortex is compartmentalized into longitudinal 
stripes, in which Purkinje cells (PCs) have compartment-specific molecular
expression profiles. How these compartments form during development is generally 
not understood. To investigate this process, we focused on the late developmental
stages of the cerebellar compartmentalization that occur from embryonic day 17.5 
(E17.5), when embryonic compartmentalization is evidently observed, to postnatal 
day 6 (P6), when adult-type compartmentalization begins to be established. The
transformation between these compartmentalization patterns was analyzed by
mapping expression patterns of several key molecular markers in serial cerebellar
sections in the mouse. A complete set of 54 clustered PC subsets, which had
different expression profiles of FoxP2, PLCß4, EphA4, Pcdh10, and a reporter
molecule of the 1NM13 transgenic mouse strain, were distinguished in
three-dimensional space in the E17.5 cerebellum. Following individual PC subsets 
during development indicated that these subsets were rearranged from a clustered 
and multilayered configuration to a flattened, single-layered and striped
configuration by means of transverse slide, longitudinal split, or transverse
twist spatial transformations during development. The Purkinje cell-free spaces
that exist between clusters at E17.5 become granule cell raphes that separate
striped compartments at P6. The results indicate that the ~50 PC clusters of the 
embryonic cerebellum will ultimately become the longitudinal compartments of the 
adult cerebellum after undergoing various peri- and postnatal transformations
that alter their relative spatial relationships.

PMID: 23136409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46995. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046995. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

CNTNAP2 and language processing in healthy individuals as measured with ERPs.

Kos M(1), van den Brink D, Snijders TM, Rijpkema M, Franke B, Fernandez G,
Hagoort P.

Author information: 
(1)Radboud University Nijmegen, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and
Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. m.kos@donders.ru.nl

The genetic FOXP2-CNTNAP2 pathway has been shown to be involved in the language
capacity. We investigated whether a common variant of CNTNAP2 (rs7794745) is
relevant for syntactic and semantic processing in the general population by using
a visual sentence processing paradigm while recording ERPs in 49 healthy adults. 
While both AA homozygotes and T-carriers showed a standard N400 effect to
semantic anomalies, the response to subject-verb agreement violations differed
across genotype groups. T-carriers displayed an anterior negativity preceding the
P600 effect, whereas for the AA group only a P600 effect was observed. These
results provide another piece of evidence that the neuronal architecture of the
human faculty of language is shaped differently by effects that are genetically
determined.

PMCID: PMC3480372
PMID: 23115634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. J Med Genet. 2012 Nov;49(11):669-70. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101242. Epub
2012 Oct 2.

The speech gene FOXP2 is not imprinted.

Thomas AC(1), Frost JM, Ishida M, Vargha-Khadem F, Moore GE, Stanier P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London, London, UK.

PMID: 23033221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e44871. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044871. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Nubp1 is required for lung branching morphogenesis and distal progenitor cell
survival in mice.

Schnatwinkel C(1), Niswander L.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of
Colorado School of Medicine and Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, Colorado,
United States of America.

The lung is a complex system in biology and medicine alike. Whereas there is a
good understanding of the anatomy and histology of the embryonic and adult lung, 
less is known about the molecular details and the cellular pathways that
ultimately orchestrate lung formation and affect its health. From a forward
genetic approach to identify novel genes involved in lung formation, we
identified a mutated Nubp1 gene, which leads to syndactyly, eye cataract and lung
hypoplasia. In the lung, Nubp1 is expressed in progenitor cells of the distal
epithelium. Nubp1(m1Nisw) mutants show increased apoptosis accompanied by a loss 
of the distal progenitor markers Sftpc, Sox9 and Foxp2. In addition, Nubp1
mutation disrupts localization of the polarity protein Par3 and the mitosis
relevant protein Numb. Using knock-down studies in lung epithelial cells, we also
demonstrate a function of Nubp1 in regulating centrosome dynamics and microtubule
organization. Together, Nubp1 represents an essential protein for lung progenitor
survival by coordinating vital cellular processes including cell polarity and
centrosomal dynamics.

PMCID: PMC3444492
PMID: 23028652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Mol Biotechnol. 2013 Jun;54(2):564-71. doi: 10.1007/s12033-012-9596-6.

First knockdown gene expression in bat (Hipposideros armiger) brain mediated by
lentivirus.

Chen Q(1), Zhu T, Jones G, Zhang J, Sun Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Advanced Studies in Multidisciplinary Science and Technology,
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.

Lentivirus-mediated RNA interference (RNAi) is a potent experimental tool for
investigating gene functions in vitro and in vivo. It has advantages that
transgenic technology lacks. However, in vivo applications are difficult to apply
in the central nervous system of non-model organisms due to the lack of a
standard brain atlas and genetic information. Here, we report the development of 
an in vivo gene delivery system used in bat brain tissue for the first time,
based on lentivirus (LV) vectors expressing short hairpin RNA (shRNA) targeting
Hipposideros armiger forkhead box P2 (FoxP2). In vitro transfection into HEK 293T
cell with the vector bearing the cassettes encoding FoxP2 shRNA verified the
knockdown efficiency. Pseudovirus particles were administered via stereotactic
intracerebral microinjection into the anterior cingulate cortex of H. armiger.
FoxP2 is of major interest because of its role in sensorimotor coordination and
probably in echolocation. Subsequent in situ hybridization validated the in vivo 
silencing of the target gene. This report demonstrates that LV-mediated
expression of RNAi could achieve effective gene silencing in bats, a non-model
organism, and will assist in elucidating the functions of bat genes.

PMID: 22965420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43968. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043968. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

Zebrafish foxP2 zinc finger nuclease mutant has normal axon pathfinding.

Xing L(1), Hoshijima K, Grunwald DJ, Fujimoto E, Quist TS, Sneddon J, Chien CB,
Stevenson TJ, Bonkowsky JL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

foxP2, a forkhead-domain transcription factor, is critical for speech and
language development in humans, but its role in the establishment of CNS
connectivity is unclear. While in vitro studies have identified axon guidance
molecules as targets of foxP2 regulation, and cell culture assays suggest a role 
for foxP2 in neurite outgrowth, in vivo studies have been lacking regarding a
role for foxP2 in axon pathfinding. We used a modified zinc finger nuclease
methodology to generate mutations in the zebrafish foxP2 gene. Using PCR-based
high resolution melt curve analysis (HRMA) of G0 founder animals, we screened and
identified three mutants carrying nonsense mutations in the 2(nd) coding exon: a 
17 base-pair (bp) deletion, an 8bp deletion, and a 4bp insertion. Sequence
analysis of cDNA confirmed that these were frameshift mutations with predicted
early protein truncations. Homozygous mutant fish were viable and fertile, with
unchanged body morphology, and no apparent differences in CNS apoptosis,
proliferation, or patterning at embryonic stages. There was a reduction in
expression of the known foxP2 target gene cntnap2 that was rescued by injection
of wild-type foxP2 transcript. When we examined axon pathfinding using a
pan-axonal marker or transgenic lines, including a foxP2-neuron-specific
enhancer, we did not observe any axon guidance errors. Our findings suggest that 
foxP2 is not necessary for axon pathfinding during development.

PMCID: PMC3427223
PMID: 22937139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Gut. 2013 Oct;62(10):1440-5. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2012-302865. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

A genome-wide association study on a southern European population identifies a
new Crohn's disease susceptibility locus at RBX1-EP300.

Julià A(1), Domènech E, Ricart E, Tortosa R, García-Sánchez V, Gisbert JP, Nos
Mateu P, Gutiérrez A, Gomollón F, Mendoza JL, Garcia-Planella E, Barreiro-de
Acosta M, Muñoz F, Vera M, Saro C, Esteve M, Andreu M, Alonso A, López-Lasanta M,
Codó L, Gelpí JL, García-Montero AC, Bertranpetit J, Absher D, Panés J, Marsal S.

Author information: 
(1)Rheumatology Research Group, Vall d'Hebron Research Institute, Barcelona,
Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified multiple risk
loci for Crohn's disease (CD). However, the cumulative risk exerted by these loci
is low, and the likelihood that additional, as-yet undiscovered loci contribute
to the risk of CD is very high. We performed a GWAS on a southern European
population to identify new CD risk loci.
DESIGN: We genotyped 620 901 genome markers on 1341 CD patients and 1518 controls
from Spain. The top association signals representing new candidate risk loci were
subsequently analysed in an independent replication cohort of 1365 CD patients
and 1396 controls.
RESULTS: We identified a genome-wide significant association on chromosome
22q13.2 in the intergenic region between the RBX1 and EP300 genes (single
nucleotide polymorphism rs4820425, OR 1.27, 95% CI 1.17 to 1.38, p=3.42E-8). We
also found suggestive evidence for the association of the IFNGR2 (21q22.11),
FOXP2 (7q31), MACROD2 (20p12.1) and AIF1 (6p21.3) loci with CD risk.
CONCLUSIONS: In this GWAS performed on a southern European cohort, we have
identified a new risk locus for CD between RBX1 and EP300. This study
demonstrates that using populations of different ancestry is a useful strategy to
identify new risk loci for CD.

PMID: 22936669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Neuron. 2012 Aug 23;75(4):601-17. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.05.034.

Human-specific transcriptional networks in the brain.

Konopka G(1), Friedrich T, Davis-Turak J, Winden K, Oldham MC, Gao F, Chen L,
Wang GZ, Luo R, Preuss TM, Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.
genevieve.konopka@utsouthwestern.edu

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurosci. 2012 Oct;13(10):655.
    Neuron. 2012 Aug 23;75(4):543-5.

Understanding human-specific patterns of brain gene expression and regulation can
provide key insights into human brain evolution and speciation. Here, we use
next-generation sequencing, and Illumina and Affymetrix microarray platforms, to 
compare the transcriptome of human, chimpanzee, and macaque telencephalon. Our
analysis reveals a predominance of genes differentially expressed within human
frontal lobe and a striking increase in transcriptional complexity specific to
the human lineage in the frontal lobe. In contrast, caudate nucleus gene
expression is highly conserved. We also identify gene coexpression signatures
related to either neuronal processes or neuropsychiatric diseases, including a
human-specific module with CLOCK as its hub gene and another module enriched for 
neuronal morphological processes and genes coexpressed with FOXP2, a gene
important for language evolution. These data demonstrate that transcriptional
networks have undergone evolutionary remodeling even within a given brain region,
providing a window through which to view the foundation of uniquely human
cognitive capacities.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3645834
PMID: 22920253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Apr;21(4):455-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.165. Epub 2012 Aug 
22.

Childhood Apraxia of Speech (CAS) in two patients with 16p11.2 microdeletion
syndrome.

Raca G(1), Baas BS, Kirmani S, Laffin JJ, Jackson CA, Strand EA, Jakielski KJ,
Shriberg LD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53705, USA.

Comment in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2013 Apr;21(4):361-5.

We report clinical findings that extend the phenotype of the ~550 kb 16p11.2
microdeletion syndrome to include a rare, severe, and persistent pediatric speech
sound disorder termed Childhood Apraxia of Speech (CAS). CAS is the speech
disorder identified in a multigenerational pedigree ('KE') in which half of the
members have a mutation in FOXP2 that co-segregates with CAS, oromotor apraxia,
and low scores on a nonword repetition task. Each of the two patients in the
current report completed a 2-h assessment protocol that provided information on
their cognitive, language, speech, oral mechanism, motor, and developmental
histories and performance. Their histories and standard scores on perceptual and 
acoustic speech tasks met clinical and research criteria for CAS. Array
comparative genomic hybridization analyses identified deletions at chromosome
16p11.2 in each patient. These are the first reported cases with
well-characterized CAS in the 16p11.2 syndrome literature and the first report of
this microdeletion in CAS genetics research. We discuss implications of findings 
for issues in both literatures.

PMCID: PMC3598318
PMID: 22909774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Development. 2012 Sep;139(18):3332-42. doi: 10.1242/dev.078063. Epub 2012 Aug 8.

Convergent repression of Foxp2 3'UTR by miR-9 and miR-132 in embryonic mouse
neocortex: implications for radial migration of neurons.

Clovis YM(1), Enard W, Marinaro F, Huttner WB, De Pietri Tonelli D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies, Fondazione Istituto
Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are rapidly emerging as a new layer of regulation of mammalian
brain development. However, most of the miRNA target genes remain unidentified.
Here, we explore gene expression profiling upon miRNA depletion and in vivo
target validation as a strategy to identify novel miRNA targets in embryonic
mouse neocortex. By this means, we find that Foxp2, a transcription factor
associated with speech and language development and evolution, is a novel miRNA
target. In particular, we find that miR-9 and miR-132 are able to repress ectopic
expression of Foxp2 protein by targeting its 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) in
vivo. Interestingly, ectopic expression of Foxp2 in cortical projection neurons
(a scenario that mimics the absence of miRNA-mediated silencing of Foxp2
expression) delays neurite outgrowth in vitro and impairs their radial migration 
in embryonic mouse neocortex in vivo. Our results uncover a new layer of control 
of Foxp2 expression that may be required for proper neuronal maturation.

PMID: 22874921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2012 Aug;71(8):741-9.

Delayed maturation and differentiation of neurons in focal cortical dysplasia
with the transmantle sign: analysis of layer-specific marker expression.

Sakakibara T(1), Sukigara S, Saito T, Otsuki T, Takahashi A, Kaneko Y, Kaido T,
Saito Y, Sato N, Kimura Y, Nakagawa E, Sugai K, Sasaki M, Goto Y, Itoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Epilepsy Center, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

Transmantle dysplasia is a rare type of focal cortical dysplasia (FCD)
characterized by expansion of the cortex from the deep white matter to the
surface and in which there is a FCD IIA or IIB pathologic pattern. To
characterize possible mechanisms underlying this regional disorder of radial
migrating cells, we studied the expression patterns of neocortical layer-specific
markers using immunohistochemistry in surgical specimens from 5 FCD IIA and 4 FCD
IIB cases in children. All neuronal cells expressed the mature neuron marker
MAP2/2B but not the microglia markers Iba-1 and CD68. Some layer-specific markers
showed distinct expression patterns. TBR1-positive, SATB2-positive, and
FOXP1-positive cells were diffusely distributed in the cortex and/or the white
matter. TBR1-positive and FOXP1-positive cells were generally more numerous in
FCD IIB than in FCD IIA and were mostly in the cortical molecular and upper
layers. FOXP1-, FOXP2-, and CUTL1-positive cells also expressed the immature
neuron marker, Nestin/PROX1, whereas TBR1-, CTIP2-, and SATB2-positive cells only
expressed MAP2/2B. These data highlight differences between FCD IIB and FCD IIA
with more cells having the immature marker in upper layer markers in the former. 
By analyzing layer-specific marker expression patterns, we identified apparent
neuronal maturation differences between FCD IIA and FCD IIB in cases of
transmantle dysplasia.

PMID: 22805777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Cereb Cortex. 2013 Sep;23(9):2204-12. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhs207. Epub 2012 Jul
12.

FoxP2 is a parvocellular-specific transcription factor in the visual thalamus of 
monkeys and ferrets.

Iwai L(1), Ohashi Y, van der List D, Usrey WM, Miyashita Y, Kawasaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Systems Neurobiology, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Hongo 7-3-1, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Although the parallel visual pathways are a fundamental basis of visual
processing, our knowledge of their molecular properties is still limited. Here,
we uncovered a parvocellular-specific molecule in the dorsal lateral geniculate
nucleus (dLGN) of higher mammals. We found that FoxP2 transcription factor was
specifically expressed in X cells of the adult ferret dLGN. Interestingly, FoxP2 
was also specifically expressed in parvocellular layers 3-6 of the dLGN of adult 
old world monkeys, providing new evidence for a homology between X cells in the
ferret dLGN and parvocellular cells in the monkey dLGN. Furthermore, this
expression pattern was established as early as gestation day 140 in the embryonic
monkey dLGN, suggesting that parvocellular specification has already occurred
when the cytoarchitectonic dLGN layers are formed. Our results should help in
gaining a fundamental understanding of the development, evolution, and function
of the parallel visual pathways, which are especially prominent in higher
mammals.

PMCID: PMC3729200
PMID: 22791804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Genet Med. 2012 Nov;14(11):928-36. doi: 10.1038/gim.2012.72. Epub 2012 Jul 5.

Novel candidate genes and regions for childhood apraxia of speech identified by
array comparative genomic hybridization.

Laffin JJ(1), Raca G, Jackson CA, Strand EA, Jakielski KJ, Shriberg LD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA.

Erratum in
    Genet Med. 2013 Jul;15(7):587-8.

PURPOSE: The goal of this study was to identify new candidate genes and genomic
copy-number variations associated with a rare, severe, and persistent speech
disorder termed childhood apraxia of speech. Childhood apraxia of speech is the
speech disorder segregating with a mutation in FOXP2 in a multigenerational
London pedigree widely studied for its role in the development of speech-language
in humans.
METHODS: A total of 24 participants who were suspected to have childhood apraxia 
of speech were assessed using a comprehensive protocol that samples speech in
challenging contexts. All participants met clinical-research criteria for
childhood apraxia of speech. Array comparative genomic hybridization analyses
were completed using a customized 385K Nimblegen array (Roche Nimblegen, Madison,
WI) with increased coverage of genes and regions previously associated with
childhood apraxia of speech.
RESULTS: A total of 16 copy-number variations with potential consequences for
speech-language development were detected in 12 or half of the 24 participants.
The copy-number variations occurred on 10 chromosomes, 3 of which had two to four
candidate regions. Several participants were identified with copy-number
variations in two to three regions. In addition, one participant had a
heterozygous FOXP2 mutation and a copy-number variation on chromosome 2, and one 
participant had a 16p11.2 microdeletion and copy-number variations on chromosomes
13 and 14.
CONCLUSION: Findings support the likelihood of heterogeneous genomic pathways
associated with childhood apraxia of speech.

PMCID: PMC3563158
PMID: 22766611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Hum Genet. 2012 Nov;131(11):1687-98. doi: 10.1007/s00439-012-1193-z. Epub 2012
Jun 27.

The distinct and overlapping phenotypic spectra of FOXP1 and FOXP2 in cognitive
disorders.

Bacon C(1), Rappold GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Im
Neuenheimer Feld 366, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
claire.bacon@med.uni-heidelberg.de

Rare disruptions of FOXP2 have been strongly implicated in deficits in language
development. Research over the past decade has suggested a role in the formation 
of underlying neural circuits required for speech. Until recently no evidence
existed to suggest that the closely related FOXP1 gene played a role in
neurodevelopmental processes. However, in the last few years, novel rare
disruptions in FOXP1 have been reported in multiple cases of cognitive
dysfunction, including intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder,
together with language impairment. As FOXP1 and FOXP2 form heterodimers for
transcriptional regulation, one may assume that they co-operate in common
neurodevelopmental pathways through the co-regulation of common targets. Here we 
compare the phenotypic consequences of FOXP1 and FOXP2 impairment, drawing on
well-known studies from the past as well as recent exciting findings and consider
what these tell us regarding the functions of these two genes in neural
development.

PMCID: PMC3470686
PMID: 22736078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jun 26;109 Suppl 1:10709-16. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1201894109. Epub 2012 Jun 20.

Human brain evolution: from gene discovery to phenotype discovery.

Preuss TM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, 
USA. tpreuss@emory.edu

The rise of comparative genomics and related technologies has added important new
dimensions to the study of human evolution. Our knowledge of the genes that
underwent expression changes or were targets of positive selection in human
evolution is rapidly increasing, as is our knowledge of gene duplications,
translocations, and deletions. It is now clear that the genetic differences
between humans and chimpanzees are far more extensive than previously thought;
their genomes are not 98% or 99% identical. Despite the rapid growth in our
understanding of the evolution of the human genome, our understanding of the
relationship between genetic changes and phenotypic changes is tenuous. This is
true even for the most intensively studied gene, FOXP2, which underwent positive 
selection in the human terminal lineage and is thought to have played an
important role in the evolution of human speech and language. In part, the
difficulty of connecting genes to phenotypes reflects our generally poor
knowledge of human phenotypic specializations, as well as the difficulty of
interpreting the consequences of genetic changes in species that are not amenable
to invasive research. On the positive side, investigations of FOXP2, along with
genomewide surveys of gene-expression changes and selection-driven sequence
changes, offer the opportunity for "phenotype discovery," providing clues to
human phenotypic specializations that were previously unsuspected. What is more, 
at least some of the specializations that have been proposed are amenable to
testing with noninvasive experimental techniques appropriate for the study of
humans and apes.

PMCID: PMC3386880
PMID: 22723367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Neuroscience. 2012 Aug 30;218:110-25. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.05.049.
Epub 2012 May 26.

Fos-activation of FoxP2 and Lmx1b neurons in the parabrachial nucleus evoked by
hypotension and hypertension in conscious rats.

Miller RL(1), Knuepfer MM, Wang MH, Denny GO, Gray PA, Loewy AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The parabrachial nucleus (PB) is a brainstem cell group that receives a strong
input from the nucleus tractus solitarius regarding the physiological status of
the internal organs and sends efferent projections throughout the forebrain.
Since the neuroanatomical organization of the PB remains unclear, our first step 
was to use specific antibodies against two neural lineage transcription factors: 
Forkhead box protein2 (FoxP2) and LIM homeodomain transcription factor 1 beta
(Lmx1b) to define the PB in adult rats. This allowed us to construct a
cytoarchitectonic PB map based on the distribution of neurons that constitutively
express these two transcription factors. Second, the in situ hybridization method
combined with immunohistochemistry demonstrated that mRNA for glutamate vesicular
transporter Vglut2 (Slc17a6) was present in most of the Lmx1b+ and FoxP2+
parabrachial neurons, indicating these neurons use glutamate as a transmitter.
Third, conscious rats were maintained in a hypotensive or hypertensive state for 
2h, and then, their brainstems were prepared by the standard c-Fos method which
is a measure of neuronal activity. Both hypotension and hypertension resulted in 
c-Fos activation of Lmx1b+ neurons in the external lateral-outer subdivision of
the PB (PBel-outer). Hypotension, but not hypertension, caused c-Fos activity in 
the FoxP2+ neurons of the central lateral PB (PBcl) subnucleus. The Kölliker-Fuse
nucleus as well as the lateral crescent PB and rostral-most part of the PBcl
contain neurons that co-express FoxP2+ and Lmx1b+, but none of these were
activated after blood pressure changes. Salt-sensitive FoxP2 neurons in the
pre-locus coeruleus and PBel-inner were not c-Fos activated following blood
pressure changes. In summary, the present study shows that the PBel-outer and
PBcl subnuclei originate from two different neural progenitors, contain
glutamatergic neurons, and are affected by blood pressure changes, with the
PBel-outer reacting to both hypo- and hypertension, and the PBcl signaling only
hypotensive changes.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3405558
PMID: 22641087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Nat Genet. 2012 May 20;44(6):725-31. doi: 10.1038/ng.2285.

A model-based approach for analysis of spatial structure in genetic data.

Yang WY(1), Novembre J, Eskin E, Halperin E.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Bioinformatics, University of California, Los
Angeles, California, USA.

Characterizing genetic diversity within and between populations has broad
applications in studies of human disease and evolution. We propose a new
approach, spatial ancestry analysis, for the modeling of genotypes in two- or
three-dimensional space. In spatial ancestry analysis (SPA), we explicitly model 
the spatial distribution of each SNP by assigning an allele frequency as a
continuous function in geographic space. We show that the explicit modeling of
the allele frequency allows individuals to be localized on the map on the basis
of their genetic information alone. We apply our SPA method to a European and a
worldwide population genetic variation data set and identify SNPs showing large
gradients in allele frequency, and we suggest these as candidate regions under
selection. These regions include SNPs in the well-characterized LCT region, as
well as at loci including FOXP2, OCA2 and LRP1B.

PMCID: PMC3592563
PMID: 22610118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Neuron. 2012 Apr 26;74(2):314-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.02.024.

Foxp-mediated suppression of N-cadherin regulates neuroepithelial character and
progenitor maintenance in the CNS.

Rousso DL(1), Pearson CA, Gaber ZB, Miquelajauregui A, Li S, Portera-Cailliau C, 
Morrisey EE, Novitch BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, 610
Charles Young Drive East, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2012 Apr 26;74(2):209-11.

Neuroepithelial attachments at adherens junctions are essential for the
self-renewal of neural stem and progenitor cells and the polarized organization
of the developing central nervous system. The balance between stem cell
maintenance and differentiation depends on the precise assembly and disassembly
of these adhesive contacts, but the gene regulatory mechanisms orchestrating this
process are not known. Here, we demonstrate that two Forkhead transcription
factors, Foxp2 and Foxp4, are progressively expressed upon neural differentiation
in the spinal cord. Elevated expression of either Foxp represses the expression
of a key component of adherens junctions, N-cadherin, and promotes the detachment
of differentiating neurons from the neuroepithelium. Conversely, inactivation of 
Foxp2 and Foxp4 function in both chick and mouse results in a spectrum of neural 
tube defects associated with neuroepithelial disorganization and enhanced
progenitor maintenance. Together, these data reveal a Foxp-based transcriptional 
mechanism that regulates the integrity and cytoarchitecture of neuroepithelial
progenitors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3444171
PMID: 22542185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;14(4):316-20.

[Molecular genetics of functional articulation disorder in children].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhao YJ(1), Ma HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital of China Medical
University, Shenyang, China.

Genetic factors are an important cause of functional articulation disorder in
children. This article reviews some genes and chromosome regions associated with 
a genetic susceptibility to functional articulation disorders. The forkhead box
P2 (FOXP2) gene on chromosome 7 is introduced in details including its structure,
expression and function. The relationship between the FOXP2 gene and
developmental apraxia of speech is discussed. As a transcription factor, FOXP2
gene regulates the expression of many genes. CNTNAP2 as an important target gene 
of FOXP2 is a key gene influencing language development. Functional articulation 
disorder may be developed to dyslexia, therefore some candidate regions and genes
related to dyslexia, such as 3p12-13, 15q11-21, 6p22 and 1p34-36, are also
introduced. ROBO1 gene in 3p12.3, ZNF280D gene, TCF12 gene, EKN1 gene in 15q21,
and KIAA0319 gene in 6p22 have been candidate genes for the study of functional
articulation disorder.

PMID: 22537967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Res Dev Disabil. 2012 Sep-Oct;33(5):1533-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ridd.2012.03.004.
Epub 2012 Apr 21.

The WNT2 gene polymorphism associated with speech delay inherent to autism.

Lin PI(1), Chien YL, Wu YY, Chen CH, Gau SS, Huang YS, Liu SK, Tsai WC, Chiu YN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
pingi.lin@gmail.com

Previous evidence suggests that language function is modulated by genetic
variants on chromosome 7q31-36. However, it is unclear whether this region
harbors loci that contribute to speech delay in autism. We previously reported
that the WNT2 gene located on 7q31 was associated with the risk of autism.
Additionally, two other genes on 7q31-36, FOXP2 and the EN2 genes are also found 
to play a role in language impairment. Therefore, we hypothesize that the WNT2
gene, FOXP2 gene, and EN2 gene, may act in concert to influence language
development in the same population. A total of 373 individuals diagnosed with
autistic disorder were recruited in the current study. We selected 6 tag single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the WNT2 gene, 3 tag SNPs in the FOXP2,
and 3 tag SNPs in the EN2 genes, to study the effect of these genes on language
development. Age of first phrase was treated as a quantitative trait. We used
general linear model to assess the association between speech delay and these
variants. The results show that rs2896218 in the WNT2 gene was moderately
significantly associated with age of first phrase (permutation p = 0.0045). A
three-locus haplotype in the WNT2 gene was significantly associated with age of
first phrase (permutation p = 2 × 10(-4)). Furthermore, we detected an
interaction effect on age of first phrase between a SNP rs2228946 in the WNT2
gene and another SNP rs6460013 in the EN2 gene (p = 0.0012). Therefore, the WNT2 
gene may play a suggestive role in language development in autistic disorder.
Additionally, the WNT2 gene and EN2 gene may act in concert to influence the
language development in autism.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22522212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Psychiatr Genet. 2012 Aug;22(4):155-60. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e328353957e.

An association study of sequence variants in the forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) gene and
adulthood attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder in two European samples.

Ribasés M(1), Sánchez-Mora C, Ramos-Quiroga JA, Bosch R, Gómez N, Nogueira M,
Corrales M, Palomar G, Jacob CP, Gross-Lesch S, Kreiker S, Reif A, Lesch KP,
Cormand B, Casas M, Bayés M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Faculty of Biology,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: Attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) is a common
psychiatric disorder manifesting as symptoms of inattention, hyperactivity,
and/or impulsivity. Learning disabilities co-occur with ADHD in 20-30% of cases
and this high co-occurrence raises the possibility of a common etiological
background. Forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) encodes a transcription factor involved in
speech and language impairment and in the control of the corticobasal ganglia
circuits known to be relevant in ADHD, suggesting a possible role of FOXP2 in
ADHD. Our aim was to carry out an association study between FOXP2 and adulthood
ADHD.
METHODS: We carried out a case-control association study in 643 adult ADHD
patients and 619 controls from Germany and in 361 adult ADHD patients and 442
controls from Spain with 12 tagging single nucleotide polymorphisms covering the 
FOXP2 gene.
RESULTS: The single-marker and multiple-marker analyses showed an association
between FOXP2 and combined ADHD in the German cohort [rs12533005: P=0.0033; odds 
ratio=1.30 (1.09-1.56); rs12533005/rs1229761: P=4.1e-04; odds ratio=1.38
(1.15-1.66)]. These positive results, however, were not confirmed in the Spanish 
sample.
CONCLUSION: Although these preliminary findings provide a tentative evidence for 
the contribution of FOXP2 to ADHD and suggest common genetic factors for this
psychiatric disorder and learning disabilities, they should be interpreted with
caution. Further studies in larger samples are needed to clarify the role of this
transcription factor in ADHD.

PMID: 22504457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 1;21(13):2862-72. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds111. Epub 2012 Mar 
20.

The DISC1 promoter: characterization and regulation by FOXP2.

Walker RM(1), Hill AE, Newman AC, Hamilton G, Torrance HS, Anderson SM, Ogawa F, 
Derizioti P, Nicod J, Vernes SC, Fisher SE, Thomson PA, Porteous DJ, Evans KL.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Section, Molecular Medicine Centre, MRC Institute of Genetics
and Molecular Medicine, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Disrupted in schizophrenia 1 (DISC1) is a leading candidate susceptibility gene
for schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and recurrent major depression, which has
been implicated in other psychiatric illnesses of neurodevelopmental origin,
including autism. DISC1 was initially identified at the breakpoint of a balanced 
chromosomal translocation, t(1;11) (q42.1;14.3), in a family with a high
incidence of psychiatric illness. Carriers of the translocation show a 50%
reduction in DISC1 protein levels, suggesting altered DISC1 expression as a
pathogenic mechanism in psychiatric illness. Altered DISC1 expression in the
post-mortem brains of individuals with psychiatric illness and the frequent
implication of non-coding regions of the gene by association analysis further
support this assertion. Here, we provide the first characterization of the DISC1 
promoter region. Using dual luciferase assays, we demonstrate that a region -300 
to -177 bp relative to the transcription start site (TSS) contributes positively 
to DISC1 promoter activity, while a region -982 to -301 bp relative to the TSS
confers a repressive effect. We further demonstrate inhibition of DISC1 promoter 
activity and protein expression by forkhead-box P2 (FOXP2), a transcription
factor implicated in speech and language function. This inhibition is diminished 
by two distinct FOXP2 point mutations, R553H and R328X, which were previously
found in families affected by developmental verbal dyspraxia. Our work identifies
an intriguing mechanistic link between neurodevelopmental disorders that have
traditionally been viewed as diagnostically distinct but which do share varying
degrees of phenotypic overlap.

PMID: 22434823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Comp Neurol. 2012 Oct 15;520(15):3395-413. doi: 10.1002/cne.23107.

Organization of the gymnotiform fish pallium in relation to learning and memory: 
IV. Expression of conserved transcription factors and implications for the
evolution of dorsal telencephalon.

Harvey-Girard E(1), Giassi AC, Ellis W, Maler L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 6N5, Canada. erik@apteronote.com

We have cloned the apteronotid homologs of FoxP2, Otx1, and FoxO3. There was, in 
the case of all three genes, good similarity between the apteronotid and human
amino acid sequences: FoxP2, 78%; Otx1, 54%; FoxO3, 71%. The functional domains
of these genes were conserved to a far greater extent, on average: FoxP2, 89%;
Otx1, 76%; FoxO3, 82%. This led us to hypothesize that the cellular functions of 
these genes might also be conserved. We used in situ hybridization to examine the
distribution of the mRNA transcripts of these genes in the apteronotid
telencephalon. We confined our analysis to the pallial regions previously
associated with learning about social signals, whose circuitry has been closely
examined in the other articles of this series. We found that AptFoxP2 and AptOtx1
transcripts were expressed predominantly in the dorsocentral division of the
pallium (DC); the dorsolateral division of the pallium (DL) contained only weakly
labeled neurons. In both cases, the distribution of labeled neurons was very
heterogeneous, and unlabeled neurons could be found adjacent to strongly labeled 
ones. In contrast, we found that most neurons in DL strongly expressed AptFoxO3
mRNA, although there was only weak expression in a small number of cells within
DC. We briefly discuss the relevance of our results regarding the functional
roles of AptFoxP2/AptOtx1-expressing neurons in DC for communication vs. foraging
behavior. We extensively discuss the implications of our results for possible
homologies between DL and DC and medial and dorsal pallium of tetrapods,
respectively.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 22430363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33130. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033130. Epub 2012 Mar 7.

Foxp2 mutations impair auditory-motor association learning.

Kurt S(1), Fisher SE, Ehret G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Heterozygous mutations of the human FOXP2 transcription factor gene cause the
best-described examples of monogenic speech and language disorders. Acquisition
of proficient spoken language involves auditory-guided vocal learning, a
specialized form of sensory-motor association learning. The impact of etiological
Foxp2 mutations on learning of auditory-motor associations in mammals has not
been determined yet. Here, we directly assess this type of learning using a newly
developed conditioned avoidance paradigm in a shuttle-box for mice. We show
striking deficits in mice heterozygous for either of two different Foxp2
mutations previously implicated in human speech disorders. Both mutations cause
delays in acquiring new motor skills. The magnitude of impairments in association
learning, however, depends on the nature of the mutation. Mice with a missense
mutation in the DNA-binding domain are able to learn, but at a much slower rate
than wild type animals, while mice carrying an early nonsense mutation learn very
little. These results are consistent with expression of Foxp2 in distributed
circuits of the cortex, striatum and cerebellum that are known to play key roles 
in acquisition of motor skills and sensory-motor association learning, and
suggest differing in vivo effects for distinct variants of the Foxp2 protein.
Given the importance of such networks for the acquisition of human spoken
language, and the fact that similar mutations in human FOXP2 cause problems with 
speech development, this work opens up a new perspective on the use of mouse
models for understanding pathways underlying speech and language disorders.

PMCID: PMC3296769
PMID: 22412993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2013 Mar;14(2):146-50. doi:
10.3109/15622975.2011.615860. Epub 2012 Mar 9.

FoxP2 is significantly associated with schizophrenia and major depression in the 
Chinese Han population.

Li T(1), Zeng Z, Zhao Q, Wang T, Huang K, Li J, Li Y, Liu J, Wei Z, Wang Y, Feng 
G, He L, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Center and Affiliated Changning Mental Health Center, Bio-X Center, Key 
Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and Neuropsychiatric Disorders
(Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, PR China.

OBJECTIVES: The FoxP2 gene, located on 7q31, encodes a transcription factor. It
was first discovered through investigations of a large multigenerational family
(the KE family) with a rare severe speech and language disorder (Fisher et al.,
Nat. Genet. 1998;18:168; Lai et al., Nature 2001;413:519). Subsequent studies
gave powerful and convincing functional evidence to the connection between FoxP2 
and language disorder ( Vernes et al. 2006 ; Groszer et al., Curr Biol
2008;18:354; Vernes et al., New Engl J Med 359(22):2337). Language disorder is
commonly considered as a core symptom of schizophrenia and some other mental
diseases; thus, we decided to investigate whether the FoxP2 gene played a
significant role in schizophrenia, major depression or bipolar disorder in a
sample set recruited from the Chinese Han population.
METHODS: In this study, we focused on 12 SNPs in the FoxP2 gene and carried out
case-control studies in 1135 schizophrenia patients, 1135 unrelated major
depression patients, 1135 unrelated bipolar disorder patients and 1135 unrelated 
normal controls recruited from the Chinese Han population.
RESULTS: We found rs10447760 was significantly associated with schizophrenia
(allelic P = 0.00069) and major depression (allelic P = 0.0011).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicated that the rare variant rs10447760 in FoxP2 may
play an important role in schizophrenia and major depression in the Chinese Han
population.

PMID: 22404659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Neuron. 2012 Feb 9;73(3):537-52. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2012.01.005.

Molecular microcircuitry underlies functional specification in a basal ganglia
circuit dedicated to vocal learning.

Hilliard AT(1), Miller JE, Fraley ER, Horvath S, White SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Biology and Physiology, University of California Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Similarities between speech and birdsong make songbirds advantageous for
investigating the neurogenetics of learned vocal communication--a complex
phenotype probably supported by ensembles of interacting genes in cortico-basal
ganglia pathways of both species. To date, only FoxP2 has been identified as
critical to both speech and birdsong. We performed weighted gene coexpression
network analysis on microarray data from singing zebra finches to discover gene
ensembles regulated during vocal behavior. We found ~2,000 singing-regulated
genes comprising three coexpression groups unique to area X, the basal ganglia
subregion dedicated to learned vocalizations. These contained known targets of
human FOXP2 and potential avian targets. We validated biological pathways not
previously implicated in vocalization. Higher-order gene coexpression patterns,
rather than expression levels, molecularly distinguish area X from the ventral
striato-pallidum during singing. The previously unknown structure of
singing-driven networks enables prioritization of molecular interactors that
probably bear on human motor disorders, especially those affecting speech.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3278710
PMID: 22325205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Neurosci. 2012 Jan 25;32(4):1156-70. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3630-12.2012.

Renshaw cells and Ia inhibitory interneurons are generated at different times
from p1 progenitors and differentiate shortly after exiting the cell cycle.

Benito-Gonzalez A(1), Alvarez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Cell Biology and Physiology, Boonshoft School of
Medicine, Wright State University, Dayton, Ohio 45435, USA.

Spinal interneurons modulating motor output are highly diverse but surprisingly
arise from just a few embryonic subgroups. The principles governing their
development, diversification, and integration into spinal circuits are unknown.
This study focuses on the differentiation of adult Renshaw cells (RCs) and Ia
inhibitory interneurons (IaINs), two subclasses that respectively mediate
recurrent and reciprocal inhibition of motoneurons from embryonic V1 interneurons
(V1-INs). V1-INs originate from p1 progenitors and, after they become
postmitotic, specifically express the transcription factor engrailed-1, a
property that permits genetic labeling of V1 lineages from embryo to adult. RCs
and IaINs are V1 derived, but differ in morphology, location, calcium-binding
protein expression, synaptic connectivity, and function. These differences are
already present in neonates, and in this study we show that their differentiation
starts in the early embryo. Using 5'-bromodeoxyuridine birth dating we
established that mouse V1-INs can be divided into early (E9.5-E10.5) and late
(E11.5-E12.5) groups generated from the p1 domain (where E is embryonic day). The
early group upregulates calbindin expression soon after becoming postmitotic and 
includes RCs, which express the transcription factor MafB during early
differentiation and maintain calbindin expression throughout life. The late group
includes IaINs, are calbindin-negative, and express FoxP2 at the start of
differentiation. Moreover, developing RCs follow a characteristic circumferential
migratory route that places them in unique relationship with motor axons with
whom they later synaptically interact. We conclude that the fate of these V1-IN
subclasses is determined before synaptogenesis and circuit formation by a process
that includes differences in neurogenesis time, transcription factor expression, 
and migratory pathways.

PMCID: PMC3276112
PMID: 22279202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30151. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030151. Epub 2012 Jan 17.

Cadm1-expressing synapses on Purkinje cell dendrites are involved in mouse
ultrasonic vocalization activity.

Fujita E(1), Tanabe Y, Imhof BA, Momoi MY, Momoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Science, International University of Health and Welfare,
Kitakanemaru, Ohtawara, Tochigi, Japan.

Foxp2(R552H) knock-in (KI) mouse pups with a mutation related to human
speech-language disorders exhibit poor development of cerebellar Purkinje cells
and impaired ultrasonic vocalization (USV), a communication tool for
mother-offspring interactions. Thus, human speech and mouse USV appear to have a 
Foxp2-mediated common molecular basis in the cerebellum. Mutations in the gene
encoding the synaptic adhesion molecule CADM1 (RA175/Necl2/SynCAM1/Cadm1) have
been identified in people with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) who have impaired
speech and language. In the present study, we show that both Cadm1-deficient
knockout (KO) pups and Foxp2(R552H) KI pups exhibit impaired USV and smaller
cerebellums. Cadm1 was preferentially localized to the apical-distal portion of
the dendritic arbor of Purkinje cells in the molecular layer of wild-type pups,
and VGluT1 level decreased in the cerebellum of Cadm1 KO mice. In addition, we
detected reduced immunoreactivity of Cadm1 and VGluT1 on the poorly developed
dendritic arbor of Purkinje cells in the Foxp2(R552H) KI pups. However, Cadm1
mRNA expression was not altered in the Foxp2(R552H) KI pups. These results
suggest that although the Foxp2 transcription factor does not target Cadm1, Cadm1
at the synapses of Purkinje cells and parallel fibers is necessary for USV
function. The loss of Cadm1-expressing synapses on the dendrites of Purkinje
cells may be associated with the USV impairment that Cadm1 KO and Foxp2(R552H) KI
mice exhibit.

PMCID: PMC3260241
PMID: 22272290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Neurosci. 2012 Jan 18;32(3):817-25. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5996-10.2012.

Genetic variants of FOXP2 and KIAA0319/TTRAP/THEM2 locus are associated with
altered brain activation in distinct language-related regions.

Pinel P(1), Fauchereau F, Moreno A, Barbot A, Lathrop M, Zelenika D, Le Bihan D, 
Poline JB, Bourgeron T, Dehaene S.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U992, Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, F-91191 Gif/Yvette, France.
philippe.pinel@cea.fr

Recent advances have been made in the genetics of two human communication skills:
speaking and reading. Mutations of the FOXP2 gene cause a severe form of language
impairment and orofacial dyspraxia, while single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) 
located within a KIAA0319/TTRAP/THEM2 gene cluster and affecting the KIAA0319
gene expression are associated with reading disability. Neuroimaging studies of
clinical populations point to partially distinct cerebral bases for language and 
reading impairments. However, alteration of FOXP2 and KIAA0319/TTRAP/THEM2
polymorphisms on typically developed language networks has never been explored.
Here, we genotyped and scanned 94 healthy subjects using fMRI during a reading
task. We studied the correlation of genetic polymorphisms with interindividual
variability in brain activation and functional asymmetry in frontal and temporal 
cortices. In FOXP2, SNPs rs6980093 and rs7799109 were associated with variations 
of activation in the left frontal cortex. In the KIAA0319/TTRAP/THEM2 locus,
rs17243157 was associated with asymmetry in functional activation of the superior
temporal sulcus (STS). Interestingly, healthy subjects bearing the
KIAA0319/TTRAP/THEM2 variants previously identified as enhancing the risk of
dyslexia showed a reduced left-hemispheric asymmetry of the STS. Our results
confirm that both FOXP2 and KIAA0319/TTRAP/THEM2 genes play an important role in 
human language development, but probably through different cerebral pathways. The
observed cortical effects mirror previous fMRI results in developmental language 
and reading disorders, and suggest that a continuum may exist between these
pathologies and normal interindividual variability.

PMID: 22262880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Nat Neurosci. 2012 Jan 15;15(3):373-80, S1-2. doi: 10.1038/nn.3020.

A role for mDia, a Rho-regulated actin nucleator, in tangential migration of
interneuron precursors.

Shinohara R(1), Thumkeo D, Kamijo H, Kaneko N, Sawamoto K, Watanabe K,
Takebayashi H, Kiyonari H, Ishizaki T, Furuyashiki T, Narumiya S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto, Japan.

In brain development, distinct types of migration, radial migration and
tangential migration, are shown by excitatory and inhibitory neurons,
respectively. Whether these two types of migration operate by similar cellular
mechanisms remains unclear. We examined neuronal migration in mice deficient in
mDia1 (also known as Diap1) and mDia3 (also known as Diap2), which encode the
Rho-regulated actin nucleators mammalian diaphanous homolog 1 (mDia1) and mDia3. 
mDia deficiency impaired tangential migration of cortical and olfactory
inhibitory interneurons, whereas radial migration and consequent layer formation 
of cortical excitatory neurons were unaffected. mDia-deficient neuroblasts
exhibited reduced separation of the centrosome from the nucleus and retarded
nuclear translocation. Concomitantly, anterograde F-actin movement and F-actin
condensation at the rear, which occur during centrosomal and nuclear movement of 
wild-type cells, respectively, were impaired in mDia-deficient neuroblasts.
Blockade of Rho-associated protein kinase (ROCK), which regulates myosin II, also
impaired nuclear translocation. These results suggest that Rho signaling via mDia
and ROCK critically regulates nuclear translocation through F-actin dynamics in
tangential migration, whereas this mechanism is dispensable in radial migration.

PMID: 22246438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Pediatrics. 2012 Jan;129(1):e183-8. doi: 10.1542/peds.2010-2094. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Mosaic 7q31 deletion involving FOXP2 gene associated with language impairment.

Palka C(1), Alfonsi M, Mohn A, Cerbo R, Guanciali Franchi P, Fantasia D, Morizio 
E, Stuppia L, Calabrese G, Zori R, Chiarelli F, Palka G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Sciences, Nano and Biotechnologies, G. D'Annunzio
University, Via dei Vestini 31, 66100 Chieti, Italy. chiarapalka@libero.it

We report on a 10-year-old patient with childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) and
mild dysmorphic features. Although multiple karyotypes were reported as normal, a
bacterial artificial chromosome array comparative genomic hybridization revealed 
the presence of a de novo 14.8-Mb mosaic deletion of chromosome 7q31. The deleted
region involved several genes, including FOXP2, which has been associated with
CAS. Interestingly, the deletion reported here was observed in about 50% of
cells, which is the first case of mosaicism in a 7q31 deletion. Despite the
presence of the deletion in only 50% of cells, the phenotype of the patient was
not milder than other published cases. To date, 6 cases with a deletion of 9.1-20
Mb involving the FOXP2 gene have been reported, suggesting a new contiguous gene 
deletion syndrome characterized mainly by CAS caused by haploinsufficiency of the
genes encompassed in the 7q critical region. This report suggests that children
found with a deletion involving the FOXP2 region should be evaluated for CAS and 
that analysis of the FOXP2 gene including array comparative genomic hybridization
should be considered in selected patients with CAS. Mosaic deletions in this area
may also be considered as causative of CAS.

PMID: 22144704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Jan 11;506(2):277-80. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.11.022. Epub
2011 Nov 22.

Cntnap2 expression in the cerebellum of Foxp2(R552H) mice, with a mutation
related to speech-language disorder.

Fujita E(1), Tanabe Y, Momoi MY, Momoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Science, International University of Health and Welfare,
2600-1, Kitakanemaru, Ohtawara, Tochigi, Japan.

Foxp2(R552H) knock-in (KI) mice carrying a mutation related to human
speech-language disorder exhibit impaired ultrasonic vocalization and poor
Purkinje cell development. Foxp2 is a forkhead domain-containing transcriptional 
repressor that associates with its co-repressor CtBP; Foxp2(R552H) displays
reduced DNA binding activity. A genetic connection between FOXP2 and CNTNAP2 has 
been demonstrated in vitro, but not in vivo. Here we show that Cntnap2 mRNA
levels significantly increased in the cerebellum of Foxp2(R552H) KI pups,
although the cerebellar population of Foxp2-positive Purkinje cells was very
small. Furthermore, Cntnap2 immunofluorescence did not decrease in the poorly
developed Purkinje cells of Foxp2(R552H) KI pups, although synaptophysin
immunofluorescence decreased. Cntnap2 and CtBP were ubiquitously expressed, while
Foxp2 co-localized with CtBP only in Purkinje cells. Taken together, these
observations suggest that Foxp2 may regulate ultrasonic vocalization by
associating with CtBP in Purkinje cells; Cntnap2 may be a target of this
co-repressor.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22133810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;28(4):941-50. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2011-111541.

FOXP2, APOE, and PRNP: new modulators in primary progressive aphasia.

Premi E(1), Pilotto A, Alberici A, Papetti A, Archetti S, Seripa D, Daniele A,
Masullo C, Garibotto V, Paghera B, Caobelli F, Padovani A, Borroni B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Ageing Brain and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Neurology Unit,
University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Primary progressive aphasia (PPA) is a heterogeneous disorder characterized by
progressive language impairment. Polymorphisms within forkhead box P2 gene
(FOXP2) gene have been associated with speech and language impairment.
Apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype and PRNP 129 codon status have been demonstrated
to increase the risk of PPA, but with contrasting results. In the present study, 
we have evaluated the impact of FOXP2, APOE and PRNP genetic variations as risk
factors and/or disease-modulators in PPA. 94 PPA patients and 200 age-matched
healthy controls were considered and FOXP2 polymorphisms (rs1456031, rs17137124),
APOE genotype, and PRNP codon 129 polymorphism analyzed. In 34 PPA patients,
SPECT imaging data were analyzed by Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM8).
Genetic distributions and allele frequencies of FOXP2 and PRNP polymorphisms did 
not differ between groups while APOE e4 was more represented in PPA as compared
to controls. PPA patients carrying at-risk FOXP2 polymorphisms (rs1456031 and/or 
rs17137124) showed greater hypoperfusion in the frontal areas, namely the left
inferior frontal gyrus and the right cingulated gyrus compared to non-carriers (p
< 0.005). PPA patients carrying at least one e4 allele had greater hypoperfusion 
in orbitofrontal regions (superior frontal gyrus and orbital gyrus) as compared
to non-carriers e4 (p < 0.005). PRNP codon 129 homozigosity correlated with left 
frontotemporal hypoperfusion (p < 0.005). Genetic variations within FOXP2, APOE, 
and PRNP modulate PPA disease, leading to a specific regional hypoperfusion
according to different molecular pathways. APOE e4 is overrepresented in PPA,
thus likely acting as genetic risk factor on disease development.

PMID: 22129783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jan;158A(1):174-81. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34354. Epub 2011
Nov 21.

Phenotype of FOXP2 haploinsufficiency in a mother and son.

Rice GM(1), Raca G, Jakielski KJ, Laffin JJ, Iyama-Kurtycz CM, Hartley SL,
Sprague RE, Heintzelman AT, Shriberg LD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Wisconsin-Madison, Wisconsin, USA.

Disruptions in FOXP2, a transcription factor, are the only known monogenic cause 
of speech and language impairment. We report on clinical findings for two new
individuals with a submicroscopic deletion of FOXP2: a boy with severe apraxia of
speech and his currently moderately affected mother. A 1.57<U+2009>Mb deletion on
chromosome 7q31 was detected by array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH).
In addition to FOXP2, the patients' deletion involves two other genes, MDFIC and 
PPP1R3A, neither of which has been associated with speech or language disorders. 
Thus, findings for these two family members provide informative phenotypic
information on FOXP2 haploinsufficiency. Evaluation by a clinical geneticist
indicated no major congenital anomalies or dysmorphic features. Evaluations by a 
clinical psychologist and occupational therapist indicated cognitive-linguistic
processing and sensorimotor control deficits, but did not support a diagnosis of 
autism spectrum disorder. Evaluation by clinical and research speech pathologists
confirmed that both patients' speech deficits met contemporary criteria for
apraxia of speech. Notably, the patients were not able to laugh, cough, or sneeze
spontaneously, replicating findings reported for two other FOXP2 cases and a
potential diagnostic sign of nonsyndromic apraxia of speech. Speech severity
findings for the boy were not consistent with the hypothesis that loss of
maternal FOXP2 should be relatively benign. Better understanding of the
behavioral phenotype of FOXP2 disruptions will aid identification of patients,
toward an eventual understanding of the pathophysiology of syndromic and
nonsyndromic apraxia of speech.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3319495
PMID: 22106036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Am J Med Genet A. 2012 Jan;158A(1):254-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.34378. Epub 2011
Nov 21.

Maternally and paternally inherited deletion of 7q31 involving the FOXP2 gene in 
two families.

Zilina O(1), Reimand T, Zjablovskaja P, Männik K, Männamaa M, Traat A,
Puusepp-Benazzouz H, Kurg A, Ounap K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology,
University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia. olga.zhilina@ut.ee

PMID: 22105961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Forensic Sci Int Genet. 2012 Jul;6(4):447-51. doi: 10.1016/j.fsigen.2011.09.006. 
Epub 2011 Oct 15.

Selective quantification of human DNA by real-time PCR of FOXP2.

Soejima M(1), Hiroshige K, Yoshimoto J, Koda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Forensic Medicine and Human Genetics, Kurume University School
of Medicine, Kurume 830-0011, Japan.

We established a simple quantitative PCR procedure with high specificity and
sensitivity using TaqMan probes targeting the FOXP2 sequence. This assay
distinguished human and nonhuman, including primates, samples with the exception 
of mouse, turtle, lizard, and fishes. However, the specific amplification of
mouse, lizard, and turtle fragments of FOXP2 could be confirmed by
electrophoresis after real-time PCR. Because the C(T) values obtained for human
DNA were not affected by contaminating animal DNA at concentrations up to 30
times that of human DNA, we were able to estimate the concentration of human DNA 
in mixed specimens. This assay provides a reliable and useful method for routine 
quantification of human-specific DNA in forensic practice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22001153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Hum Genet. 2012 Apr;131(4):565-79. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-1094-6. Epub 2011 Oct 
14.

A novel approach of homozygous haplotype sharing identifies candidate genes in
autism spectrum disorder.

Casey JP, Magalhaes T, Conroy JM, Regan R, Shah N, Anney R, Shields DC, Abrahams 
BS, Almeida J, Bacchelli E, Bailey AJ, Baird G, Battaglia A, Berney T, Bolshakova
N, Bolton PF, Bourgeron T, Brennan S, Cali P, Correia C, Corsello C, Coutanche M,
Dawson G, de Jonge M, Delorme R, Duketis E, Duque F, Estes A, Farrar P, Fernandez
BA, Folstein SE, Foley S, Fombonne E, Freitag CM, Gilbert J, Gillberg C, Glessner
JT, Green J, Guter SJ, Hakonarson H, Holt R, Hughes G, Hus V, Igliozzi R, Kim C, 
Klauck SM, Kolevzon A, Lamb JA, Leboyer M, Le Couteur A, Leventhal BL, Lord C,
Lund SC, Maestrini E, Mantoulan C, Marshall CR, McConachie H, McDougle CJ,
McGrath J, McMahon WM, Merikangas A, Miller J, Minopoli F, Mirza GK, Munson J,
Nelson SF, Nygren G, Oliveira G, Pagnamenta AT, Papanikolaou K, Parr JR, Parrini 
B, Pickles A, Pinto D, Piven J, Posey DJ, Poustka A, Poustka F, Ragoussis J, Roge
B, Rutter ML, Sequeira AF, Soorya L, Sousa I, Sykes N, Stoppioni V, Tancredi R,
Tauber M, Thompson AP, Thomson S, Tsiantis J, Van Engeland H, Vincent JB, Volkmar
F, Vorstman JA, Wallace S, Wang K, Wassink TH, White K, Wing K, Wittemeyer K,
Yaspan BL, Zwaigenbaum L, Betancur C, Buxbaum JD, Cantor RM, Cook EH, Coon H,
Cuccaro ML, Geschwind DH, Haines JL, Hallmayer J, Monaco AP, Nurnberger JI Jr,
Pericak-Vance MA, Schellenberg GD, Scherer SW, Sutcliffe JS, Szatmari P, Vieland 
VJ, Wijsman EM, Green A, Gill M, Gallagher L, Vicente A, Ennis S.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heritable disorder of complex and
heterogeneous aetiology. It is primarily characterized by altered cognitive
ability including impaired language and communication skills and fundamental
deficits in social reciprocity. Despite some notable successes in
neuropsychiatric genetics, overall, the high heritability of ASD (~90%) remains
poorly explained by common genetic risk variants. However, recent studies suggest
that rare genomic variation, in particular copy number variation, may account for
a significant proportion of the genetic basis of ASD. We present a large scale
analysis to identify candidate genes which may contain low-frequency recessive
variation contributing to ASD while taking into account the potential
contribution of population differences to the genetic heterogeneity of ASD. Our
strategy, homozygous haplotype (HH) mapping, aims to detect homozygous segments
of identical haplotype structure that are shared at a higher frequency amongst
ASD patients compared to parental controls. The analysis was performed on 1,402
Autism Genome Project trios genotyped for 1 million single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs). We identified 25 known and 1,218 novel ASD candidate genes 
in the discovery analysis including CADM2, ABHD14A, CHRFAM7A, GRIK2, GRM3, EPHA3,
FGF10, KCND2, PDZK1, IMMP2L and FOXP2. Furthermore, 10 of the previously reported
ASD genes and 300 of the novel candidates identified in the discovery analysis
were replicated in an independent sample of 1,182 trios. Our results demonstrate 
that regions of HH are significantly enriched for previously reported ASD
candidate genes and the observed association is independent of gene size (odds
ratio 2.10). Our findings highlight the applicability of HH mapping in complex
disorders such as ASD and offer an alternative approach to the analysis of
genome-wide association data.

PMCID: PMC3303079
PMID: 21996756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Neurochem. 2012 Jul;122(1):72-80. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2011.07524.x. Epub
2011 Nov 3.

Temporal expression and mitochondrial localization of a Foxp2 isoform lacking the
forkhead domain in developing Purkinje cells.

Tanabe Y(1), Fujiwara Y, Matsuzaki A, Fujita E, Kasahara T, Yuasa S, Momoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Science, International University of Health and Welfare,
Otawara, Tochigi, Japan.

FOXP2, a forkhead box-containing transcription factor, forms homo- or
hetero-dimers with FOXP family members and localizes to the nucleus, while
FOXP2(R553H), which contains a mutation related to speech/language disorders,
features reduced DNA binding activity and both cytoplasmic and nuclear
localization. In addition to being a loss-of-function mutation, it is possible
that FOXP2(R553H) also may act as a gain-of-function mutation to inhibit the
functions of FOXP2 isoforms including FOXP2Ex10+ lacking forkhead domain.
Foxp2(R552H) knock-in mouse pups exhibit impaired ultrasonic vocalization and
poor dendritic development in Purkinje cells. However, expressions of Foxp2
isoforms in the developing Purkinje are unclear. The appearance of 'apical
cytoplasmic swelling' (mitochondria-rich regions that are the source of budding
processes) correlates with dendritic development of Purkinje cells. In the
present study, we focused on Foxp2 isoforms localizing to the apical cytoplasmic 
swelling and identified two isoforms lacking forkhead domain: Foxp2Ex12+ and
Foxp2Ex15. They partly localized to the membrane fraction that includes
mitochondria. Foxp2Ex12+ mainly localized to the apical cytoplasmic swelling in
early developing Purkinje cells at the stellate stage (P2-P4). Mitochondrial
localization of Foxp2Ex12+ in Purkinje cells was confirmed by immune-electron
microscopic analysis. Foxp2Ex12+ may play a role in dendritic development in
Purkinje cells.

© 2011 The Authors. Journal of Neurochemistry © 2011 International Society for
Neurochemistry.

PMID: 21985339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Comp Neurol. 2012 Feb 15;520(3):656-77. doi: 10.1002/cne.22760.

FoxP2 expression in the cerebellum and inferior olive: development of the
transverse stripe-shaped expression pattern in the mouse cerebellar cortex.

Fujita H(1), Sugihara I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Neurophysiology, Graduate School of Medicine, Tokyo
Medical and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Many molecules are expressed heterogeneously in subpopulations of cerebellar
Purkinje cells (PCs) and inferior olive (IO) neurons during development or in
adulthood. These expression patterns are often organized in longitudinal stripes 
in the cerebellar cortex, which may be related to functional
compartmentalization. FoxP2, a transcription factor, is expressed in PCs and IO
neurons, but the details of its expression pattern remain unclear. Here we
examined FoxP2 expression patterns systematically by immunostaining serial
sections of the hindbrain from embryonic day 14.5 to adulthood in mice. FoxP2 was
highly expressed in virtually all PCs at and before postnatal day 6 (P6), except 
for those in the flocculus and small parts of the nodulus (vermal lobule X),
where FoxP2 expression was moderate or absent. After P6, FoxP2 expression
gradually diminished in PCs in some areas. In adults, FoxP2 was expressed, less
intensely than in earlier stages, in subsets of PCs that were mostly arranged
transversely along the folial apices. In contrast, FoxP2 was expressed intensely 
in most IO neurons during development and in adulthood. FoxP2 was also expressed 
in a small population of neurons in the cerebellar nuclei. FoxP2 expression in
adult rats and chicks was generally comparable to that in adult mice, suggesting 
evolutionary conservation of the expression pattern. Thus, the FoxP2 expression
pattern reflects new transverse compartmentalization in the adult cerebellar
cortex, although its functional significance remains unclear.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21935935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb;20(2):224-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.160. Epub 2011 Sep 
7.

Imaging genetics of FOXP2 in dyslexia.

Wilcke A(1), Ligges C, Burkhardt J, Alexander M, Wolf C, Quente E, Ahnert P,
Hoffmann P, Becker A, Müller-Myhsok B, Cichon S, Boltze J, Kirsten H.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Universität Leipzig, Leipzig, 
Germany.

Erratum in
    Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Jun;20(6):714.

Dyslexia is a developmental disorder characterised by extensive difficulties in
the acquisition of reading or spelling. Genetic influence is estimated at 50-70%.
However, the link between genetic variants and phenotypic deficits is largely
unknown. Our aim was to investigate a role of genetic variants of FOXP2, a
prominent speech and language gene, in dyslexia using imaging genetics. This
technique combines functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and genetics to
investigate relevance of genetic variants on brain activation. To our knowledge, 
this represents the first usage of fMRI-based imaging genetics in dyslexia. In an
initial case/control study (n = 245) for prioritisation of FOXP2 polymorphisms
for later use in imaging genetics, nine SNPs were selected. A non-synonymously
coding mutation involved in verbal dyspraxia was also investigated. SNP
rs12533005 showed nominally significant association with dyslexia (genotype GG
odds ratio recessive model = 2.1 (95% confidence interval 1.1-3.9), P = 0.016). A
correlated SNP was associated with altered expression of FOXP2 in vivo in human
hippocampal tissue. Therefore, influence of the rs12533005-G risk variant on
brain activity was studied. fMRI revealed a significant main effect for the
factor 'genetic risk' in a temporo-parietal area involved in phonological
processing as well as a significant interaction effect between the factors
'disorder' and 'genetic risk' in activation of inferior frontal brain areas.
Hence, our data may hint at a role of FOXP2 genetic variants in dyslexia-specific
brain activation and demonstrate use of imaging genetics in dyslexia research.

PMCID: PMC3260915
PMID: 21897444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 2011;59(9):1197-9.

Prediction of three-independent scales endowed on poliovirus proteinase 2A
sequence.

Numao N(1), Fukazawa Y, Tanaka K.

Author information: 
(1)BioFrontier Institute Inc., Sagamihara, Japan. fukazawa@kanagawa-iri.go.jp

Mulliken's electronegativity (M) scale was found as a parameterization to predict
(elucidate) a virtually specific interaction between Poliovirus proteinase 2A and
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase p38a, as well as that between the 2A and
apoptotic protein activating factor 1c (Apaf 1c) (or prion) with intermolecular
frequency symmetry (IFS) rule. Also, Lacey's hydropathical (H) scale and Garel's 
(G) one could be found in the specific relationship between the 2A and the
extracellular signal-regulated kinase 2 (ERK2) [or fibroblast growth factor
receptor 3 (FGFR3)], and that between the 2A and the c-Jun N-terminal kinase 2
(JNK2) [or forkhead box P2-1 (FOXP2-1)], respectively. Based on these, both the
same physicochemical scale and almost the same resonant frequency (f) value would
be conserved in the same succession of a signal transduction process in a
Poliovirus-infected cell. Furthermore, the 2A could play a trigger role to cause 
cancer, prion disease, bone disease, or speech and language disorder.

PMID: 21881272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Mol Psychiatry. 2012 Nov;17(11):1077-85. doi: 10.1038/mp.2011.105. Epub 2011 Aug 
30.

An aetiological Foxp2 mutation causes aberrant striatal activity and alters
plasticity during skill learning.

French CA(1), Jin X, Campbell TG, Gerfen E, Groszer M, Fisher SE, Costa RM.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Mutations in the human FOXP2 gene cause impaired speech development and
linguistic deficits, which have been best characterised in a large pedigree
called the KE family. The encoded protein is highly conserved in many vertebrates
and is expressed in homologous brain regions required for sensorimotor
integration and motor-skill learning, in particular corticostriatal circuits.
Independent studies in multiple species suggest that the striatum is a key site
of FOXP2 action. Here, we used in vivo recordings in awake-behaving mice to
investigate the effects of the KE-family mutation on the function of striatal
circuits during motor-skill learning. We uncovered abnormally high ongoing
striatal activity in mice carrying an identical mutation to that of the KE
family. Furthermore, there were dramatic alterations in striatal plasticity
during the acquisition of a motor skill, with most neurons in mutants showing
negative modulation of firing rate, starkly contrasting with the predominantly
positive modulation seen in control animals. We also observed striking changes in
the temporal coordination of striatal firing during motor-skill learning in
mutants. Our results indicate that FOXP2 is critical for the function of striatal
circuits in vivo, which are important not only for speech but also for other
striatal-dependent skills.

PMCID: PMC3481071
PMID: 21876543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Neurosci. 2011 Aug 10;31(32):11437-42. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0181-11.2011.

Regulation of MET by FOXP2, genes implicated in higher cognitive dysfunction and 
autism risk.

Mukamel Z(1), Konopka G, Wexler E, Osborn GE, Dong H, Bergman MY, Levitt P,
Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of
Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a highly heritable, behaviorally defined,
heterogeneous disorder of unknown pathogenesis. Several genetic risk genes have
been identified, including the gene encoding the receptor tyrosine kinase MET,
which regulates neuronal differentiation and growth. An ASD-associated
polymorphism disrupts MET gene transcription, and there are reduced levels of MET
protein expression in the mature temporal cortex of subjects with ASD. To address
the possible neurodevelopmental contribution of MET to ASD pathogenesis, we
examined the expression and transcriptional regulation of MET by a transcription 
factor, FOXP2, which is implicated in regulation of cognition and language, two
functions altered in ASD. MET mRNA expression in the midgestation human fetal
cerebral cortex is strikingly restricted, localized to portions of the temporal
and occipital lobes. Within the cortical plate of the temporal lobe, the pattern 
of MET expression is highly complementary to the expression pattern of FOXP2,
suggesting the latter may play a role in repression of gene expression.
Consistent with this, MET and FOXP2 also are reciprocally expressed by
differentiating normal human neuronal progenitor cells (NHNPs) in vitro, leading 
us to assess whether FOXP2 transcriptionally regulates MET. Indeed, FOXP2 binds
directly to the 5' regulatory region of MET, and overexpression of FOXP2 results 
in transcriptional repression of MET. The expression of MET in restricted human
neocortical regions, and its regulation in part by FOXP2, is consistent with
genetic evidence for MET contributing to ASD risk.

PMCID: PMC3667610
PMID: 21832174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Neuroscience. 2011 Oct 13;193:229-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.07.008.
Epub 2011 Jul 18.

Serotonergic inputs to FoxP2 neurons of the pre-locus coeruleus and parabrachial 
nuclei that project to the ventral tegmental area.

Miller RL(1), Stein MK, Loewy AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The present study demonstrates that serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine,
5-HT)-containing axons project to two sets of neurons in the dorsolateral pons
that have been implicated in salt appetite regulation. These two neuronal groups 
are the pre-locus coeruleus (pre-LC) and a region in the parabrachial nucleus
termed the external lateral-inner subdivision (PBel-inner). Neurons in both
regions constitutively express the transcription factor Forkhead protein2
(FoxP2), and become c-Fos activated after prolonged sodium depletion. They send
extensive projections to the midbrain and forebrain, including a strong
projection to the ventral tegmental area (VTA)-a reward processing site. The
retrograde neuronal tracer cholera toxin ß-subunit (CTb) was injected into the
VTA region; this was done to label the cell bodies of the pre-LC and PBel-inner
neurons. After 1 week, the rats were killed and their brainstems processed by a
triple-color immunofluorescence procedure. The purpose was to determine whether
the CTb-labeled pre-LC and PBel-inner neurons, which also had FoxP2
immunoreactive nuclei, received close contacts from 5-HT axons. Neurons with
these properties were found in both sites. Since the origin of this 5-HT input
was unknown, a second set of experiments was carried out in which CTb was
injected into the pre-LC or lateral PB. One week later, the rats were perfused
and the brainstems from these animals were analyzed for the presence of neurons
that co-contained CTb and tryptophan hydroxylase (synthetic enzyme for 5-HT)
immunoreactivity. Co-labeled neurons were found mainly in the area postrema and
to a lesser degree, in the dorsal raphe nucleus. We propose that the 5-HT inputs 
to the pre-LC and PBel-inner may modulate the salt appetite-related functions
that influence the reward system.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3185334
PMID: 21784133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. PLoS Genet. 2011 Jul;7(7):e1002145. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002145. Epub 2011 
Jul 7.

Foxp2 regulates gene networks implicated in neurite outgrowth in the developing
brain.

Vernes SC(1), Oliver PL, Spiteri E, Lockstone HE, Puliyadi R, Taylor JM, Ho J,
Mombereau C, Brewer A, Lowy E, Nicod J, Groszer M, Baban D, Sahgal N, Cazier JB, 
Ragoussis J, Davies KE, Geschwind DH, Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

Forkhead-box protein P2 is a transcription factor that has been associated with
intriguing aspects of cognitive function in humans, non-human mammals, and
song-learning birds. Heterozygous mutations of the human FOXP2 gene cause a
monogenic speech and language disorder. Reduced functional dosage of the mouse
version (Foxp2) causes deficient cortico-striatal synaptic plasticity and impairs
motor-skill learning. Moreover, the songbird orthologue appears critically
important for vocal learning. Across diverse vertebrate species, this
well-conserved transcription factor is highly expressed in the developing and
adult central nervous system. Very little is known about the mechanisms regulated
by Foxp2 during brain development. We used an integrated functional genomics
strategy to robustly define Foxp2-dependent pathways, both direct and indirect
targets, in the embryonic brain. Specifically, we performed genome-wide in vivo
ChIP-chip screens for Foxp2-binding and thereby identified a set of 264
high-confidence neural targets under strict, empirically derived significance
thresholds. The findings, coupled to expression profiling and in situ
hybridization of brain tissue from wild-type and mutant mouse embryos, strongly
highlighted gene networks linked to neurite development. We followed up our
genomics data with functional experiments, showing that Foxp2 impacts on neurite 
outgrowth in primary neurons and in neuronal cell models. Our data indicate that 
Foxp2 modulates neuronal network formation, by directly and indirectly regulating
mRNAs involved in the development and plasticity of neuronal connections.

PMCID: PMC3131290
PMID: 21765815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Curr Pharm Des. 2011;17(19):1914-23.

The role of the urokinase receptor in epilepsy, in disorders of language,
cognition, communication and behavior, and in the central nervous system.

Bruneau N(1), Szepetowski P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 901, Marseille, France.

As a key component of the plasminogen activation system, uPAR, the receptor for
the plasminogen activator of the urokinase type, is involved in many
physiological and pathological processes. Besides its classical roles, there has 
been increased evidence that uPAR or uPAR-associated pathways, participate in the
development, in the functioning and in the pathology of the central nervous
system. Qualitative and quantitative changes in the expressions of uPAR and of
its canonical ligand uPA have been observed in a large variety of epileptic
disorders, either in human or in animal models, as well as in other brain
diseases (stroke and brain trauma, multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease,
cerebral malaria, HIV-associated leukoencephalopathy and encephalitis). The
variety of such pathological conditions and the different brain areas and cell
types involved, likely reflects the wide range and the complexity of the multiple
and somehow intertwined pathophysiological mechanisms related with uPAR. In the
mouse, the knock-out of the Upar-encoding gene (Plaur) leads to significant and
nearly complete loss in parvalbumin-containing interneurons during brain
development. This is associated with increased susceptibility to spontaneous and 
chemically-induced seizures and with increased anxiety and impaired social
interactions. The recent identification of the novel uPAR ligand SRPX2 (Sushi
repeat protein, X-linked 2) and the regulation of both the SRPX2 and PLAUR genes 
by transcription factor FOXP2 has shed novel and exciting insights into the role 
of uPAR-related molecular networks in rolandic epilepsy, in developmental verbal 
dyspraxia, in perisylvian polymicrogyria, and generally in disorders of the
speech areas and circuits. uPAR, its regulators and partners, as well as other
proteins containing Ly-6/uPAR/alpha-neurotoxin domains, represent key entry
points for present and future studies not only on speech-related disorders but
also on epilepsy and autism spectrum disorders.

PMID: 21711233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci. 2011 Jul 27;366(1574):2124-40. doi:
10.1098/rstb.2011.0001.

Evo-devo, deep homology and FoxP2: implications for the evolution of speech and
language.

Scharff C(1), Petri J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Behavior, Freie Universität Berlin, Takustr. 6, 14195
Berlin, Germany. scharff@zedat.fu-berlin.de

The evolution of novel morphological features, such as feathers, involves the
modification of developmental processes regulated by gene networks. The fact that
genetic novelty operates within developmental constraints is the central tenet of
the 'evo-devo' conceptual framework. It is supported by findings that certain
molecular regulatory pathways act in a similar manner in the development of
morphological adaptations, which are not directly related by common ancestry but 
evolved convergently. The Pax6 gene, important for vision in molluscs, insects
and vertebrates, and Hox genes, important for tetrapod limbs and fish fins,
exemplify this 'deep homology'. Recently, 'evo-devo' has expanded to the
molecular analysis of behavioural traits, including social behaviour, learning
and memory. Here, we apply this approach to the evolution of human language.
Human speech is a form of auditory-guided, learned vocal motor behaviour that
also evolved in certain species of birds, bats and ocean mammals. Genes relevant 
for language, including the transcription factor FOXP2, have been identified. We 
review evidence that FoxP2 and its regulatory gene network shapes neural
plasticity in cortico-basal ganglia circuits underlying the sensory-guided motor 
learning in animal models. The emerging picture can help us understand how
complex cognitive traits can 'descend with modification'.

PMCID: PMC3130369
PMID: 21690130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 8;410(3):593-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.06.032. Epub 2011 Jun 12.

FOXP2 promotes the nuclear translocation of POT1, but FOXP2(R553H), mutation
related to speech-language disorder, partially prevents it.

Tanabe Y(1), Fujita E, Momoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Development and Differentiation, National Institute of
Neuroscience, NCNP, 4-1-1 Ogawahigasi, Kodaira 187-8511, Japan.

FOXP2 is a forkhead box-containing transcription factor with several recognizable
sequence motifs. However, little is known about the FOXP2-associated proteins
except for C-terminal binding protein (CtBP). In the present study, we attempted 
to isolate the FOXP2-associated protein with a yeast two-hybrid system using the 
C-terminal region, including the forkhead domain, as a bait probe, and identified
protection of telomeres 1 (POT1) as a FOXP2-associated protein.
Immunoprecipitation assay confirmed the association with FOXP2 and POT1. POT1
alone localized in the cytoplasm but co-localized with FOXP2 and the forkhead
domain of FOXP2 in nuclei. However, both FOXP2 with mutated nuclear localization 
signals and (R553H) mutated forkhead, which is associated with speech-language
disorder, prevented the nuclear translocation of POT1. These results suggest that
FOXP2 is a binding partner for the nuclear translocation of POT1. As loss of POT1
function induces the cell arrest, the impaired nuclear translocation of POT1 in
the developing neuronal cells may be associated with the pathogenesis of
speech-language disorder with FOXP2(R553H) mutation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21684252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2011;12:145-64. doi:
10.1146/annurev-genom-090810-183119.

Genetics of speech and language disorders.

Kang C(1), Drayna D.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Vocal communication mediated by speech and language is a uniquely human trait,
and has served an important evolutionary role in the development of our species. 
Deficits in speech and language functions can be of numerous types, including
aphasia, stuttering, articulation disorders, verbal dyspraxia, and specific
language impairment; language deficits are also related to dyslexia. Most
communication disorders are prominent in children, where they are common. A
number of these disorders have been shown to cluster in families, suggesting that
genetic factors are involved, but their etiology at the molecular level is not
well understood. In the past decade, genetic methods have proven to be powerful
for understanding these etiologies. Linkage studies and molecular genetic
analyses in a large family containing multiple individuals affected with verbal
dyspraxia led to the discovery of mutations in the FOXP2 gene. This gene encodes 
a forkhead domain transcription factor, a finding that has led researchers to a
new avenue of investigation into the substrates and mechanisms that underlie
human speech development. In studies of stuttering, linkage and candidate gene
approaches in consanguineous families identified mutations in the lysosomal
enzyme-targeting pathway genes GNPTAB, GNPTG, and NAGPA, revealing a role for
inherited defects in cell metabolism in this disorder. In specific language
impairment, linkage studies have identified several loci, and candidate gene
association studies are making progress in identifying causal variants at these
loci. Although only a small fraction of all cases of speech and language
disorders can be explained by genetic findings to date, the significant progress 
made thus far suggests that genetic approaches will continue to provide important
avenues for research on this group of disorders.

PMID: 21663442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Neurologia. 2012 May;27(4):225-33. doi: 10.1016/j.nrl.2011.04.008. Epub 2011 Jun 
8.

[Problematic aspects of the genetic analysis of the specific disorders of the
language: FOXP2 as paradigm].

[Article in Spanish]

Benítez-Burraco A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Filología Española y sus Didácticas, Área de Lengua Española, 
Facultad de Humanidades, Universidad de Huelva, Huelva, España.
antonio.benitez@dfesp.uhu.es

INTRODUCTION: Genetic analysis of specific language disorders is of major
interest for both clinical research and linguistic theory. However, the results
of this analysis almost always do not show any univocal and compulsory
relationships between particular gene mutations and particular disorders or a
casual link between the genotype and the phenotype.
OBJECTIVES: This paper will review this type of evidence (referring to the
«language gene»FOXP2 as a leading example, where possible), try to suggest
plausible reasons for such a perplexing output, and ultimately discuss if such
reasons really explain the genuine aetiology of these conditions.
RESULTS: The key to disentangle and understand the puzzling scenario emerging
from the genetic analysis of specific language disorders is to pay attention to
the actual role played by genes during ontogeny and, in particular, to the way in
which developmental processes are actually regulated: genes are not direct causal
agents regarding the emergence of impaired or wild phenotypes, but just one among
the diverse types of regulatory factors involved.
CONCLUSIONS: When such a complex role as well as development models less focused 
on the genes are considered, the way in which genetic mutations really contribute
to the emergence of these cognitive disorders is quite satisfactorily explained.

Copyright © 2010 Sociedad Española de Neurología. Published by Elsevier Espana.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 21652119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Genome Res. 2011 Aug;21(8):1349-59. doi: 10.1101/gr.124115.111. Epub 2011 May 26.

Discovery and assessment of conserved Pax6 target genes and enhancers.

Coutinho P(1), Pavlou S, Bhatia S, Chalmers KJ, Kleinjan DA, van Heyningen V.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, 
Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK. p.coutinho@hgu.mrc.ac.uk

The characterization of transcriptional networks (TNs) is essential for
understanding complex biological phenomena such as development, disease, and
evolution. In this study, we have designed and implemented a procedure that
combines in silico target screens with zebrafish and mouse validation, in order
to identify cis-elements and genes directly regulated by Pax6. We chose Pax6 as
the paradigm because of its crucial roles in organogenesis and human disease. We 
identified over 600 putative Pax6 binding sites and more than 200 predicted
direct target genes, conserved in evolution from zebrafish to human and to mouse.
This was accomplished using hidden Markov models (HMMs) generated from
experimentally validated Pax6 binding sites. A small sample of genes, expressed
in the neural lineage, was chosen from the predictions for RNA in situ validation
using zebrafish and mouse models. Validation of DNA binding to some predicted
cis-elements was also carried out using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and 
zebrafish reporter transgenic studies. The results show that this combined
procedure is a highly efficient tool to investigate the architecture of TNs and
constitutes a useful complementary resource to ChIP and expression data sets
because of its inherent spatiotemporal independence. We have identified several
novel direct targets, including some putative disease genes, among them Foxp2;
these will allow further dissection of Pax6 function in development and disease.

PMCID: PMC3149501
PMID: 21617155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Hum Biol. 2011 Apr;83(2):213-45. doi: 10.3378/027.083.0205.

The parental antagonism theory of language evolution: preliminary evidence for
the proposal.

Brown WM(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary University of London,
UK. w.m.brown@uel.ac.uk

Language--as with most communication systems--likely evolved by means of natural 
selection. Accounts for the genetical selection of language can usually be
divided into two scenarios, either of which used in isolation of the other appear
insufficient to explain the phenomena: (1) there are group benefits from
communicating, and (2) there are individual benefits from being a better
communicator. In contrast, it is hypothesized that language phenotypes emerged
during a coevolutionary struggle between parental genomes via genomic imprinting,
which is differential gene expression depending on parental origin of the genetic
element. It is hypothesized that relatedness asymmetries differentially selected 
for patrigene-caused language phenotypes to extract resources from mother (early 
in development) and matrigene-caused language phenotypes to influence degree of
cooperativeness among asymmetric kin (later in development). This paper reports
that imprinted genes have a high frequency of involvement in language phenotypes 
(~36%), considering their presumed rarity in the human genome (~2%). For example,
two well-studied genes associated with language impairments (FOXP2 and UBE3A)
exhibit parent-of- origin effects. Specifically, FOXP2 is putatively paternally
expressed, whereas UBE3A is a maternally expressed imprinted gene. It is also
hypothesized that the more unique and cooperative aspects of human language
emerged to the benefit of matrilineal inclusive fitness. Consistent with this
perspective, it is reported here that the X-chromosome has higher involvement in 
loci that have associations with language than would be expected by chance. It is
also reported, for the first time, that human and chimpanzee maternally expressed
overlapping imprinted genes exhibit greater evolutionary divergence (in terms of 
the degree of overlapping transcripts) than paternally expressed overlapping
imprinted genes. Finally, an analysis of global language patterns reveals that
paternally but not maternally silenced Alu elements are positively correlated
with language diversity. Furthermore, there is a much higher than expected
frequency of Alu elements inserted into the protein-coding machinery of imprinted
and X-chromosomal language loci compared with nonimprinted language loci. Taken
together these findings provide some support for parental antagonism theory.
Unlike previous theories for language evolution, parental antagonism theory
generates testable predictions at the proximate (e.g., neurocognitive areas
important for social transmission and language capacities), ontogenetic (e.g.,
the function of language at different points of development), ultimate (e.g.,
inclusive fitness), and phylogenetic levels (e.g., the spread of maternally
derived brain components in mammals, particularly in the hominin lineage), thus
making human capacities for culture more tractable than previously thought.

PMID: 21615287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Chem Neuroanat. 2011 Sep;42(1):1-23. doi: 10.1016/j.jchemneu.2011.05.003. Epub 
2011 May 13.

FoxP2 brainstem neurons project to sodium appetite regulatory sites.

Shin JW(1), Geerling JC, Stein MK, Miller RL, Loewy AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The transcription factor Forkhead box protein 2 (FoxP2) is expressed in two cell 
groups of the brainstem that have been implicated in sodium appetite regulation: 
the pre-locus coeruleus (pre-LC) and parabrachial nucleus--external lateral-inner
subdivision (PBel-inner). Because the connections of these two groups are
unknown, neuroanatomical tracing methods were used to define their central
projections. The pre-LC outputs were first analyzed using an anterograde axonal
tracer--Phaseolus vulgaris leucoagglutinin (PHAL) to construct a brain map. Next,
we examined whether the FoxP2 immunoreactive (FoxP2+) neurons of the pre-LC
contribute to these projections using a retrograde neuronal tracer--cholera toxin
ß-subunit (CTb). CTb was injected into selected brain regions identified in the
anterograde tracing study. One week later the rats were killed, and brainstem
sections were processed by a double immunohistochemical procedure to determine
whether the FoxP2+ neurons in the pre-LC and/or PBel-inner contained CTb. FoxP2+ 
pre-LC neurons project to: (1) ventral pallidum; (2) substantia innominata and
bed nucleus of the stria terminalis; (3) paraventricular, central medial,
parafascicular, and subparafascicular parvicellular thalamic nuclei; (4)
paraventricular (PVH), lateral, perifornical, dorsomedial (DMH), and
parasubthalamic hypothalamic nuclei; and (5) ventral tegmental area (VTA),
periaqueductal gray matter (PAG), dorsal and central linear raphe nuclei. FoxP2+ 
PBel-inner neurons project to the PVH and DMH, with weaker connections to the
LHA, VTA, and PAG. Both the pre-LC and PBel-inner project to central sites
implicated in sodium appetite, and related issues, including foraging behavior,
hedonic responses to salt intake, sodium balance, and cardiovascular regulation, 
are discussed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3148274
PMID: 21605659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2011 Jun;21(3):415-24. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2011.04.008. Epub
2011 May 16.

FOXP2 and the role of cortico-basal ganglia circuits in speech and language
evolution.

Enard W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6, D-04103
Leipzig, Germany. enard@eva.mpg.de

PURPOSE OF THE REVIEW: A reduced dosage of the transcription factor FOXP2 leads
to speech and language impairments probably owing to deficits in cortical and
subcortical neural circuits. Based on evolutionary sequence analysis it has been 
proposed that the two amino acid substitutions that occurred on the human lineage
have been positively selected. Here I review recent studies investigating the
functional consequences of these two substitutions and discuss how these first
endeavors to study human brain evolution can be interpreted in the context of
speech and language evolution.
RECENT FINDINGS: Mice carrying the two substitutions in their endogenous Foxp2
gene show specific alterations in dopamine levels, striatal synaptic plasticity
and neuronal morphology. Mice carrying only one functional Foxp2, show additional
and partly opposite effects suggesting that FOXP2 has contributed to tuning
cortico-basal ganglia circuits during human evolution. Evidence from human and
songbird studies suggest that this could have been relevant during language
acquisition or vocal learning, respectively.
SUMMARY: FOXP2 could have contributed to the evolution of human speech and
language by adapting cortico-basal ganglia circuits. More generally the recent
studies allow careful optimism that aspects of human brain evolution can be
investigated in model systems such as the mouse.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21592779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Eur J Paediatr Neurol. 2011 Jul;15(4):283-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ejpn.2011.04.006.
Epub 2011 May 14.

Endophenotypes of FOXP2: dysfunction within the human articulatory network.

Liégeois F(1), Morgan AT, Connelly A, Vargha-Khadem F.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, UCL Institute of Child Health, 30
Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK. F.Liegeois@ich.ucl.ac.uk

The identification of the first gene involved in a speech-language disorder was
made possible through the study of a British multi-generational family (the "KE
family") in whom half the members have an inherited speech-language disorder
caused by a FOXP2 mutation. Neuroimaging investigations in the affected members
of the KE family have revealed structural and functional abnormalities in a wide 
cortical-subcortical network. Functional imaging studies have confirmed
dysfunction of this network by revealing abnormal activation in several areas
including Broca's area and the putamen during language-related tasks, such as
word repetition and generation. Repeating nonsense words is particularly
challenging for the affected members of the family, as well as in other
individuals suffering from idiopathic developmental specific language
impairments; yet, thus far the neural correlates of the nonword repetition task
have not been examined in individuals with developmental speech and language
disorders. Here, four affected members of the KE family and four unrelated
age-matched healthy participants repeated nonsense words aloud during functional 
MRI scanning. Relative to control participants, repetition in the affected
members was severely impaired, and brain activation was significantly reduced in 
the premotor, supplementary and primary motor cortices, as well as in the
cerebellum and basal ganglia. We suggest that nonword repetition is the optimal
endophenotype for FOXP2 disruption in humans because this task recruits brain
regions involved in the imitation and vocal learning of novel sequences of speech
sounds.

Copyright © 2011 European Paediatric Neurology Society. Published by Elsevier
Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21576028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2011 Aug 1;35(6):1512-7. doi:
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2011.04.010. Epub 2011 May 5.

Association study of the CNS patterning genes and autism in Han Chinese in
Taiwan.

Chien YL(1), Wu YY, Chiu YN, Liu SK, Tsai WC, Lin PI, Chen CH, Gau SS, Chien WH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.

Autism is a complex neurodevelopmental disorder with high heritability. Despite
different approaches worldwide to identify susceptibility loci or genes for
autism spectrum disorders (ASDs), no consistent result has been reported. CNS
patterning genes have been recognized as candidate genes for autism based on
neuroimage and neuropathology evidence. This study investigated four candidate
genes (WNT2, EN2, SHANK3, and FOXP2) by a tag SNP approach in a family-based
association study. The trio samples include 1164 subjects from 393 families,
including 393 probands (aged 9.1±4.0years; male, 88.6%) diagnosed with autistic
disorder (n=373) or Asperger's disorder (n=20) according to the DSM-IV diagnostic
criteria and confirmed by the Chinese ADI-R interview. Three tag SNPs of EN2
(7q36), 6 SNPs of WNT2 (7q31-33), 5 SNPs of SHANK3 (22q13.3), 3 SNPs of FOXP2
(7q31) were genotyped. TDT analysis was done to test the association of each tag 
SNP and haplotype. There was no association with autism for 17 tag SNPs of WNT2, 
EN2, SHANK3, and FOXP2 based on SNP analyses. Haplotype analyses did not reveal
significant association except for the 6 tag SNPs of WNT2 gene showing a
significant association on one haplotype composed of rs2896218 and rs6950765
(G-G) (p=0.0095). Other haplotypes composed of rs2896218 and rs6950765 (G-G) were
also significantly associated with autism. The present study indicates that
SHANK3 may not be a critical gene for the etiology of ASDs in Han Chinese
population. Inconsistent findings in EN2 and FOXP2 in the Han Chinese population 
need further clarification. A haplotype of WNT2 (rs2896218-rs6950765: G-G) is
significantly associated with ASDs in our trios samples, this finding warrants
further validation by different sample and confirmation by functional study.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21575668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Schizophr Res. 2011 Jul;129(2-3):141-8. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2011.03.027. Epub
2011 Apr 20.

Genetic influences of cortical gray matter in language-related regions in healthy
controls and schizophrenia.

Jamadar S(1), Powers NR, Meda SA, Gelernter J, Gruen JR, Pearlson GD.

Author information: 
(1)Olin Neuropsychiatry Research Center, Institute of Living, Hartford, CT 06106,
USA. sjamadar@harthosp.org

Individuals with schizophrenia show a broad range of language impairments,
including reading difficulties. A recent structural MRI (sMRI) study linked these
difficulties to structural abnormalities in language-related regions (Leonard et 
al., 2008). Similar regions have been implicated in primary reading disability
(RD). Major hypotheses of RD implicate abnormal embryonic neuronal migration in
the cortex, and genetic linkage and association studies have identified a number 
of candidate RD genes that are associated with neuronal migration (Paracchini et 
al., 2007). Interestingly, evidence suggests at least some individuals with
schizophrenia also show impaired neuronal migration in the cortex (Akbarian et
al., 1996). Thus the aim of this study was to examine the link between RD-related
genes and gray matter volumes in healthy controls and schizophrenia. We used
parallel independent component analysis (parallel-ICA) to examine the
relationship between gray matter volumes extracted using voxel-based morphometry 
(VBM) and 16 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) spanning FOXP2 and four
RD-related genes, DCDC2, DYX1C1, KIAA0319 and TTRAP. Parallel-ICA identified five
sMRI-SNP relationships. Superior and inferior cerebellar networks were related to
DYX1C1 and DCDC2/KIAA0319 respectively in both groups. The superior prefrontal,
temporal and occipital networks were positively related to DCDC2 in the
schizophrenia, but not the control group. The identified networks closely
correspond to the known distribution of language processes in the cortex. Thus,
reading and language difficulties in schizophrenia may be related to distributed 
cortical structural abnormalities associated with RD-related genes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3110636
PMID: 21507613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Prog Brain Res. 2011;189:225-38. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53884-0.00027-0.

Developmental disorders of speech and language: from genes to brain structure and
function.

Watkins K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
kate.watkins@psy.ox.ac.uk

Functional and structural brain imaging studies of developmental disorders
provide insights into their neural correlates and have potential to bridge the
gap between genotype and phenotype. We have used such techniques to investigate
the neural correlates of two developmental disorders of speech and language, in
which a genetic etiology is either known or strongly suspected. The first
disorder is one shared by the affected members of the KE family who have a
mutation in the FOXP2 gene. The brain structural and functional correlates of
this disorder help clarify the nature of the behavioral impairment. They confirm 
that a deficit in auditory-motor learning of articulation patterns is core to the
behavioral phenotype. In the second disorder, developmental stuttering, brain
imaging data reveal functional abnormalities consistent with theories that it is 
caused by a basal ganglia deficit and structural differences consistent with an
impairment in auditory-motor integration necessary for fluent speech. The common 
finding of basal ganglia abnormality in two developmental disorders of speech and
language is discussed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21489392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Neurodev Disord. 2011 Mar;3(1):39-49. doi: 10.1007/s11689-010-9065-0. Epub 2010
Nov 9.

Replication of CNTNAP2 association with nonword repetition and support for FOXP2 
association with timed reading and motor activities in a dyslexia family sample.

Peter B(1), Raskind WH, Matsushita M, Lisowski M, Vu T, Berninger VW, Wijsman EM,
Brkanac Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, P.O.
Box 354875, Seattle, WA, 98195, USA, bvpeter@u.washington.edu.

Two functionally related genes, FOXP2 and CNTNAP2, influence language abilities
in families with rare syndromic and common nonsyndromic forms of impaired
language, respectively. We investigated whether these genes are associated with
component phenotypes of dyslexia and measures of sequential motor ability.
Quantitative transmission disequilibrium testing (QTDT) and linear association
modeling were used to evaluate associations with measures of phonological memory 
(nonword repetition, NWR), expressive language (sentence repetition), reading
(real word reading efficiency, RWRE; word attack, WATT), and timed sequential
motor activities (rapid alternating place of articulation, RAPA; finger
succession in the dominant hand, FS-D) in 188 family trios with a child with
dyslexia. Consistent with a prior study of language impairment, QTDT in dyslexia 
showed evidence of CNTNAP2 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) association with 
NWR. For FOXP2, we provide the first evidence for SNP association with component 
phenotypes of dyslexia, specifically NWR and RWRE but not WATT. In addition,
FOXP2 SNP associations with both RAPA and FS-D were observed. Our results confirm
the role of CNTNAP2 in NWR in a dyslexia sample and motivate new questions about 
the effects of FOXP2 in neurodevelopmental disorders.

PMCID: PMC3163991
PMID: 21484596  [PubMed]


202. PLoS One. 2011 Mar 18;6(3):e17753. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017753.

Genes expressed in specific areas of the human fetal cerebral cortex display
distinct patterns of evolution.

Lambert N(1), Lambot MA, Bilheu A, Albert V, Englert Y, Libert F, Noel JC,
Sotiriou C, Holloway AK, Pollard KS, Detours V, Vanderhaeghen P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Recherches en Biologie Humaine et Moléculaire (IRIBHM), Université
Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium.

The developmental mechanisms through which the cerebral cortex increased in size 
and complexity during primate evolution are essentially unknown. To uncover
genetic networks active in the developing cerebral cortex, we combined
three-dimensional reconstruction of human fetal brains at midgestation and whole 
genome expression profiling. This novel approach enabled transcriptional
characterization of neurons from accurately defined cortical regions containing
presumptive Broca and Wernicke language areas, as well as surrounding associative
areas. We identified hundreds of genes displaying differential expression between
the two regions, but no significant difference in gene expression between left
and right hemispheres. Validation by qRTPCR and in situ hybridization confirmed
the robustness of our approach and revealed novel patterns of area- and
layer-specific expression throughout the developing cortex. Genes differentially 
expressed between cortical areas were significantly associated with fast-evolving
non-coding sequences harboring human-specific substitutions that could lead to
divergence in their repertoires of transcription factor binding sites.
Strikingly, while some of these sequences were accelerated in the human lineage
only, many others were accelerated in chimpanzee and/or mouse lineages,
indicating that genes important for cortical development may be particularly
prone to changes in transcriptional regulation across mammals. Genes
differentially expressed between cortical regions were also enriched for
transcriptional targets of FoxP2, a key gene for the acquisition of language
abilities in humans. Our findings point to a subset of genes with a unique
combination of cortical areal expression and evolutionary patterns, suggesting
that they play important roles in the transcriptional network underlying
human-specific neural traits.

PMCID: PMC3060818
PMID: 21445258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Protein Sci. 2011 May;20(5):908-24. doi: 10.1002/pro.626. Epub 2011 Apr 11.

Solution structure and backbone dynamics of the DNA-binding domain of FOXP1:
insight into its domain swapping and DNA binding.

Chu YP(1), Chang CH, Shiu JH, Chang YT, Chen CY, Chuang WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Cheng Kung
University College of Medicine, Tainan, Taiwan.

FOXP1 belongs to the P-subfamily of forkhead transcription factors and contains a
conserved forkhead DNA-binding domain. According to size exclusion chromatography
analysis, the forkhead domain of FOXP1 existed as a mixture of monomer and dimer.
The dissociation constants of the forkhead domain of wild-type, C61S, and C61Y
mutants of FOXP1 were 27.3, 28.8, and 332.0 µM, respectively. In contrast, FOXP1 
A39P mutant formed only a monomer. NMR analysis also showed that FOXP1 C61S and
C61Y mutants existed as a mixture. The solution structure of FOXP1 A39P/C61Y
mutant was similar to the X-ray structure of the FOXP2 monomer. Comparison of
backbone dynamics of FOXP1 A39P/C61Y and C61Y mutants showed that the residues
preceding helix 3, the hinge region, exhibited the largest conformational
exchange in FOXP1 monomer. The A39 residue of FOXP1 dimer has a lower order
parameter with internal motion on the ps-ns timescale, suggesting that the
dynamics of the hinge region of FOXP1 are important in the formation of the
swapped dimer. The analysis also showed that the residues exhibiting the motions 
on the ps-ns and µs-ms timescales were located at the DNA-binding surface of
FOXP1, suggesting the interactions between FOXP1 and DNA may be highly dynamic.

Copyright © 2011 The Protein Society.

PMCID: PMC3125874
PMID: 21416545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Eur J Hum Genet. 2011 Jun;19(6):634-9. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.238. Epub 2011 Mar 
9.

Translocation breakpoint at 7q31 associated with tics: further evidence for
IMMP2L as a candidate gene for Tourette syndrome.

Patel C(1), Cooper-Charles L, McMullan DJ, Walker JM, Davison V, Morton J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Birmingham Women's Hospital NHS Foundation
Trust, Birmingham, UK. Chirag.Patel@bwhct.nhs.uk

Gilles de la Tourette syndrome is a complex neuropsychiatric disorder with a
strong genetic basis. We identified a male patient with Tourette syndrome-like
tics and an apparently balanced de novo translocation [46,XY,t(2;7)(p24.2;q31)]. 
Further analysis using array comparative genomic hybridisation (CGH) revealed a
cryptic deletion at 7q31.1-7q31.2. Breakpoints disrupting this region have been
reported in one isolated and one familial case of Tourette syndrome. In our case,
IMMP2L, a gene coding for a human homologue of the yeast inner mitochondrial
membrane peptidase subunit 2, was disrupted by the breakpoint on 7q31.1, with
deletion of exons 1-3 of the gene. The IMMP2L gene has previously been proposed
as a candidate gene for Tourette syndrome, and our case provides further evidence
of its possible role in the pathogenesis. The deleted region (7q31.1-7q31.2) of
7.2 Mb of genomic DNA also encompasses numerous genes, including FOXP2,
associated with verbal dyspraxia, and the CFTR gene.

PMCID: PMC3110039
PMID: 21386874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Neurosci Lett. 2011 Apr 15;493(3):131-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.02.024. Epub 
2011 Feb 18.

Genetic variation in FOXP2 alters grey matter concentrations in schizophrenia
patients.

paniel F(1), Horácek J, Tintera J, Ibrahim I, Novák T, Cermák J, Klírová M,
Höschl C.

Author information: 
(1)Prague Psychiatric Centre, Prague, Czech Republic. spaniel@pcp.lf3.cuni.cz

FOXP2, the first gene known to be involved in the development of speech and
language, can be considered to be, a priori, a candidate gene in schizophrenia,
given the mounting evidence that the underlying core deficit in this disease
could be a failure of structures relevant to normal language processing. To
investigate the potential link between grey matter concentration (GMC) changes in
patients with schizophrenia and the FOXP2 rs2396753 polymorphism previously
reported to be associated with hallucinations in schizophrenia, we analysed
high-resolution anatomical magnetic resonance images of 40 genotyped patients
with schizophrenia and 36 healthy controls, using optimised voxel-based
morphometry (VBM). Here we show that the common SNP rs2396753 (C>A) gene variant 
of the FOXP2 gene has significant effects on GMC in patients with schizophrenia, 
within regions of the brain known to be affected by this disease. Our data
suggest that GMC reductions in schizophrenia may be driven by C allele carriers
of the FOXP2 gene variant.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21334420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Curr Opin Neurol. 2011 Apr;24(2):126-31. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e328344634a.

Epilepsy and neurodevelopmental disorders of language.

Pal DK(1).

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, Department of Clinical
Neuroscience, London, UK. deb.pal@kcl.ac.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Neurodevelopmental disorders of language are increasingly
appreciated as part of the phenotype of childhood-onset epilepsy. Here I review
studies of the prevalence and prognosis of language impairment in new-onset
childhood epilepsy and provide an update of new genetic discoveries that shed
light on molecular pathways common to epilepsy and language impairment.
RECENT FINDINGS: Three recent papers describe the cognitive and language
phenotype of children with new-onset epilepsy and their discrepancy with controls
over a 2-3-year period of follow-up. A new study examines the question of
pleiotropic effects acting on both electro-encephalographic (EEG) abnormalities
and speech sound disorder in rolandic epilepsy families - another study questions
the rationale for EEG recording in patients with specific language impairment
(SLI) - whereas two studies examine the effect of anti-epileptic drug treatment
on speech and language. Two MRI studies indicate the neural basis for language
impairment in epilepsy. Three new copy number variant hotspots are reported
linking epilepsy and speech or language impairment; and the links between two
known genes for developmental verbal dyspraxia, FOXP2 and SRPX2, begin to be
elucidated.
SUMMARY: Comprehensive neuropsychological and speech pathology assessment need to
be factored into the initial evaluation and continued monitoring of children with
new-onset epilepsy. EEG recording remains of unknown utility in children with SLI
or speech sound disorder (SSD) who do not have epilepsy. Some anti-epileptic
drugs may worsen SSD. As the molecular pathways for speech continue to be
elucidated, future genetic imaging studies will show how genetic variants map
onto to altered structural and connectivity patterns, which could be used as
biomarkers for interventions.

PMID: 21293269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Comp Neurol. 2011 Feb 15;519(3):544-61. doi: 10.1002/cne.22532.

Region-specific gene expression in early postnatal mouse thalamus.

Yuge K(1), Kataoka A, Yoshida AC, Itoh D, Aggarwal M, Mori S, Blackshaw S,
Shimogori T.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, Japan.

Previous studies in the developing mouse thalamus have demonstrated that regional
identity is established during early stages of development (Suzuki-Hirano et al. 
J. Comp. Neurol. 2011;519:528-543). However, the developing thalamus often shows 
little resemblance to the anatomical organization of the postnatal thalamus,
making it difficult to identify genes that might mediate the organization of
thalamic nuclei. We therefore analyzed the expression pattern of genes that we
have identified as showing regional expression in embryonic thalamus on postnatal
days (P) 6-8 by using in situ hybridization. We also identified several genes
expressed only in the postnatal thalamus with restricted expression in specific
nuclei. We first demonstrated the selective expression of
neurotransmitter-related genes (vGlut2, vGAT, D2R, and HTR2C), identifying the
neurotransmitter subtypes of cells in this region, and we also demonstrated
selective expression of additional genes in the thalamus (Steel, Slitrk6, and
AI852580). In addition, we demonstrated expression of genes specific to
somatosensory thalamic nuclei, the ventrobasal posterior nuclei (VP); a visual
thalamic nucleus, the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (dLGN); and an auditory
thalamic nucleus, the medial geniculate body (MGB) (p57Kip, Nr1d1, and GFRa1). We
also identified genes that are selectively expressed in multiple different nuclei
(Foxp2, Chst2, and EphA8). Finally, we demonstrated that several bone
morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and their inhibitors are expressed in the postnatal
thalamus in a nucleus-specific fashion, suggesting that BMPs play roles in the
postnatal thalamus unrelated to their known role in developmental patterning. Our
findings provide important information for understanding the mechanisms of
nuclear specification and connectivity during development, as well as their
maintenance in adult thalamus.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21192083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. ILAR J. 2010;51(4):362-77.

The songbird as a model for the generation and learning of complex sequential
behaviors.

Fee MS(1), Scharff C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. fee@mit.edu

Over the past four decades songbirds have become a widely used model organism for
neuroscientists studying complex sequential behaviors and sensory-guided motor
learning. Like human babies, young songbirds learn many of the sounds they use
for communication by imitating adults. This remarkable behavior emerges as a
product of genetic predispositions and specific individual experiences. Research 
on different aspects of this behavior has elucidated key principles that may
underlie vertebrate motor learning and motor performance in general, including
(1) the mechanisms by which neural circuits generate sequential behaviors, (2)
the existence of specialized neuronal circuits for the generation of exploratory 
variability, (3) the importance of basal ganglia-forebrain circuits for learning 
sequentially patterned behaviors, including speech and language, and (4) the
existence of genetic toolkits that may have been coopted multiple times during
evolution to play a role in learned vocal communication, such as the
transcription factor FoxP2 and its molecular targets. This review presents new
techniques, experiments, and findings in areas where songbirds have made
significant contributions toward understanding of some of the most fundamental
questions in neuroscience.

PMID: 21131713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Neuroscience. 2011 Feb 23;175:75-84. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.11.042.
Epub 2010 Nov 25.

Humanized Foxp2 specifically affects cortico-basal ganglia circuits.

Reimers-Kipping S(1), Hevers W, Pääbo S, Enard W.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6,D-04103 
Leipzig, Germany.

It has been proposed that two amino acid substitutions in the transcription
factor FOXP2 have been positively selected during human evolution and influence
aspects of speech and language. Recently it was shown that when these
substitutions are introduced into the endogenous Foxp2 gene of mice, they
increase dendrite length and long-term depression (LTD) in medium spiny neurons
of the striatum. Here we investigated if these effects are found in other brain
regions. We found that neurons in the cerebral cortex, the thalamus and the
striatum have increased dendrite lengths in the humanized mice whereas neurons in
the amygdala and the cerebellum do not. In agreement with previous work we found 
increased LTD in medium spiny neurons, but did not detect alterations of synaptic
plasticity in Purkinje cells. We conclude that although Foxp2 is expressed in
many brain regions and has multiple roles during mammalian development, the
evolutionary changes that occurred in the protein in human ancestors specifically
affect brain regions that are connected via cortico-basal ganglia circuits.

Copyright Â© 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21111790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Brain Res. 2011 Feb 23;1375:19-27. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.11.028. Epub 2010
Nov 23.

FoxP2 expression defines dorsolateral pontine neurons activated by sodium
deprivation.

Geerling JC, Stein MK, Miller RL, Shin JW, Gray PA, Loewy AD.

Two specific groups of neurons in the dorsolateral pons are activated by dietary 
sodium deprivation. These two groups are the pre-locus coeruleus (pre-LC) and the
inner subdivision of the external lateral parabrachial nucleus (PBel-inner). In
each site, after rats are fed an extremely low-sodium diet for over a week,
neurons increase their expression of an activity-induced transcription factor,
c-Fos. Here, we confirm this observation and extend it by demonstrating that
these two groups of neurons express a common marker gene, the
constitutively-expressed transcription factor Forkhead box protein 2 (FoxP2).
That is, virtually all of the c-Fos activated neurons in both regions also
express FoxP2. The expression of FoxP2 by both these groups of neurons suggests
that they are developmentally-related subsets derived from the same basic
population. Given that FoxP2, unlike c-Fos, is expressed independent of sodium
deprivation, this marker may be useful in future studies of the pre-LC and
PBel-inner. The molecular definition of these neurons, which project to circuits 
in the forebrain that influence visceral, appetitive, and hedonic functions, may 
allow direct experimental exploration of the functional role of these circuits
using genetic tools.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3034829
PMID: 21108936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Dec;152A(12):3164-72. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33749.

Identification of a microdeletion at the 7q33-q35 disrupting the CNTNAP2 gene in 
a Brazilian stuttering case.

Petrin AL(1), Giacheti CM, Maximino LP, Abramides DV, Zanchetta S, Rossi NF,
Richieri-Costa A, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Speech and language disorders are some of the most common referral reasons to
child development centers accounting for approximately 40% of cases. Stuttering
is a disorder in which involuntary repetition, prolongation, or cessation of the 
sound precludes the flow of speech. About 5% of individuals in the general
population have a stuttering problem, and about 80% of the affected children
recover naturally. The causal factors of stuttering remain uncertain in most
cases; studies suggest that genetic factors are responsible for 70% of the
variance in liability for stuttering, whereas the remaining 30% is due to
environmental effects supporting a complex cause of the disorder. The use of
high-resolution genome wide array comparative genomic hybridization has proven to
be a powerful strategy to narrow down candidate regions for complex disorders. We
report on a case with a complex set of speech and language difficulties including
stuttering who presented with a 10<U+2009>Mb deletion of chromosome region 7q33-35
causing the deletion of several genes and the disruption of CNTNAP2 by deleting
the first three exons of the gene. CNTNAP2 is known to be involved in the cause
of language and speech disorders and autism spectrum disorder and is in the same 
pathway as FOXP2, another important language gene, which makes it a candidate
gene for causal studies speech and language disorders such as stuttering.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3058358
PMID: 21108403  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2010 Nov;11(11):747-59. doi: 10.1038/nrn2931.

Twitter evolution: converging mechanisms in birdsong and human speech.

Bolhuis JJ(1), Okanoya K, Scharff C.

Author information: 
(1)Behavioural Biology, Department of Biology and Helmholtz Institute, Utrecht
University, Padualaan 8, Utrecht, the Netherlands. j.j.bolhuis@uu.nl

Vocal imitation in human infants and in some orders of birds relies on
auditory-guided motor learning during a sensitive period of development. It
proceeds from 'babbling' (in humans) and 'subsong' (in birds) through distinct
phases towards the full-fledged communication system. Language development and
birdsong learning have parallels at the behavioural, neural and genetic levels.
Different orders of birds have evolved networks of brain regions for song
learning and production that have a surprisingly similar gross anatomy, with
analogies to human cortical regions and basal ganglia. Comparisons between
different songbird species and humans point towards both general and
species-specific principles of vocal learning and have identified common neural
and molecular substrates, including the forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) gene.

PMID: 20959859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Neuron. 2010 Oct 21;68(2):309-20. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.10.001.

Genetic advances in the study of speech and language disorders.

Newbury DF(1), Monaco AP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Headington, Oxford, UK.
dianne@well.ox.ac.uk

Developmental speech and language disorders cover a wide range of childhood
conditions with overlapping but heterogeneous phenotypes and underlying
etiologies. This characteristic heterogeneity hinders accurate diagnosis, can
complicate treatment strategies, and causes difficulties in the identification of
causal factors. Nonetheless, over the last decade, genetic variants have been
identified that may predispose certain individuals to different aspects of speech
and language difficulties. In this review, we summarize advances in the genetic
investigation of stuttering, speech-sound disorder (SSD), specific language
impairment (SLI), and developmental verbal dyspraxia (DVD). We discuss how the
identification and study of specific genes and pathways, including FOXP2,
CNTNAP2, ATP2C2, CMIP, and lysosomal enzymes, may advance our understanding of
the etiology of speech and language disorders and enable us to better understand 
the relationships between the different forms of impairment across the spectrum.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2977079
PMID: 20955937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov 12;87(5):671-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.09.017. Epub
2010 Oct 14.

De novo mutations in FOXP1 in cases with intellectual disability, autism, and
language impairment.

Hamdan FF(1), Daoud H, Rochefort D, Piton A, Gauthier J, Langlois M, Foomani G,
Dobrzeniecka S, Krebs MO, Joober R, Lafrenière RG, Lacaille JC, Mottron L,
Drapeau P, Beauchamp MH, Phillips MS, Fombonne E, Rouleau GA, Michaud JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre of Excellence in Neuromics of Université de Montréal, Sainte-Justine
Hospital Research Center, Montréal, Canada.

Heterozygous mutations in FOXP2, which encodes a forkhead transcription factor,
have been shown to cause developmental verbal dyspraxia and language impairment. 
FOXP2 and its closest homolog, FOXP1, are coexpressed in brain regions that are
important for language and cooperatively regulate developmental processes,
raising the possibility that FOXP1 may also be involved in developmental
conditions that are associated with language impairment. In order to explore this
possibility, we searched for mutations in FOXP1 in patients with intellectual
disability (ID; mental retardation) and/or autism spectrum disorders (ASD). We
first performed array-based genomic hybridization on sporadic nonsyndromic ID
(NSID) (n = 30) or ASD (n = 80) cases. We identified a de novo intragenic
deletion encompassing exons 4-14 of FOXP1 in a patient with NSID and autistic
features. In addition, sequencing of all coding exons of FOXP1 in sporadic NSID
(n = 110) or ASD (n = 135) cases, as well as in 570 controls, revealed the
presence of a de novo nonsense mutation (c.1573C>T [p.R525X]) in the conserved
forkhead DNA-binding domain in a patient with NSID and autism. Luciferase
reporter assays showed that the p.R525X alteration disrupts the activity of the
protein. Formal assessments revealed that both patients with de novo mutations in
FOXP1 also show severe language impairment, mood lability with physical
aggressiveness, and specific obsessions and compulsions. In conclusion, both
FOXP1 and FOXP2 are associated with language impairment, but decrease of the
former has a more global impact on brain development than that of the latter.

Copyright © 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2978954
PMID: 20950788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov 12;87(5):661-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.09.014. Epub
2010 Oct 14.

A genome-wide study reveals copy number variants exclusive to childhood obesity
cases.

Glessner JT(1), Bradfield JP, Wang K, Takahashi N, Zhang H, Sleiman PM, Mentch
FD, Kim CE, Hou C, Thomas KA, Garris ML, Deliard S, Frackelton EC, Otieno FG,
Zhao J, Chiavacci RM, Li M, Buxbaum JD, Berkowitz RI, Hakonarson H, Grant SF.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Research Center, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

The prevalence of obesity in children and adults in the United States has
increased dramatically over the past decade. Genomic copy number variations
(CNVs) have been strongly implicated in subjects with extreme obesity and
coexisting developmental delay. To complement these previous studies, we
addressed CNVs in common childhood obesity by examining children with a BMI in
the upper 5(th) percentile but excluding any subject greater than three standard 
deviations from the mean in order to reduce severe cases in the cohort. We
performed a whole-genome CNV survey of our cohort of 1080 defined European
American (EA) childhood obesity cases and 2500 lean controls (< 50(th) percentile
BMI) who were genotyped with 550,000 SNP markers. Positive findings were
evaluated in an independent African American (AA) cohort of 1479 childhood
obesity cases and 1575 lean controls. We identified 17 CNV loci that were unique 
to at least three EA cases and were both previously unreported in the public
domain and validated via quantitative PCR. Eight of these loci (47.1%) also
replicated exclusively in AA cases (six deletions and two duplications).
Replicated deletion loci consisted of EDIL3, S1PR5, FOXP2, TBCA, ABCB5, and
ZPLD1, whereas replicated duplication loci consisted of KIF2B and ARL15. We also 
observed evidence for a deletion at the EPHA6-UNQ6114 locus when the AA cohort
was investigated as a discovery set. Although these variants may be individually 
rare, our results indicate that CNVs contribute to the genetic susceptibility of 
common childhood obesity in subjects of both European and African ancestry.

Copyright © 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2978976
PMID: 20950786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2010 Oct;64(5):565-73. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1819.2010.02123.x.

Association between FOXP2 gene and speech sound disorder in Chinese population.

Zhao Y(1), Ma H, Wang Y, Gao H, Xi C, Hua T, Zhao Y, Qiu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Pediatrics, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang, China.

AIM: FOXP2 was described as the first gene relevant to human speech and language 
disorders. The main objective of this study was to compare the distribution of
FOXP2 gene polymorphisms between patients with speech sound disorder and healthy 
controls.
METHODS: Five FOXP2 polymorphisms, rs923875, rs2396722, rs1852469, rs17137124 and
rs1456031, were analyzed in 150 patients with speech sound disorder according to 
DSM-IV, as well as in 140 healthy controls. Coding exons for key domains of FOXP2
were also sequenced in all the patients.
RESULTS: Significant differences in the genotype (P = 0.001) and allele (P =
0.0025) frequencies of rs1852469 (located 5' upstream of the ATG initiator codon)
were found between patients and controls. The excess of the T allele in the
patients group remained significant after Bonferroni correction (P = 0.0126).
Further investigations revealed a risk haplotype: rs2396722T/+rs1852469T. Our
screening of key domains did not detect any point mutations in this sample. But
we detected heterozygous triplet deletion of the glutamine-encoding region of
exon 5 that alter FOXP2 protein sequence in five probands. These changes are
predicted to yield a polyglutamine tract reduction from 40 to 39 consecutive
glutamines.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support a possible role of FOXP2 in the vulnerability to
speech sound disorder, which adds further evidence to implicate this gene in
speech and language functions.

© 2010 The Authors. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences © 2010 Japanese Society
of Psychiatry and Neurology.

PMID: 20923434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;22(3):923-31. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-101206.

The speech and language FOXP2 gene modulates the phenotype of frontotemporal
lobar degeneration.

Padovani A(1), Cosseddu M, Premi E, Archetti S, Papetti A, Agosti C, Bigni B,
Cerini C, Paghera B, Bellelli G, Borroni B.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Brain Aging and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Neurology Unit,
University of Brescia, Italy.

The FOXP2 gene is mutated in a severe monogenic form of speech and language
deficits, but no study on the influence of genetic variations within FOXP2 in
neurological disorders characterized by language impairment is available yet. In 
the present study, we investigated the impact of common FOXP2 polymorphisms with 
regard to frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Two-hundred ten FTLD patients
underwent clinical and a wide standardized neuropsychological examination as well
as brain imaging. In all patients, and in 200 age-matched healthy controls, four 
FOXP2 polymorphisms were evaluated, namely rs2396753, rs1456031, rs17137124 and
rs1852469. SPECT images were analyzed by Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM5).
No significant differences of the four FOXP2 polymorphisms in genotype
distribution and allele frequency between FTLD and controls were observed. A
significant and specific association between rs1456031 TT and rs17137124 TT
genotypes and verbal fluency scores was reported. The two polymorphisms showed an
addictive effect. When the analysis was computed on the number of observations
over time, and 391 assessments considered, comparable results were obtained. FTLD
patients carrying at-risk polymorphisms showed greater hypoperfusion in the
frontal areas, namely the left inferior frontal gyrus, and putamen, compared to
the non-carriers (p < 0.005). Genetic variations within FOXP2 do not represent a 
genetic risk to FTLD per se, but modulate FTLD presentation when disease is
overt, affecting language performances and leading to hypoperfusion in
language-associated brain areas.

PMID: 20858950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Dec 15;19(24):4848-60. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq415. Epub 2010 Sep
21.

Molecular networks implicated in speech-related disorders: FOXP2 regulates the
SRPX2/uPAR complex.

Roll P(1), Vernes SC, Bruneau N, Cillario J, Ponsole-Lenfant M, Massacrier A,
Rudolf G, Khalife M, Hirsch E, Fisher SE, Szepetowski P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 910, Marseille, France.

It is a challenge to identify the molecular networks contributing to the neural
basis of human speech. Mutations in transcription factor FOXP2 cause difficulties
mastering fluent speech (developmental verbal dyspraxia, DVD), whereas mutations 
of sushi-repeat protein SRPX2 lead to epilepsy of the rolandic (sylvian) speech
areas, with DVD or with bilateral perisylvian polymicrogyria. Pathophysiological 
mechanisms driven by SRPX2 involve modified interaction with the plasminogen
activator receptor (uPAR). Independent chromatin-immunoprecipitation microarray
screening has identified the uPAR gene promoter as a potential target site bound 
by FOXP2. Here, we directly tested for the existence of a transcriptional
regulatory network between human FOXP2 and the SRPX2/uPAR complex. In silico
searches followed by gel retardation assays identified specific efficient
FOXP2-binding sites in each of the promoter regions of SRPX2 and uPAR. In
FOXP2-transfected cells, significant decreases were observed in the amounts of
both SRPX2 (43.6%) and uPAR (38.6%) native transcripts. Luciferase reporter
assays demonstrated that FOXP2 expression yielded a marked inhibition of SRPX2
(80.2%) and uPAR (77.5%) promoter activity. A mutant FOXP2 that causes DVD
(p.R553H) failed to bind to SRPX2 and uPAR target sites and showed impaired
down-regulation of SRPX2 and uPAR promoter activity. In a patient with
polymicrogyria of the left rolandic operculum, a novel FOXP2 mutation (p.M406T)
was found in the leucine-zipper (dimerization) domain. p.M406T partially impaired
the FOXP2 regulation of SRPX2 promoter activity, whereas that of the uPAR
promoter remained unchanged. Together with recently described FOXP2-CNTNAP2 and
SRPX2/uPAR links, the FOXP2-SRPX2/uPAR network provides exciting insights into
molecular pathways underlying speech-related disorders.

PMCID: PMC2989892
PMID: 20858596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Hum Mutat. 2010 Nov;31(11):E1851-60. doi: 10.1002/humu.21362.

Identification of FOXP1 deletions in three unrelated patients with mental
retardation and significant speech and language deficits.

Horn D(1), Kapeller J, Rivera-Brugués N, Moog U, Lorenz-Depiereux B, Eck S,
Hempel M, Wagenstaller J, Gawthrope A, Monaco AP, Bonin M, Riess O, Wohlleber E, 
Illig T, Bezzina CR, Franke A, Spranger S, Villavicencio-Lorini P, Seifert W,
Rosenfeld J, Klopocki E, Rappold GA, Strom TM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, Charité, University Medicine of Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

Mental retardation affects 2-3% of the population and shows a high
heritability.Neurodevelopmental disorders that include pronounced impairment in
language and speech skills occur less frequently. For most cases, the molecular
basis of mental retardation with or without speech and language disorder is
unknown due to the heterogeneity of underlying genetic factors.We have used
molecular karyotyping on 1523 patients with mental retardation to detect copy
number variations (CNVs) including deletions or duplications. These studies
revealed three heterozygous overlapping deletions solely affecting the forkhead
box P1 (FOXP1) gene. All three patients had moderate mental retardation and
significant language and speech deficits. Since our results are consistent with a
de novo occurrence of these deletions, we considered them as causal although we
detected a single large deletion including FOXP1 and additional genes in 4104
ancestrally matched controls. These findings are of interest with regard to the
structural and functional relationship between FOXP1 and FOXP2. Mutations in
FOXP2 have been previously related to monogenic cases of developmental verbal
dyspraxia. Both FOXP1 and FOXP2 are expressed in songbird and human brain regions
that are important for the developmental processes that culminate in speech and
language.

©2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3049153
PMID: 20848658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Anthropol Sci. 2010;88:113-27.

Right handed Neandertals: Vindija and beyond.

Frayer DW(1), Fiore I, Lalueza-Fox C, Radovcic J, Bondioli L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, USA. frayer@ku.edu

Comment in
    J Anthropol Sci. 2012;90:187-92; discussion 193-7.

Seven Vindija (Croatia) Neandertal teeth, dated about 32,000 years ago, were
analyzed to determine patterning of scratches on the anterior teeth. Oblique
scratches exclusively on the labial faces of incisors and canines represent a
distinctive pattern, characteristic of hand directed, non-masticatory activities.
At Vindija and elsewhere these scratches reveal activities, which were performed 
primarily with the right hand. The late Neandertals from Vindija, combined with
other studies, show that European Neandertals were predominately right-handed
with a ratio 15:2 (88.2%), a frequency similar to living people. Studies of teeth
from Atapuerca extend this modern ratio to more than 500,000 years ago and
increase the frequency of right- handers in the European fossil record to almost 
94%. Species-wide, preferential right-handedness is a defining feature of modern 
Homo sapiens, tied to brain laterality and language with the 9:1 ratio of right- 
to left- handers - a reflection of the link between left hemispheric dominance
and language. Up-to-date behavioral and anatomical studies of Neandertal fossils 
and the recent discovery of their possession of the FOXP2 gene indicate
Neandertals (and, very likely, their European ancestors) had linguistic
capacities similar to living humans.

PMID: 20834053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2010 Dec;20(6):748-53. doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2010.08.007. Epub
2010 Sep 9.

Neurobiology of vocal communication: mechanisms for sensorimotor integration and 
vocal patterning.

Kelley DB(1), Bass AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, MC2432, Columbia University, New York, NY
10025, USA. dbk3@columbia.edu

This review will focus on recent developments in the sensorimotor integration of 
vocal communication. Two broad themes are emphasized: the evolution of vocal
production and perception, and the role of social context. Advances include: a
proposal for the emergence of vocal patterning during vertebrate evolution, the
role of sensory mechanisms such as categorical perception in decoding
communication signals, contributions of sensorimotor integration phenomena
including mirror neurons and vocal learning, and mechanisms of hormone-dependent 
plasticity in both auditory and vocal systems. Transcriptional networks activated
in humans but not in chimps by the FoxP2 gene suggest molecular mechanisms
underlying vocal gestures and the emergence of human language.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3025055
PMID: 20829032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Brain Res. 2010 Nov 4;1359:116-27. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.08.085. Epub 2010
Sep 21.

Area postrema projects to FoxP2 neurons of the pre-locus coeruleus and
parabrachial nuclei: brainstem sites implicated in sodium appetite regulation.

Stein MK(1), Loewy AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The area postrema (AP) is a circumventricular organ located in the dorsal midline
of the medulla. It functions as a chemosensor for blood-borne peptides and
solutes, and converts this information into neural signals that are transmitted
to the nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS) and parabrachial nucleus (PB). One of its
NTS targets in the rat is the aldosterone-sensitive neurons which contain the
enzyme 11 ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 (HSD2). The HSD2 neurons are part
of a central network involved in sodium appetite regulation, and they innervate
numerous brain sites including the pre-locus coeruleus (pre-LC) and PB external
lateral-inner (PBel-inner) cell groups of the dorsolateral pons. Both pontine
cell groups express the transcription factor FoxP2 and become c-Fos activated
following sodium depletion. Because the AP is a component in this network, we
wanted to determine whether it also projects to the same sites as the HSD2
neurons. By using a combination of anterograde axonal and retrograde cell body
tract-tracing techniques in individual rats, we show that the AP projects to
FoxP2 immunoreactive neurons in the pre-LC and PBel-inner. Thus, the AP sends a
direct projection to both the first-order medullary (HSD2 neurons of the NTS) and
the second-order dorsolateral pontine neurons (pre-LC and PB-el inner neurons).
All three sites transmit information related to systemic sodium depletion to
forebrain sites and are part of the central neural circuitry that regulates the
complex behavior of sodium appetite.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2955772
PMID: 20816675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2010 Sep;69(9):880-95. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181ed7a41.

Decreased Lin7b expression in layer 5 pyramidal neurons may contribute to
impaired corticostriatal connectivity in huntington disease.

Zucker B(1), Kama JA, Kuhn A, Thu D, Orlando LR, Dunah AW, Gokce O, Taylor DM,
Lambeck J, Friedrich B, Lindenberg KS, Faull RL, Weiller C, Young AB,
Luthi-Carter R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

Motor dysfunction, cognitive impairment, and regional cortical atrophy indicate
cerebral cortical involvement in Huntington disease (HD). To address the
hypothesis that abnormal corticostriatal connectivity arises from
polyglutamine-related alterations in cortical gene expression, we isolated layer 
5 cortical neurons by laser-capture microdissection and analyzed
transcriptome-wide mRNA changes in them. Enrichment of transcription factor mRNAs
including foxp2, tbr1, and neuroD6, and neurotransmission- and plasticity-related
RNAs including sema5A, pclo, ntrk2, cntn1, and Lin7b were observed. Layer 5 motor
cortex neurons of transgenic R6/2 HD mice also demonstrated numerous
transcriptomic changes, including decreased expression of mRNAs encoding the Lin7
homolog b ([Lin7b] also known as veli-2 and mals2). Decreases in LIN7B and CNTN1 
RNAs were also detected in human HD layer 5 motor cortex neurons. Lin7 homolog b,
a scaffold protein implicated in synaptic plasticity, neurite outgrowth, and
cellular polarity, was decreased at the protein level in layer 5 cortical neurons
in R6/2 mice and human HD brains. Decreases in Lin7b and Lin7a mRNAs were
detected in R6/2 cortex as early as 6 weeks of age, suggesting that this is an
early pathogenetic event. Thus, decreased cortical LIN7 expression may contribute
to abnormal corticostriatal connectivity in HD.

PMCID: PMC3376025
PMID: 20720508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Mol Biol Evol. 2011 Jan;28(1):237-47. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msq182. Epub 2010 Jul
22.

Alternative splicing and gene duplication in the evolution of the FoxP gene
subfamily.

Santos ME(1), Athanasiadis A, Leitão AB, DuPasquier L, Sucena E.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Animal, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade de
Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal.

The FoxP gene subfamily of transcription factors is defined by its characteristic
110 amino acid long DNA-binding forkhead domain and plays essential roles in
vertebrate biology. Its four members, FoxP1-P4, have been extensively
characterized functionally. FoxP1, FoxP2, and FoxP4 are involved in lung, heart, 
gut, and central nervous system (CNS) development. FoxP3 is necessary and
sufficient for the specification of regulatory T cells (Tregs) of the adaptive
immune system. In Drosophila melanogaster, in silico predictions identify one
unique FoxP subfamily gene member (CG16899) with no described function. We
characterized this gene and established that it generates by alternative splicing
two isoforms that differ in the forkhead DNA-binding domain. In D. melanogaster, 
both isoforms are expressed in the embryonic CNS, but in hemocytes, only isoform 
A is expressed, hinting to a putative modulation through alternative splicing of 
FoxP1 function in immunity and/or other hemocyte-dependent processes.
Furthermore, we show that in vertebrates, this novel alternative splicing pattern
is conserved for FoxP1. In mice, this new FoxP1 isoform is expressed in brain,
liver, heart, testes, thymus, and macrophages (equivalent in function to
hemocytes). This alternative splicing pattern has arisen at the base of the
Bilateria, probably through exon tandem duplication. Moreover, our phylogenetic
analysis suggests that in vertebrates, FoxP1 is more related to the FoxP gene
ancestral form and the other three paralogues, originated through serial
duplications, which only retained one of the alternative exons. Also, the newly
described isoform differs from the other in amino acids critical for DNA-binding 
specificity. The integrity of its fold is maintained, but the molecule has lost
the direct hydrogen bonding to DNA bases leading to a putatively lower
specificity and possibly affinity toward DNA. With the present comparative study,
through the integration of experimental and in silico studies of the FoxP gene
subfamily across the animal kingdom, we establish a new model for the FoxP gene
in invertebrates and for the vertebrate FoxP1 paralogue. Furthermore, we present 
a scenario for the structural evolution of this gene class and reveal new
previously unsuspected levels of regulation for FoxP1 in the vertebrate system.

PMCID: PMC3002244
PMID: 20651048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Jul 22;11:114. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-114.

FOXP2 gene and language impairment in schizophrenia: association and epigenetic
studies.

Tolosa A(1), Sanjuán J, Dagnall AM, Moltó MD, Herrero N, de Frutos R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Faculty in Biology, University of Valencia, C/Doctor
Moliner 50, Burjassot, Valencia, Spain. amparo.tolosa@uv.es

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is considered a language related human specific
disease. Previous studies have reported evidence of positive selection for
schizophrenia-associated genes specific to the human lineage. FOXP2 shows two
important features as a convincing candidate gene for schizophrenia
vulnerability: FOXP2 is the first gene related to a language disorder, and it has
been subject to positive selection in the human lineage.
METHODS: Twenty-seven SNPs of FOXP2 were genotyped in a cohort of 293 patients
with schizophrenia and 340 controls. We analyzed in particular the association
with the poverty of speech and the intensity of auditory hallucinations.
Potential expansion of three trinucleotide repeats of FOXP2 was also screened in 
a subsample. Methylation analysis of a CpG island, located in the first exon of
the gene, was performed in post-mortem brain samples, as well as qRT-PCR
analysis.
RESULTS: A significant association was found between the SNP rs2253478 and the
item Poverty of speech of the Manchester scale (p = 0.038 after Bonferroni
correction). In patients, we detected higher degree of methylation in the left
parahippocampus gyrus than in the right one.
CONCLUSIONS: FOXP2 might be involved in the language disorder in patients with
schizophrenia. Epigenetic factors might be also implicated in the developing of
this disorder.

PMCID: PMC2918571
PMID: 20649982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jul 13;9:190. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-190.

Extensive analysis of D7S486 in primary gastric cancer supports TESTIN as a
candidate tumor suppressor gene.

Ma H(1), Weng D, Chen Y, Huang W, Pan K, Wang H, Sun J, Wang Q, Zhou Z, Wang H,
Xia J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in Southern China and Department of
Experimental Research, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, 651 Dongfeng Road
East, Guangzhou 510060, PR China.

BACKGROUND: High frequency of loss of heterozygosity (LOH) was found at D7S486 in
primary gastric cancer (GC). And we found a high frequency of LOH region on 7q31 
in primary GC from China, and identified D7S486 to be the most frequent LOH
locus. This study was aimed to determine what genes were affected by the LOH and 
served as tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) in this region. Here, a high-throughput
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) microarray fabricated in-house was used to
analyze the LOH status around D7S486 on 7q31 in 75 patients with primary GC.
Western blot, immunohistochemistry, and RT-PCR were used to assess the protein
and mRNA expression of TESTIN (TES) in 50 and 140 primary GC samples,
respectively. MTS assay was used to investigate the effect of TES overexpression 
on the proliferation of GC cell lines. Mutation and methylation analysis were
performed to explore possible mechanisms of TES inactivation in GC.
RESULTS: LOH analysis discovered five candidate genes (ST7, FOXP2, MDFIC, TES and
CAV1) whose frequencies of LOH were higher than 30%. However, only TES showed the
potential to be a TSG associated with GC. Among 140 pairs of GC samples,
decreased TES mRNA level was found in 96 (68.6%) tumor tissues when compared with
matched non-tumor tissues (p < 0.001). Also, reduced TES protein level was
detected in 36 (72.0%) of all 50 tumor tissues by Western blot (p = 0.001). In
addition, immunohistochemical staining result was in agreement with that of
RT-PCR and Western blot. Down regulation of TES was shown to be correlated with
tumor differentiation (p = 0.035) and prognosis (p = 0.035, log-rank test). Its
overexpression inhibited the growth of three GC cell lines. Hypermethylation of
TES promoter was a frequent event in primary GC and GC cell lines. However, no
specific gene mutation was observed in the coding region of the TES gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, all results support the role of TES as a TSG in
gastric carcinogenesis and that TES is inactivated primarily by LOH and CpG
island methylation.

PMCID: PMC2915979
PMID: 20626849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Hum Hered. 2010;70(2):141-9. doi: 10.1159/000313854. Epub 2010 Jul 8.

Genetic differences between five European populations.

Moskvina V(1), Smith M, Ivanov D, Blackwood D, StClair D, Hultman C, Toncheva D, 
Gill M, Corvin A, O'Dushlaine C, Morris DW, Wray NR, Sullivan P, Pato C, Pato MT,
Sklar P, Purcell S, Holmans P, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ, Kirov G; International
Schizophrenia Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Department of
Psychological Medicine and Neurology, School of Medicine, Cardiff University,
Cardiff, UK.

AIMS: We sought to examine the magnitude of the differences in SNP allele
frequencies between five European populations (Scotland, Ireland, Sweden,
Bulgaria and Portugal) and to identify the loci with the greatest differences.
METHODS: We performed a population-based genome-wide association analysis with
Affymetrix 6.0 and 5.0 arrays. We used a 4 degrees of freedom <U+03C7>(2) test to
determine the magnitude of stratification for each SNP. We then examined the
genes within the most stratified regions, using a highly conservative cutoff of p
< 10(-45).
RESULTS: We found 40,593 SNPs which are genome-wide significantly (p = 10(-8))
stratified between these populations. The largest differences clustered in gene
ontology categories for immunity and pigmentation. Some of the top loci span
genes that have already been reported as highly stratified: genes for hair color 
and pigmentation (HERC2, EXOC2, IRF4), the LCT gene, genes involved in NAD
metabolism, and in immunity (HLA and the Toll-like receptor genes TLR10, TLR1,
TLR6). However, several genes have not previously been reported as stratified
within European populations, indicating that they might also have provided
selective advantages: several zinc finger genes, two genes involved in
glutathione synthesis or function, and most intriguingly, FOXP2, implicated in
speech development.
CONCLUSION: Our analysis demonstrates that many SNPs show genome-wide significant
differences within European populations and the magnitude of the differences
correlate with the geographical distance. At least some of these differences are 
due to the selective advantage of polymorphisms within these loci.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20616560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Genes Brain Behav. 2011 Feb;10(1):17-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2010.00610.x.

Ultrasonic vocalizations in mouse models for speech and socio-cognitive
disorders: insights into the evolution of vocal communication.

Fischer J(1), Hammerschmidt K.

Author information: 
(1)Cognitive Ethology Laboratory, German Primate Center, Göttingen, Germany.
fischer@cog-ethol.de

Comparative analyses used to reconstruct the evolution of traits associated with 
the human language faculty, including its socio-cognitive underpinnings,
highlight the importance of evolutionary constraints limiting vocal learning in
non-human primates. After a brief overview of this field of research and the
neural basis of primate vocalizations, we review studies that have addressed the 
genetic basis of usage and structure of ultrasonic communication in mice, with a 
focus on the gene FOXP2 involved in specific language impairments and neuroligin 
genes (NL-3 and NL-4) involved in autism spectrum disorders. Knockout of FoxP2
leads to reduced vocal behavior and eventually premature death. Introducing the
human variant of FoxP2 protein into mice, in contrast, results in shifts in
frequency and modulation of pup ultrasonic vocalizations. Knockout of NL-3 and
NL-4 in mice diminishes social behavior and vocalizations. Although such studies 
may provide insights into the molecular and neural basis of social and
communicative behavior, the structure of mouse vocalizations is largely innate,
limiting the suitability of the mouse model to study human speech, a learned mode
of production. Although knockout or replacement of single genes has perceptible
effects on behavior, these genes are part of larger networks whose functions
remain poorly understood. In humans, for instance, deficiencies in NL-4 can lead 
to a broad spectrum of disorders, suggesting that further factors (experiential
and/or genetic) contribute to the variation in clinical symptoms. The precise
nature as well as the interaction of these factors is yet to be determined.

© 2010 The Authors. Genes, Brain and Behavior © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and
International Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society.

PMCID: PMC3047712
PMID: 20579107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Comp Neurol. 2010 Aug 15;518(16):3272-89. doi: 10.1002/cne.22399.

Molecular analysis of neocortical layer structure in the ferret.

Rowell JJ(1), Mallik AK, Dugas-Ford J, Ragsdale CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Molecular markers that distinguish specific layers of rodent neocortex are
increasingly employed to study cortical development and the physiology of
cortical circuits. The extent to which these markers represent general features
of neocortical cell type identity across mammals, however, is unknown. To assess 
the conservation of layer markers more broadly, we isolated orthologs for 15
layer-enriched genes in the ferret, a carnivore with a large, gyrencephalic
brain, and analyzed their patterns of neocortical gene expression. Our major
findings are: 1) Many but not all layer markers tested show similar patterns of
layer-specific gene expression between mouse and ferret cortex, supporting the
view that layer-specific cell type identity is conserved at a molecular level
across mammalian superorders; 2) Our panel of deep layer markers (ER81/ETV1,
SULF2, PCP4, FEZF2/ZNF312, CACNA1H, KCNN2/SK2, SYT6, FOXP2, CTGF) provides
molecular evidence that the specific stratifications of layers 5 and 6 into 5a,
5b, 6a, and 6b are also conserved between rodents and carnivores; 3) Variations
in layer-specific gene expression are more pronounced across areas of ferret
cortex than between homologous areas of mouse and ferret cortex; 4) This
variation of area gene expression was clearest with the superficial layer markers
studied (SERPINE2, MDGA1, CUX1, UNC5D, RORB/NR1F2, EAG2/KCNH5). Most
dramatically, the layer 4 markers RORB and EAG2 disclosed a molecular
sublamination to ferret visual cortex and demonstrated a molecular dissociation
among the so-called agranular areas of the neocortex. Our findings establish
molecular markers as a powerful complement to cytoarchitecture for neocortical
layer and cell-type comparisons across mammals.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2894274
PMID: 20575059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov;18(11):1216-20. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2010.96. Epub 2010
Jun 23.

Chiari I malformation, delayed gross motor skills, severe speech delay, and
epileptiform discharges in a child with FOXP1 haploinsufficiency.

Carr CW(1), Moreno-De-Luca D, Parker C, Zimmerman HH, Ledbetter N, Martin CL,
Dobyns WB, Abdul-Rahman OA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson,
MS 39216, USA.

Human FOXP2 deficiency has been identified as a cause of hereditary developmental
verbal dyspraxia. Another member of the same gene family, FOXP1, has expression
patterns that overlap with FOXP2 in some areas of the brain, and FOXP1 and FOXP2 
have the ability to form heterodimers. These findings suggest the possibility
that FOXP1 may also contribute to proper speech development. However, no such
role of FOXP1 has been established to date. Recently, a child was reported who
presented with a 3p13-14.1 deletion of four genes, including FOXP1, and a
constellation of deficits that included speech delay. In this study, we report
the case of a patient with a single deletion of FOXP1. This patient presented
with speech and motor developmental delays, a Chiari I malformation, and
epileptiform discharges. The nature of the speech deficit is different from the
primary oromotor verbal dyspraxia found in patients with FOXP2 deficiency. The
patient's developmental deficits may support a role for FOXP1 in the development 
of verbal and motor skills.

PMCID: PMC2987472
PMID: 20571508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 15;5(6):e11109. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011109.

Large-scale expression analysis reveals distinct microRNA profiles at different
stages of human neurodevelopment.

Smith B(1), Treadwell J, Zhang D, Ly D, McKinnell I, Walker PR, Sikorska M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Biological Sciences, National Research Council Canada, Ottawa,
Canada. brandon.smith@nrc-cnrc.gc.ca

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short non-coding RNAs predicted to regulate
one third of protein coding genes via mRNA targeting. In conjunction with key
transcription factors, such as the repressor REST (RE1 silencing transcription
factor), miRNAs play crucial roles in neurogenesis, which requires a highly
orchestrated program of gene expression to ensure the appropriate development and
function of diverse neural cell types. Whilst previous studies have highlighted
select groups of miRNAs during neural development, there remains a need for
amenable models in which miRNA expression and function can be analyzed over the
duration of neurogenesis.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed large-scale expression profiling of miRNAs in
human NTera2/D1 (NT2) cells during retinoic acid (RA)-induced transition from
progenitors to fully differentiated neural phenotypes. Our results revealed
dynamic changes of miRNA patterns, resulting in distinct miRNA subsets that could
be linked to specific neurodevelopmental stages. Moreover, the cell-type specific
miRNA subsets were very similar in NT2-derived differentiated cells and human
primary neurons and astrocytes. Further analysis identified miRNAs as putative
regulators of REST, as well as candidate miRNAs targeted by REST. Finally, we
confirmed the existence of two predicted miRNAs; pred-MIR191 and pred-MIR222
associated with SLAIN1 and FOXP2, respectively, and provided some evidence of
their potential co-regulation.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, we demonstrate that regulation of miRNAs
occurs in precise patterns indicative of their roles in cell fate commitment,
progenitor expansion and differentiation into neurons and glia. Furthermore, the 
similarity between our NT2 system and primary human cells suggests their roles in
molecular pathways critical for human in vivo neurogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2886071
PMID: 20559549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Life Sci. 2010 Jul 3;87(1-2):17-25. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2010.05.009. Epub 2010 May
27.

The mouse forkhead gene Foxp2 modulates expression of the lung genes.

Yang Z(1), Hikosaka K, Sharkar MT, Tamakoshi T, Chandra A, Wang B, Itakura T, Xue
X, Uezato T, Kimura W, Miura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1
Handa-yama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Japan.

AIMS: Foxp2 is expressed in the lung during mouse development. A monoclonal
anti-mouse Foxp2 antibody was created to determine the expression pattern in the 
developing lung. Next, transcriptional control of two lung genes, CC10 and
surfactant protein C (SPC) genes, by Foxp2 was investigated in H441 and A549
cells. Thirdly, expression patterns of Foxp2 and Foxf2 were compared in the
developing lung. Finally, Foxp2 expression was determined in the Foxf2-null mice.
MAIN METHODS: Immunohistochemical staining and in situ hybridization were applied
to the sections of lungs in the developing embryos.
KEY FINDINGS: Monoclonal anti-Foxp2 antibody demonstrated that Foxp2 was
expressed in the bronchial epithelium at E10.5 and its expression became
restricted to the distal portion of the elongating bronchiolar epithelium and
finally to type II alveolar epithelial cells around birth and in the adult. Foxp2
activated the SPC gene promoter in the presence of Nkx2.1 in A549 cells while it 
repressed the CC10 gene promoter in H441 cells. Next, the expression domains of
the Foxp2 and Foxf2 were found to be exclusive in the lung. Finally, the
expression of Foxp2 did not change in the lung of Foxf2-null mice.
SIGNIFICANCE: The Foxp2 protein is expressed in the growing distal edge of airway
epithelium. When the bronchiolus elongates, Foxp2 suppresses CC10 expression.
When the lung alveolus is formed, Foxp2 modulates the Nkx2.1-mediated SPC
expression in type II alveolar cells. Foxp2 and Foxf2 independently play distinct
roles in the alveoli and the mesenchyme, respectively.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20553735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Neurosci Nurs. 2010 Jun;42(3):117.

Insight and imagination.

Carroll VS.

PMID: 20550070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Genes Brain Behav. 2010 Oct;9(7):732-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2010.00607.x.
Epub 2010 Jul 6.

Knockdown of FoxP2 alters spine density in Area X of the zebra finch.

Schulz SB(1), Haesler S, Scharff C, Rochefort C.

Author information: 
(1)Freie Universität Berlin, Laboratory of Animal Behavior, Berlin, Germany.

Mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor FoxP2 impair human speech
and language. We have previously shown that deficits in vocal learning occur in
zebra finches after reduction of FoxP2 in Area X, a striatal nucleus involved in 
song acquisition. We recently showed that FoxP2 is expressed in newly generated
spiny neurons (SN) in adult Area X as well as in the ventricular zone (VZ) from
which the SN originates. Moreover, their recruitment to Area X increases
transiently during the song learning phase. The present report therefore
investigated whether FoxP2 is involved in the structural plasticity of Area X. We
assessed the proliferation, differentiation and morphology of SN after
lentivirally mediated knockdown of FoxP2 in Area X or in the VZ during the song
learning phase. Proliferation rate was not significantly affected by knockdown of
FoxP2 in the VZ. In addition, FoxP2 reduction both in the VZ and in Area X did
not affect the number of new neurons in Area X. However, at the fine-structural
level, SN in Area X bore fewer spines after FoxP2 knockdown. This effect was even
more pronounced when neurons received the knockdown before differentiation, i.e. 
as neuroblasts in the VZ. These results suggest that FoxP2 might directly or
indirectly regulate spine dynamics in Area X and thereby influence song
plasticity. Together, these data present the first evidence for a role of FoxP2
in the structural plasticity of dendritic spines and complement the emerging
evidence of physiological synaptic plasticity in FoxP2 mouse models.

Genes, Brain and Behavior © 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd and International
Behavioural and Neural Genetics Society. No claim to original US government
works.

PMID: 20528955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Neural Dev. 2010 May 27;5:14. doi: 10.1186/1749-8104-5-14.

Sonic hedgehog expressing and responding cells generate neuronal diversity in the
medial amygdala.

Carney RS(1), Mangin JM, Hayes L, Mansfield K, Sousa VH, Fishell G, Machold RP,
Ahn S, Gallo V, Corbin JG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neuroscience Research, Children's Research Institute, Children's
National Medical Center, Washington, DC 20010, USA.

BACKGROUND: The mammalian amygdala is composed of two primary functional
subdivisions, classified according to whether the major output projection of each
nucleus is excitatory or inhibitory. The posterior dorsal and ventral
subdivisions of the medial amygdala, which primarily contain inhibitory output
neurons, modulate specific aspects of innate socio-sexual and aggressive
behaviors. However, the development of the neuronal diversity of this complex and
important structure remains to be fully elucidated.
RESULTS: Using a combination of genetic fate-mapping and loss-of-function
analyses, we examined the contribution and function of Sonic hedgehog
(Shh)-expressing and Shh-responsive (Nkx2-1+ and Gli1+) neurons in the medial
amygdala. Specifically, we found that Shh- and Nkx2-1-lineage cells contribute
differentially to the dorsal and ventral subdivisions of the postnatal medial
amygdala. These Shh- and Nkx2-1-lineage neurons express overlapping and
non-overlapping inhibitory neuronal markers, such as Calbindin, FoxP2, nNOS and
Somatostatin, revealing diverse fate contributions in discrete medial amygdala
nuclear subdivisions. Electrophysiological analysis of the Shh-derived neurons
additionally reveals an important functional diversity within this lineage in the
medial amygdala. Moreover, inducible Gli1CreER(T2) temporal fate mapping shows
that early-generated progenitors that respond to Shh signaling also contribute to
medial amygdala neuronal diversity. Lastly, analysis of Nkx2-1 mutant mice
demonstrates a genetic requirement for Nkx2-1 in inhibitory neuronal
specification in the medial amygdala distinct from the requirement for Nkx2-1 in 
cerebral cortical development.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, these data reveal a differential contribution of
Shh-expressing and Shh-responding cells to medial amygdala neuronal diversity as 
well as the function of Nkx2-1 in the development of this important limbic system
structure.

PMCID: PMC2892491
PMID: 20507551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Genome Res. 2010 May;20(5):547-53. doi: 10.1101/gr.076000.108.

Neanderthal genomics and the evolution of modern humans.

Noonan JP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520, USA. james.noonan@yale.edu

Humans possess unique physical and cognitive characteristics relative to other
primates. Comparative analyses of the human and chimpanzee genomes are beginning 
to reveal sequence changes on the human lineage that may have contributed to the 
evolution of human traits. However, these studies cannot identify the genetic
differences that distinguish modern humans from archaic human species. Here, I
will discuss efforts to obtain genomic sequence from Neanderthal, the closest
known relative of modern humans. Recent studies in this nascent field have
focused on developing methods to recover nuclear DNA from Neanderthal remains.
The success of these early studies has inspired a Neanderthal genome project,
which promises to produce a reference Neanderthal genome sequence in the near
future. Technical issues, such as the level of Neanderthal sequence coverage that
can realistically be obtained from a single specimen and the presence of modern
human contaminating sequences, reduce the detection of authentic
human-Neanderthal sequence differences but may be remedied by methodological
improvements. More critical for the utility of a Neanderthal genome sequence is
the evolutionary relationship of humans and Neanderthals. Current evidence
suggests that the modern human and Neanderthal lineages diverged before the
emergence of contemporary humans. A fraction of biologically relevant
human-chimpanzee sequence differences are thus likely to have arisen and become
fixed exclusively on the modern human lineage. A reconstructed Neanderthal genome
sequence could be integrated into human-primate genome comparisons to help reveal
the evolutionary genetic events that produced modern humans.

PMCID: PMC2860157
PMID: 20439435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Rev Neurol. 2010 Mar 3;50 Suppl 3:S101-6.

[Genetic factors in the development of language].

[Article in Spanish]

Sanjuán J(1), Tolosa A, Colomer-Revuelta J, Ivorra-Martínez J, Llacer B, Jover M.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad de Valencia, España. julio.sanjuan@uv.es

AIM: To review selectively the status of the genetic research in the field of
speech and language disorders.
DEVELOPMENT: Major contributions to the field are selected, presented, and
discussed. Twin and family studies have demonstrated that most cognitive traits
including language are moderately to highly heritable. Rare mutations affecting
the FOXP2 transcription factor cause a monogenic speech and language disorder.
The results of association studies of FOXP2 with several language disorders are
controversial, probably due to the problem of phenotype definition.
CONCLUSIONS: Common forms of disorders of speech and language are mostly likely
associated with variability in the function of multiple genes. Longitudinal
studies looking at gene environmental interaction might be important in order to 
understand the mechanism of language development.

PMID: 20200835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Genome Med. 2010 Jan 26;2(1):6. doi: 10.1186/gm127.

Recent advances in the genetics of language impairment.

Newbury DF(1), Fisher SE, Monaco AP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Headington, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. dianne@well.ox.ac.uk.

Specific language impairment (SLI) is defined as an unexpected and persistent
impairment in language ability despite adequate opportunity and intelligence and 
in the absence of any explanatory medical conditions. This condition is highly
heritable and affects between 5% and 8% of pre-school children. Over the past few
years, investigations have begun to uncover genetic factors that may contribute
to susceptibility to language impairment. So far, variants in four specific genes
have been associated with spoken language disorders - forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) and
contactin-associated protein-like 2 (CNTNAP2) on chromosome7 and
calcium-transporting ATPase 2C2 (ATP2C2) and c-MAF inducing protein (CMIP) on
chromosome 16. Here, we describe the different ways in which these genes were
identified as candidates for language impairment. We discuss how characterization
of these genes, and the pathways in which they are involved, may enhance our
understanding of language disorders and improve our understanding of the
biological foundations of language acquisition.

PMCID: PMC2829931
PMID: 20193051  [PubMed]


239. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 23;285(17):13304-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.088468. Epub
2010 Feb 25.

Foxp1/2/4-NuRD interactions regulate gene expression and epithelial injury
response in the lung via regulation of interleukin-6.

Chokas AL(1), Trivedi CM, Lu MM, Tucker PW, Li S, Epstein JA, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

To determine the underlying mechanism of Foxp1/2/4-mediated transcriptional
repression, a yeast two-hybrid screen was performed that identified p66beta, a
transcriptional repressor and component of the NuRD chromatin-remodeling complex.
We show that direct interactions between Foxp1/4 and p66beta are mediated by the 
CR2 domain within p66beta and the zinc finger/leucine zipper repression domain
found in Foxp1/2/4. These direct interactions are functionally relevant as
overexpression of p66beta in combination with Foxp factors cooperatively
represses Foxp target gene expression, whereas loss of p66 and Foxp factors
results in de-repression of endogenous Foxp target genes in lung epithelial
cells. Moreover, the NuRD components HDAC1/2 associate in a macromolecular
complex with Foxp proteins, and loss of expression or inhibition of HDAC1/2
activity leads to de-repression of Foxp target gene expression. Importantly, we
show in vivo that Foxp1 and HDAC2 act cooperatively to regulate expression of the
cytoprotective cytokine interleukin-6, which results in increased resistance to
hyperoxic lung injury in Foxp1/HDAC2 compound mutant animals. These data reveal
an important interaction between the Foxp transcription factors and the NuRD
chromatin-remodeling complex that modulates transcriptional repression critical
for the lung epithelial injury response.

PMCID: PMC2857082
PMID: 20185820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Genes Brain Behav. 2010 Jun 1;9(4):390-401. doi:
10.1111/j.1601-183X.2010.00570.x. Epub 2010 Jan 30.

The structure of innate vocalizations in Foxp2-deficient mouse pups.

Gaub S(1), Groszer M, Fisher SE, Ehret G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

Heterozygous mutations of the human FOXP2 gene are implicated in a severe speech 
and language disorder. Aetiological mutations of murine Foxp2 yield abnormal
synaptic plasticity and impaired motor-skill learning in mutant mice, while
knockdown of the avian orthologue in songbirds interferes with auditory-guided
vocal learning. Here, we investigate influences of two distinct Foxp2 point
mutations on vocalizations of 4-day-old mouse pups (Mus musculus). The R552H
missense mutation is identical to that causing speech and language deficits in a 
large well-studied human family, while the S321X nonsense mutation represents a
null allele that does not produce Foxp2 protein. We ask whether vocalizations,
based solely on innate mechanisms of production, are affected by these
alternative Foxp2 mutations. Sound recordings were taken in two different
situations: isolation and distress, eliciting a range of call types, including
broadband vocalizations of varying noise content, ultrasonic whistles and clicks.
Sound production rates and several acoustic parameters showed that, despite
absence of functional Foxp2, homozygous mutants could vocalize all types of
sounds in a normal temporal pattern, but only at comparably low intensities. We
suggest that altered vocal output of these homozygotes may be secondary to
developmental delays and somatic weakness. Heterozygous mutants did not differ
from wild-types in any of the measures that we studied (R552H ) or in only a few 
(S321X ), which were in the range of differences routinely observed for different
mouse strains. Thus, Foxp2 is not essential for the innate production of
emotional vocalizations with largely normal acoustic properties by mouse pups.

PMCID: PMC2895353
PMID: 20132318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Br J Haematol. 2010 Apr;149(2):221-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2009.08070.x.
Epub 2010 Jan 20.

Aberrant expression of the neuronal transcription factor FOXP2 in neoplastic
plasma cells.

Campbell AJ(1), Lyne L, Brown PJ, Launchbury RJ, Bignone P, Chi J, Roncador G,
Lawrie CH, Gatter KC, Kusec R, Banham AH.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Oxford,
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

FOXP2 mutation causes a severe inherited speech and language defect, while the
related transcription factors FOXP1, FOXP3 and FOXP4 are implicated in cancer.
FOXP2 mRNA and protein expression were characterised in normal human tissues,
haematological cell lines and multiple myeloma (MM) patients' samples. FOXP2 mRNA
and protein were absent in mononuclear cells from different anatomical sites,
lineages and stages of differentiation. However, FOXP2 mRNA and protein was
detected in several lymphoma (8/20) and all MM-derived cell lines (n = 4). FOXP2 
mRNA was expressed in bone marrow samples from 96% of MM patients (24/25), 66.7% 
of patients with the pre-neoplastic plasma cell proliferation monoclonal
gammopathy of undetermined significance (MGUS) (6/9), but not in reactive plasma 
cells. The frequency of FOXP2 protein expression in CD138(+) plasma cells was
significantly higher in MGUS (P = 0.0005; mean 46.4%) and MM patients (P < or =
0.0001; mean 57.3%) than in reactive marrows (mean 2.5%). FOXP2 (>10% nuclear
positivity) was detectable in 90.2% of MM (55/61) and 90.9% of MGUS (10/11)
patients, showing more frequent expression than CD56 and labelling 75% of
CD56-negative MM (9/12). FOXP2 represents the first transcription factor whose
expression consistently differentiates normal and abnormal plasma cells and FOXP2
target genes are implicated in MM pathogenesis.

PMID: 20096010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 6;5(1):e8592. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008592.

Song practice promotes acute vocal variability at a key stage of sensorimotor
learning.

Miller JE(1), Hilliard AT, White SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Science, University of California Los Angeles, Los
Angeles, California, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Trial by trial variability during motor learning is a feature encoded
by the basal ganglia of both humans and songbirds, and is important for
reinforcement of optimal motor patterns, including those that produce speech and 
birdsong. Given the many parallels between these behaviors, songbirds provide a
useful model to investigate neural mechanisms underlying vocal learning. In
juvenile and adult male zebra finches, endogenous levels of FoxP2, a molecule
critical for language, decrease two hours after morning song onset within area X,
part of the basal ganglia-forebrain pathway dedicated to song. In juveniles,
experimental 'knockdown' of area X FoxP2 results in abnormally variable song in
adulthood. These findings motivated our hypothesis that low FoxP2 levels increase
vocal variability, enabling vocal motor exploration in normal birds.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: After two hours in either singing or non-singing 
conditions (previously shown to produce differential area X FoxP2 levels),
phonological and sequential features of the subsequent songs were compared across
conditions in the same bird. In line with our prediction, analysis of songs sung 
by 75 day (75d) birds revealed that syllable structure was more variable and
sequence stereotypy was reduced following two hours of continuous practice
compared to these features following two hours of non-singing. Similar trends in 
song were observed in these birds at 65d, despite higher overall within-condition
variability at this age.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Together with previous work, these findings point to
the importance of behaviorally-driven acute periods during song learning that
allow for both refinement and reinforcement of motor patterns. Future work is
aimed at testing the observation that not only does vocal practice influence
expression of molecular networks, but that these networks then influence
subsequent variability in these skills.

PMCID: PMC2797613
PMID: 20066039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 6;5(1):e8548. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008548.

Striatal FoxP2 is actively regulated during songbird sensorimotor learning.

Teramitsu I(1), Poopatanapong A, Torrisi S, White SA.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Program in Molecular, Cellular and Integrative Physiology,
University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the FOXP2 transcription factor lead to language
disorders with developmental onset. Accompanying structural abnormalities in
cortico-striatal circuitry indicate that at least a portion of the behavioral
phenotype is due to organizational deficits. We previously found parallel FoxP2
expression patterns in human and songbird cortico/pallio-striatal circuits
important for learned vocalizations, suggesting that FoxP2's function in birdsong
may generalize to speech.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used zebra finches to address the question of 
whether FoxP2 is additionally important in the post-organizational function of
these circuits. In both humans and songbirds, vocal learning depends on auditory 
guidance to achieve and maintain optimal vocal output. We tested whether
deafening prior to or during the sensorimotor phase of song learning disrupted
FoxP2 expression in song circuitry. As expected, the songs of deafened juveniles 
were abnormal, however basal FoxP2 levels were unaffected. In contrast, when
hearing or deaf juveniles sang for two hours in the morning, FoxP2 was acutely
down-regulated in the striatal song nucleus, area X. The extent of
down-regulation was similar between hearing and deaf birds. Interestingly, levels
of FoxP2 and singing were correlated only in hearing birds.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Hearing appears to link FoxP2 levels to the amount of
vocal practice. As juvenile birds spent more time practicing than did adults,
their FoxP2 levels are likely to be low more often. Behaviorally-driven
reductions in the mRNA encoding this transcription factor could ultimately affect
downstream molecules that function in vocal exploration, especially during
sensorimotor learning.

PMCID: PMC2796720
PMID: 20062527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Neuroscience. 2010 Mar 31;166(3):785-95. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.12.054.
Epub 2010 Jan 6.

Alpha-synuclein deficiency affects brain Foxp1 expression and ultrasonic
vocalization.

Kurz A(1), Wöhr M, Walter M, Bonin M, Auburger G, Gispert S, Schwarting RK.

Author information: 
(1)Section Molecular Neurogenetics, Department Neurology, Goethe University
Medical School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

Alpha-synuclein is an abundant protein implicated in synaptic function and
plasticity, but the molecular mechanism of its action is not understood. Missense
mutations and gene duplication/triplication events result in Parkinson's disease,
a neurodegenerative disorder of old age with impaired movement and emotion
control. Here, we systematically investigated the striatal as well as the
cerebellar transcriptome profile of alpha-synuclein-deficient mice via a
genome-wide microarray survey in order to gain hypothesis-free molecular insights
into the physiological function of alpha-synuclein. A genotype-dependent,
specific and strong downregulation of forkhead box P1 (Foxp1) transcript levels
was observed in all brain regions from postnatal age until old age and could be
validated by qPCR. In view of the co-localization and heterodimer formation of
FOXP1 with FOXP2, a transcription factor with a well established role for
vocalization, and the reported regulation of both alpha-synuclein and FOXP2
expression during avian song learning, we performed a detailed assessment of
mouse movements and vocalizations in the postnatal period. While there was no
difference in isolation-induced behavioral activity in these animals, the
alpha-synuclein-deficient mice exhibited an increased production of
isolation-induced ultrasonic vocalizations (USVs). This phenotype might also
reflect the reduced expression of the anxiety-related GABA-A receptor subunit
gamma 2 (Gabrg2) we observed. Taken together, we identified an early behavioral
consequence of alpha-synuclein deficiency and accompanying molecular changes,
which supports the notion that the neural connectivity of sound or emotion
control systems is affected.

Copyright 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20056137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Neuroscience. 2010 Mar 17;166(2):551-63. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.12.055.
Epub 2009 Dec 28.

The forkhead transcription factors, Foxp1 and Foxp2, identify different
subpopulations of projection neurons in the mouse cerebral cortex.

Hisaoka T(1), Nakamura Y, Senba E, Morikawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1
Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.

Foxp1 and Foxp2, which belong to the forkhead transcription factor family, are
expressed in the developing and adult mouse brain, including the striatum,
thalamus, and cerebral cortex. Recent reports suggest that FOXP1 and FOXP2 are
involved in the development of speech and language in humans. Although both Foxp1
and Foxp2 are expressed in the neural circuits that mediate speech and language, 
including the corticostriatal circuit, the functions of Foxp1 and Foxp2 in the
cerebral cortex remain unclear. To gain insight into the functions of Foxp1 and
Foxp2 in the cerebral cortex, we characterized Foxp1- and Foxp2-expressing cells 
in postnatal and adult mice using immunohistochemistry. In adult mice, Foxp1 was 
expressed in neurons of layers III-VIa in the neocortex, whereas the expression
of Foxp2 was restricted to dopamine and cyclic adenosine
3',5'-monophosphate-regulated phosphoprotein, 32 kDa (DARPP-32)(+) neurons of
layer VI. In addition, Foxp2 was weakly expressed in the neurons of layer V of
the motor cortex and hindlimb and forelimb regions of the primary somatosensory
cortex. Both Foxp1 and Foxp2 were expressed in the ionotropic glutamate receptor 
(GluR) 2/3(+) neurons, and colocalized with none of GluR1, gamma-aminobutyric
acid, calbindin, and parvalbumin, indicating that expression of Foxp1 and Foxp2
is restricted to projection neurons. During the postnatal stages, Foxp1 was
predominantly expressed in Satb2(+)/Ctip2(-) corticocortical projection neurons
of layers III-V and in Tbr1(+) corticothalamic projection neurons of layer VIa.
Although Foxp2 was also expressed in Tbr1(+) corticothalamic projection neurons
of layer VI, no colocalization of Foxp1 with Foxp2 was observed from postnatal
day (P) 0 to P7. These findings suggest that Foxp1 and Foxp2 may be involved in
the development of different cortical projection neurons during the early
postnatal stages in addition to the establishment and maintenance of different
cortical circuits from the late postnatal stage to adulthood.

Copyright (c) 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20040367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Dev Neurobiol. 2010 Feb 15;70(3):195-203. doi: 10.1002/dneu.20772.

Late-postnatal cannabinoid exposure persistently increases FoxP2 expression
within zebra finch striatum.

Soderstrom K(1), Luo B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Brody School of Medicine, East
Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina 27834, USA. soderstromk@ecu.edu

Prior work has shown that cannabinoid exposure of zebra finches during
sensorimotor stages of vocal development alters song patterns produced in
adulthood. We are currently working to identify physiological substrates for this
altered song learning. FoxP2 is a transcription factor associated with altered
vocal development in both zebra finches and humans. This protein shows a distinct
pattern of expression within Area X of striatum that coincides with peak
expression of CB(1) cannabinoid receptors during sensorimotor learning.
Coincident expression in a brain region essential for song learning led us to
test for a potential signaling interaction. We have found that cannabinoid
agonists acutely increase expression of FoxP2 throughout striatum. When
administered during sensorimotor song learning, cannabinoids increase basal
levels of striatal FoxP2 expression in adulthood. Thus, song-altering cannabinoid
treatments are associated with persistent increases in basal expression of FoxP2 
in zebra finch striatum.

PMCID: PMC2907664
PMID: 20017118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Neuroscience. 2010 Mar 10;166(1):220-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.12.004.
Epub 2009 Dec 14.

Molecular characterization of the intercalated cell masses of the amygdala:
implications for the relationship with the striatum.

Kaoru T(1), Liu FC, Ishida M, Oishi T, Hayashi M, Kitagawa M, Shimoda K,
Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Group, Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life
Sciences, Machida-shi, Tokyo 194-8511, Japan.

The intercalated cell masses of the amygdala consist of cell clusters located
between the basolateral complex of the amygdala and its surrounding structures
including the central nucleus of the amygdala and the external capsule. Although 
recent studies have revealed that the intercalated cell masses may play an
important role in emotional learning and memory, there are only a few reports on 
its molecular characterization. We examined the expression patterns of
transcription factors in the intercalated cell masses in late embryonic stage and
postnatal rats, and non-human primates. Dlx5, Foxp2, Pbx3 and Meis2 were
expressed in all subdivisions of the intercalated cell masses, while Ebf1, Nkx2.1
and Foxp1 were not. In contrast, Pax6 was only expressed in a small population of
the main intercalated islands, but not in the medial or lateral cell clusters. In
addition, few Pax6-positive neurons co-expressed Foxp2. Thus the intercalated
cell masses do not contain a homogeneous population of neurons, in terms of their
molecular constituents. Given that Foxp2, Pbx3 and Meis2 are preferentially
expressed in distinct cell populations in the developing striatum, and that the
intercalated cell masses of the amygdala appear to be a ventrocaudal expansion of
the striatum, the intercalated neurons may share a common origin with some types 
of neurons located in the dorsal striatum.

Copyright 2010 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20004711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2010 Feb;28(2):289-95. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2009.11.007.
Epub 2009 Nov 14.

Characterization of grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idellus) Foxp1a/1b/2: evidence
for their involvement in the activation of peripheral blood lymphocyte
subpopulations.

Yang M(1), Wang Y, Wang X, Chen C, Zhou H.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, University of Electronic Science and
Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, People's Republic of China.

Foxp subfamily belongs to the Fox family of winged-helix transcription factors
and plays critical roles in multiple biological processes including development
and immunoregulation. However, little is known about the regulation and function 
of Foxp subfamily in fish immune system. In this study, we obtained the complete 
cDNAs of grass carp Foxp1a, Foxp1b and Foxp2. They possess the conserved leucine 
zipper domain, zinc finger domain and forkhead domain when compared with their
mammalian counterparts, except that Foxp1a lacks the forkhead domain. Real-time
RT-PCR analysis showed that their transcripts were mainly found in thymus, spleen
and peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs). In grass carp PBLs, both LPS and PHA
were effective in elevating Foxp1b mRNA levels but had no effect on Foxp1a mRNA, 
while only PHA affected Foxp2 mRNA expression. Using the same cell model, PHA was
revealed to up-regulate mRNA expression of T-cell marker genes (CD4-like,
CD8alpha and CD8beta) but not B-cell marker gene (IgM). Unlike PHA, LPS increased
IgM mRNA level but did not affect T-cell marker gene expression. These findings
suggest that PHA and LPS may act on distinct lymphocyte subpopulations in grass
carp PBLs and provide evidence for the involvement of Foxp1b and Foxp2 in the
activation of different lymphocyte subpopulations in grass carp.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19922798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Brain Lang. 2010 Oct;115(1):21-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2009.10.002. Epub 2009 Nov
13.

Genes and vocal learning.

White SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Science, University of California, Los Angeles,
90095, USA. sawhite@ucla.edu

Could a mutation in a single gene be the evolutionary lynchpin supporting the
development of human language? A rare mutation in the molecule known as FOXP2
discovered in a human family seemed to suggest so, and its sequence phylogeny
reinforced a Chomskian view that language emerged wholesale in humans. Spurred by
this discovery, research in primates, rodents and birds suggests that FoxP2 and
other language-related genes are interactors in the neuromolecular networks that 
underlie subsystems of language, such symbolic understanding, vocal learning and 
theory of mind. The whole picture will only come together through comparative and
integrative study into how the human language singularity evolved.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2888939
PMID: 19913899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Biochem Soc Trans. 2009 Dec;37(Pt 6):1263-9. doi: 10.1042/BST0371263.

Unravelling neurogenetic networks implicated in developmental language disorders.

Vernes SC(1), Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

Childhood syndromes disturbing language development are common and display high
degrees of heritability. In most cases, the underlying genetic architecture is
likely to be complex, involving multiple chromosomal loci and substantial
heterogeneity, which makes it difficult to track down the crucial genomic risk
factors. Investigation of rare Mendelian phenotypes offers a complementary route 
for unravelling key neurogenetic pathways. The value of this approach is
illustrated by the discovery that heterozygous FOXP2 (where FOX is forkhead box) 
mutations cause an unusual monogenic disorder, characterized by problems with
articulating speech along with deficits in expressive and receptive language.
FOXP2 encodes a regulatory protein, belonging to the forkhead box family of
transcription factors, known to play important roles in modulating gene
expression in development and disease. Functional genetics using human neuronal
models suggest that the different FOXP2 isoforms generated by alternative
splicing have distinct properties and may act to regulate each other's activity. 
Such investigations have also analysed the missense and nonsense mutations found 
in cases of speech and language disorder, showing that they alter intracellular
localization, DNA binding and transactivation capacity of the mutated proteins.
Moreover, in the brains of mutant mice, aetiological mutations have been found to
disrupt the synaptic plasticity of Foxp2-expressing circuitry. Finally, although 
mutations of FOXP2 itself are rare, the downstream networks which it regulates in
the brain appear to be broadly implicated in typical forms of language
impairment. Thus, through ongoing identification of regulated targets and
interacting co-factors, this gene is providing the first molecular entry points
into neural mechanisms that go awry in language-related disorders.

PMID: 19909259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Nature. 2009 Nov 12;462(7270):213-7. doi: 10.1038/nature08549.

Human-specific transcriptional regulation of CNS development genes by FOXP2.

Konopka G(1), Bomar JM, Winden K, Coppola G, Jonsson ZO, Gao F, Peng S, Preuss
TM, Wohlschlegel JA, Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurogenetics, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of
California, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA. gena@alum.mit.edu

Comment in
    Nature. 2009 Nov 12;462(7270):169-70.

The signalling pathways controlling both the evolution and development of
language in the human brain remain unknown. So far, the transcription factor
FOXP2 (forkhead box P2) is the only gene implicated in Mendelian forms of human
speech and language dysfunction. It has been proposed that the amino acid
composition in the human variant of FOXP2 has undergone accelerated evolution,
and this two-amino-acid change occurred around the time of language emergence in 
humans. However, this remains controversial, and whether the acquisition of these
amino acids in human FOXP2 has any functional consequence in human neurons
remains untested. Here we demonstrate that these two human-specific amino acids
alter FOXP2 function by conferring differential transcriptional regulation in
vitro. We extend these observations in vivo to human and chimpanzee brain, and
use network analysis to identify novel relationships among the differentially
expressed genes. These data provide experimental support for the functional
relevance of changes in FOXP2 that occur on the human lineage, highlighting
specific pathways with direct consequences for human brain development and
disease in the central nervous system (CNS). Because FOXP2 has an important role 
in speech and language in humans, the identified targets may have a critical
function in the development and evolution of language circuitry in humans.

PMCID: PMC2778075
PMID: 19907493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Nature. 2009 Nov 12;462(7270):169-70. doi: 10.1038/462169a.

Language evolution: The importance of being human.

Dominguez MH, Rakic P.

Comment on
    Nature. 2009 Nov 12;462(7270):213-7.

PMID: 19907485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Neurosci. 2009 Oct 28;29(43):13672-83. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2127-09.2009.

Differential gene expression in the developing lateral geniculate nucleus and
medial geniculate nucleus reveals novel roles for Zic4 and Foxp2 in visual and
auditory pathway development.

Horng S(1), Kreiman G, Ellsworth C, Page D, Blank M, Millen K, Sur M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Primary sensory nuclei of the thalamus process and relay parallel channels of
sensory input into the cortex. The developmental processes by which these nuclei 
acquire distinct functional roles are not well understood. To identify novel
groups of genes with a potential role in differentiating two adjacent sensory
nuclei, we performed a microarray screen comparing perinatal gene expression in
the principal auditory relay nucleus, the medial geniculate nucleus (MGN), and
principal visual relay nucleus, the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN). We
discovered and confirmed groups of highly ranked, differentially expressed genes 
with qRT-PCR and in situ hybridization. A functional role for Zic4, a
transcription factor highly enriched in the LGN, was investigated using Zic4-null
mice, which were found to have changes in topographic patterning of
retinogeniculate projections. Foxp2, a transcriptional repressor expressed
strongly in the MGN, was found to be positively regulated by activity in the MGN.
These findings identify roles for two differentially expressed genes, Zic4 and
Foxp2, in visual and auditory pathway development. Finally, to test whether
modality-specific patterns of gene expression are influenced by extrinsic
patterns of input, we performed an additional microarray screen comparing the
normal MGN to "rewired" MGN, in which normal auditory afferents are ablated and
novel retinal inputs innervate the MGN. Data from this screen indicate that
rewired MGN acquires some patterns of gene expression that are present in the
developing LGN, including an upregulation of Zic4 expression, as well as novel
patterns of expression which may represent unique processes of cross-modal
plasticity.

PMCID: PMC3395072
PMID: 19864579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2009 Oct;52(5):1157-74. doi:
10.1044/1092-4388(2009/07-0162).

Language features in a mother and daughter of a chromosome 7;13 translocation
involving FOXP2.

Tomblin JB(1), O'Brien M, Shriberg LD, Williams C, Murray J, Patil S, Bjork J,
Anderson S, Ballard K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Speech Pathology and Audiology, University of Iowa, WJSHC, Iowa 
City, IA, USA. j-tomblin@uiowa.edu

PURPOSE: The aims of this study were (a) to locate the breakpoints of a balanced 
translocation (7;13) within a mother (B) and daughter (T); (b) to describe the
language and cognitive skills of B and T; and (c) to compare this profile with
affected family members of the KE family who have a mutation within FOXP2.
METHOD: The breakpoint locations for T and B were identified by use of
fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis followed by DNA sequencing using
long-range polymer chain reaction amplification methods. The cognitive and
language characteristics were obtained via the use of standardized tests of
intelligence, receptive and expressive vocabulary and sentence use, and a
spontaneous language sample.
RESULTS: The translocation breakpoints in T and B were found in FOXP2 on
chromosome 7 and in RFC3 on chromosome 13. T and B's pattern of relative
strengths and weaknesses across their cognitive and language performance was
found to be similar to descriptions of the affected KE family members.
CONCLUSIONS: Prior reports of individuals with chromosomal rearrangements of
FOXP2 have emphasized their speech impairment. This study provides additional
evidence that language-in particular, grammar-is likely to be influenced by
abnormalities of FOXP2 function.

PMCID: PMC2760059
PMID: 19797137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Dec 1;517(4):405-51. doi: 10.1002/cne.22115.

Genoarchitectonic profile of developing nuclear groups in the chicken pretectum.

Ferran JL(1), de Oliveira ED, Merchán P, Sandoval JE, Sánchez-Arrones L,
Martínez-De-La-Torre M, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, University of Murcia, Murcia,
E30071, Spain.

Earlier results on molecularly coded progenitor domains in the chicken pretectum 
revealed an anteroposterior subdivision of the pretectum in precommissural (PcP),
juxtacommissural (JcP), and commissural (CoP) histogenetic areas, each specified 
differentially (Ferran et al. [2007] J Comp Neurol 505:379-403). Here we examined
the nuclei derived from these areas with regard to characteristic gene expression
patterns and gradual histogenesis (eventually, migration patterns). We sought a
genoarchitectonic schema of the avian pretectum within the prosomeric model of
the vertebrate forebrain (Puelles and Rubenstein [2003] Trends Neurosci
26:469-476; Puelles et al. [2007] San Diego: Academic Press).
Transcription-factor gene markers were used to selectively map derivatives of the
three pretectal histogenetic domains: Pax7 and Pax6 (CoP); FoxP1 and Six3 (JcP); 
and FoxP2, Ebf1, and Bhlhb4 (PcP). The combination of this genoarchitectonic
information with additional data on Lim1, Tal2, and Nbea mRNA expression and
other chemoarchitectonic results allowed unambiguous characterization of some 30 
pretectal nuclei. Apart from grouping them as derivatives of the three early
anteroposterior domains, we also assigned them to postulated dorsoventral
subdomains (Ferran et al. [2007]). Several previously unknown neuronal
populations were detected, thus expanding the list of pretectal structures, and
we corrected some apparently confused concepts in the earlier literature. The
composite gene expression map represents a substantial advance in anatomical and 
embryological knowledge of the avian pretectum. Many nuclear primordia can be
recognized long before the mature differentiated state of the pretectum is
achieved. This study provides fundamental notions for ultimate scientific study
of the specification and regionalization processes building up this brain area,
both in birds and other vertebrates.

PMID: 19790262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2009 Oct;40(4):369-71.

[FoxP2 gene and bird song].

[Article in Chinese]

Liao CS, Li J, Li DF.

PMID: 21417043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Dec 15;18(24):4853-67. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp457. Epub 2009 Sep
25.

Detecting natural selection by empirical comparison to random regions of the
genome.

Yu F(1), Keinan A, Chen H, Ferland RJ, Hill RS, Mignault AA, Walsh CA, Reich D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. fyu@bcm.edu

Historical episodes of natural selection can skew the frequencies of genetic
variants, leaving a signature that can persist for many tens or even hundreds of 
thousands of years. However, formal tests for selection based on allele frequency
skew require strong assumptions about demographic history and mutation, which are
rarely well understood. Here, we develop an empirical approach to test for
signals of selection that compares patterns of genetic variation at a candidate
locus with matched random regions of the genome collected in the same way. We
apply this approach to four genes that have been implicated in syndromes of
impaired neurological development, comparing the pattern of variation in our
re-sequencing data with a large-scale, genomic data set that provides an
empirical null distribution. We confirm a previously reported signal at FOXP2,
and find a novel signal of selection centered at AHI1, a gene that is involved in
motor and behavior abnormalities. The locus is marked by many high frequency
derived alleles in non-Africans that are of low frequency in Africans, suggesting
that selection at this or a closely neighboring gene occurred in the ancestral
population of non-Africans. Our study also provides a prototype for how empirical
scans for ancient selection can be carried out once many genomes are sequenced.

PMCID: PMC2778377
PMID: 19783549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Nature. 2009 Aug 20;460(7258):947-8. doi: 10.1038/460947a.

Mouse genetics: The check-up.

Abbott A.

PMID: 19693060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Biol Evol. 2009 Oct;26(10):2181-4. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msp143. Epub 2009 Jul 
16.

Linkage disequilibrium extends across putative selected sites in FOXP2.

Ptak SE, Enard W, Wiebe V, Hellmann I, Krause J, Lachmann M, Pääbo S.

Polymorphism data in humans suggest that the gene encoding the transcription
factor FOXP2, which influences speech and language development, has been subject 
to a selective sweep within the last 260,000 years. It has been proposed that one
or both of two substitutions that occurred on the human evolutionary lineage and 
changed amino acids were the targets for selection. In apparent contradiction to 
this is the observation that these substitutions are present in Neandertals who
diverged from humans maybe 300,000-400,000 years ago. We have collected
polymorphism data upstream and downstream of the substitutions. Contrary to what 
is expected, following a selective sweep, we find that the haplotypes extend
across the two sites. We discuss possible explanations for these observations.
One of them is that the selective sweep reflected in FOXP2 polymorphism data was 
not associated with the two amino acid substitutions.

PMID: 19608635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Brain Res. 2009 Sep 15;1289:30-6. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.06.092. Epub 2009 
Jul 9.

Modified sound-evoked brainstem potentials in Foxp2 mutant mice.

Kurt S(1), Groszer M, Fisher SE, Ehret G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Neurobiology, University of Ulm, D-89069 Ulm, Germany.

Heterozygous mutations of the human FOXP2 gene cause a developmental disorder
involving impaired learning and production of fluent spoken language. Previous
investigations of its aetiology have focused on disturbed function of neural
circuits involved in motor control. However, Foxp2 expression has been found in
the cochlea and auditory brain centers and deficits in auditory processing could 
contribute to difficulties in speech learning and production. Here, we recorded
auditory brainstem responses (ABR) to assess two heterozygous mouse models
carrying distinct Foxp2 point mutations matching those found in humans with
FOXP2-related speech/language impairment. Mice which carry a Foxp2-S321X nonsense
mutation, yielding reduced dosage of Foxp2 protein, did not show systematic ABR
differences from wildtype littermates. Given that speech/language disorders are
observed in heterozygous humans with similar nonsense mutations (FOXP2-R328X),
our findings suggest that auditory processing deficits up to the midbrain level
are not causative for FOXP2-related language impairments. Interestingly, however,
mice harboring a Foxp2-R552H missense mutation displayed systematic alterations
in ABR waves with longer latencies (significant for waves I, III, IV) and smaller
amplitudes (significant for waves I, IV) suggesting that either the synchrony of 
synaptic transmission in the cochlea and in auditory brainstem centers is
affected, or fewer auditory nerve fibers and fewer neurons in auditory brainstem 
centers are activated compared to wildtypes. Therefore, the R552H mutation
uncovers possible roles for Foxp2 in the development and/or function of the
auditory system. Since ABR audiometry is easily accessible in humans, our data
call for systematic testing of auditory functions in humans with FOXP2 mutations.

PMID: 19596273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Neurogenetics. 2010 Feb;11(1):81-9. doi: 10.1007/s10048-009-0205-1. Epub 2009 Jul
7.

Disruption of CNTNAP2 and additional structural genome changes in a boy with
speech delay and autism spectrum disorder.

Poot M(1), Beyer V, Schwaab I, Damatova N, Van't Slot R, Prothero J, Holder SE,
Haaf T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre Utrecht, Mail stop: 
KC.04.084.2, P. O. Box 85090, 3508, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
M.Poot@umcutrecht.nl

Patients with autism spectrum disorder (ASD) frequently harbour chromosome
rearrangements and segmental aneuploidies, which allow us to identify candidate
genes. In a boy with mild facial dysmorphisms, speech delay and ASD, we
reconstructed by karyotyping, FISH and SNP array-based segmental aneuploidy
profiling a highly complex chromosomal rearrangement involving at least three
breaks in chromosome 1 and seven breaks in chromosome 7. Chromosome banding
revealed an inversion of region 7q32.1-7q35 on the derivative chromosome 7. FISH 
with region-specific BACs mapped both inversion breakpoints and revealed
additional breaks and structural changes in the CNTNAP2 gene. Two gene segments
were transposed and inserted into the 1q31.2 region, while the CNTNAP2 segment
between the two transposed parts as well as intron 13 to the 5-UTR were retained 
on the der(7). SNP array analysis revealed an additional de novo deletion
encompassing the distal part of intron1 and exon 2 of CNTNAP2, which contains
FOXP2 binding sites. Second, we found another de novo deletion on chromosome
1q41, containing 15 annotated genes, including KCTD3 and USH2A. Disruptions of
the CNTNAP2 gene have been associated with ASD and with Gilles de la Tourette
syndrome (GTS). Comparison of disruptions of CNTNAP2 in patients with GTS and ASD
suggests that large proximal disruptions result in either GTS or ASD, while
relatively small distal disruptions may be phenotypically neutral. For full-blown
ASD to develop, a proximal disruption of CNTNAP2 may have to occur concomitantly 
with additional genome mutations such as hemizygous deletions of the KCTD3 and
USH2A genes.

PMID: 19582487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cell. 2009 May 29;137(5):961-71. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.041.

A humanized version of Foxp2 affects cortico-basal ganglia circuits in mice.

Enard W(1), Gehre S, Hammerschmidt K, Hölter SM, Blass T, Somel M, Brückner MK,
Schreiweis C, Winter C, Sohr R, Becker L, Wiebe V, Nickel B, Giger T, Müller U,
Groszer M, Adler T, Aguilar A, Bolle I, Calzada-Wack J, Dalke C, Ehrhardt N,
Favor J, Fuchs H, Gailus-Durner V, Hans W, Hölzlwimmer G, Javaheri A, Kalaydjiev 
S, Kallnik M, Kling E, Kunder S, Mossbrugger I, Naton B, Racz I, Rathkolb B,
Rozman J, Schrewe A, Busch DH, Graw J, Ivandic B, Klingenspor M, Klopstock T,
Ollert M, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Schulz H, Wolf E, Wurst W, Zimmer A, Fisher SE,
Morgenstern R, Arendt T, de Angelis MH, Fischer J, Schwarz J, Pääbo S.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6, D-04103
Leipzig, Germany. enard@eva.mpg.de

Comment in
    Cell. 2009 May 29;137(5):800-2.

It has been proposed that two amino acid substitutions in the transcription
factor FOXP2 have been positively selected during human evolution due to effects 
on aspects of speech and language. Here, we introduce these substitutions into
the endogenous Foxp2 gene of mice. Although these mice are generally healthy,
they have qualitatively different ultrasonic vocalizations, decreased exploratory
behavior and decreased dopamine concentrations in the brain suggesting that the
humanized Foxp2 allele affects basal ganglia. In the striatum, a part of the
basal ganglia affected in humans with a speech deficit due to a nonfunctional
FOXP2 allele, we find that medium spiny neurons have increased dendrite lengths
and increased synaptic plasticity. Since mice carrying one nonfunctional Foxp2
allele show opposite effects, this suggests that alterations in cortico-basal
ganglia circuits might have been important for the evolution of speech and
language in humans.

PMID: 19490899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Cell. 2009 May 29;137(5):800-2. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.05.013.

FOXP2 and Human Cognition.

Lieberman P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912,
USA. philip_lieberman@brown.edu

Comment on
    Cell. 2009 May 29;137(5):961-71.

Using a mouse model, Enard et al. (2009) show that the human form of the FOXP2
gene increases synaptic plasticity and dendrite connectivity in the basal
ganglia. These results partly explain the enhanced capability of cortico-basal
ganglia circuits in the human brain that regulate critical aspects of language,
cognition, and motor control.

PMID: 19490887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Neuroscience. 2009 Sep 15;162(4):1150-62. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.05.022. Epub 2009 May 20.

Characterization of Foxp2-expressing cells in the developing spinal cord.

Morikawa Y(1), Hisaoka T, Senba E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Wakayama Medical University, 811-1,
Kimiidera, Wakayama 641-8509, Japan. yoshim@wakayama-med.ac.jp

Two members of winged-helix/forkhead transcription factors, Foxp1 and Foxp2, are 
expressed in the developing and adult CNS, including the striatum, cerebral
cortex, and thalamus. In a previous study, we have demonstrated that Foxp1 is
expressed in a subpopulation of V1 interneurons in addition to motor neurons of
the spinal cord during mouse embryogenesis. However, the detailed expression
pattern of Foxp2 and its relationship with Foxp1 in the developing spinal cord
remains to be elucidated. To shed light on the potential roles of Foxp1 and Foxp2
in the developing spinal cord, we characterized Foxp2-expressing cells during
mouse embryogenesis. At embryonic day (E) 11.0, Foxp2-expressing cells were first
observed in the ventral spinal cord, which were Pax6(-), p27(+), and
neuron-specific class III beta-tubulin(+) postmitotic neurons. Between E13.5 and 
E15.5, high expression of Foxp2 was observed in both medial and lateral parts of 
the ventral spinal cord. Double-immunofluorescence staining for Foxp2 with some
homeodomain transcription factors revealed that Foxp2-expressing neurons were
Pax2(+), En1(+), Evx1(-), Chx10(-), Gata3(-), and Lhx3(-) V1 interneurons in the 
intermediate zone throughout the ventral spinal cord, indicating that
Foxp2-expressing neurons were also V1 interneurons with the same phenotypes as
Foxp1-expressing interneurons. In addition, neither Foxp1 nor Foxp2 was expressed
in ventral calbindin(+) Renshaw cells. However, Foxp2 did not colocalize with
Foxp1 in interneurons of the ventral spinal cord. These findings suggest that
Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed in the distinct subsets of V1 interneurons that
belong to non-Renshaw cells in the ventral spinal cord during embryogenesis.
Thus, Foxp1 and Foxp2 may be involved in the determination of the cell type
identities during late embryogenesis: the classes of neurotransmitters and the
functional subtypes of non-Renshaw cells, such as Ia and Ib inhibitory
interneurons.

PMID: 19463901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Forensic Sci. 2009 Jul;54(4):857-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1556-4029.2009.01063.x.
Epub 2009 Apr 24.

Simple and sensitive method for identification of human DNA by allele-specific
polymerase chain reaction of FOXP2.

Hiroshige K(1), Soejima M, Nishioka T, Kamimura S, Koda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Forensic Science Laboratory, Fukuoka Prefectural Police Headquarters, 7-7
Higashikoen, Hakata-ku, Fukuoka 812-8576, Japan.

The forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) gene is specifically involved in speech and language 
development in humans. The sequence is well conserved among many vertebrate
species but has accumulated amino acid changes in the human lineage. The aim of
this study was to develop a simple method to discriminate between human and
nonhuman vertebrate DNA in forensic specimens by amplification of a
human-specific genomic region. In the present study, we designed an
allele-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using primers to amplify smaller 
than 70-bp regions of FOXP2 to identify DNA as being of human or nonhuman,
including ape, origin. PCR amplification was also successfully performed using
fluorescence-labeled primers, and this method allows a single PCR reaction with a
genomic DNA sample as small as 0.01 ng. This system also identified the presence 
of human DNA in two blood stains stored for 20 and 38 years. The results
suggested the potential usefulness of FOXP2 as an identifier of human DNA in
forensic samples.

PMID: 19457146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Sci Am. 2009 May;300(5):44-9.

What makes us human?

Pollard KS(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of California, San Francisco, USA.

PMID: 19438048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Eur J Hum Genet. 2009 Oct;17(10):1354-8. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.43. Epub 2009 Apr
8.

Assessing the impact of FOXP1 mutations on developmental verbal dyspraxia.

Vernes SC(1), MacDermot KD, Monaco AP, Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford, UK.

Neurodevelopmental disorders that disturb speech and language are highly
heritable. Isolation of the underlying genetic risk factors has been hampered by 
complexity of the phenotype and potentially large number of contributing genes.
One exception is the identification of rare heterozygous mutations of the FOXP2
gene in a monogenic syndrome characterised by impaired sequencing of articulatory
gestures, disrupting speech (developmental verbal dyspraxia, DVD), as well as
multiple deficits in expressive and receptive language. The protein encoded by
FOXP2 belongs to a divergent subgroup of forkhead-box transcription factors, with
a distinctive DNA-binding domain and motifs that mediate hetero- and
homodimerisation. FOXP1, the most closely related member of this subgroup, can
directly interact with FOXP2 and is co-expressed in neural structures relevant to
speech and language disorders. Moreover, investigations of songbird orthologues
indicate that combinatorial actions of the two proteins may play important roles 
in vocal learning, leading to the suggestion that human FOXP1 should be
considered a strong candidate for involvement in DVD. Thus, in this study, we
screened the entire coding region of FOXP1 (exons and flanking intronic sequence)
for nucleotide changes in a panel of probands used earlier to detect novel
mutations in FOXP2. A non-synonymous coding change was identified in a single
proband, yielding a proline-to-alanine change (P215A). However, this was also
found in a random control sample. Analyses of non-coding SNP changes did not find
any correlation with affection status. We conclude that FOXP1 mutations are
unlikely to represent a major cause of DVD.

PMCID: PMC2784575
PMID: 19352412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Eur J Med Genet. 2009 Mar-Jun;52(2-3):123-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2009.03.012.
Epub 2009 Mar 28.

A 785kb deletion of 3p14.1p13, including the FOXP1 gene, associated with speech
delay, contractures, hypertonia and blepharophimosis.

Pariani MJ(1), Spencer A, Graham JM Jr, Rimoin DL.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, 8700 Beverly Blvd,
Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA. mitchel.pariani@cshs.org

We report a child with a 785kb deletion of the 3p14.1p13 region including the
genes FOXP1, EIF4E3, PROK2, GPR27 resulting in speech delay, contractures,
hypertonia and blepharophimosis. FOXP1 and FOXP2 are transcription factors
containing a polyglutamine tract and a forkhead DNA binding domain. They both
play a role in the developing human foregut and brain [W. Shu, M.M. Lu, Y. Zhang,
P. Tucker, D. Zhou, E.E. Morrisey, Foxp2 and Foxp1 cooperatively regulate lung
and esophagus development, Development 134 (2007) 1991-2000, E. Spiteri, G.
Konopka, G. Coppola, J. Bomar, M. Oldham, J. Ou, et al. Identification of the
transcriptional targets of FOXP2, a gene linked to speech and language, in
developing human brain, Am. J. Hum. Genet. 81 (2007) 1144-1157, S. Tamura, Y.
Morikawa, H. Iwanishi, T. Hisaoka, E. Senba. Expression pattern of the
winged-helix/forkhead transcription factor Foxp1 in the developing central
nervous system, Gene Expr. Patterns. 3 (2003) 193-197.]. Mutations in FOXP2 are
known to cause severe speech and language abnormalities [C.S.L. Lai, S.E. Fisher,
J.A. Hurst, F. Vargha-Khadem, A.P. Monaco, A forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a
severe speech and language disorder, Nature 413 (2001) 519-523.] in humans and
animals. It has been suggested that overlap of FOXP1 and FOXP2 expression in the 
songbird and human brain may indicate that mutations in FOXP1 would also result
in speech and language abnormalities. The roles of EIF4E3, PROK2 and GPR27 are
also evaluated.

PMCID: PMC2853231
PMID: 19332160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Neuroreport. 2009 Apr 22;20(6):611-6. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e32832a0a44.

Analysis of Foxp2 expression in the cerebellum reveals a possible sex difference.

Hamson DK(1), Csupity AS, Gaspar JM, Watson NV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, 
Canada.

Deletion of the gene Foxp2 affects ultrasonic vocalizations and induces
morphological abnormalities in the Purkinje cell layer of the cerebellum in mice.
Castration decreases the production of ultrasonic vocalizations in rats, but the 
mechanisms of androgenic regulation of ultrasounds are unknown. We explored a
possible relationship between Foxp2 expression and androgens in the Purkinje cell
layer of wild-type and androgen-insensitive male rats, as well as estrous and
nonestrous female rats. Analyses of relative optical densities of Foxp2
immunoreactivity revealed significantly greater immunolabeling in the wild-type
and testicular feminization mutation-affected male rats (which did not differ
from each other) than in either the estrous or nonestrous female rats (which
similarly did not differ from each other). These data suggest a sex difference in
Foxp2 expression in the cerebellum.

PMID: 19319003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Trends Genet. 2009 Apr;25(4):166-77. doi: 10.1016/j.tig.2009.03.002. Epub 2009
Mar 21.

FOXP2 as a molecular window into speech and language.

Fisher SE(1), Scharff C.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford, OX3 7BN, UK. simon.fisher@well.ox.ac.uk

Rare mutations of the FOXP2 transcription factor gene cause a monogenic syndrome 
characterized by impaired speech development and linguistic deficits. Recent
genomic investigations indicate that its downstream neural targets make broader
impacts on common language impairments, bridging clinically distinct disorders.
Moreover, the striking conservation of both FoxP2 sequence and neural expression 
in different vertebrates facilitates the use of animal models to study ancestral 
pathways that have been recruited towards human speech and language.
Intriguingly, reduced FoxP2 dosage yields abnormal synaptic plasticity and
impaired motor-skill learning in mice, and disrupts vocal learning in songbirds. 
Converging data indicate that Foxp2 is important for modulating the plasticity of
relevant neural circuits. This body of research represents the first functional
genetic forays into neural mechanisms contributing to human spoken language.

PMID: 19304338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Child Psychol Psychiatry. 2009 Jan;50(1-2):116-25. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-7610.2008.02006.x.

Speaking genes or genes for speaking? Deciphering the genetics of speech and
language.

Grigorenko EL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Yale University, Child Study Center, 230 South Frontage Road, New Haven, CT
06519-1124, USA. elena.grigorenko@yale.edu

BACKGROUND: This article selectively reviews the status of the genetic research
in the field of speech and language disorders.
METHODS: Major contributions to the field are selected, presented, and discussed.
RESULTS: The field presents itself through a variety of findings, characterized
by both consistencies and inconsistencies.
CONCLUSIONS: The last 30 + years of the field unequivocally testify to the
importance of genetic factors in the acquisition of speech and language. However,
the details of how these factors exert their influence are yet to be determined.

PMCID: PMC4108247
PMID: 19220595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Rev Neurol. 2009 Jan 16-31;48(2):75-84.

[Huntington's disease: molecular foundations and implications in the
characterisation of the neuronal mechanisms responsible for linguistic
processing].

[Article in Spanish]

Benítez-Burraco A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Filología Española, Area de Lingüística, Facultad de
Filología, Universidad de Oviedo, Asturias, España. abenitez@us.es

INTRODUCTION: Certain neuronal models of linguistic processing suggest that the
basal ganglia play a key role in this processing, thanks to their integration
within the so-called cortico-striato-cortical circuits.
DEVELOPMENT: A comparative analysis, at a phenotypic and molecular level, of the 
pathologies, syndromes and disorders that entail a structural alteration and/or a
dysfunction of the basal ganglia is essential for validating and optimising such 
models, as well as for achieving a suitable characterisation of the genetic
program responsible for the development and functioning of the 'language organ'. 
One of the most significant pathologies in this respect is Huntington's disease, 
which is caused by the destruction of certain groups of neurons in the caudate
nucleus.
CONCLUSIONS: This type of analysis seems to confirm the hypothesis that, during
linguistic processing, the basal ganglia would be responsible for planning and
modulating the sequential tasks related to the so-called procedural (or
computational or rule-applying) component of language. Equally plausible,
however, is the hypothesis that, inside them, there would be regions that are
specifically dedicated to processing the different (morphological and
syntactical) rules that go to make up said component. Additionally, the nature of
these subcortical structures and the function they perform would explain the
simultaneous presence of an articulatory and a linguistic deficit in disorders in
which the basal ganglia are affected. Lastly, this kind of analysis is also
making it possible to characterise some of the genes that constitute the genetic 
program responsible for the development and functioning of this region of the
brain and, by extension, of the 'language organ'.

PMID: 19173205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Biol Chem. 2009 Feb 27;284(9):5709-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807322200. Epub 2008
Dec 24.

Foxp3 processing by proprotein convertases and control of regulatory T cell
function.

de Zoeten EF(1), Lee I, Wang L, Chen C, Ge G, Wells AD, Hancock WW, Ozkaynak E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology Hepatology and Nutrition, Children's Hospital of 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4318, USA.

Foxp3 is a 47-kDa transcription factor central to regulatory T cell (Treg)
function. The importance of Foxp3(+) Tregs in controlling self-reactive T cells
and preventing autoimmunity is well established. Our analysis of Foxp3 expression
in natural Tregs led to identification of a shorter 41-kDa Foxp3 species in
activated Tregs, indicating that Foxp3 may be processed by proteolytic cleavage
upon cell activation. Searches of murine and human Foxp3 sequences for potential 
cleavage sites responsible for the generation of the short Foxp3 species revealed
the presence of two RXXR proprotein convertase (PC) motifs, (48)RDLR(51) and
(414)RKKR(417), located near the N- and C-terminal ends, respectively. We show,
using retroviral expression of Foxp3 in CD4(+) T cells, that Foxp3 is cleaved at 
both the N- and C-terminal RXXR sites and that mutagenesis of the RXXR motif
prevents cleavage. The cleaved forms of Foxp3 are found in the chromatin fraction
but not in nuclear or cytoplasmic extracts. CD4(+) T cells expressing Foxp3
species engineered to mimic N-terminally, C-terminally, or N- and C-terminally
cleaved Foxp3 forms are functionally distinct, as indicated by differences in
expression of key Treg genes, such as interleukin-10 and cytotoxic T-lymphocyte
antigen 4 (CTLA-4). In addition, CD4(+) cells expressing C-cleaved Foxp3 are
superior to those that express WT Foxp3 in preventing experimental colitis.
Coexpression of Foxp3 with PC1 or PC7 results in cleavage of the Foxp3 C
terminus. The mechanism by which Foxp3 is processed likely extends to other
members of the FoxP subfamily, because Foxp1 and Foxp2 also have N-terminal RXXR 
proteolytic cleavage motifs at similar locations to Foxp3. Our results indicate
that the generation of fully functionally competent Tregs is complex and
dependent on the generation of multiple forms of Foxp3 that have differing
effects on Treg cytokine production and suppressive function.

PMCID: PMC2645825
PMID: 19117830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2009;665:117-29.

FOXP genes, neural development, speech and language disorders.

Takahashi H(1), Takahashi K, Liu FC.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Group, Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life
Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. hiroshi@mitils.jp

Foxp subfamily genes were recently recognized to be members of the Fox gene
family. Foxp subfamily members contain a zinc finger domain and a leucine zipper 
motif in addition to a forkhead domain and their DNA binding capacities and
transcriptional activities are regulated by homo- and heterodimerization via a
zinc finger and a leucine zipper motif. Three Foxp subfamily members are
abundantly expressed in developing brains. The expression patterns of these genes
are overlapping, but they are distinctly expressed in some regions. Thus these
genes appear to be involved in the development control of the central nervous
system. Recently, FOXP2, a member of the Foxp subfamily, was identified as the
first gene to be linked to an inherited form of language and speech disorder. The
discovery of a mutation in FOXP2 in a family with a speech and language disorder 
opened a new window to understanding the genetic cascades and neural circuits
that underlie speech and language via molecular approaches. The spatiotemporal
FOXP2 mRNA expression pattern suggests that the basic neural network that
underlies speech and language may include motor-related circuits, including
frontostriatal and/or frontocerebellar circuits. This assumption is supported by 
brain imaging data obtained by using fMRI and PET on the FOXP2-mutated patients
and also by analysis of Foxp2 mutant mice.

PMID: 20429420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Nov;24(11):906-7. doi: 10.1051/medsci/20082411906.

[The FoxP2 gene makes humans speak and birds twitter].

[Article in French]

Rochefort C.

PMID: 19038086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Psychiatr Genet. 2008 Dec;18(6):295-301. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283060fa5.

Polymorphisms of coding trinucleotide repeats of homeogenes in neurodevelopmental
psychiatric disorders.

Laroche F(1), Ramoz N, Leroy S, Fortin C, Rousselot-Paillet B, Philippe A,
Colleaux L, Bresson JL, Mogenet A, Golse B, Mouren-Simeoni MC, Gorwood P, Galli
T, Simonneau M, Krebs MO, Robel L.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM AVENIR, Institut Jacques Monod UMR7592, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVES: Autism (MIM#209850) and schizophrenia (MIM#181500) are both
neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders characterized by a highly genetic
component. Homeogenes and forkhead genes encode transcription factors, which have
been involved in brain development and cell differentiation. Thus, they are
relevant candidate genes for psychiatric disorders. Genetic studies have reported
an association between autism and DLX2, HOXA1, EN2, ARX, and FOXP2 genes whereas 
only three studies of EN2, OTX2, and FOXP2 were performed on schizophrenia.
Interestingly, most of these candidate genes contain trinucleotide repeats coding
for polyamino acid stretch in which instability can be the cause of
neurodevelopmental disorders. Our goal was to identify variations of coding
trinucleotide repeats in schizophrenia, autism, and idiopathic mental
retardation.
METHODS: We screened the coding trinucleotide repeats of OTX1, EN1, DLX2, HOXA1, 
and FOXP2 genes in populations suffering from schizophrenia (247 patients),
autism (98 patients), and idiopathic mental retardation (56 patients), and
compared them with control populations (112 super controls and 202 healthy
controls).
RESULTS: Novel deletions and insertions of coding trinucleotide repeats were
found in the DLX2, HOXA1, and FOXP2 genes. Most of these variations were detected
in controls and no difference in their distribution was observed between patient 
and control groups. Two different polymorphisms in FOXP2 were, however, found
only in autistic patients and the functional consequences of these variations of 
repeats have to be characterized and correlated to particular clinical features.
CONCLUSION: This study did not identify specific disease risk variants of
trinucleotide repeats in OTX1, EN1, DLX2, HOXA1, and FOXP2 candidate genes in
neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders.

PMID: 19018235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Science. 2008 Nov 14;322(5904):1057-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1167437.

Behavior. A biolinguistic agenda.

Hauser MD(1), Bever T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, Human Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. mdh@wjh.harvard.edu

PMID: 19008433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. N Engl J Med. 2008 Nov 27;359(22):2381-3. doi: 10.1056/NEJMe0807813. Epub 2008
Nov 5.

The genetics of speech and language impairments.

Stromswold K.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Nov 27;359(22):2337-45.

PMID: 18987364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. N Engl J Med. 2008 Nov 27;359(22):2337-45. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa0802828. Epub 2008 
Nov 5.

A functional genetic link between distinct developmental language disorders.

Vernes SC(1), Newbury DF, Abrahams BS, Winchester L, Nicod J, Groszer M, Alarcón 
M, Oliver PL, Davies KE, Geschwind DH, Monaco AP, Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2008 Nov 27;359(22):2381-3.

BACKGROUND: Rare mutations affecting the FOXP2 transcription factor cause a
monogenic speech and language disorder. We hypothesized that neural pathways
downstream of FOXP2 influence more common phenotypes, such as specific language
impairment.
METHODS: We performed genomic screening for regions bound by FOXP2 using
chromatin immunoprecipitation, which led us to focus on one particular gene that 
was a strong candidate for involvement in language impairments. We then tested
for associations between single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in this gene and 
language deficits in a well-characterized set of 184 families affected with
specific language impairment.
RESULTS: We found that FOXP2 binds to and dramatically down-regulates CNTNAP2, a 
gene that encodes a neurexin and is expressed in the developing human cortex. On 
analyzing CNTNAP2 polymorphisms in children with typical specific language
impairment, we detected significant quantitative associations with nonsense-word 
repetition, a heritable behavioral marker of this disorder (peak association,
P=5.0x10(-5) at SNP rs17236239). Intriguingly, this region coincides with one
associated with language delays in children with autism.
CONCLUSIONS: The FOXP2-CNTNAP2 pathway provides a mechanistic link between
clinically distinct syndromes involving disrupted language.

2008 Massachusetts Medical Society

PMCID: PMC2756409
PMID: 18987363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Comp Neurol. 2009 Jan 1;512(1):84-100. doi: 10.1002/cne.21881.

Conservation and diversity of Foxp2 expression in muroid rodents: functional
implications.

Campbell P(1), Reep RL, Stoll ML, Ophir AG, Phelps SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611, USA.
pcampbel@zoo.ufl.edu

FOXP2, the first gene causally linked to a human language disorder, is implicated
in song acquisition, production, and perception in oscine songbirds, the
evolution of speech and language in hominids, and the evolution of echolocation
in bats. Despite the evident relevance of Foxp2 to vertebrate acoustic
communication, a comprehensive description of neural expression patterns is
currently lacking in mammals. Here we use immunocytochemistry to systematically
describe the neural distribution of Foxp2 protein in four species of muroid
rodents: Scotinomys teguina and S. xerampelinus ("singing mice"), the deer mouse,
Peromyscus maniculatus, and the lab mouse, Mus musculus. While expression
patterns were generally highly conserved across brain regions, we identified
subtle but consistent interspecific differences in Foxp2 distribution, most
notably in the medial amygdala and nucleus accumbens, and in layer V cortex
throughout the brain. Throughout the brain, Foxp2 was highly enriched in areas
involved in modulation of fine motor output (striatum, mesolimbic dopamine
circuit, olivocerebellar system) and in multimodal sensory processing and
sensorimotor integration (thalamus, cortex). We propose a generalized model for
Foxp2-modulated pathways in the adult brain including, but not limited to, fine
motor production and auditory perception.

PMCID: PMC2677918
PMID: 18972576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Oct 24;8:103. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-103.

Domain-specific regulation of foxP2 CNS expression by lef1.

Bonkowsky JL(1), Wang X, Fujimoto E, Lee JE, Chien CB, Dorsky RI.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Department of Pediatrics, University of Utah 
School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84108, USA.
joshua.bonkowsky@hsc.utah.edu

BACKGROUND: FOXP2 is a forkhead transcription factor critical for normal
development of language in humans, but little is known of its broader function
and regulation during central nervous system (CNS) development. We report here
that lef1, a member of the Lef/Tcf family of transcription factors activated by
Wnt signaling, regulates foxP2 during embryogenesis, and we isolate novel foxP2
enhancers which are lef1-dependent.
RESULTS: Loss, knock down, or inhibition of lef1 led to loss of foxP2 expression.
We isolated DNA fragments from the foxP2 genomic region that function as
enhancers to drive GFP expression in the CNS during development, including in the
telencephalon, diencephalon, eye, tectum, and hindbrain. Three of these
enhancers, foxP2-enhancerA.1, foxP2-enhancerB, and foxP2-enhancerD, contain
putative Lef1 binding sites, and are regulated by lef1. However, two other
genomic fragments containing Lef1 sites failed to function in vivo as enhancers. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed that Lef1 binds to sites in
foxP2-enhancerA.1 and foxP2-enhancerB.
CONCLUSION: This work shows that lef1 is necessary for expression of foxP2 in the
tectum, mid-hindbrain boundary, and hindbrain during CNS development, and is the 
first insight into the upstream regulation of foxP2 during development. We also
demonstrate that in silico prediction of potential lef1 binding sites poorly
predicts their ability to function in vivo as enhancers. The foxP2 enhancers we
identified will allow dissection of foxP2's role during CNS development.

PMCID: PMC2579431
PMID: 18950487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Ideggyogy Sz. 2008 Jul 30;61(7-8):220-9.

[Evolution of human brain and intelligence].

[Article in Hungarian]

Lakatos L(1), Janka Z.

Author information: 
(1)Pszichiátriai Magánrendelés, Székesfehérvár. forumhumanum.szfvar@t-online.hu

The biological evolution, including human evolution is mainly driven by
environmental changes. Accidental genetic modifications and their innovative
results make the successful adaptation possible. As we know the human evolution
started 7-8 million years ago in the African savannah, where upright position and
bipedalism were significantly advantageous. The main drive of improving manual
actions and tool making could be to obtain more food. Our ancestor got more meat 
due to more successful hunting, resulting in more caloric intake, more protein
and essential fatty acid in the meal. The nervous system uses disproportionally
high level of energy, so better quality of food was a basic condition for the
evolution of huge human brain. The size of human brain was tripled during 3.5
million years, it increased from the average of 450 cm3 of Australopithecinae to 
the average of 1350 cm3 of Homo sapiens. A genetic change in the system
controlling gene expression could happen about 200 000 years ago, which
influenced the development of nervous system, the sensorimotor function and
learning ability for motor processes. The appearance and stabilisation of FOXP2
gene structure as feature of modern man coincided with the first presence and
quick spread of Homo sapiens on the whole Earth. This genetic modification made
opportunity for human language, as the basis of abrupt evolution of human
intelligence. The brain region being responsible for human language is the left
planum temporale, which is much larger in left hemisphere. This shows the most
typical human brain asymmetry. In this case the anatomical asymmetry means a
clearly defined functional asymmetry as well, where the brain hemispheres act
differently. The preference in using hands, the lateralised using of tools
resulted in the brain asymmetry, which is the precondition of human language and 
intelligence. However, it cannot be held anymore, that only humans make tools,
because our closest relatives, the chimpanzees are able not only to use, but also
to make tools, and they can be taught how to produce quite difficult ones. Some
brain characteristics connected to human consciousness and intelligence, like
brain asymmetry, the "consciousness" or "theory of mind" based on mirror neurons 
are surprisingly present in monkeys. Nevertheless, the human intelligence is
extremely flexible and different, while the animal intelligence is specialised,
producing one thing at high level. Based on recent knowledge the level of
intelligence is related anatomically to the number of cortical neurons and
physiologically to the speed of conductivity of neural pathways, the latter being
dependent on the degree of myelinisation. The improvement of cognitive functions 
including language is driver by the need of more effective communication
requiring less energy, the need of social dominance, the competitive advantages
within smaller groups and species or against other species, which improves the
opportunity for obtaining food. Better mental skills give also sexual dominance, 
which is beneficial for stabilising "cleverness" genes. The evolutionary history 
of human consciousness emphasises its adaptive survival helping nature. The
evolution of language was the basic condition of conscious thinking as a
qualitative change, which fundamentally differentiate us from all other
creatures.

PMID: 18763477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Neurophysiol. 2008 Oct;100(4):2015-25. doi: 10.1152/jn.90415.2008. Epub 2008
Aug 13.

Birdsong decreases protein levels of FoxP2, a molecule required for human speech.

Miller JE(1), Spiteri E, Condro MC, Dosumu-Johnson RT, Geschwind DH, White SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Science, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Cognitive and motor deficits associated with language and speech are seen in
humans harboring FOXP2 mutations. The neural bases for FOXP2 mutation-related
deficits are thought to reside in structural abnormalities distributed across
systems important for language and motor learning including the cerebral cortex, 
basal ganglia, and cerebellum. In these brain regions, our prior research showed 
that FoxP2 mRNA expression patterns are strikingly similar between developing
humans and songbirds. Within the songbird brain, this pattern persists throughout
life and includes the striatal subregion, Area X, that is dedicated to song
development and maintenance. The persistent mRNA expression suggests a role for
FoxP2 that extends beyond the formation of vocal learning circuits to their
ongoing use. Because FoxP2 is a transcription factor, a role in shaping circuits 
likely depends on FoxP2 protein levels which might not always parallel mRNA
levels. Indeed our current study shows that FoxP2 protein, like its mRNA, is
acutely downregulated in mature Area X when adult males sing with some
differences. Total corticosterone levels associated with the different behavioral
contexts did not vary, indicating that differences in FoxP2 levels are not likely
attributable to stress. Our data, together with recent reports on FoxP2's target 
genes, suggest that lowered FoxP2 levels may allow for expression of genes
important for circuit modification and thus vocal variability.

PMCID: PMC2576221
PMID: 18701760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Neurosci Res. 2008 Nov 1;86(14):3106-16. doi: 10.1002/jnr.21770.

Expression of Foxp4 in the developing and adult rat forebrain.

Takahashi K(1), Liu FC, Hirokawa K, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Group, Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life
Sciences, Tokyo, Japan. hiroshi@mitils.jp

Many members of the Fox family are transcription factors that regulate the
morphogenesis of various organs. In the present study, we examined the expression
pattern of Foxp4, a member of the Foxp subfamily, and compared its pattern with
the patterns of Foxp2 and Foxp1 in the developing rat brain. In general, these
three Foxp genes shared partially overlapping and yet differentially regulated
expression patterns in the striatum, the cerebral cortex, and the thalamus during
development. In the developing dorsal telencephalon, a mediolateral gradient of
Foxp4 was present in the cortical primordium, with high levels in the ventricular
zone of the medial cortex. By contrast, no gradient of Foxp2 and Foxp1 was
detected in the dorsal telencephalon. At later stages, Foxp4 was expressed
throughout all cortical layers as opposed to the layer-specific expression of
Foxp2 and Foxp1. In the developing striatum, the pattern of Foxp4 expression was 
distinct from the patterns of Foxp2 and Foxp1. The spatial expression pattern of 
Foxp4 was similar to that of Foxp2 during the early embryonic stage. However,
from the late embryonic stage to postnatal day 4, Foxp4 was expressed in a
mediolateral gradient and decreased in the striosomal compartment, in contrast to
the striosomal expression of Foxp2 and homogeneous expression of Foxp1. Foxp4 was
developmentally down-regulated such that Foxp4 was undetectable in the forebrain 
after postnatal day 14, whereas Foxp2 and Foxp1 were persistently expressed in
adulthood. Given that Foxp4, Foxp2, and Foxp1 are capable of heterodimerization
for transcriptional regulation, the partially overlapping expression patterns of 
Foxp4, Foxp2, and Foxp1 in different domains of the developing forebrain suggest 
that each member and/or different combinatory actions of the Foxp subfamily may
play a pivotal role in regulating forebrain development.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18561326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Epilepsy Res. 2008 Jul;80(1):9-17. doi: 10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2008.03.014. Epub
2008 May 27.

Familial epilepsy and developmental dysphasia: description of an Italian pedigree
with autosomal dominant inheritance and screening of candidate loci.

Michelucci R(1), Scudellaro E, Testoni S, Passarelli D, Riguzzi P, Diani E, Vazza
G, Vianello V, Scabar A, Mostacciuolo ML, Volpi L, Rubboli G, Pinardi F, Mancardi
MM, Tassinari CA, Nobile C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Division of Neurology, Via Altura 3, Bellaria
Hospital, 40139 Bologna, Italy. roberto.michelucci@ausl.bo.it

PURPOSE: To describe a familial epileptic condition combining a peculiar
electro-clinical pattern with developmental language dysfunction in a large
Italian kindred.
METHODS: We studied the clinical and neurophysiological features of a
4-generation family with 10 affected members (3 deceased). We also analysed in 7 
affected and 7 healthy members microsatellite markers for 51 candidate loci for
epilepsy, including 42 loci containing ion channel genes expressed in the brain, 
as well as the SPCH1 and SRPX2 loci.
RESULTS: Five of the seven living affected members (aged 20-58 years) had the
full phenotype (seizures, EEG epileptiform abnormalities and dysphasia). The
language dysfunction was the first symptom, becoming evident since the period of 
language development and mainly consisting of phonemic and syntactic paraphasias,
difficulty of expression and reduced verbal fluency. The seizures had their onset
between 2 and 23 years and were reported as epileptic falls (4) associated or not
with myoclonic features, absences (3), tonic-clonic (1) and complex partial
seizures (1). The seizures were easily controlled by antiepileptic treatment in
all patients except one. In the five patients with a good response of seizures to
treatment, the EEG tracings showed the coexistence of focal and generalized
epileptiform abnormalities; in the refractory patient the interictal EEG
demonstrated bilateral asynchronous fronto-temporal paroxysms with left
predominance and ictal SEEG recording suggested a multifocal origin of the
discharges. MRI of the brain was normal in all patients. Linkage analysis
provided negative LOD scores for all the investigated loci.
CONCLUSION: We have described a novel familial pattern of epilepsy and
developmental dysphasia which is not genetically linked to epilepsy or speech
disorder loci, as documented by a candidate-gene linkage approach.

PMID: 18508238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Annu Rev Genomics Hum Genet. 2008;9:143-60. doi:
10.1146/annurev.genom.9.081307.164411.

Positive selection in the human genome: from genome scans to biological
significance.

Kelley JL(1), Swanson WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
jkelley@uchicago.edu

Here we review the evidence for positive selection in the human genome and its
role in human evolution and population differentiation. In recent years, there
has been a dramatic increase in the use of genome-wide scans to identify
adaptively evolving loci in the human genome. Attention is now turning to
understanding the biological relevance and adaptive significance of the regions
identified as being subject to recent positive selection. Examples of adaptively 
evolving loci are discussed, specifically LCT and FOXP2. Comprehensive studies of
these loci also provide information about the functional relevance of the
selected alleles. We discuss current studies examining the role of positive
selection in shaping copy number variation and noncoding genomic regions and
highlight challenges presented by the study of positive selection in the human
genome.

PMID: 18505377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Trends Neurosci. 2008 Jun;31(6):265-72. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2008.02.011. Epub
2008 May 9.

Cerebellar contributions to speech production and speech perception:
psycholinguistic and neurobiological perspectives.

Ackermann H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, University
of Tuebingen, Hoppe-Seyler-Strasse 3, D-72076 Tuebingen, Germany.
hermann.ackermann@uni-tuebingen.de

Articulate speech represents a unique trait of our species. Besides other
structures, the cerebellum pertains to the brain network engaged in spoken
language production. Data from different sources point at a dual role of this
organ within the verbal domain: (i) the cerebellum appears to subserve the online
sequencing of syllables into fast, smooth and rhythmically organized larger
utterances, and (ii) furthermore, the cerebellum seems to participate in the
temporal organization of internal speech, that is, a prearticulatory verbal code.
Impaired prearticulatory verbal coding mechanisms could explain at least some of 
the perceptual and cognitive deficits observed in cerebellar disorders. Recent
genetic studies indicate that distinct mutations of a specific regulatory gene
(FOXP2) promoted the emergence of articulate speech during the course of hominid 
evolution. Conceivably, structural changes of the expressed FOXP2 protein
supported the 'vocal elaboration' of phylogenetically older brain networks
engaged in upper limb motor control, such as the cerebro-cerebellar loops.

PMID: 18471906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Commun Disord. 2008 Sep-Oct;41(5):409-20. doi: 10.1016/j.jcomdis.2008.03.003.
Epub 2008 Mar 25.

The human lexinome: genes of language and reading.

Gibson CJ(1), Gruen JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale Child Health Research Center, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8081, USA.

Within the human genome, genetic mapping studies have identified 10 regions of
different chromosomes, known as DYX loci, in genetic linkage with dyslexia, and
two, known as SLI loci, in genetic linkage with Specific Language Impairment
(SLI). Further genetic studies have identified four dyslexia genes within the DYX
loci: DYX1C1 on 15q, KIAA0319 and DCDC2 on 6p22, and ROBO1 on 13q. FOXP2 on 7q
has been implicated in the development of Speech-Language Disorder. No genes for 
Specific Language Impairment have yet been identified within the two SLI loci.
Functional studies have shown that all four dyslexia genes play roles in brain
development, and ongoing molecular studies are attempting to elucidate how these 
genes exert their effects at a subcellular level. Taken together, these genes and
loci likely represent only a fraction of the human lexinome, a term we introduce 
here to refer to the collection of all the genetic and protein elements involved 
in the development of human language, expression, and reading.LEARNING OUTCOMES: 
The reader will become familiar with (i) methods for identifying genes for
complex diseases, (ii) the application of these methods in the elucidation of
genes underlying disorders of language and reading, and (iii) the cellular
pathways through which polymorphisms in these genes may contribute to the
development of the disorders.

PMCID: PMC2488410
PMID: 18466916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Comp Neurol. 2008 Jul 10;509(2):180-9. doi: 10.1002/cne.21740.

Expression of FOXP2 in the developing monkey forebrain: comparison with the
expression of the genes FOXP1, PBX3, and MEIS2.

Takahashi K(1), Liu FC, Oishi T, Mori T, Higo N, Hayashi M, Hirokawa K, Takahashi
H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Group, Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life
Sciences, Tokyo, Tokyo 194-8511, Japan.

By using the developing monkey brain as a model for human development, we
investigated the expression pattern of the FOXP2 gene, a member of the FOX family
of transcription factors in the developing monkey brain, and compared its
expression pattern with transcription factors PBX3, MEIS2, and FOXP1. We observed
FOXP2 mRNA expression in several brain structures, including the striatum, the
islands of Calleja and other basal forebrain regions, the cerebral cortex, and
the thalamus. FOXP2 mRNA was preferentially expressed in striosomal compartments 
during striatal development. The striosomal expression was transient and
developmentally down-regulated in a topographical order. Specifically, during the
perinatal state, striosomal FOXP2 expression was detected in both the caudate
nucleus and the putamen, although expression was more prominent in the caudate
nucleus than in the putamen. Striosomal FOXP2 expression declined during the
postnatal period, first in the putamen and later in the caudate nucleus. During
the same period, we also detected PBX3 mRNA in the striosomal compartment of the 
developing monkey striatum. FOXP2, as well as PBX3 and MEIS2, was expressed in
the islands of Calleja and other cell clusters of the basal forebrain. FOXP2, in 
combination with PBX3 and MEIS2, may play a pivotal role in the development of
striosomal neurons of the striatum and the islands of Calleja.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18461604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Curr Biol. 2008 Apr 22;18(8):R335-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.02.048.

Motor learning: the FoxP2 puzzle piece.

Teramitsu I(1), White SA.

Author information: 
(1)University College London, Wolfson Institute for Biomedical Research, Gower
Street, London WC1E 6BT, UK.

Comment on
    Curr Biol. 2008 Mar 11;18(5):354-62.

Mutation of the DNA-binding region of the FOXP2 protein causes an inherited
language disorder. A recent study provides the first data on mice with this
mutation, which exhibit deficits in motor-skill learning and abnormal properties 
of neural circuits that contribute to these skills.

PMCID: PMC2699589
PMID: 18430631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Mol Biol Evol. 2008 Jul;25(7):1257-9. doi: 10.1093/molbev/msn091. Epub 2008 Apr
15.

The timing of selection at the human FOXP2 gene.

Coop G, Bullaughey K, Luca F, Przeworski M.

Krause J, Lalueza-Fox C, Orlando L, et al. recently examined patterns of genetic 
variation at FOXP2 in 2 Neanderthals. This gene is of particular interest because
it is involved in speech and language and was previously shown to harbor the
signature of recent positive selection. The authors found the same 2 amino acid
substitutions in Neanderthals as in modern humans. Assuming that these sites were
the targets of selection and no interbreeding between the 2 groups, they
concluded that selection at FOXP2 occurred before the populations split, over 300
thousand years ago. Here, we show that the data are unlikely under this scenario 
but may instead be consistent with low rates of gene flow between modern humans
and Neanderthals. We also collect additional data and introduce a modeling
framework to estimate levels of modern human contamination of the Neanderthal
samples. We find that, depending on the assumptions, additional control
experiments may be needed to rule out contamination at FOXP2.

PMCID: PMC2429961
PMID: 18413354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Anat. 2008 Apr;212(4):337-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2007.00840.x.

Reconstructing phylogenies and phenotypes: a molecular view of human evolution.

Bradley BJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Christ's College, University of Cambridge, UK.
bjb37@cam.ac.uk

This review broadly summarizes how molecular biology has contributed to our
understanding of human evolution. Molecular anthropology began in the 1960s with 
immunological comparisons indicating that African apes and humans were closely
related and, indeed, shared a common ancestor as recently as 5 million years ago.
Although initially dismissed, this finding has proven robust and numerous lines
of molecular evidence now firmly place the human-ape divergence at 4-8 Ma.
Resolving the trichotomy among humans, chimpanzees and gorillas took a few more
decades. Despite the readily apparent physical similarities shared by African
apes to the exclusion of modern humans (body hair, knuckle-walking, thin tooth
enamel), the molecular support for a human-chimpanzee clade is now overwhelming. 
More recently, whole genome sequencing and gene mapping have shifted the focus of
molecular anthropology from phylogenetic analyses to phenotypic reconstruction
and functional genomics. We are starting to identify the genetic basis of the
morphological, physiological and behavioural traits that distinguish modern
humans from apes and apes from other primates. Most notably, recent comparative
genomic analyses strongly indicate that the marked differences between modern
humans and chimpanzees are likely due more to changes in gene regulation than to 
modifications of the genes themselves, an idea first proposed over 30 years ago. 
Almost weekly, press releases describe newly identified genes and regulatory
elements that seem to have undergone strong positive selection along the human
lineage. Loci involved in speech (e.g. FOXP2), brain development (e.g. ASPM), and
skull musculature (e.g. MYH16) have been of particular interest, but some
surprising candidate loci (e.g. those involved in auditory capabilities) have
emerged as well. Exciting new research avenues, such as the Neanderthal Genome
Project, promise that molecular analyses will continue to provide novel insights 
about our evolution. Ultimately, however, these molecular findings can only be
understood in light of data from field sites, morphology labs, and museum
collections. Indeed, molecular anthropology depends on these sources for
calibrating molecular clocks and placing genetic data within the context of key
morphological and ecological transitions in human evolution.

PMCID: PMC2409108
PMID: 18380860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Rev Neurol. 2008 Mar 16-31;46(6):351-9.

[FOXP2 and the molecular biology of language: new evidence. II. Molecular aspects
and implications for the ontogenesis and phylogeny of language].

[Article in Spanish]

Benítez-Burraco A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Filología Española, Area de Lingüística, Facultad de
Filología, Universidad de Oviedo, Campus de Humanidades El Milán, E-33011 Oviedo,
Asturias. abenitez@us.es

INTRODUCTION: FOXP2 is the first gene linked to a hereditary variant of specific 
language impairment and seems to code for a transcriptional repressor that
intervenes in the regulation of the development and the functioning of certain
thalamic-cortical-striatal circuits.
DEVELOPMENT: In the last three years, significant progress has been made in the
determination of the structural and functional properties of the gene. These
advances essentially have to do with the precise analysis of the most important
structural motifs of the protein that it codes for and the main parameters that
determine its interaction with DNA. They also concern the determination of the
functional and behavioural properties in vivo of the main isoforms of the FOXP2
protein, the exact determination of the pattern of expression of new orthologues 
of the gene, and the identification of the different target genes for factor
FOXP2.
CONCLUSIONS: This new evidence suggests that protein FOXP2 protein has a high
degree of versatility in vivo when it comes to binding to DNA; that its different
isoforms are biologically functional; and that the FOXP2 gene is functional
during embryonic development and during the adult phase. It also suggests that it
is involved in the development and/or functioning of the
thalamic-cortical-striatal circuits associated to motor planning, sequential
behaviour and procedural learning (a significant saving in developmental terms of
the regulatory mechanism in which the gene is involved), as well as the accuracy 
of the models of linguistic processing that consider language to be, to a large
extent, the result of an interaction between certain cortical and subcortical
structures.

PMID: 18368680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Rev Neurol. 2008 Mar 1-15;46(5):289-98.

[FOXP2 and the molecular biology of language: new evidence. I. Phenotypic aspects
and animal models].

[Article in Spanish]

Benítez-Burraco A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Filología Española, Area de Lingüística, Facultad de
Filología, Universidad de Oviedo, Oviedo, Asturias, España. abenitez@us.es

INTRODUCTION: FOXP2 is the first gene linked to a hereditary variant of specific 
language impairment and seems to code for a transcriptional repressor that
intervenes in the regulation of development and the functioning of certain
thalamic-cortical-striatal circuits.
DEVELOPMENT: In the last three years significant progress has been made in the
analysis of the structural and functional properties of the gene. The most
notable advances have been made in the genotypic and phenotypic characterisation 
of new alterations in its sequencing in human beings; the determination in vivo
of the functional properties of the mutated proteins generated from said
variants; the cloning and characterisation of new orthologues of the gene; the
generation of the first knockout and knockdown organisms for it; and a more
precise molecular characterisation of the biological role played by the
orthologues corresponding to species that are also capable of learning the
articulatory patterns of the vocalisations they use to communicate.
CONCLUSIONS: The latest clinical evidence and that obtained from analysing animal
models generated to date appear to suggest the presence of a 'sensory-motor
disorder' as the central deficit behind the different phenotypes associated to
the different mutations of the gene in the human species, the functionality of
the gene FOXP2 during development of the embryo and during the adult phase, its
involvement in the development and functioning of the thalamic-cortical-striatal 
circuits associated to motor planning, sequential behaviour and procedural
learning, and significant old age, in developmental terms, of a part of the
neuroanatomical substrate that is involved in processing linguistic stimuli in
our species.

PMID: 18351569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Rev Neurol. 2008;46 Suppl 1:S71-7.

[Autism, epilepsy and genetics].

[Article in Spanish]

Muñoz-Yunta JA(1), Palau-Baduell M, Salvadó-Salvadó B, Valls-Santasusana A,
Rosendo-Moreno N, Clofent-Torrentó M, Manchado F.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Neuropediatría, Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital del Mar, Barcelona. 
10030amy@telefonica.net

INTRODUCTION: The rate of epilepsy in autism is higher than in other
developmental disorders and estimates point to a frequency range of between 7%
and 42%. Between 40% and 47% of autistic children suffer from clinical epilepsy. 
Onset of epilepsy may occur at any age.
DEVELOPMENT: During the ontogenesis of the nervous system, if the maturing
process is upset by some epileptogenic phenomenon, the consequences on the
consolidation of the emerging cognitive functions can be severe. Epileptiform
discharges can occur although clinical seizures are absent, but nevertheless they
still have an effect on the maturing process. Between 10% and 50% of autistic
children undergo a regression of acquired behaviour following a period of normal 
development. The absence of clinical seizures during regression does not rule out
the epileptogenic origin of the regressive process.
CONCLUSIONS: The relation between pervasive developmental disorders and epilepsy,
epileptiform activity and subclinical seizures can be explained from a
neurobiological point of view, on the one hand, by an imbalance between the
excitatory system -glutamate- and the inhibitory system -gamma-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA)- in key points in the cerebral cortex and, on the other, by means of
molecular genetic studies and studies of candidate genes (FOXP2, WNT2, subunits
of GABA receptors, neuroligins, ARX, SCN1A, SCN2A, MECP2, CDKL5 and DLX5).

PMID: 18302128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Curr Biol. 2008 Mar 11;18(5):354-62. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2008.01.060.

Impaired synaptic plasticity and motor learning in mice with a point mutation
implicated in human speech deficits.

Groszer M(1), Keays DA, Deacon RM, de Bono JP, Prasad-Mulcare S, Gaub S, Baum MG,
French CA, Nicod J, Coventry JA, Enard W, Fray M, Brown SD, Nolan PM, Pääbo S,
Channon KM, Costa RM, Eilers J, Ehret G, Rawlins JN, Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2008 Apr 22;18(8):R335-7.

The most well-described example of an inherited speech and language disorder is
that observed in the multigenerational KE family, caused by a heterozygous
missense mutation in the FOXP2 gene. Affected individuals are characterized by
deficits in the learning and production of complex orofacial motor sequences
underlying fluent speech and display impaired linguistic processing for both
spoken and written language. The FOXP2 transcription factor is highly similar in 
many vertebrate species, with conserved expression in neural circuits related to 
sensorimotor integration and motor learning. In this study, we generated mice
carrying an identical point mutation to that of the KE family, yielding the
equivalent arginine-to-histidine substitution in the Foxp2 DNA-binding domain.
Homozygous R552H mice show severe reductions in cerebellar growth and postnatal
weight gain but are able to produce complex innate ultrasonic vocalizations.
Heterozygous R552H mice are overtly normal in brain structure and development.
Crucially, although their baseline motor abilities appear to be identical to
wild-type littermates, R552H heterozygotes display significant deficits in
species-typical motor-skill learning, accompanied by abnormal synaptic plasticity
in striatal and cerebellar neural circuits.

PMCID: PMC2917768
PMID: 18328704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Gene. 2008 Apr 30;413(1-2):42-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.01.015. Epub 2008 Jan
29.

Multiple transcription start sites for FOXP2 with varying cellular specificities.

Schroeder DI(1), Myers RM.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Informatics Program, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, California 94305-5120, USA.

FOXP2 is a forkhead transcription factor implicated in developmental verbal
dyspraxia, a human speech and language disorder. FOXP2 is expressed in complex
patterns during brain, lung, heart, and gut development and on into adulthood.
Both the protein sequence and brain expression patterns are highly conserved
through much of vertebrate evolution. FOXP2 also contains six ultraconserved
regions in its introns, consistent with the idea that FOXP2 is tightly regulated.
Previous evidence suggested the presence of three transcription start sites for
FOXP2, and we sought to characterize them and determine their cell and tissue
specificity. We used 5' RNA ligase-mediated rapid amplification of cDNA ends
(RLM-RACE) and RT-PCR to identify four transcription start sites for human FOXP2,
the fourth being in a novel exon. Two of the transcription start sites, including
the one in the novel exon, appear to be more cell line specific and lie in an
area of remarkably high conservation. We propose that these two transcription
start sites may be of great interest in future studies of FOXP2 regulation.

PMID: 18316164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Clin Linguist Phon. 2008 Mar;22(3):171-98. doi: 10.1080/02699200701799825.

Central timing deficits in subtypes of primary speech disorders.

Peter B(1), Stoel-Gammon C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Speech and Hearing Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98105, USA. bvpeter@u.washington.edu

Childhood apraxia of speech (CAS) is a proposed speech disorder subtype that
interferes with motor planning and/or programming, affecting prosody in many
cases. Pilot data (Peter & Stoel-Gammon, 2005) were consistent with the notion
that deficits in timing accuracy in speech and music-related tasks may be
associated with CAS. This study replicated and expanded earlier findings. Eleven 
children with speech disorders and age-and gender-matched controls participated
in non-word imitation, clapped rhythm imitation, and paced repetitive tapping
tasks. Results suggest a central timing deficit, expressed in both the oral and
the limb modality, and observable in two different types of timing measures,
overall rhythmic structures and small-scale durations. Associations among timing 
measures were strongest in the participants with speech disorders, who also
showed lower timing accuracy than the controls in all measures. The number of
observed CAS characteristics was associated with timing deficits.

PMID: 18307084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Feb 26;105(8):3117-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0712298105. Epub 2008 Feb 19.

Ultrasonic vocalization impairment of Foxp2 (R552H) knockin mice related to
speech-language disorder and abnormality of Purkinje cells.

Fujita E(1), Tanabe Y, Shiota A, Ueda M, Suwa K, Momoi MY, Momoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Development and Differentiation, Department of Human Inherited
Metabolic Disease, National Institute of Neuroscience, 4-1-1 Ogawahigashi-machi, 
Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8502, Japan.

Previous studies have demonstrated that mutation in the forkhead domain of the
forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) protein (R553H) causes speech-language disorders. To
further analyze FOXP2 function in speech learning, we generated a knockin (KI)
mouse for Foxp2 (R552H) [Foxp2 (R552H)-KI], corresponding to the human FOXP2
(R553H) mutation, by homologous recombination. Homozygous Foxp2 (R552H)-KI mice
showed reduced weight, immature development of the cerebellum with incompletely
folded folia, Purkinje cells with poor dendritic arbors and less synaptophysin
immunoreactivity, and achieved crisis stage for survival 3 weeks after birth. At 
postnatal day 10, these mice also showed severe ultrasonic vocalization (USV) and
motor impairment, whereas the heterozygous Foxp2 (R552H)-KI mice exhibited modest
impairments. Similar to the wild-type protein, Foxp2 (R552H) localized in the
nuclei of the Purkinje cells and the thalamus, striatum, cortex, and hippocampus 
(CA1) neurons of the homozygous Foxp2 (R552H)-KI mice (postnatal day 10), and
some of the neurons showed nuclear aggregates of Foxp2 (R552H). In addition to
the immature development of the cerebellum, Foxp2 (R552H) nuclear aggregates may 
further compromise the function of the Purkinje cells and cerebral neurons of the
homozygous mice, resulting in their death. In contrast, heterozygous Foxp2
(R552H)-KI mice, which showed modest impairment of USVs with different USV
qualities and which did not exhibit nuclear aggregates, should provide insights
into the common molecular mechanisms between the mouse USV and human speech
learning and the relationship between the USV and motor neural systems.

PMCID: PMC2268594
PMID: 18287060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Schizophr Res. 2008 Feb;99(1-3):56-70. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2007.11.018. Epub
2008 Jan 9.

Maternal infection leads to abnormal gene regulation and brain atrophy in mouse
offspring: implications for genesis of neurodevelopmental disorders.

Fatemi SH(1), Reutiman TJ, Folsom TD, Huang H, Oishi K, Mori S, Smee DF, Pearce
DA, Winter C, Sohr R, Juckel G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Division of Neuroscience Research, University of
Minnesota Medical School, 420 Delaware St. SE, MMC 392, Minneapolis, MN 55455,
USA. fatem002@umn.edu

Prenatal viral infection has been associated with development of schizophrenia
and autism. Our laboratory has previously shown that viral infection causes
deleterious effects on brain structure and function in mouse offspring following 
late first trimester (E9) administration of influenza virus. We hypothesized that
late second trimester infection (E18) in mice may lead to a different pattern of 
brain gene expression and structural defects in the developing offspring. C57BL6J
mice were infected on E18 with a sublethal dose of human influenza virus or
sham-infected using vehicle solution. Male offsping of the infected mice were
collected at P0, P14, P35 and P56, their brains removed and prefrontal cortex,
hippocampus and cerebellum dissected and flash frozen. Microarray, qRT-PCR, DTI
and MRI scanning, western blotting and neurochemical analysis were performed to
detect differences in gene expression and brain atrophy. Expression of several
genes associated with schizophrenia or autism including Sema3a, Trfr2 and Vldlr
were found to be altered as were protein levels of Foxp2. E18 infection of
C57BL6J mice with a sublethal dose of human influenza virus led to significant
gene alterations in frontal, hippocampal and cerebellar cortices of developing
mouse progeny. Brain imaging revealed significant atrophy in several brain areas 
and white matter thinning in corpus callosum. Finally, neurochemical analysis
revealed significantly altered levels of serotonin (P14, P35),
5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid (P14) and taurine (P35). We propose that maternal
infection in mouse provides an heuristic animal model for studying the
environmental contributions to genesis of schizophrenia and autism, two important
examples of neurodevelopmental disorders.

PMCID: PMC2312390
PMID: 18248790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2008 Jun;38(6):750-8. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2007-0350OC.
Epub 2008 Jan 31.

Foxp2 inhibits Nkx2.1-mediated transcription of SP-C via interactions with the
Nkx2.1 homeodomain.

Zhou B(1), Zhong Q, Minoo P, Li C, Ann DK, Frenkel B, Morrisey EE, Crandall ED,
Borok Z.

Author information: 
(1)Will Rogers Institute Pulmonary Research Center, Division of Pulmonary and
Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of Southern
California, 2020 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

The transcription factor (TF) Foxp2 has been shown to partially repress
surfactant protein C (SP-C) transcription, presumably through interaction of an
independent repressor domain with a conserved Foxp2 consensus site in the SP-C
promoter. We explored the role of interactions between Foxp2 and the homeodomain 
TF Nkx2.1 that may contribute to the marked reduction in SP-C expression
accompanying phenotypic transition of alveolar epithelial type II (AT2) to type I
(AT1) cells. Foxp2 dose-dependently inhibited Nkx2.1-mediated activation of SP-C 
in MLE-15 cells. While electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitations revealed an interaction between Foxp2 and the conserved
consensus motif in the SP-C promoter, Nkx2.1-mediated activation of the 318-bp
proximal SP-C promoter (which lacks a Foxp2 consensus) was attenuated by
increasing amounts of Foxp2. Co-immunoprecipitation and mammalian two-hybrid
assays confirmed a physical interaction between Nkx2.1 and Foxp2 mediated through
the Nkx2.1 homeodomain. Formation of an Nkx2.1 complex with an SP-C
oligonucleotide was inhibited dose-dependently by recombinant Foxp2. These
findings demonstrate that direct interaction between Foxp2 and Nkx2.1 inhibits
Nkx2.1 DNA-binding and transcriptional activity and suggest a mechanism for
down-regulation of SP-C (and probably other AT2 cell genes) during transition of 
AT2 cells to an AT1 cell phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2396252
PMID: 18239190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Insect Mol Biol. 2008 Feb;17(1):53-60. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2583.2008.00775.x.

Expression analysis of the FoxP homologue in the brain of the honeybee, Apis
mellifera.

Kiya T(1), Itoh Y, Kubo T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, The University 
of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan.
kiya@biol.s.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The transcription factor FoxP2 is related to acoustic communication in
vertebrates and, although widely expressed in various tissues, its mutations
cause a speech disorder in humans and disrupt vocalization in mice. In honeybee
colonies, workers transmit information about a food location using 'dance
communication', which is a form of acoustic communication. We identified a
honeybee FoxP2-homologue, AmFoxP, and investigated its expression in the honeybee
brain to elucidate its possible role in dance communication. The relative
abundance of AmFoxP mRNA in the worker brain increased during the first 4 days of
adult life. In situ hybridization revealed AmFoxP expression around the optic
lobes, central complex, dorsal lobes, and protocerebral lobes, which was not
dependent on the caste or division of labour.

PMID: 18237284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2008 May;104(5):1513-21. doi:
10.1152/japplphysiol.01383.2007. Epub 2008 Jan 24.

Transcription factors and the genetic organization of brain stem respiratory
neurons.

Gray PA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, 660 S. Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110-1093, USA.
pgray@pcg.wustl.edu

Breathing is a genetically determined behavior generated by neurons in the brain 
stem. Transcription factors, in part, determine the basic developmental identity 
of neurons, but the relationships between these genes and the neural populations 
generating and modulating respiration are unclear. The diversity of brain stem
populations has been proposed to result from a combinatorial code of
transcription factor expression corresponding to the anterior-posterior (A-P) and
dorsal-ventral (D-V) location of a neuron's birth. I provide a schematic of
transcription factor coding identifying at least 15 genetically distinct D-V
subdivisions of brain stem neurons that, combined with A-P patterning, may
provide a genetic organization of the brain stem in general, with the eventual
goal of describing respiratory populations in particular. Using a combination of 
fate mapping in transgenic mouse lines and immunohistochemistry, we confirm the
parabrachial nuclei are derived from a subset of Atoh1 expression progenitor
neurons. I hypothesize the Kölliker-Fuse nucleus can be uniquely defined in the
neonate mouse by the coexpression of the transcription factor FoxP2 in
Atoh1-derived neurons of rhombomere 1.

PMID: 18218908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Cell Neurosci. 2008 Apr;37(4):696-707. doi: 10.1016/j.mcn.2007.12.015. Epub
2007 Dec 15.

Cre fate mapping reveals lineage specific defects in neuronal migration with loss
of Pitx2 function in the developing mouse hypothalamus and subthalamic nucleus.

Skidmore JM(1), Cramer JD, Martin JF, Martin DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA.

Establishment of neuronal diversity is a central topic in developmental
neurobiology. Prior studies implicated Pitx2, a paired-like homeodomain
transcription factor, in mouse subthalamic nucleus neuronal development, but
precise stages of neuronal differentiation affected (migration, axon outgrowth,
fate specification) and underlying mechanisms were unknown. Here we report
lineage tracing experiments using Pitx2(cre/+), Pitx2(cre/null), and conditional 
nuclear lacZ reporter mice to track embryonic Pitx2 expressing neurons. Migration
of subthalamic nucleus and hypothalamic neurons was severely arrested in
Pitx2(cre/null) embryos, and subclasses of subthalamic nucleus neurons identified
by Lmx1b, Foxp1, and Foxp2-gene expression revealed differing sensitivities to
Pitx2 dosage. Interestingly, embryonic subthalamic nucleus development was
unaffected in Lmx1b null mice, suggesting that Pitx2 and Lmx1b act via
independent genetic pathways. These data provide the first direct evidence for
Pitx2-dependent neuronal migration in the developing hypothalamus, and
demonstrate that complex transcriptional networks regulate regional
specialization of distinct hypothalamic and subthalamic nucleus neurons.

PMCID: PMC2386145
PMID: 18206388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. BMJ. 2007 Dec 22;335(7633):1299-301.

Origins of magic: review of genetic and epigenetic effects.

Ramagopalan SV(1), Knight M, Ebers GC, Knight JC.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3
7BN.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the evidence for a genetic basis to magic.
DESIGN: Literature review.
SETTING: Harry Potter novels of J K Rowling.
PARTICIPANTS: Muggles, witches, wizards, and squibs.
INTERVENTIONS: Limited.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Family and twin studies, magical ability, and specific
magical skills.
RESULTS: Magic shows strong evidence of heritability, with familial aggregation
and concordance in twins. Evidence suggests magical ability to be a quantitative 
trait. Specific magical skills, notably being able to speak to snakes, predict
the future, and change hair colour, all seem heritable.
CONCLUSIONS: A multilocus model with a dominant gene for magic might exist,
controlled epistatically by one or more loci, possibly recessive in nature.
Magical enhancers regulating gene expressionmay be involved, combined with
mutations at specific genes implicated in speech and hair colour such as FOXP2
and MCR1.

PMCID: PMC2151141
PMID: 18156238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Biochem. 2008 Mar;143(3):407-16. Epub 2007 Dec 13.

The medaka FoxP2, a homologue of human language gene FOXP2, has a diverged
structure and function.

Itakura T(1), Chandra A, Yang Z, Xue X, Wang B, Kimura W, Hikosaka K, Inohaya K, 
Kudo A, Uezato T, Miura N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 1-20-1
Handa-yama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu, Japan.

Forkhead box (Fox) genes are involved in organogenesis and cell differentiation. 
A mutation of FOXP2 was discovered in patients with severe defects in speech and 
language. The medaka FoxP2 was cloned in order to clarify the molecular evolution
and difference in the protein structure and function by comparing human/mouse and
medaka genes. The result showed that medaka FoxP2 had a 73.7% homology to the
human and mouse counterparts, and its zinc finger, leucine zipper and forkhead
domain structures were conserved. However, medaka FoxP2 lacked a long
polyglutamine repeat and had two insertions of unique amino acid sequences. FoxP2
expression was found in the epiphysis and retina, in addition to the midbrain and
cerebellum. The transcriptional assay revealed that medaka FoxP2 showed a very
weak repressive activity to the CC10 promoter while mouse Foxp2 exhibited a
strong repressive activity. Mutational analyses of medaka FoxP2 showed that the
three amino acids of forkhead domain were responsible for the weak repressive
activity. These results suggest that medaka FoxP2 may play a different function
in the development of the medaka fish.

PMID: 18079162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. PLoS Biol. 2007 Dec;5(12):e321.

Incomplete and inaccurate vocal imitation after knockdown of FoxP2 in songbird
basal ganglia nucleus Area X.

Haesler S(1), Rochefort C, Georgi B, Licznerski P, Osten P, Scharff C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany.

The gene encoding the forkhead box transcription factor, FOXP2, is essential for 
developing the full articulatory power of human language. Mutations of FOXP2
cause developmental verbal dyspraxia (DVD), a speech and language disorder that
compromises the fluent production of words and the correct use and comprehension 
of grammar. FOXP2 patients have structural and functional abnormalities in the
striatum of the basal ganglia, which also express high levels of FOXP2. Since
human speech and learned vocalizations in songbirds bear behavioral and neural
parallels, songbirds provide a genuine model for investigating the basic
principles of speech and its pathologies. In zebra finch Area X, a basal ganglia 
structure necessary for song learning, FoxP2 expression increases during the time
when song learning occurs. Here, we used lentivirus-mediated RNA interference
(RNAi) to reduce FoxP2 levels in Area X during song development. Knockdown of
FoxP2 resulted in an incomplete and inaccurate imitation of tutor song.
Inaccurate vocal imitation was already evident early during song ontogeny and
persisted into adulthood. The acoustic structure and the duration of adult song
syllables were abnormally variable, similar to word production in children with
DVD. Our findings provide the first example of a functional gene analysis in
songbirds and suggest that normal auditory-guided vocal motor learning requires
FoxP2.

PMCID: PMC2100148
PMID: 18052609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Clin Dysmorphol. 2008 Jan;17(1):31-4.

De-novo balanced translocation between 7q31 and 10p14 in a girl with central
precocious puberty, moderate mental retardation, and severe speech impairment.

Kosho T(1), Sakazume S, Kawame H, Wakui K, Wada T, Okoshi Y, Mikawa M, Hasegawa
T, Matsuura N, Niikawa N, Matsumoto N, Fukushima Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Shinshu University School of Medicine,
Matsumoto, Japan. ktomoki@hsp.md.shinshu-u.ac.jp

No causative gene has been found for idiopathic central precocious puberty; and
FOXP2, located in 7q31, is the only known gene for speech and language
disturbances. We report a girl with central precocious puberty, moderate mental
retardation, and severe speech impairment; accompanied by a de-novo balanced
translocation between 7q31 and 10p14. Physical mapping through molecular
cytogenetic investigations demonstrated the breakpoints of 7q31 and 10p14 within 
a bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clone RP11-124G5 and a cosmid clone
derived from a BAC clone RP11-1122C18, respectively. FOXP2 was found to be
localized approximately 500 kb distant from the centromeric end of the disrupted 
BAC RP11-124G5 at the 7q31 breakpoint. Speech impairment in the girl might be
derived from dysfunction of FOXP2 by a position effect of the 7q31 translocation 
breakpoint.

PMID: 18049078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Dec;81(6):1232-50. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

High-throughput analysis of promoter occupancy reveals direct neural targets of
FOXP2, a gene mutated in speech and language disorders.

Vernes SC(1), Spiteri E, Nicod J, Groszer M, Taylor JM, Davies KE, Geschwind DH, 
Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, The University of Oxford, Oxford,
OX3 7BN, UK.

We previously discovered that mutations of the human FOXP2 gene cause a monogenic
communication disorder, primarily characterized by difficulties in learning to
make coordinated sequences of articulatory gestures that underlie speech.
Affected people have deficits in expressive and receptive linguistic processing
and display structural and/or functional abnormalities in cortical and
subcortical brain regions. FOXP2 provides a unique window into neural processes
involved in speech and language. In particular, its role as a transcription
factor gene offers powerful functional genomic routes for dissecting critical
neurogenetic mechanisms. Here, we employ chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled
with promoter microarrays (ChIP-chip) to successfully identify genomic sites that
are directly bound by FOXP2 protein in native chromatin of human neuron-like
cells. We focus on a subset of downstream targets identified by this approach,
showing that altered FOXP2 levels yield significant changes in expression in our 
cell-based models and that FOXP2 binds in a specific manner to consensus sites
within the relevant promoters. Moreover, we demonstrate significant quantitative 
differences in target expression in embryonic brains of mutant mice, mediated by 
specific in vivo Foxp2-chromatin interactions. This work represents the first
identification and in vivo verification of neural targets regulated by FOXP2. Our
data indicate that FOXP2 has dual functionality, acting to either repress or
activate gene expression at occupied promoters. The identified targets suggest
roles in modulating synaptic plasticity, neurodevelopment, neurotransmission, and
axon guidance and represent novel entry points into in vivo pathways that may be 
disturbed in speech and language disorders.

PMCID: PMC2276341
PMID: 17999362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Dec;81(6):1144-57. Epub 2007 Oct 31.

Identification of the transcriptional targets of FOXP2, a gene linked to speech
and language, in developing human brain.

Spiteri E(1), Konopka G, Coppola G, Bomar J, Oldham M, Ou J, Vernes SC, Fisher
SE, Ren B, Geschwind DH.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, University of
California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Mutations in FOXP2, a member of the forkhead family of transcription factor
genes, are the only known cause of developmental speech and language disorders in
humans. To date, there are no known targets of human FOXP2 in the nervous system.
The identification of FOXP2 targets in the developing human brain, therefore,
provides a unique tool with which to explore the development of human language
and speech. Here, we define FOXP2 targets in human basal ganglia (BG) and
inferior frontal cortex (IFC) by use of chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
microarray analysis (ChIP-chip) and validate the functional regulation of targets
in vitro. ChIP-chip identified 285 FOXP2 targets in fetal human brain;
statistically significant overlap of targets in BG and IFC indicates a core set
of 34 transcriptional targets of FOXP2. We identified targets specific to IFC or 
BG that were not observed in lung, suggesting important regional and tissue
differences in FOXP2 activity. Many target genes are known to play critical roles
in specific aspects of central nervous system patterning or development, such as 
neurite outgrowth, as well as plasticity. Subsets of the FOXP2 transcriptional
targets are either under positive selection in humans or differentially expressed
between human and chimpanzee brain. This is the first ChIP-chip study to use
human brain tissue, making the FOXP2-target genes identified in these studies
important to understanding the pathways regulating speech and language in the
developing human brain. These data provide the first insight into the functional 
network of genes directly regulated by FOXP2 in human brain and by evolutionary
comparisons, highlighting genes likely to be involved in the development of human
higher-order cognitive processes.

PMCID: PMC2276350
PMID: 17999357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Curr Biol. 2007 Nov 6;17(21):R917-9.

Human Evolution: Neandertal gene speaks out.

Trinkaus E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Campus Box 1114, Washington University, St. Louis,
Missouri 63130, USA. trinkaus@artsci.wustl.edu

Comment on
    Curr Biol. 2007 Nov 6;17(21):1908-12.

An analysis of Neandertal DNA indicates that they shared with living humans a
form of the FOXP2 gene, the absence of which impairs speech and cognitive
processing related to human language.

PMID: 17983567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Science. 2007 Oct 26;318(5850):546-7.

Genetics. Ancient DNA reveals Neandertals with red hair, fair complexions.

Culotta E.

PMID: 17962526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Curr Biol. 2007 Nov 6;17(21):1908-12. Epub 2007 Oct 18.

The derived FOXP2 variant of modern humans was shared with Neandertals.

Krause J(1), Lalueza-Fox C, Orlando L, Enard W, Green RE, Burbano HA, Hublin JJ, 
Hänni C, Fortea J, de la Rasilla M, Bertranpetit J, Rosas A, Pääbo S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Deutscher Platz 6, 04103
Leipzig, Germany.

Comment in
    Curr Biol. 2007 Nov 6;17(21):R917-9.

Although many animals communicate vocally, no extant creature rivals modern
humans in language ability. Therefore, knowing when and under what evolutionary
pressures our capacity for language evolved is of great interest. Here, we find
that our closest extinct relatives, the Neandertals, share with modern humans two
evolutionary changes in FOXP2, a gene that has been implicated in the development
of speech and language. We furthermore find that in Neandertals, these changes
lie on the common modern human haplotype, which previously was shown to have been
subject to a selective sweep. These results suggest that these genetic changes
and the selective sweep predate the common ancestor (which existed about
300,000-400,000 years ago) of modern human and Neandertal populations. This is in
contrast to more recent age estimates of the selective sweep based on extant
human diversity data. Thus, these results illustrate the usefulness of retrieving
direct genetic information from ancient remains for understanding recent human
evolution.

PMID: 17949978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Comp Neurol. 2007 Dec 1;505(4):379-403.

A model of early molecular regionalization in the chicken embryonic pretectum.

Ferran JL(1), Sánchez-Arrones L, Sandoval JE, Puelles L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Psychobiology, University of Murcia, Murcia,
Spain.

The pretectal region of the brain is visualized as a dorsal region of prosomere 1
in the caudal diencephalon, including derivatives from both the roof and alar
plates. Its neuronal derivatives in the adult brain are known as pretectal
nuclei. The literature is inconsistent about the precise anteroposterior
delimitation of this region and on the number of specific histogenetic domains
and subdomains that it contains. We performed a cross-correlated gene-expression 
map of this brain area in chicken embryos, with the aim of identifying
differently fated pretectal domains on the basis of combinatorial gene expression
patterns. We examined in detail Pax3, Pax6, Pax7, Tcf4, Meis1, Meis2, Nkx2.2,
Lim1, Dmbx1, Dbx1, Six3, FoxP2, Zic1, Ebf1, and Shh mRNA expression, as well as
PAX3 and PAX7 immunoreaction, between stages HH11 and HH28. The patterns analyzed
serve to fix the cephalic and caudal boundaries of the pretectum and to define
three molecularly distinct anteroposterior pretectal domains (precommissural,
juxtacommissural, and commissural) and several dorsoventral subdomains. These
molecular specification patterns are established step by step between stages HH10
and HH18, largely before neurogenesis begins. This set of gene-architectonic data
constitutes a useful scaffold for correlations with fate maps and other
experimental embryologic results and may serve as well for inquiries on
homologies in this part of the brain.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17912743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 19;2(9):e900.

Accelerated FoxP2 evolution in echolocating bats.

Li G(1), Wang J, Rossiter SJ, Jones G, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China.

FOXP2 is a transcription factor implicated in the development and neural control 
of orofacial coordination, particularly with respect to vocalisation.
Observations that orthologues show almost no variation across vertebrates yet
differ by two amino acids between humans and chimpanzees have led to speculation 
that recent evolutionary changes might relate to the emergence of language.
Echolocating bats face especially challenging sensorimotor demands, using vocal
signals for orientation and often for prey capture. To determine whether
mutations in the FoxP2 gene could be associated with echolocation, we sequenced
FoxP2 from echolocating and non-echolocating bats as well as a range of other
mammal species. We found that contrary to previous reports, FoxP2 is not highly
conserved across all nonhuman mammals but is extremely diverse in echolocating
bats. We detected divergent selection (a change in selective pressure) at FoxP2
between bats with contrasting sonar systems, suggesting the intriguing
possibility of a role for FoxP2 in the evolution and development of echolocation.
We speculate that observed accelerated evolution of FoxP2 in bats supports a
previously proposed function in sensorimotor coordination.

PMCID: PMC1976393
PMID: 17878935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Genesis. 2007 Jul;45(7):440-6.

Generation of mice with a conditional Foxp2 null allele.

French CA(1), Groszer M, Preece C, Coupe AM, Rajewsky K, Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)The Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
United Kingdom.

Disruptions of the human FOXP2 gene cause problems with articulation of complex
speech sounds, accompanied by impairment in many aspects of language ability. The
FOXP2/Foxp2 transcription factor is highly similar in humans and mice, and shows 
a complex conserved expression pattern, with high levels in neuronal
subpopulations of the cortex, striatum, thalamus, and cerebellum. In the present 
study we generated mice in which loxP sites flank exons 12-14 of Foxp2; these
exons encode the DNA-binding motif, a key functional domain. We demonstrate that 
early global Cre-mediated recombination yields a null allele, as shown by loss of
the loxP-flanked exons at the RNA level and an absence of Foxp2 protein.
Homozygous null mice display severe motor impairment, cerebellar abnormalities
and early postnatal lethality, consistent with other Foxp2 mutants. When crossed 
to transgenic lines expressing Cre protein in a spatially and/or temporally
controlled manner, these conditional mice will provide new insights into the
contributions of Foxp2 to distinct neural circuits, and allow dissection of roles
during development and in the mature brain.

PMCID: PMC2682329
PMID: 17619227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2007 Oct 5;144B(7):923-43.

A review of association and linkage studies for genetical analyses of learning
disorders.

Caylak E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Clinical Biochemistry, Firat University, School
of Medicine, Elazig, Turkey. emrah333@hotmail.com

Learning disorders (LD) commonly comprise of a heterogeneous group of disorders
manifested by unexpected problems in some children's experiences in the academic 
performance arena. These problems especially comprise of a variety of disorders
which may be subclassified to attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD),
reading disability (RD), specific language impairment (SLI), speech-sound
disorder (SSD), and dyspraxia. The aim of this review is to summarize the current
molecular studies and some of the most exciting recent developments in molecular 
genetic research on LD. The findings for the association and linkage of LD with
candidate genes will help to set the research agendas for future studies to
follow.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17510947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Dev Neurobiol. 2007 May;67(6):809-17.

Recruitment of FoxP2-expressing neurons to area X varies during song development.

Rochefort C(1), He X, Scotto-Lomassese S, Scharff C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Behavior, Freie Universität Berlin, Takustr. 6, 14195
Berlin, Germany. rochefor@molgen.mpg.de

In adult songbirds, neural progenitors proliferate along the lateral ventricles. 
After migration, many of the subsequently formed neuroblasts integrate into the
song nuclei HVC and Area X that participate in auditory-guided vocal motor
learning and singing. Recruitment of postembryonically generated neurons into
HVC, rodent hippocampus, and olfactory bulb has been linked to learning and
memory. The cellular identity and the role of postembryonically generated neurons
in Area X are unknown. Here we describe that the majority of new neurons in
postembryonic Area X of male zebra finches expressed DARPP32 but not choline
acetyltransferase or parvalbumin. This suggests that they are spiny neurons.
Retrogradely labeled neurons projecting to thalamic nucleus DLM were not renewed.
The spiny neurons in Area X were recently shown to express FoxP2, a transcription
factor critical for normal speech and language development in humans. Since
increased FoxP2 mRNA expression was previously observed during periods of vocal
plasticity we investigated whether this increase might be associated with
neuronal recruitment. Consistent with their spiny phenotype, new neurons in Area 
X did express FoxP2 and recruitment increased transiently during the juvenile
song learning period. Moreover we found that FoxP2 was expressed in the
ventricular zone of adult songbirds but was absent from the germinal zones in
adult mouse brains, the hippocampus, and the subventricular zone. Together these 
results raise the possibility that neuronal recruitment and FoxP2 expression in
Area X are associated with vocal learning.

PMID: 17443826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2006 Nov;46(11):848-50.

[Language gene].

[Article in Japanese]

Takahashi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life Sciences.

The human capacity for acquiring speech and language must derive, at least in
part, from the genome. Recent advance in the field of molecular genetics finally 
discovered 'Language Gene'. Disruption of FOXP2 gene, the firstly identified
'language gene' causes severe speech and language disorder. To elucidate the
anatomical basis of language processing in the brain, we examined the expression 
pattern of FOXP2/Foxp2 genes in the monkey and rat brains through development. We
found the preferential expression of FOXP2/Foxp2 in the striosomal compartment of
the developing striatum. Thus, we suggest the striatum, particularly striosomal
system may participate in neural information processing for language and speech. 
Our suggestion is consistent with the declarative/ procedural model of language
proposed by Ullman (1997, 2001), which the procedural memory-dependent mental
grammar is rooted in the basal ganglia and the frontal cortex, and the
declarative memory-dependent mental lexicon is rooted in the temporal lobe.

PMID: 17432197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Development. 2007 May;134(10):1991-2000. Epub 2007 Apr 11.

Foxp2 and Foxp1 cooperatively regulate lung and esophagus development.

Shu W(1), Lu MM, Zhang Y, Tucker PW, Zhou D, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania, 956 BRB II/III, 421
Curie Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The airways of the lung develop through a reiterative process of branching
morphogenesis that gives rise to the intricate and extensive surface area
required for postnatal respiration. The forkhead transcription factors Foxp2 and 
Foxp1 are expressed in multiple foregut-derived tissues including the lung and
intestine. In this report, we show that loss of Foxp2 in mouse leads to defective
postnatal lung alveolarization, contributing to postnatal lethality. Using in
vitro and in vivo assays, we show that T1alpha, a lung alveolar epithelial type 1
cell-restricted gene crucial for lung development and function, is a direct
target of Foxp2 and Foxp1. Remarkably, loss of a single Foxp1 allele in addition 
to complete loss of Foxp2 results in increased severity of morphological defects 
in mutant lungs and leads to perinatal loss of all Foxp2(-/-);Foxp1(+/-) mice.
Expression of N-myc and Hop, crucial regulators of lung development, is
compromised in Foxp2(-/-);Foxp1(+/-) mutants. In addition to the defects in lung 
development, esophageal muscle development is disrupted in Foxp2(-/-);Foxp1(+/-) 
embryos, a tissue where Foxp2 and Foxp1 are co-expressed. These data identify
Foxp2 and Foxp1 as crucial regulators of lung and esophageal development,
underscoring the necessity of these transcription factors in the development of
anterior foregut-derived tissues and demonstrating functional cooperativity
between members of the Foxp1/2/4 family in tissues where they are co-expressed.

PMID: 17428829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Am J Med Genet A. 2007 Apr 15;143A(8):791-8.

Deletion of 7q31.1 supports involvement of FOXP2 in language impairment: clinical
report and review.

Lennon PA(1), Cooper ML, Peiffer DA, Gunderson KL, Patel A, Peters S, Cheung SW, 
Bacino CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA.

We report on a young male with moderate mental retardation, dysmorphic features, 
and language delay who is deleted for 7q31.1-7q31.31. His full karyotype is
46,XY,der(7)del(7)(q31.1q31.31)ins(10;7)(q24.3;q31.1q31.31)mat. This child had
language impairment, including developmental verbal dyspraxia, but did not meet
criteria for autism according to standardized ADOS testing. Our patient's
deletion, which is the smallest reported deletion including FOXP2, adds to the
body of evidence that supports the role of FOXP2 in speech and language
impairment, but not in autism. A reported association between autism and
deletions of WNT2, a gene also deleted in our patient, is likewise not supported 
by our case. Previously, fine mapping with microsatellites markers within in a
large three-generation family, in which half the members had severe specific
language impairment, aided the localization of the SPCH1 locus to 7q31 within
markers D7S2459 (107.1 Mb) and D7S643 (120.5 Mb). Additionally, chromosome
rearrangement of 7q31 and mutational analyses have supported the growing evidence
that FOXP2, a gene within the SPCH1 region, is involved with speech and language 
development. It is unclear however whether the AUTS1 (autistic spectrum 1) locus,
highly linked to 7q31, overlaps with the SPCH1 and FOXP2.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17330859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Trends Ecol Evol. 2007 Apr;22(4):174-5. Epub 2007 Feb 2.

Sly FOXP2: genomic conflict in the evolution of language.

Crespi BJ.

Comment on
    Trends Ecol Evol. 2006 Oct;21(10):555-61.

PMID: 17276539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Feb 23;353(4):869-74. Epub 2006 Dec 26.

Intracellular distribution of a speech/language disorder associated FOXP2 mutant.

Mizutani A(1), Matsuzaki A, Momoi MY, Fujita E, Tanabe Y, Momoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Development, Department of Human Inherited Metabolic Disease,
National Institute of Neuroscience, Ogawahigashi-machi 4-1-1, Kodaira, Tokyo
187-8502, Japan.

Although a mutation (R553H) in the forkhead box (FOX)P2 gene is associated with
speech/language disorder, little is known about the function of FOXP2 or its
relevance to this disorder. In the present study, we identify the forkhead
nuclear localization domains that contribute to the cellular distribution of
FOXP2. Nuclear localization of FOXP2 depended on two distally separated nuclear
localization signals in the forkhead domain. A truncated version of FOXP2 lacking
the leu-zip, Zn2+ finger, and forkhead domains that was observed in another
patient with speech abnormalities demonstrated an aggregated cytoplasmic
localization. Furthermore, FOXP2 (R553H) mainly exhibited a cytoplasmic
localization despite retaining interactions with nuclear transport proteins
(importin alpha and beta). Interestingly, wild type FOXP2 promoted the transport 
of FOXP2 (R553H) into the nucleus. Mutant and wild type FOXP2 heterodimers in the
nucleus or FOXP2 R553H in the cytoplasm may underlie the pathogenesis of the
autosomal dominant speech/language disorder.

PMID: 17196932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Rev Neurol. 2006 Dec 1-15;43(11):690-8.

[The origins of language: an analysis from the aphasia perspective].

[Article in Spanish]

Ardila A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders, Florida International
University, 12230 NW 8th Street, Miami, FL 33182, USA. ardilaa@fiu.edu

INTRODUCTION: Different areas of knowledge have contributed to a better
understanding of the origins of human language. AIM. To relate our current
knowledge about the origins of language with the language pathology found in the 
case of brain injuries (aphasia).
DEVELOPMENT: There are two fundamental forms of aphasia, which linked to defects 
in the lexico-semantic and grammatical systems of language (Wernicke-type aphasia
and Broca-type aphasia, respectively). From observations made on children's
development of language and experiments with primates, it has been shown that
language initially appears as a lexico-semantic system. Grammar correlates with
the ability to represent actions (verbs) and depends on what is known as Broca's 
area and its related brain circuits, but it is also related to the ability to
quickly carry out the sequencing of the articulatory movements required for
speaking (speech praxis).
CONCLUSIONS: Language may have appeared as a lexico-semantic system much earlier 
than language as a syntactic system. The former may have developed around
200,000-300,000 years ago, coinciding with the increase in the temporal lobe, and
would have existed in other hominids. Language as a grammatical system appeared
perhaps as recently as 50,000 years ago and seems to be exclusive to Homo
sapiens.

PMID: 17133331  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Neurosci. 2006 Oct 11;26(41):10376-9.

Singing mice, songbirds, and more: models for FOXP2 function and dysfunction in
human speech and language.

White SA(1), Fisher SE, Geschwind DH, Scharff C, Holy TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Science, University of California, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA. sawhite@ucla.edu

In 2001, a point mutation in the forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) coding sequence was
identified as the basis of an inherited speech and language disorder suffered by 
members of the family known as "KE." This mini-symposium review focuses on recent
findings and research-in-progress, primarily from five laboratories. Each aims at
capitalizing on the FOXP2 discovery to build a neurobiological bridge between
molecule and phenotype. Below, we describe genetic through behavioral techniques 
used currently to investigate FoxP2 in birds, rodents, and humans for discovery
of the neural bases of vocal learning and language.

PMCID: PMC2683917
PMID: 17035521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Am J Hum Genet. 2006 Nov;79(5):965-72. Epub 2006 Sep 27.

Absence of a paternally inherited FOXP2 gene in developmental verbal dyspraxia.

Feuk L(1), Kalervo A, Lipsanen-Nyman M, Skaug J, Nakabayashi K, Finucane B,
Hartung D, Innes M, Kerem B, Nowaczyk MJ, Rivlin J, Roberts W, Senman L, Summers 
A, Szatmari P, Wong V, Vincent JB, Zeesman S, Osborne LR, Cardy JO, Kere J,
Scherer SW, Hannula-Jouppi K.

Author information: 
(1)The Centre for Applied Genomics and Program in Genetics and Genomic Biology,
The Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Mutations in FOXP2 cause developmental verbal dyspraxia (DVD), but only a few
cases have been described. We characterize 13 patients with DVD--5 with
hemizygous paternal deletions spanning the FOXP2 gene, 1 with a translocation
interrupting FOXP2, and the remaining 7 with maternal uniparental disomy of
chromosome 7 (UPD7), who were also given a diagnosis of Silver-Russell Syndrome
(SRS). Of these individuals with DVD, all 12 for whom parental DNA was available 
showed absence of a paternal copy of FOXP2. Five other individuals with deletions
of paternally inherited FOXP2 but with incomplete clinical information or
phenotypes too complex to properly assess are also described. Four of the
patients with DVD also meet criteria for autism spectrum disorder. Individuals
with paternal UPD7 or with partial maternal UPD7 or deletion starting downstream 
of FOXP2 do not have DVD. Using quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction,
we show the maternally inherited FOXP2 to be comparatively underexpressed. Our
results indicate that absence of paternal FOXP2 is the cause of DVD in patients
with SRS with maternal UPD7. The data also point to a role for differential
parent-of-origin expression of FOXP2 in human speech development.

PMCID: PMC1698557
PMID: 17033973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Nov 1;15(21):3154-67. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

Functional genetic analysis of mutations implicated in a human speech and
language disorder.

Vernes SC(1), Nicod J, Elahi FM, Coventry JA, Kenny N, Coupe AM, Bird LE, Davies 
KE, Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford, OX3 7BN, UK.

Mutations in the FOXP2 gene cause a severe communication disorder involving
speech deficits (developmental verbal dyspraxia), accompanied by wide-ranging
impairments in expressive and receptive language. The protein encoded by FOXP2
belongs to a divergent subgroup of forkhead-box transcription factors, with a
distinctive DNA-binding domain and motifs that mediate hetero- and
homodimerization. Here we report the first direct functional genetic
investigation of missense and nonsense mutations in FOXP2 using human cell-lines,
including a well-established neuronal model system. We focused on three unusual
FOXP2 coding variants, uniquely identified in cases of verbal dyspraxia,
assessing expression, subcellular localization, DNA-binding and transactivation
properties. Analysis of the R553H forkhead-box substitution, found in all
affected members of a large three-generation family, indicated that it severely
affects FOXP2 function, chiefly by disrupting nuclear localization and
DNA-binding properties. The R328X truncation mutation, segregating with
speech/language disorder in a second family, yields an unstable, predominantly
cytoplasmic product that lacks transactivation capacity. A third coding variant
(Q17L) observed in a single affected child did not have any detectable functional
effect in the present study. In addition, we used the same systems to explore the
properties of different isoforms of FOXP2, resulting from alternative splicing in
human brain. Notably, one such isoform, FOXP2.10+, contains dimerization domains,
but no DNA-binding domain, and displayed increased cytoplasmic localization,
coupled with aggresome formation. We hypothesize that expression of alternative
isoforms of FOXP2 may provide mechanisms for post-translational regulation of
transcription factor function.

PMID: 16984964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Rev Neurol. 2006 Sep 1-15;43(5):280-6.

[The aetiopathogenesis of auditory hallucinations in psychosis].

[Article in Spanish]

Sanjuan J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Psiquiatría, Facultad de Medicina. Universidad de Valencia, 46010
Valencia, Espana. julio.sanjuan@uv.es

INTRODUCTION: Auditory hallucinations is one of the core symptoms of psychosis.
Two main different approaches have been made in recent years in order to
understand this perceptual abnormality. The psycho-social approaches is trying to
explain auditory hallucinations as a common human phenomenon that only
environmental factors cause them to be pathological. It propose psychotherapeutic
techniques based on the cognitive model, paying special attention to the
emotional component. The neurobiological approach, specially with neuroimaging
techniques, is giving us new information about abnormal activation in specific
neural networks, particularly in language areas. It propose biological treatments
with antipsychotics and transcranial magnetic stimulation. Neither of these
approaches are listening to each other. Neither of them look at the molecular
genetic vulnerability to auditory hallucinations in psychosis.
DEVELOPMENT: From a review of the literature and our own findings, we present a
genetic-environmental model of auditory hallucinations in psychoses. We
hypothesize two types of genetic vulnerability: vulnerability to hearing voices
-that could be related with genes that are expressed in language areas and are
related with language abnormalities (FOXP2)-, and vulnerability to abnormal
emotional response to voices -that could be related with genes that are involved 
in the regulation of dopamine in the limbic system (5-HTT, CCK-AR)-. Finally,
environmental and cultural factors explain the content and social adjustment to
auditory hallucinations.
CONCLUSION: Our model allow the integration of many data from epidemiology and
neuroimaging, to psychopharmacology in the understanding of the aetiology of
auditory hallucinations.

PMID: 16941426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Cell. 2006 Jul 28;126(2):375-87.

FOXP3 controls regulatory T cell function through cooperation with NFAT.

Wu Y(1), Borde M, Heissmeyer V, Feuerer M, Lapan AD, Stroud JC, Bates DL, Guo L, 
Han A, Ziegler SF, Mathis D, Benoist C, Chen L, Rao A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder,
Boulder, CO 80309, USA.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Jul 28;126(2):253-6.

Antigen stimulation of immune cells activates the transcription factor NFAT, a
key regulator of T cell activation and anergy. NFAT forms cooperative complexes
with the AP-1 family of transcription factors and regulates T cell
activation-associated genes. Here we show that regulatory T cell (Treg) function 
is mediated by an analogous cooperative complex of NFAT with the forkhead
transcription factor FOXP3, a lineage specification factor for Tregs. The crystal
structure of an NFAT:FOXP2:DNA complex reveals an extensive protein-protein
interaction interface between NFAT and FOXP2. Structure-guided mutations of
FOXP3, predicted to progressively disrupt its interaction with NFAT, interfere in
a graded manner with the ability of FOXP3 to repress expression of the cytokine
IL2, upregulate expression of the Treg markers CTLA4 and CD25, and confer
suppressor function in a murine model of autoimmune diabetes. Thus by switching
transcriptional partners, NFAT converts the acute T cell activation program into 
the suppressor program of Tregs.

PMID: 16873067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Neurosci. 2006 Jul 12;26(28):7390-4.

FoxP2 regulation during undirected singing in adult songbirds.

Teramitsu I(1), White SA.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Programs in Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Physiology,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095, USA.

Learned vocal communication, including human speech, is a socially influenced
behavior limited to certain animals. This ability requires auditory feedback
during vocalization, which allows for on-line evaluation, to achieve the desired 
vocal output. To date, FOXP2 (forkhead box P2), a transcriptional repressor, is
the only molecule directly linked to human speech. Identified FOXP2 mutations
cause orofacial dyspraxia accompanied by abnormalities in corticostriatal
circuitry controlling voluntary orofacial movements. These observations implicate
FOXP2 in the developmental formation of neural circuits used in speech, but
whether FOXP2 additionally plays an active role in mature circuitry was unknown. 
To address this question, we use a songbird, the zebra finch (Taeniopygia
guttata), whose learned song and underlying circuitry are well characterized. We 
show that, when adult males sing, FoxP2 mRNA is acutely downregulated within area
X, the specific region of the songbird striatum dedicated to song. Furthermore,
we find downregulation in males that sing by themselves (undirected singers) but 
not in males that sing to females (directed singers). This FoxP2 downregulation
cannot be a simple consequence of the motor act because birds sang in both
directed and undirected contexts. Our data suggest that FoxP2 is important not
only for the formation but also for the function of vocal control circuitry.
Social context-dependent, acute changes in FoxP2 within the basal ganglia of
adult songbirds also suggest, by analogy, that the core deficits of affected
humans extend beyond development and beyond basic central motor control.

PMCID: PMC2683919
PMID: 16837586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2006 Jun;49(3):500-25.

Speech, prosody, and voice characteristics of a mother and daughter with a 7;13
translocation affecting FOXP2.

Shriberg LD(1), Ballard KJ, Tomblin JB, Duffy JR, Odell KH, Williams CA.

Author information: 
(1)Waisman Research Center, University of Wisconsin--Madison, 53705, USA.
shriberg@waisman.wisc.edu

PURPOSE: The primary goal of this case study was to describe the speech, prosody,
and voice characteristics of a mother and daughter with a breakpoint in a
balanced 7;13 chromosomal translocation that disrupted the transcription gene,
FOXP2 (cf. J. B. Tomblin et al., 2005). As with affected members of the widely
cited KE family, whose communicative disorders have been associated with a point 
mutation in the FOXP2 gene, both mother and daughter had cognitive, language, and
speech challenges. A 2nd goal of the study was to illustrate in detail, the types
of speech, prosody, and voice metrics that can contribute to phenotype sharpening
in speech-genetics research.
METHOD: A speech, prosody, and voice assessment protocol was administered twice
within a 4-month period. Analyses were aided by comparing profiles from the
present speakers (the TB family) with those from 2 groups of adult speakers: 7
speakers with acquired (with one exception) spastic or spastic-flaccid dysarthria
and 14 speakers with acquired apraxia of speech.
RESULTS: The descriptive and inferential statistical findings for 13 speech,
prosody, and voice variable supported the conclusion that both mother and
daughter had spastic dysarthria, an apraxia of speech, and residual developmental
distortion errors.
CONCLUSION: These findings are consistent with, but also extend, the reported
communicative disorders in affected members of the KE family. A companion article
(K. J. Ballard, L. D. Shriberg, J. R. Duffy, & J. B. Tomblin, 2006) reports
information from the orofacial and speech motor control measures administered to 
the same family; reports on neuropsychological and neuroimaging findings are in
preparation.

PMID: 16787893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Cognition. 2006 Sep;101(2):270-97. Epub 2006 Jun 9.

Tangled webs: tracing the connections between genes and cognition.

Fisher SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, Roosevelt Drive, Oxford, OX3 7BN,
UK. simon.fisher@well.ox.ac.uk <simon.fisher@well.ox.ac.uk>

The rise of molecular genetics is having a pervasive influence in a wide variety 
of fields, including research into neurodevelopmental disorders like dyslexia,
speech and language impairments, and autism. There are many studies underway
which are attempting to determine the roles of genetic factors in the aetiology
of these disorders. Beyond the obvious implications for diagnosis, treatment and 
understanding, success in these efforts promises to shed light on the links
between genes and aspects of cognition and behaviour. However, the deceptive
simplicity of finding correlations between genetic and phenotypic variation has
led to a common misconception that there exist straightforward linear
relationships between specific genes and particular behavioural and/or cognitive 
outputs. The problem is exacerbated by the adoption of an abstract view of the
nature of the gene, without consideration of molecular, developmental or
ontogenetic frameworks. To illustrate the limitations of this perspective, I
select two cases from recent research into the genetic underpinnings of
neurodevelopmental disorders. First, I discuss the proposal that dyslexia can be 
dissected into distinct components specified by different genes. Second, I review
the story of the FOXP2 gene and its role in human speech and language. In both
cases, adoption of an abstract concept of the gene can lead to erroneous
conclusions, which are incompatible with current knowledge of molecular and
developmental systems. Genes do not specify behaviours or cognitive processes;
they make regulatory factors, signalling molecules, receptors, enzymes, and so
on, that interact in highly complex networks, modulated by environmental
influences, in order to build and maintain the brain. I propose that it is
necessary for us to fully embrace the complexity of biological systems, if we are
ever to untangle the webs that link genes to cognition.

PMID: 16764847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cognition. 2006 Sep;101(2):298-332. Epub 2006 Jun 5.

Cognitive developmental biology: history, process and fortune's wheel.

Balaban E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Behavioral Neurosciences Program, McGill University, 1205 Avenue Dr. Penfield,
Montreal, Canada QC H3A 1B1. evan@psych.mcgill.ca <evan@psych.mcgill.ca>

Biological contributions to cognitive development continue to be conceived
predominantly along deterministic lines, with proponents of different positions
arguing about the preponderance of gene-based versus experience-based influences 
that organize brain circuits irreversibly during prenatal or early postnatal
life, and evolutionary influences acting through selection on small numbers of
genes. This article discusses evolutionary, mechanistic and probabilistic aspects
of developmental processes that cognitive scientists need to better integrate.
Developmental processes inseparably fuse experience-dependent and
experience-independent components, have important stochastic contributions, and
exhibit a greater degree of mechanistic continuity between developing and adult
nervous systems than previously thought. Their balanced integration leads to new 
models for "critical or sensitive" period phenomena and behavioral biases. A
general understanding of behavioral development - cognitive developmental
biology--will require better coordination between comparative animal and human
developmental research programs.

PMID: 16750186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jul 7;345(3):911-6. Epub 2006 May 15.

Molecular genetic determinants of human brain size.

Tang BL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 8 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597, Singapore.
bchtbl@nus.edu.sg

Cognitive skills such as tool use, syntactical languages, and self-awareness
differentiate humans from other primates. The underlying basis for this cognitive
difference has been widely associated with a high encephalization quotient and an
anatomically distinct, exceptionally large cerebral cortex. Investigations on
congenital microcephaly had revealed several genes that affect mammalian brain
size when mutated. At least four of these, microcephalin (MCPH1), abnormal
spindle-like microcephaly-associated (ASPM), cyclin-dependent kinase 5 regulatory
associated protein 2 (CDK5RAP2), and centromere-associated protein J (CENPJ) are 
known to have undergone significant positive selection in the great apes and
human lineages during primate evolution. MCPH1 and ASPM both have very young
single nucleotide polymorphism haplotypes associated with modern humans, and
these genes are presumably still evolving in Homo sapiens. Microcephalin has a
role in DNA damage response and regulation of cell cycle checkpoints. The other
known microcephaly-associated genes encode microtubule-associated centrosomal
proteins that might regulate neural progenitor cell division and cell number.
Recent reports have also unveiled a previously unknown function of ephrins and
Eph in the regulation of neural progenitor cell death with a consequential effect
on brain size. Understanding the mechanism for developmental control of brain
organogenesis by these genes, and others such as FOXP2, shall provide fresh
perspectives on the evolution of human intelligence.

PMID: 16716254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2006;30(7):949-60. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

From manual gesture to speech: a gradual transition.

Gentilucci M(1), Corballis MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Parma, Parma I-43100, Italy.

There are a number of reasons to suppose that language evolved from manual
gestures. We review evidence that the transition from primarily manual to
primarily vocal language was a gradual process, and is best understood if it is
supposed that speech itself a gestural system rather than an acoustic system, an 
idea captured by the motor theory of speech perception and articulatory
phonology. Studies of primate premotor cortex, and, in particular, of the
so-called "mirror system" suggest a double hand/mouth command system that may
have evolved initially in the context of ingestion, and later formed a platform
for combined manual and vocal communication. In humans, speech is typically
accompanied by manual gesture, speech production itself is influenced by
executing or observing hand movements, and manual actions also play an important 
role in the development of speech, from the babbling stage onwards. The final
stage at which speech became relatively autonomous may have occurred late in
hominid evolution, perhaps with a mutation of the FOXP2 gene around 100,000 years
ago.

PMID: 16620983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2006 Jul;30(5):827-53. Epub 2006 Mar
23.

Human brain evolution and the "Neuroevolutionary Time-depth Principle:"
Implications for the Reclassification of fear-circuitry-related traits in DSM-V
and for studying resilience to warzone-related posttraumatic stress disorder.

Bracha HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Pacific Islands Health Care System, and
Department of Tropical Medicine, Medical Microbiology and Pharmacology, John A.
Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu 96813-2830, USA.
H.BRACHA@MED.VA.GOV

The DSM-III, DSM-IV, DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10 have judiciously minimized discussion
of etiologies to distance clinical psychiatry from Freudian psychoanalysis. With 
this goal mostly achieved, discussion of etiological factors should be
reintroduced into the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fifth Edition (DSM-V). A research agenda for the DSM-V advocated the "development
of a pathophysiologically based classification system". The author critically
reviews the neuroevolutionary literature on stress-induced and fear circuitry
disorders and related amygdala-driven, species-atypical fear behaviors of
clinical severity in adult humans. Over 30 empirically testable/falsifiable
predictions are presented. It is noted that in DSM-IV-TR and ICD-10, the
classification of stress and fear circuitry disorders is neither
mode-of-acquisition-based nor brain-evolution-based. For example, snake phobia
(innate) and dog phobia (overconsolidational) are clustered together. Similarly, 
research on blood-injection-injury-type-specific phobia clusters two fears
different in their innateness: 1) an arguably ontogenetic
memory-trace-overconsolidation-based fear (hospital phobia) and 2) a hardwired
(innate) fear of the sight of one's blood or a sharp object penetrating one's
skin. Genetic architecture-charting of fear-circuitry-related traits has been
challenging. Various, non-phenotype-based architectures can serve as targets for 
research. In this article, the author will propose one such alternative genetic
architecture. This article was inspired by the following: A) Nesse's
"Smoke-Detector Principle", B) the increasing suspicion that the "smooth" rather 
than "lumpy" distribution of complex psychiatric phenotypes (including
fear-circuitry disorders) may in some cases be accounted for by oligogenic (and
not necessarily polygenic) transmission, and C) insights from the initial
sequence of the chimpanzee genome and comparison with the human genome by the
Chimpanzee Sequencing and Analysis Consortium published in late 2005.
Neuroevolutionary insights relevant to fear circuitry symptoms that primarily
emerge overconsolidationally (especially Combat related Posttraumatic Stress
Disorder) are presented. Also introduced is a human-evolution-based principle for
clustering innate fear traits. The "Neuroevolutionary Time-depth Principle" of
innate fears proposed in this article may be useful in the development of a
neuroevolution-based taxonomic re-clustering of stress-triggered and
fear-circuitry disorders in DSM-V. Four broad clusters of evolved fear circuits
are proposed based on their time-depths: 1) Mesozoic (mammalian-wide) circuits
hardwired by wild-type alleles driven to fixation by Mesozoic selective sweeps;
2) Cenozoic (simian-wide) circuits relevant to many specific phobias; 3) mid
Paleolithic and upper Paleolithic (Homo sapiens-specific) circuits (arguably
resulting mostly from mate-choice-driven stabilizing selection); 4) Neolithic
circuits (arguably mostly related to stabilizing selection driven by gene-culture
co-evolution). More importantly, the author presents evolutionary perspectives on
warzone-related PTSD, Combat-Stress Reaction, Combat-related Stress,
Operational-Stress, and other deployment-stress-induced symptoms. The
Neuroevolutionary Time-depth Principle presented in this article may help explain
the dissimilar stress-resilience levels following different types of acute threat
to survival of oneself or one's progency (aka DSM-III and DSM-V PTSD Criterion-A 
events). PTSD rates following exposure to lethal inter-group violence (combat,
warzone exposure or intentionally caused disasters such as terrorism) are usually
5-10 times higher than rates following large-scale natural disasters such as
forest fires, floods, hurricanes, volcanic eruptions, and earthquakes. The author
predicts that both intentionally-caused large-scale bioevent-disasters, as well
as natural bioevents such as SARS and avian flu pandemics will be an exception
and are likely to be followed by PTSD rates approaching those that follow warzone
exposure. During bioevents, Amygdala-driven and locus-coeruleus-driven epidemic
pseudosomatic symptoms may be an order of magnitude more common than
infection-caused cytokine-driven symptoms. Implications for the red cross and
FEMA are discussed. It is also argued that hospital phobia as well as dog phobia,
bird phobia and bat phobia require re-taxonomization in DSM-V in a new
"overconsolidational disorders" category anchored around PTSD. The
overconsolidational spectrum category may be conceptualized as straddling the
fear circuitry spectrum disorders and the affective spectrum disorders
categories, and may be a category for which Pitman's secondary prevention
propranolol regimen may be specifically indicated as a "morning after pill"
intervention. Predictions are presented regarding obsessive-compulsive disorder
(OCD) (e.g., female-pattern hoarding vs. male-pattern hoarding) and
"culture-bound" acute anxiety symptoms (taijin-kyofusho, koro, shuk yang, shook
yong, suo yang, rok-joo, jinjinia-bemar, karoshi, gwarosa, Voodoo death). Also
discussed are insights relevant to pseudoneurological symptoms and to the
forthcoming Dissociative-Conversive disorders category in DSM-V, including what
the author terms fright-triggered acute pseudo-localized symptoms (i.e.,
pseudoparalysis, pseudocerebellar imbalance, psychogenic blindness,
pseudoseizures, and epidemic sociogenic illness). Speculations based on studies
of the human abnormal-spindle-like, microcephaly-associated (ASPM) gene, the
microcephaly primary autosomal recessive (MCPH) gene, and the forkhead box p2
(FOXP2) gene are made and incorporated into what is termed "The pre-FOXP2
Hypothesis of Blood-Injection-Injury Phobia." Finally, the author argues for a
non-reductionistic fusion of "distal (evolutionary) neurobiology" with clinical
"proximal neurobiology," utilizing neurological heuristics. It is noted that the 
value of re-clustering fear traits based on behavioral ethology,
human-phylogenomics-derived endophenotypes and on ontogenomics (gene-environment 
interactions) can be confirmed or disconfirmed using epidemiological or twin
studies and psychiatric genomics.

PMID: 16563589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Psychiatr Genet. 2006 Apr;16(2):67-72.

Association between FOXP2 polymorphisms and schizophrenia with auditory
hallucinations.

Sanjuán J(1), Tolosa A, González JC, Aguilar EJ, Pérez-Tur J, Nájera C, Moltó MD,
de Frutos R.

Author information: 
(1)Psychiatric Unit, Faculty of Medicine, Clinical Hospital, Valencia, Spain.
julio.sanjuán@uv.es

OBJECTIVE: A mutation in the FOXP2 gene has been the first genetic association
with a language disorder. Language disorder is considered as a core symptom of
schizophrenia. Therefore, the FOXP2 gene could be considered a good candidate
gene for the vulnerability to schizophrenia.
METHODS: A set of single nucleotide polymorphisms mainly located in the 5'
regulatory region of the FOXP2 gene was analysed in a sample of 186 DSM-IV
schizophrenic patients with auditory hallucinations and in 160 healthy controls.
RESULTS: Statistically significant differences in the genotype (P=0.007) and
allele frequencies (P=0.0027) between schizophrenic patients with auditory
hallucinations and controls were found in the single nucleotide polymorphism
rs2396753. These P values changed to 0.07 and 0.0273, respectively, after
Bonferroni sequential correction. The haplotype
rs7803667T/rs10447760C/rs923875A/rs1358278A/rs2396753A (TCAAA) also showed a
significant difference confirmed with a permutation test (P=0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggested that the FOXP2 gene may confer vulnerability
to schizophrenic patients with auditory hallucinations.

PMID: 16538183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Int J Dev Biol. 2006;50(4):435-8.

Expression of FoxP2 during zebrafish development and in the adult brain.

Shah R(1), Medina-Martinez O, Chu LF, Samaco RC, Jamrich M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Fox (forkhead) genes encode transcription factors that play important roles in
the regulation of embryonic patterning as well as in tissue specific gene
expression. Mutations in the human FOXP2 gene cause abnormal speech development. 
Here we report the structure and expression pattern of zebrafish FoxP2. In
zebrafish, this gene is first expressed at the 20-somite stage in the presumptive
telencephalon. At this stage there is a significant overlap of FoxP2 expression
with the expression of the emx homeobox genes. However, in contrast to emx1,
FoxP2 is not expressed in the pineal gland or in the pronephric duct. After 72
hours of development, the expression of zebrafish FoxP2 becomes more complex in
the brain. The developing optic tectum becomes the major area of FoxP2
expression. In the adult brain, the highest concentrations of the FoxP2
transcript can be observed in the optic tectum. In the cerebellum, only the
caudal lobes show high levels of Foxp2 expression. These regions correspond to
the vestibulocerebellum of mammals. Several other regions of the brain also show 
high levels of Foxp2 expression.

PMID: 16525940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Mar 1;140(5):509-14.

Speech and language impairment and oromotor dyspraxia due to deletion of 7q31
that involves FOXP2.

Zeesman S(1), Nowaczyk MJ, Teshima I, Roberts W, Cardy JO, Brian J, Senman L,
Feuk L, Osborne LR, Scherer SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada.

We report detailed clinical, cytogenetic, and molecular findings in a girl with a
deletion of chromosome 7q31-q32. This child has a severe communication disorder
with evidence of oromotor dyspraxia, dysmorphic features, and mild developmental 
delay. She is unable to cough, sneeze, or laugh spontaneously. Her deletion is on
the paternally inherited chromosome and includes the FOXP2 gene, which has
recently been associated with speech and language impairment and a similar form
of oromotor dyspraxia in at least three other published cases. We hypothesize
that our patient's communication disorder and oromotor deficiency are due to
haploinsufficiency for FOXP2 and that her dysmorphism and developmental delay are
a consequence of the absence of the other genes involved in the microdeletion. We
propose that this patient, together with others reported in the literature, may
define a new contiguous gene deletion syndrome encompassing the 7q31-FOXP2
region. Cytogenetic and molecular analysis of this region should be considered
for other individuals displaying similar characteristics.

PMID: 16470794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Anat Rec B New Anat. 2006 Jan;289(1):9-24.

Broca's arrow: evolution, prediction, and language in the brain.

Cooper DL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Krasnow Institute for Advanced Study, George Mason University, Fairfax, VA
22030, USA. dcoopere@gmu.edu

Brodmann's areas 44 and 45 in the human brain, also known as Broca's area, have
long been associated with language functions, especially in the left hemisphere. 
However, the precise role Broca's area plays in human language has not been
established with certainty. Broca's area has homologs in the great apes and in
area F5 in monkeys, which suggests that its original function was not linguistic 
at all. In fact, great ape and hominid brains show very similar left-over-right
asymmetries in Broca's area homologs as well as in other areas, such as homologs 
to Wernicke's area, that are normally associated with language in modern humans. 
Moreover, the so-called mirror neurons are located in Broca's area in great apes 
and area F5 in monkeys, which seem to provide a representation of cause and
effect in a primate's environment, particularly its social environment. Humans
appear to have these mirror neurons in Broca's area as well. Similarly, genetic
evidence related to the FOXP2 gene implicates Broca's area in linguistic function
and dysfunction, but the gene itself is a highly conserved developmental gene in 
vertebrates and is shared with only two or three differences between humans and
great apes, five between humans and mice, and eight between humans and songbirds.
Taking neurons and portions of the brain as discrete computational segments in
the sense of constituting specific Turing machines, this evidence points to a
predictive motor and conceptual function for Broca's area in primates, especially
for social concepts. In human language, this is consistent with evidence from
typological and cognitive linguistics.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16437554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Structure. 2006 Jan;14(1):159-66.

Structure of the forkhead domain of FOXP2 bound to DNA.

Stroud JC(1), Wu Y, Bates DL, Han A, Nowick K, Paabo S, Tong H, Chen L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado at Boulder,
Colorado 80309, USA.

FOXP (FOXP1-4) is a newly defined subfamily of the forkhead box (FOX)
transcription factors. A mutation in the FOXP2 forkhead domain cosegregates with 
a severe speech disorder, whereas several mutations in the FOXP3 forkhead domain 
are linked to the IPEX syndrome in human and a similar autoimmune phenotype in
mice. Here we report a 1.9 A crystal structure of the forkhead domain of human
FOXP2 bound to DNA. This structure allows us to revise the previously proposed
DNA recognition mechanism and provide a unifying model of DNA binding for the FOX
family of proteins. Our studies also reveal that the FOXP2 forkhead domain can
form a domain-swapped dimer, made possible by a strategic substitution of a
highly conserved proline in conventional FOX proteins with alanine in the P
subfamily. Disease-causing mutations in FOXP2 and FOXP3 map either to the DNA
binding surface or the domain-swapping dimer interface, functionally
corroborating the crystal structure.

PMID: 16407075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Psychiatr Genet. 2006 Feb;16(1):19-23.

Autism and ultraconserved non-coding sequence on chromosome 7q.

Richler E(1), Reichert JG, Buxbaum JD, McInnes LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Autism has been linked to a broad region on chromosome 7q that
contains a large number of genes involved in transcription and development. This 
region is also enriched for ultraconserved non-coding elements, defined as
human-rodent sequences that are 100% aligned over > or =200 base pairs, which
have a high likelihood of being functional. Therefore, as only a few rare coding 
variants have been detected in the autism candidate genes on 7q examined to date,
we decided to screen these ultraconserved elements for possible autism
susceptibility alleles.
METHODS: We used denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography, and DNA
sequencing, to perform variant detection in a total of 146 cases with autism, 96 
from the Autism Genetic Resource Exchange and 50 from the Central Valley of Costa
Rica, as well as 124 controls from the Polymorphism Discovery Resource Panel. We 
screened 10 consecutive ultraconserved elements in, or flanking, the genes
DLX5/6, AUTS2 and FOXP2 on chromosome 7q.
RESULTS: Although we did find several rare variants in autism cases that were not
present in controls, we also observed rare variants present in controls and not
cases. The most common variant occurred in controls at a frequency of 3.3%.
Interestingly, two ultraconserved elements each harbored three independent
variants and one ultraconserved element harbored two independent variants,
suggesting that ultraconservation is maintained chiefly by a decreased tendency
toward fixation, rather than a significantly lower mutation rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that these sequences are unlikely to harbor major
autism susceptibility alleles.

PMID: 16395125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2005 Dec;15(6):683-5. Epub 2005 Nov 3.

Neural circuits and behaviour: developmental and evolutionary perspectives.

Clayton NS, Hen R.

PMID: 16271456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Curr Opin Neurobiol. 2005 Dec;15(6):694-703. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

An evolutionary perspective on FoxP2: strictly for the birds?

Scharff C(1), Haesler S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 73, 14195 Berlin,
Germany; Freie Universität Berlin, Department of Animal Behavior,
Grunewaldstrasse 34, 12165 Berlin, Germany. scharff@molgen.mpg.de

FoxP2 mutations in humans are associated with a disorder that affects both the
comprehension of language and its production, speech. This discovery provided the
first opportunity to analyze the genetics of language with molecular and
neurobiological tools. The amino acid sequence and the neural expression pattern 
of FoxP2 are extremely conserved, from reptile to man. This suggests an important
role for FoxP2 in vertebrate brains, regardless of whether they support imitative
vocal learning or not. Its expression pattern pinpoints neural circuits that
might have been crucial for the evolution of speech and language, including the
basal ganglia and the cerebellum. Recent studies in songbirds show that during
times of song plasticity FoxP2 is upregulated in a striatal region essential for 
song learning. This suggests that FoxP2 plays important roles both in the
development of neural circuits and in the postnatal behaviors they mediate.

PMID: 16266802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. N Engl J Med. 2005 Oct 20;353(16):1655-7.

On genes, speech, and language.

Fisher SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford,
England.

Comment on
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Oct 20;353(16):1694-701.

PMID: 16236736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Neuron. 2005 Sep 15;47(6):817-31.

Fezl is required for the birth and specification of corticospinal motor neurons.

Molyneaux BJ(1), Arlotta P, Hirata T, Hibi M, Macklis JD.

Author information: 
(1)MGH-HMS Center for Nervous System Repair, Department of Neurosurgery, Program 
in Neuroscience and Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

The molecular mechanisms controlling the differentiation of neural progenitors
into distinct subtypes of neurons during neocortical development are unknown.
Here, we report that Fezl is required for the specification of corticospinal
motor neurons and other subcerebral projection neurons, which are absent from
Fezl null mutant neocortex. There is neither an increase in cell death in
Fezl(-/-) cortex nor abnormalities in migration, indicating that the absence of
subcerebral projection neurons is due to a failure in fate specification. In
striking contrast, other neuronal populations in the same and other cortical
layers are born normally. Overexpression of Fezl results in excess production of 
subcerebral projection neurons and arrested migration of these neurons in the
germinal zone. These data indicate that Fezl plays a central role in the
specification of corticospinal motor neurons and other subcerebral projection
neurons, controlling early decisions regarding lineage-specific differentiation
from neural progenitors.

PMID: 16157277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Dev Dyn. 2005 Nov;234(3):740-6.

Molecular cloning and developmental expression of foxP2 in zebrafish.

Bonkowsky JL(1), Chien CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Neurology and Pediatrics, University of Utah Medical
Center, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA. joshua.bonkowsky@hsc.utah.edu

Forkhead domain transcription factors are a large gene family with multiple roles
in development. FOXP2, a recently identified member of this family, has been
shown to be critical for normal development of language in humans, but little is 
known of its broader function during nervous system development. We report here
the cloning of foxP2, the zebrafish ortholog of FOXP2. Zebrafish FoxP2 is highly 
conserved in its zinc-finger and forkhead domains, but lacks the large glutamine 
repeat characteristic of its orthologs. In examining the spatial and temporal
distribution of foxP2 during development, we find that it is specifically
expressed in many domains of the nervous system, including the telencephalon,
diencephalon, cerebellum, hindbrain, tectum, retinal ganglion cells, and spinal
cord. Thus, in addition to specific roles in language development, foxP2 likely
has a more general conserved role in nervous system development.

Developmental Dynamics 234:740-746, 2005. (c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16028276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Rev Neurol. 2005 Jul 1-15;41(1):37-44.

[FOXP2: from the specific disorder to the molecular biology of language. II.
Implications for the ontogenesis and phylogenesis of language].

[Article in Spanish]

Benítez-Burraco A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Spanish Language, Linguistics and Theory of Literature, Faculty 
of Philology, University of Seville, Palos de la Frontera s/n, E-41004 Seville,
Spain abenitez@us.es

INTRODUCTION: Cloning FOXP2, the first gene linked to a hereditary variant of
specific language impairment (SLI), has allowed researchers to conduct more
precise studies into the nature and developmental path of the molecular bases
governing the organisation and functioning of the neuron centres responsible for 
language processing.
DEVELOPMENT: The FOXP2 gene codes for a transcriptional repressor that regulates 
the proliferation and/or migration of certain neuronal populations in the basal
ganglia, cortex, cerebellum and thalamus, and presumably plays a part in the
organisation and/or functioning of the fronto-thalamic-striatal system. Moreover,
the analysis of the developmental history of the gene suggests that the
transcriptional factor FOXP2, although it is quite old, has undergone certain
modifications in its secondary structure and has acquired a potential site for
phosphorylation for protein kinase C during the recent developmental history of
the human species.
CONCLUSIONS: The evidence discussed in this article allows us to suggest FOXP2
plays a significant role in the ontogenetic and phylogenetic development of
language. On the one hand, it seems to validate certain general models of
linguistic processing that call for a more important role of the subcortical
structures (above all for the basal ganglia) in that processing. On the other
hand, it seems to suggest that the modifications undergone by FOXP2 would have
also allowed certain regions (such as Broca's area) to be recruited for language,
either by facilitating the appearance of syntax and/or verbal working memory or
by transferring control of articulation to those regions, thereby laying down the
foundations for the appearance of spoken language.

PMID: 15999329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Neurosci Res. 2005 Sep;53(1):91-4.

No association of FOXP2 and PTPRZ1 on 7q31 with autism from the Japanese
population.

Marui T(1), Koishi S, Funatogawa I, Yamamoto K, Matsumoto H, Hashimoto O, Nanba
E, Kato C, Ishijima M, Watanabe K, Kasai K, Kato N, Sasaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Autism is a child-onset pervasive developmental disorder, with a significant role
of genetic factors in its development. Genome-wide linkage studies have suggested
a 7q region as a susceptibility locus for autism. We investigated several single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of Forkhead Box P2 (FOXP2) and Protein-Tyrosine
Phosphatase, Receptor-type, Zeta-1 (PTPRZ1) at the 7q region in Japanese patients
with autism and healthy controls. No significant difference was observed, after
correction for the multiple testing, in allele, genotype or haplotype frequencies
of the SNPs of FOXP2 or PTPRZ1 between patients and controls. No evidence was
thus obtained for a major role of FOXP2 or PTPRZ1 in the development of autism.

PMID: 15998549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jul 5;102(27):9643-8. Epub 2005 Jun 27.

Altered ultrasonic vocalization in mice with a disruption in the Foxp2 gene.

Shu W(1), Cho JY, Jiang Y, Zhang M, Weisz D, Elder GA, Schmeidler J, De Gasperi
R, Sosa MA, Rabidou D, Santucci AC, Perl D, Morrisey E, Buxbaum JD.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Center, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania Medical Center, 956 Biomedical Research Building II/III,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Neurobiology of speech and language has previously been studied in the KE family,
in which half of the members have severe impairment in both speech and language. 
The gene responsible for the phenotype was mapped to chromosome 7q31 and
identified as the FOXP2 gene, coding for a transcription factor containing a
polyglutamine tract and a forkhead DNA-binding domain. Because of linkage studies
implicating 7q31 in autism, where language impairment is a component of the
disorder, and in specific language impairment, FOXP2 has also been considered as 
a potential susceptibility locus for the language deficits in autism and/or
specific language impairment. In this study, we characterized mice with a
disruption in the murine Foxp2 gene. Disruption of both copies of the Foxp2 gene 
caused severe motor impairment, premature death, and an absence of ultrasonic
vocalizations that are elicited when pups are removed from their mothers.
Disruption of a single copy of the gene led to modest developmental delay but a
significant alteration in ultrasonic vocalization in response to such separation.
Learning and memory appear normal in the heterozygous animals. Cerebellar
abnormalities were observed in mice with disruptions in Foxp2, with Purkinje
cells particularly affected. Our findings support a role for Foxp2 in cerebellar 
development and in a developmental process that subsumes social communication
functions in diverse organisms.

PMCID: PMC1160518
PMID: 15983371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Rev Neurol. 2005 Jun 1-15;40(11):671-82.

[FOXP2: from the specific disorder to the molecular biology of language. I.
Aetiological, neuroanatomical, neurophysiological and molecular aspects].

[Article in Spanish]

Benítez-Burraco A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Lengua Española, Lingüística y Teoría de la Literatura,
Facultad de Filología, Universidad de Sevilla, Palos de la Frontera, s/n, E-41004
Seville, Spain. abenitez@us.es

INTRODUCTION: The task of cloning the genes whose products are involved in the
organisation and functioning of the nerve centres that enable language tasks to
be executed must necessarily start with the identification and the cognitive,
linguistic, neuroanatomical and neurophysiological analysis of individuals with
hereditary (specific) language impairment (SLI).
DEVELOPMENT: The first of these genes to be characterised in this way--a gene
called FOXP2--codes for a regulating factor that acts as a transcriptional
repressor in the central nervous system. It is expressed in neuronal populations 
mainly situated in the basal ganglia, but also in the cortex, cerebellum and the 
thalamus, which are presumably involved in the development and/or functioning of 
the thalamic-cortical-striatal circuits associated with motor planning and
learning. The protein FOXP2 shows several structural patterns that, when altered 
in other proteins, also give rise to different disorders in the central nervous
system. The pattern of expression of the gene is preserved phylogenetically,
although this does not happen in the case of the pattern of mRNA maturation. In
individuals with a mutated version of FOXP2, morphological and functional
anomalies are detected in those areas in which the gene is expressed. These
abnormalities can be correlated satisfactorily with the phenotypic
characteristics of the disorder, which are at the same time of both a motor and
linguistic nature.
CONCLUSIONS: The fact that other variations of SLI are not linked to the FOXP2
gene raises the need for further research into the genetic bases of the disorder,
while also suggesting that it would be advisable to reassess the phenotypic scope
of the variant associated to the mutation of this gene.

PMID: 15948071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Am J Hum Genet. 2005 Jun;76(6):1074-80. Epub 2005 Apr 22.

Identification of FOXP2 truncation as a novel cause of developmental speech and
language deficits.

MacDermot KD(1), Bonora E, Sykes N, Coupe AM, Lai CS, Vernes SC, Vargha-Khadem F,
McKenzie F, Smith RL, Monaco AP, Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom.

FOXP2, the first gene to have been implicated in a developmental communication
disorder, offers a unique entry point into neuromolecular mechanisms influencing 
human speech and language acquisition. In multiple members of the well-studied KE
family, a heterozygous missense mutation in FOXP2 causes problems in sequencing
muscle movements required for articulating speech (developmental verbal
dyspraxia), accompanied by wider deficits in linguistic and grammatical
processing. Chromosomal rearrangements involving this locus have also been
identified. Analyses of FOXP2 coding sequence in typical forms of specific
language impairment (SLI), autism, and dyslexia have not uncovered any
etiological variants. However, no previous study has performed mutation screening
of children with a primary diagnosis of verbal dyspraxia, the most overt feature 
of the disorder in affected members of the KE family. Here, we report
investigations of the entire coding region of FOXP2, including alternatively
spliced exons, in 49 probands affected with verbal dyspraxia. We detected
variants that alter FOXP2 protein sequence in three probands. One such variant is
a heterozygous nonsense mutation that yields a dramatically truncated protein
product and cosegregates with speech and language difficulties in the proband,
his affected sibling, and their mother. Our discovery of the first nonsense
mutation in FOXP2 now opens the door for detailed investigations of
neurodevelopment in people carrying different etiological variants of the gene.
This endeavor will be crucial for gaining insight into the role of FOXP2 in human
cognition.

PMCID: PMC1196445
PMID: 15877281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Apr 5;102(14):5138-43. Epub 2005 Mar 24.

Foxp3 interacts with nuclear factor of activated T cells and NF-kappa B to
repress cytokine gene expression and effector functions of T helper cells.

Bettelli E(1), Dastrange M, Oukka M.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard
Medical School, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Scurfy mice, which are deficient in a functional Foxp3, exhibit a severe
lymphoproliferative disorder and display generalized over-production of
cytokines. Here, we show that, among the Foxp transcriptional factor family,
which includes Foxp1, Foxp2, and Foxp3, only Foxp3 has the ability to inhibit
IL-2, IL-4, and IFN-gamma production by primary T helper cells. We found that
Foxp3 physically associates with the Rel family transcription factors, nuclear
factor of activated T cells (NFAT) and NF-kappaB, and blocks their ability to
induce the endogenous expression of their target genes, including key cytokine
genes. More importantly, T cells derived from scurfy mice have a dramatic
increase in nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) and NF-kappa B
transcriptional activity compared with the T cells derived from WT mice.
Furthermore, complementation of Foxp3 in scurfy-derived T cells lowers the NFAT
and NF-kappa B transcriptional activity to the physiological level. Finally, we
show that myelin proteolipid protein-specific autoreactive T cells transduced
with Foxp3 cannot mediate experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis, providing
further support that Foxp3 suppresses the effector function of autoreactive T
cells. Foxp3 has already been associated with the generation of CD4(+)CD25+
regulatory T cells; our data additionally demonstrate that Foxp3 suppresses the
effector functions of T helper cells by directly inhibiting the activity of two
key transcription factors, NFAT and NF-kappa B, which are essential for cytokine 
gene expression and T cell functions.

PMCID: PMC555574
PMID: 15790681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Brain Dev. 2005 Apr;27(3):207-10.

Absence of causative mutations and presence of autism-related allele in FOXP2 in 
Japanese autistic patients.

Li H(1), Yamagata T, Mori M, Momoi MY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Jichi Medical School, 3311-1 Yakushiji,
Minamikawachi, Tochigi 329-0498, Japan.

We analyzed the FOXP2 gene, which encodes a putative transcription factor
containing a polyglutamine tract and a forkhead DNA-binding domain, for a
possible causative mutation in autism. FOXP2 was reported to be mutated in
patients with a severe speech and language disorder. FOXP2 was located on
chromosome 7q31, which is one of the loci involved in autism. Autism and specific
language impairment share some of their clinical phenotypes. In addition, FOXP2
was expressed abundantly in the brain. We screened all of the exons of FOXP2 for 
causative mutations in 53 Japanese autistic patients using denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography and direct sequencing. A delCAA in exon 5 
causing one glutamine deletion in the first polyglutamine tract was detected in
four patients and in 2 of 50 control individuals. The frequency of the TT allele 
with the G to T base change in intron 15 was significantly high in the autistic
population. The other base changes included one silent base change (A569G) in
exon 5 and three in introns. Our results may suggest a relationship between
autism and the FOXP2 gene or a gene located nearby.

PMID: 15737702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Feb 1;11(3):1065-72.

Expression of the FOXP1 transcription factor is strongly associated with inferior
survival in patients with diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.

Banham AH(1), Connors JM, Brown PJ, Cordell JL, Ott G, Sreenivasan G, Farinha P, 
Horsman DE, Gascoyne RD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Research Fund Immunodiagnostics Unit, Nuffield Department of Clinical
Laboratory Sciences, John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Headington,
Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom. alison.banham@ndcls.ox.ac.uk

Gene expression profiling studies have reported up-regulated mRNA expression of
the FOXP1 forkhead transcription factor in response to normal B-cell activation
and high expression in a poor prognosis subtype of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma 
(DLBCL). The purpose of this study was to investigate the prognostic importance
of FOXP1 protein expression in an independent series of DLBCL.First, the
specificity of our FOXP1 monoclonal antibody was verified by confirming that it
did not recognize the closely related FOXP2, FOXP3, or FOXP4 proteins. FOXP1
protein expression was then analyzed by immunohistochemistry using a DLBCL tissue
microarray constructed from 101 previously untreated de novo cases from the
British Columbia Cancer Agency. FOXP1 expression was scored as either positive
(>30% positive nuclei) or negative (<30% positive nuclei). The overall survival
curves clearly showed that patients grouped as FOXP1-positive (40%) had a
significantly decreased overall survival (P = 0.0001). FOXP1-positive patients
had a median overall survival of 1.6 years compared with 12.2 years in
FOXP1-negative cases. In addition, FOXP1-positive patients showed a clear trend
to earlier progression in comparison to the FOXP1-negative patients. The analysis
of FOXP1 expression within low, medium, and high International Prognostic Index
groupings found that FOXP1-negative patients had better overall survival within
each group indicating that FOXP1 expression has predictive value independent of
the International Prognostic Index subgrouping, a finding that was confirmed in
multivariate analysis. These initial results suggest that FOXP1 expression may be
important in DLBCL pathogenesis.

PMID: 15709173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2005 Feb;6(2):131-8.

FOXP2 and the neuroanatomy of speech and language.

Vargha-Khadem F(1), Gadian DG, Copp A, Mishkin M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London and Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
fkhadem@ich.ucl.ac.uk

That speech and language are innate capacities of the human brain has long been
widely accepted, but only recently has an entry point into the genetic basis of
these remarkable faculties been found. The discovery of a mutation in FOXP2 in a 
family with a speech and language disorder has enabled neuroscientists to trace
the neural expression of this gene during embryological development, track the
effects of this gene mutation on brain structure and function, and so begin to
decipher that part of our neural inheritance that culminates in articulate
speech.

PMID: 15685218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Schizophr Res. 2005 Mar 1;73(2-3):253-6.

FOXP2 polymorphisms in patients with schizophrenia.

Sanjuan J(1), Tolosa A, González JC, Aguilar EJ, Moltó MD, Nájera C, de Frutos R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Psiquiatría, Facultad de Medicina, Hospital Clínico, Universitat de 
València, Blasco Ibaez 15, 46010 Valencia, Spain. julio.sanjuan@uv.es

BACKGROUND: FOXP2 was described as the first gene involved in our ability to
acquire spoken language. The main objective of this study was to compare the
distribution of FOXP2 gene polymorphisms between patients with schizophrenia and 
healthy controls.
METHODS: Two FOXP2 polymorphisms, Intron3a and SNP 923875, and the G-->A
transition in exon 14 were analysed in 149 patients with schizophrenia and
schizoaffective disorders according to DSM-IV, as well as in 137 controls. All
the patients showed a history of auditory hallucinations.
RESULTS: The transition G-->A at exon 14, detected in all the affected members in
KE family, was not found in any of the analyzed samples from patients or
controls. No significant differences were found between individual controls and
patients for the two analysed polymorphisms.
CONCLUSIONS: This study would not support a possible role of the two FOXP2
analyzed polymorphisms in the vulnerability to schizophrenia.

PMID: 15653268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Rev Neurol. 2004 Dec 16-31;39(12):1173-81.

[Specific developmental language disorder: a theoretical approach to its
diagnosis, aetiology and clinical symptoms].

[Article in Spanish]

Castro-Rebolledo R(1), Giraldo-Prieto M, Hincapié-Henao L, Lopera F, Pineda DA.

Author information: 
(1)Grupo de Neurociencias, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellín, Colombia.

AIM: This article presents an updated review about the definition, diagnostic
criteria, classifications, etiology and the evolution of the specific language
impairment (SLI).
DEVELOPMENT: The specific language impairment is characterized by a developmental
language delay and an impaired language, that persist over time and it is not
explained by sensorial, motor and mental disabilities, neither by
psycopathological disorders, socio-emotional deprivation, nor brain injury. The
diagnosis is based on exclusional criteria. Some researchers propose different
classifications considering the children performance in language comprehension
and language production. Genetical linkage to the FOXP2 gen in the SPCH1 region
of the chromosome 7 and to the chromosomes 13, 16 y 19 has been reported. The
neuroimage studies have shown alterations in the volume and perfusion of some
brain structures related to language. The manifestations of SLI may change during
the development of the children and may disturb the self-esteem, the academic
performance and the social abilities.
CONCLUSIONS: The variability in the linguistic and cognitive performance, and the
variety in the etiological findings in children with SLI, don't allow to settle
the affected population as an homogeneous group. Different theoretical positions 
have emerged as a consequence of this condition.

PMID: 15625638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Hered. 2005 May-Jun;96(3):212-6. Epub 2004 Dec 23.

FoxP2 in song-learning birds and vocal-learning mammals.

Webb DM(1), Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

FoxP2 is the first identified gene that is specifically involved in speech and
language development in humans. Population genetic studies of FoxP2 revealed a
selective sweep in recent human history associated with two amino acid
substitutions in exon 7. Avian song learning and human language acquisition share
many behavioral and neurological similarities. To determine whether FoxP2 plays a
similar role in song-learning birds, we sequenced exon 7 of FoxP2 in multiple
song-learning and nonlearning birds. We show extreme conservation of FoxP2
sequences in birds, including unusually low rates of synonymous substitutions.
However, no amino acid substitutions are shared between the song-learning birds
and humans. Furthermore, sequences from vocal-learning whales, dolphins, and bats
do not share the human-unique substitutions. While FoxP2 appears to be under
strong functional constraints in mammals and birds, we find no evidence for its
role during the evolution of vocal learning in nonhuman animals as in humans.

PMID: 15618302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 4;280(5):3898-910. Epub 2004 Nov 8.

CAG repeats containing CAA interruptions form branched hairpin structures in
spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 transcripts.

Sobczak K(1), Krzyzosiak WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cancer Genetics, Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Noskowskiego 12/14, 61-704 Poznan, Poland.

Spinocerebellar ataxia type 2 (SCA2), one of the hereditary human
neurodegenerative disorders, is caused by the expansion of the CAG tandem repeats
in the translated sequence of the SCA2 gene. In a normal population the CAG
repeat is polymorphic not only in length but also in the number and localization 
of its CAA interruptions. The aim of this study was to determine the structure of
the repeat region in the normal and mutant SCA2 transcripts and to reveal the
structural basis of its normal function and dysfunction. We show here that the
properties of the CAA interruptions are major determinants of the CAG repeat
folding in the normal SCA2 transcripts. We also show that the uninterrupted
repeats in mutant transcripts form slippery hairpins, whose length is further
reduced by the base pairing of the repeat portion with a specific flanking
sequence. The structural organization of the repeat interruption systems present 
in other human transcripts, such as SCA1, TBP, FOXP2, and MAML2, are also
discussed.

PMID: 15533937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Int J Oncol. 2004 Nov;25(5):1495-500.

Human FOX gene family (Review).

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

Human Forkhead-box (FOX) gene family consists of at least 43 members, including
FOXA1, FOXA2, FOXA3, FOXB1, FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXD1, FOXD2, FOXD3, FOXD4, FOXD5
(FOXD4L1), FOXD6 (FOXD4L3), FOXE1, FOXE2, FOXE3, FOXF1, FOXF2, FOXG1 (FOXG1B),
FOXH1, FOXI1, FOXJ1, FOXJ2, FOXJ3, FOXK1, FOXK2, FOXL1, FOXL2, FOXM1, FOXN1,
FOXN2 (HTLF), FOXN3 (CHES1), FOXN4, FOXN5 (FOXR1), FOXN6 (FOXR2), FOXO1 (FOXO1A),
FOXO2 (FOXO6), FOXO3 (FOXO3A), FOXO4 (MLLT7), FOXP1, FOXP2, FOXP3, FOXP4, and
FOXQ1. FOXE3-FOXD2 (1p33), FOXQ1-FOXF2-FOXC1 (6p25.3), and FOXF1-FOXC2-FOXL1
(16q24.1) loci are FOX gene clusters within the human genome. Members of FOX
subfamilies A-G, I-L and Q were grouped into class 1 FOX proteins, while members 
of FOX subfamilies H and M-P were grouped into class 2 FOX proteins. C-terminal
basic region within the FOX domain was the common feature of class 1 FOX
proteins. FOXH1 and FOXO1 mRNAs are expressed in human embryonic stem (ES) cells.
FOXC1, FOXC2, FOXE1, FOXE3, FOXL2, FOXN1, FOXP2 and FOXP3 genes are mutated in
human congenital disorders. FOXA1 gene is amplified and over-expressed in
esophageal and lung cancer. FOXM1 gene is up-regulated in pancreatic cancer and
basal cell carcinoma due to the transcriptional regulation by Sonic Hedgehog
(SHH) pathway. FOXO1 gene is fused to PAX3 or PAX7 genes in rhabdomyosarcoma.
FOXO3 and FOXO4 genes are fused to MLL gene in hematological malignancies.
Deregulation of FOX family genes leads to congenital disorders, diabetes
mellitus, or carcinogenesis. Expression profiles, genetic alterations and
epigenetic changes of FOX family genes as well as binding proteins and target
genes of FOX family transcription factors should be comprehensively investigated 
to develop novel therapeutics and preventives for human diseases.

PMID: 15492844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Arch Pediatr. 2004 Oct;11(10):1213-6.

[Genetics of specific language impairments].

[Article in French]

Bonneau D(1), Verny C, Uzé J.

Author information: 
(1)Service de génétique, centre hospitalier universitaire d'Angers, 4, rue
Larrey, 49033 Angers, France. dobonneau@chu-angers.fr <dobonneau@chu-angers.fr>

Specific language impairment (SLI), involving environmental as well as genetic
factors, is a complex disorder affecting 5-10% of preschool-age children. This
review summarizes current data regarding the genetic factors involved in SLI.
Genetic factors were first implicated in SLI on the basis of twin studies and
reports of familial cases. Furthermore, several studies have shown that the
relative risk of SLI was higher for close relatives of affected individuals.
Finally, a specific gene (FOXP2) has been identified on the long arm of
chromosome 7 in a family affected with SLI, and several regions of the genome,
i.e. 7q31, 16q and 19q, have been found to be strongly linked to SLI.

PMID: 15475279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Jun;1016:325-47.

Genetic components of vocal learning.

Scharff C(1), White SA.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Ihnestrasse 73, 14195 Berlin,
Germany. scharff@molgen.mpg.de

Vocal learning is a rare trait. Humans depend on vocal learning to acquire spoken
language, but most species that communicate acoustically have an innate
repertoire of sounds that they use for information exchange. Among the few
non-human species that also rely on vocal learning, songbirds have provided by
far the most information for understanding this process. This article
concentrates on the genetic components of vocal learning in humans and birds. We 
summarize the existing evidence for a genetic predisposition towards acquiring
the species-specific human and avian vocal repertoires. We describe the
approaches used for finding genes involved in shaping the neural circuitry
required for vocal learning or in mediating the learning process itself. Special 
attention is given to a particular gene, FOXP2, which has been implicated in a
human speech and language disorder. We have studied FoxP2 in avian vocal learners
and non-learners and review evidence that links both the molecule and its close
homologue FoxP1 to the development of brain regions implicated in vocal learning 
and to their function. FoxP2 has a characteristic expression pattern in a brain
structure uniquely associated with learned vocal communication, Area X in
songbirds, or its analogue in parrots and hummingbirds. In both avian song
learners and non-learners FoxP2 expression predominates in sensory and
sensory-motor circuits. These latter regions also express FoxP2 in mammals and
reptiles. We conclude that FoxP2 is important for the building and function of
brain pathways including, but not limited to, those essential for learned vocal
communication.

PMID: 15313783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Trends Cogn Sci. 2004 Mar;8(3):95-6.

FOXP2 and the mirror system.

Corballis MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland 
1, New Zealand. mcorballis@myrealbox.com

Comment in
    Trends Cogn Sci. 2004 Jun;8(6):251-2; author reply 252.

An inherited deficit in spoken language has been associated with a mutation in
the forkhead box P2 (FOXP2) gene on chromosome 7. A recent functional magnetic
resonance imaging study has linked the deficit to underactivity in Broca's area
during word generation, which in turn suggests a possible link between FOXP2 and 
the mirror-neuron system observed in the primate homologue of Broca's area. This 
link might have implications for the evolution of Broca's area and its role in
speech.

PMID: 15301747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Trends Cogn Sci. 2004 Jun;8(6):251-2; author reply 252.

FOXP2 and the language working-memory system.

Bosman C, García R, Aboitiz F.

Comment on
    Trends Cogn Sci. 2004 Mar;8(3):95-6.

PMID: 15165546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Pediatrics. 2004 May;113(5):e472-86.

The genetics of autism.

Muhle R(1), Trentacoste SV, Rapin I.

Author information: 
(1)Class of 2004, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461,
USA.

Autism is a complex, behaviorally defined, static disorder of the immature brain 
that is of great concern to the practicing pediatrician because of an astonishing
556% reported increase in pediatric prevalence between 1991 and 1997, to a
prevalence higher than that of spina bifida, cancer, or Down syndrome. This jump 
is probably attributable to heightened awareness and changing diagnostic criteria
rather than to new environmental influences. Autism is not a disease but a
syndrome with multiple nongenetic and genetic causes. By autism (the autistic
spectrum disorders [ASDs]), we mean the wide spectrum of developmental disorders 
characterized by impairments in 3 behavioral domains: 1) social interaction; 2)
language, communication, and imaginative play; and 3) range of interests and
activities. Autism corresponds in this article to pervasive developmental
disorder (PDD) of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fourth Edition and International Classification of Diseases, Tenth Revision.
Except for Rett syndrome--attributable in most affected individuals to mutations 
of the methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 (MeCP2) gene--the other PDD subtypes
(autistic disorder, Asperger disorder, disintegrative disorder, and PDD Not
Otherwise Specified [PDD-NOS]) are not linked to any particular genetic or
nongenetic cause. Review of 2 major textbooks on autism and of papers published
between 1961 and 2003 yields convincing evidence for multiple interacting genetic
factors as the main causative determinants of autism. Epidemiologic studies
indicate that environmental factors such as toxic exposures, teratogens,
perinatal insults, and prenatal infections such as rubella and cytomegalovirus
account for few cases. These studies fail to confirm that immunizations with the 
measles-mumps-rubella vaccine are responsible for the surge in autism. Epilepsy, 
the medical condition most highly associated with autism, has equally complex
genetic/nongenetic (but mostly unknown) causes. Autism is frequent in tuberous
sclerosis complex and fragile X syndrome, but these 2 disorders account for but a
small minority of cases. Currently, diagnosable medical conditions, cytogenetic
abnormalities, and single-gene defects (eg, tuberous sclerosis complex, fragile X
syndrome, and other rare diseases) together account for <10% of cases. There is
convincing evidence that "idiopathic" autism is a heritable disorder.
Epidemiologic studies report an ASD prevalence of approximately 3 to 6/1000, with
a male to female ratio of 3:1. This skewed ratio remains unexplained: despite the
contribution of a few well characterized X-linked disorders, male-to-male
transmission in a number of families rules out X-linkage as the prevailing mode
of inheritance. The recurrence rate in siblings of affected children is
approximately 2% to 8%, much higher than the prevalence rate in the general
population but much lower than in single-gene diseases. Twin studies reported 60%
concordance for classic autism in monozygotic (MZ) twins versus 0 in dizygotic
(DZ) twins, the higher MZ concordance attesting to genetic inheritance as the
predominant causative agent. Reevaluation for a broader autistic phenotype that
included communication and social disorders increased concordance remarkably from
60% to 92% in MZ twins and from 0% to 10% in DZ pairs. This suggests that
interactions between multiple genes cause "idiopathic" autism but that epigenetic
factors and exposure to environmental modifiers may contribute to variable
expression of autism-related traits. The identity and number of genes involved
remain unknown. The wide phenotypic variability of the ASDs likely reflects the
interaction of multiple genes within an individual's genome and the existence of 
distinct genes and gene combinations among those affected. There are 3 main
approaches to identifying genetic loci, chromosomal regions likely to contain
relevant genes: 1) whole genome screens, searching for linkage of autism to
shared genetic markers in populations of multiplex families (families with >1
affected family member; 2) cytogenetic studies that may guide molecular studies
by pointing to relevant inherited or de novo chromosomal abnormalities in
affected individuals and their families; and 3) evaluation of candidate genes
known to affect brain development in these significantly linked regions or,
alternatively, linkage of candidate genes selected a priori because of their
presumptive contribution to the pathogenesis of autism. Data from whole-genome
screens in multiplex families suggest interactions of at least 10 genes in the
causation of autism. Thus far, a putative speech and language region at 7q31-q33 
seems most strongly linked to autism, with linkages to multiple other loci under 
investigation. Cytogenetic abnormalities at the 15q11-q13 locus are fairly
frequent in people with autism, and a "chromosome 15 phenotype" was described in 
individuals with chromosome 15 duplications. Among other candidate genes are the 
FOXP2, RAY1/ST7, IMMP2L, and RELN genes at 7q22-q33 and the GABA(A) receptor
subunit and UBE3A genes on chromosome 15q11-q13. Variant alleles of the serotonin
transporter gene (5-HTT) on 17q11-q12 are more frequent in individuals with
autism than in nonautistic populations. In addition, animal models and linkage
data from genome screens implicate the oxytocin receptor at 3p25-p26. Most
pediatricians will have 1 or more children with this disorder in their practices.
They must diagnose ASD expeditiously because early intervention increases its
effectiveness. Children with dysmorphic features, congenital anomalies, mental
retardation, or family members with developmental disorders are those most likely
to benefit from extensive medical testing and genetic consultation. The yield of 
testing is much less in high-functioning children with a normal appearance and IQ
and moderate social and language impairments. Genetic counseling justifies
testing, but until autism genes are identified and their functions are
understood, prenatal diagnosis will exist only for the rare cases ascribable to
single-gene defects or overt chromosomal abnormalities. Parents who wish to have 
more children must be told of their increased statistical risk. It is crucial for
pediatricians to try to involve families with multiple affected members in formal
research projects, as family studies are key to unraveling the causes and
pathogenesis of autism. Parents need to understand that they and their affected
children are the only available sources for identifying and studying the elusive 
genes responsible for autism. Future clinically useful insights and potential
medications depend on identifying these genes and elucidating the influences of
their products on brain development and physiology.

PMID: 15121991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2004 May 15;127B(1):113-6.

Association between the FOXP2 gene and autistic disorder in Chinese population.

Gong X(1), Jia M, Ruan Y, Shuang M, Liu J, Wu S, Guo Y, Yang J, Ling Y, Yang X,
Zhang D.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Mental Health, Peking University, Beijing, China.

Several genomewide screens indicated that chromosome 7q was linked to autistic
disorder. FOXP2, located on 7q31, is a putative transcription factor containing a
polyglutamine tract and a forkhead DNA binding domain. It is one member of the
forkhead family who are known to be key regulators of embryogenesis. A point
mutation at a highly conserved residue within the forkhead domain co-segregated
with affected status in the KE family who was a unique three generation pedigree 
with a severe speech and language disorder and FOXP2 was directly disrupted by a 
translocation in an individual who had similar deficits as those of the KE
family. Several studies have investigated the role of FOXP2 polymorphisms in
autism and none of them found positive association. We performed a family-based
association study of three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of FOXP2 in 181
Chinese Han trios using the analyses of transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT)
and haplotype. We found a significant association between autistic disorder and
one SNP, as well as with specific haplotypes formed by this SNP with two other
SNPs we investigated. Our findings suggest that the FOXP2 gene may be involved in
the pathogenesis of autism in Chinese population.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15108192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Psychol Rev. 2004 Apr;111(2):543-52.

The origins of modernity: was autonomous speech the critical factor?

Corballis MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.
m.corballis@auckland.ac.nz

Although Homo sapiens emerged in Africa some 170000 years ago, the origins of
"modern" behavior, as expressed in technology and art, are attributed to people
who migrated out of Africa around 50000 years ago, creating what has been called 
a human revolution in Europe and Asia. There is recent evidence that a mutation
of the FOXP2 gene (forkhead box P2), important for the development of articulate 
speech, occurred some time within the past 100000 years. This event may have
allowed speech to become fully autonomous, so that language no longer depended on
a visuomanual component. The consequent freeing of the hands and development of
pedagogy may have led to the technological advances that allowed H. sapiens to
dominate and eventually replace all other hominids.

PMID: 15065922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Neurosci. 2004 Mar 31;24(13):3164-75.

FoxP2 expression in avian vocal learners and non-learners.

Haesler S(1), Wada K, Nshdejan A, Morrisey EE, Lints T, Jarvis ED, Scharff C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, 14195 Berlin, Germany.

Most vertebrates communicate acoustically, but few, among them humans, dolphins
and whales, bats, and three orders of birds, learn this trait. FOXP2 is the first
gene linked to human speech and has been the target of positive selection during 
recent primate evolution. To test whether the expression pattern of FOXP2 is
consistent with a role in learned vocal communication, we cloned zebra finch
FoxP2 and its close relative FoxP1 and compared mRNA and protein distribution in 
developing and adult brains of a variety of avian vocal learners and
non-learners, and a crocodile. We found that the protein sequence of zebra finch 
FoxP2 is 98% identical with mouse and human FOXP2. In the avian and crocodilian
forebrain, FoxP2 was expressed predominantly in the striatum, a basal ganglia
brain region affected in patients with FOXP2 mutations. Strikingly, in zebra
finches, the striatal nucleus Area X, necessary for vocal learning, expressed
more FoxP2 than the surrounding tissue at post-hatch days 35 and 50, when vocal
learning occurs. In adult canaries, FoxP2 expression in Area X differed
seasonally; more FoxP2 expression was associated with times when song becomes
unstable. In adult chickadees, strawberry finches, song sparrows, and Bengalese
finches, Area X expressed FoxP2 to different degrees. Non-telencephalic regions
in both vocal learning and non-learning birds, and in crocodiles, were less
variable in expression and comparable with regions that express FOXP2 in human
and rodent brains. We conclude that differential expression of FoxP2 in avian
vocal learners might be associated with vocal plasticity.

PMID: 15056696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. J Neurosci. 2004 Mar 31;24(13):3152-63.

Parallel FoxP1 and FoxP2 expression in songbird and human brain predicts
functional interaction.

Teramitsu I(1), Kudo LC, London SE, Geschwind DH, White SA.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Programs in Molecular, Cellular, and Integrative Physiology,
David Geffen School of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles,
California 90095, USA.

Humans and songbirds are two of the rare animal groups that modify their innate
vocalizations. The identification of FOXP2 as the monogenetic locus of a human
speech disorder exhibited by members of the family referred to as KE enables the 
first examination of whether molecular mechanisms for vocal learning are shared
between humans and songbirds. Here, in situ hybridization analyses for FoxP1 and 
FoxP2 in a songbird reveal a corticostriatal expression pattern congruent with
the abnormalities in brain structures of affected KE family members. The overlap 
in FoxP1 and FoxP2 expression observed in the songbird suggests that
combinatorial regulation by these molecules during neural development and within 
vocal control structures may occur. In support of this idea, we find that FOXP1
and FOXP2 expression patterns in human fetal brain are strikingly similar to
those in the songbird, including localization to subcortical structures that
function in sensorimotor integration and the control of skilled, coordinated
movement. The specific colocalization of FoxP1 and FoxP2 found in several
structures in the bird and human brain predicts that mutations in FOXP1 could
also be related to speech disorders.

PMID: 15056695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Proteins. 2004 Mar 1;54(4):639-47.

Structural analysis of disease-causing mutations in the P-subfamily of forkhead
transcription factors.

Banerjee-Basu S(1), Baxevanis AD.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-8002, USA.

Mutations in a number of forkhead transcription factors are associated with the
development of inherited diseases in humans. Two closely related genes, FOXP2 and
FOXP3, are implicated in two completely different human disorders. A point
mutation in the forkhead domain of FOXP2 (R553H) is responsible for a severe
speech and language disorder, while a series of missense mutations distributed
over the forkhead domain of FOXP3 cause a fatal disorder called IPEX,
characterized by immune dysregulation, polyendocrinopathy, and enteropathy.
Homology model building techniques were used to generate atomic structures of
FOXP2 and FOXP3, using the solution structures of the forkhead domain of the
adipocyte-transcription factor FREAC-11 and AFX as templates. The impact of these
disease-causing missense mutations on the three-dimensional structure, stability,
and surface electrostatic charge distribution of the forkhead domains is examined
here. The missense mutations R553H in FOXP2 and R397W in FOXP3 dramatically alter
the electrostatic potentials of the molecular surface of their respective
forkhead domains.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14997560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1316-9.

The origin of speech.

Holden C.

PMID: 14988546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(2):809-22.

Transcriptional and DNA binding activity of the Foxp1/2/4 family is modulated by 
heterotypic and homotypic protein interactions.

Li S(1), Weidenfeld J, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Molecular Cardiology Research Center, University of
Pennsylvania, 421 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Foxp1, Foxp2, and Foxp4 are large multidomain transcriptional regulators
belonging to the family of winged-helix DNA binding proteins known as the Fox
family. Foxp1 and Foxp2 have been shown to act as transcriptional repressors,
while regulatory activity of the recently identified Foxp4 has not been
determined. Given the importance of this Fox gene subfamily in neural and lung
development, we sought to elucidate the mechanisms by which Foxp1, Foxp2, and
Foxp4 repress gene transcription. We show that like Foxp1 and Foxp2, Foxp4
represses transcription. Analysis of the N-terminal repression domain in Foxp1,
Foxp2, and Foxp4 shows that this region contains two separate and distinct
repression subdomains that are highly homologous termed subdomain 1 and subdomain
2. However, subdomain 2 is not functional in Foxp4. Screening for proteins that
interact with subdomains 1 and 2 of Foxp2 using yeast two-hybrid analysis
revealed that subdomain 2 binds to C-terminal binding protein 1, which can
synergistically repress transcription with Foxp1 and Foxp2, but not Foxp4.
Subdomain 1 contains a highly conserved leucine zipper similar to that found in
N-myc and confers homo- and heterodimerization to the Foxp1/2/4 family members.
These interactions are dependent on the conserved leucine zipper motif. Finally, 
we show that the integrity of this subdomain is essential for DNA binding, making
Foxp1, Foxp2, and Foxp4 the first Fox proteins that require dimerization for DNA 
binding. These data reveal a complex regulatory mechanism underlying Foxp1,
Foxp2, and Foxp4 activity, demonstrating that Foxp1, Foxp2, and Foxp4 are the
first Fox proteins reported whose activity is regulated by homo- and
heterodimerization.

PMCID: PMC343786
PMID: 14701752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Nat Neurosci. 2003 Nov;6(11):1230-7. Epub 2003 Oct 12.

Language fMRI abnormalities associated with FOXP2 gene mutation.

Liégeois F(1), Baldeweg T, Connelly A, Gadian DG, Mishkin M, Vargha-Khadem F.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, Institute of Child Health,
University College London, The Wolfson Centre, Mecklenburgh Square, London WC1N
2AP, UK. F.Liegeois@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Half the members of the KE family suffer from a speech and language disorder
caused by a mutation in the FOXP2 gene. We examined functional brain
abnormalities associated with this mutation using two fMRI language experiments, 
one involving covert (silent) verb generation and the other overt (spoken) verb
generation and word repetition. The unaffected family members showed a typical
left-dominant distribution of activation involving Broca's area in the generation
tasks and a more bilateral distribution in the repetition task, whereas the
affected members showed a more posterior and more extensively bilateral pattern
of activation in all tasks. Consistent with previously reported bilateral
morphological abnormalities, the affected members showed significant
underactivation relative to the unaffected members in Broca's area and its right 
homolog, as well as in other cortical language-related regions and in the
putamen. Our findings suggest that the FOXP2 gene is critically involved in the
development of the neural systems that mediate speech and language.

PMID: 14555953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mech Dev. 2002 Dec;119 Suppl 1:S197-202.

Foxp4: a novel member of the Foxp subfamily of winged-helix genes co-expressed
with Foxp1 and Foxp2 in pulmonary and gut tissues.

Lu MM(1), Li S, Yang H, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

In this study, we describe the isolation and characterization of Foxp4, a new
member of the Foxp subfamily of winged-helix transcription factors. The
full-length mouse Foxp4 cDNA encodes a 685-amino-acid protein that is similar to 
Foxp1 and Foxp2. Foxp4 gene expression is observed primarily in pulmonary,
neural, and gut tissues during embryonic development. To compare the protein
expression patterns of Foxp4 to Foxp1 and Foxp2, specific polyclonal antisera to 
each of these proteins was used in immunohistochemical analysis of mouse
embryonic tissues. All three proteins are expressed in lung epithelium with Foxp1
and Foxp4 expressed in both proximal and distal airway epithelium while Foxp2 is 
expressed primarily in distal epithelium. Foxp1 protein expression is also
observed in the mesenchyme and vascular endothelial cells of the lung. At
embryonic day 12.5, Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed in both the mucosal and
epithelial layers of the intestine. However, Foxp2 is expressed only in the outer
mucosal layer of the intestine and stomach later in development. Finally, Foxp4
is expressed exclusively in the epithelial cells of the developing intestine,
where, in late development, it is expressed in a gradient along the longitudinal 
axis of the villi.

PMID: 14516685  [PubMed - in process]


376. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Nov 15;12(22):2993-3005. Epub 2003 Sep 23.

Structural and functional analyses of disease-causing missense mutations in the
forkhead domain of FOXC1.

Saleem RA(1), Banerjee-Basu S, Berry FB, Baxevanis AD, Walter MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada, T6G
2H7.

Five missense mutations (P79L, P79T, I91S, I91T and R127H) within the forkhead
DNA-binding domain of the FOXC1 transcription factor, identified in patients with
Axenfeld-Rieger (AR) malformations, were studied to identify the effects of these
mutations on FOXC1 structure and function. Molecular modeling and threading
analyses predict that the I91S and T mutations may generate local disruptions to 
the structure of the forkhead domain while the R127H mutation alters the
electrostatic charge of the DNA binding surface of the forkhead domain. The P79L 
and T mutations are not predicted to grossly perturb the structure of the
forkhead domain. Biological analyses indicate that all of these missense
mutations cause a range of FOXC1 perturbations, including nuclear localization
defects, reduced or abolished DNA binding capacity, and a reduction in the
transactivation capacity of FOXC1. These experiments extend our previous
hypothesis that reduced transactivation of appropriate target genes by FOXC1,
underlie AR malformations mapping to human chromosome 6p25. Importantly, these
results can also be applied to predict the consequences of the molecular effects 
of mutations of other FOX genes that have analogous missense mutations, including
FOXP2, FOXE3 and FOXC2.

PMID: 14506133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Brain. 2003 Nov;126(Pt 11):2455-62. Epub 2003 Jul 22.

FOXP2 expression during brain development coincides with adult sites of pathology
in a severe speech and language disorder.

Lai CS(1), Gerrelli D, Monaco AP, Fisher SE, Copp AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Neural Development Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
UK.

Disruption of FOXP2, a gene encoding a forkhead-domain transcription factor,
causes a severe developmental disorder of verbal communication, involving
profound articulation deficits, accompanied by linguistic and grammatical
impairments. Investigation of the neural basis of this disorder has been limited 
previously to neuroimaging of affected children and adults. The discovery of the 
gene responsible, FOXP2, offers a unique opportunity to explore the relevant
neural mechanisms from a molecular perspective. In the present study, we have
determined the detailed spatial and temporal expression pattern of FOXP2 mRNA in 
the developing brain of mouse and human. We find expression in several structures
including the cortical plate, basal ganglia, thalamus, inferior olives and
cerebellum. These data support a role for FOXP2 in the development of
corticostriatal and olivocerebellar circuits involved in motor control. We find
intriguing concordance between regions of early expression and later sites of
pathology suggested by neuroimaging. Moreover, the homologous pattern of
FOXP2/Foxp2 expression in human and mouse argues for a role for this gene in
development of motor-related circuits throughout mammalian species. Overall, this
study provides support for the hypothesis that impairments in sequencing of
movement and procedural learning might be central to the FOXP2-related speech and
language disorder.

PMID: 12876151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Neurosci Res. 2003 Jul 1;73(1):61-72.

Expression of Foxp2, a gene involved in speech and language, in the developing
and adult striatum.

Takahashi K(1), Liu FC, Hirokawa K, Takahashi H.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Neurobiology Group, Mitsubishi Kagaku Institute of Life
Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.

Many members of the forkhead/winged helix transcriptional factors are known to be
regulators of embryogenesis. Mutations of the Fox gene family have been
implicated in a range of human developmental disorders. Foxp2, a member of the
Fox gene family, has recently been identified as the first gene that is linked to
an inherited form of language and speech disorder. To elucidate the anatomical
basis of language processing in the brain, we have examined the expression
pattern of Foxp2 gene and its homologous gene, Foxp1, in the rat brain through
development. Expression of Foxp2 mRNA was detected in the ventral telencephalon
as early as embryonic day 13. Foxp2 mRNA was expressed primarily in
differentiated cells of the lateral ganglionic eminence (striatal primordium). Of
particular interest was that the developmental expression of Foxp2 followed a
compartmental order in the striatum. Patches containing high levels of Foxp2 were
aligned with patches enriched in mu-opoid receptor, a marker for striosomal
cells, in the striatum through postnatal development. Conversely, Foxp2-positive 
patches were devoid of calbindin-D28k, a maker for striatal matrix cells.
Therefore, Foxp2 was preferentially expressed in striosomal compartment in the
striatum during development. In the mature striatum, Foxp2 expression was
maintained in striosomes, although its expression level was reduced. In contrast 
to Foxp2, Foxp1 was expressed in both the striosomal and matrix compartments in
the striatum through development. The striatum is known to be involved in the
process of procedural memory, and mutation of Foxp2 results in neurological
disorders of language and speech. Given the preferential expression of Foxp2 in
the striosomal compartment, the striatum, particularly the striosomal system, may
participate in neural information processing for language and speech. Our
suggestion is consistent with the declarative/procedural model proposed by Ullman
and colleagues (Ullman et al. [1997] J. Cogn. Neurosci. 9:266-276; Ullman [2001] 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2:717-726), in which the procedural memory-dependent mental
grammar is rooted in the basal ganglia and the frontal cortex and the declarative
memory-dependent mental lexicon is rooted in the temporal lobe.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12815709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Trends Cogn Sci. 2003 Jun;7(6):257-262.

FOXP2 in focus: what can genes tell us about speech and language?

Marcus GF(1), Fisher SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychology, New York University, 6 Washington Place, 10003, New 
York, NY, USA

The human capacity for acquiring speech and language must derive, at least in
part, from the genome. In 2001, a study described the first case of a gene,
FOXP2, which is thought to be implicated in our ability to acquire spoken
language. In the present article, we discuss how this gene was discovered, what
it might do, how it relates to other genes, and what it could tell us about the
nature of speech and language development. We explain how FOXP2 could, without
being specific to the brain or to our own species, still provide an invaluable
entry-point into understanding the genetic cascades and neural pathways that
contribute to our capacity for speech and language.

PMID: 12804692  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


380. J Med Genet. 2003 May;40(5):340-5.

A genome scan for developmental dyslexia confirms linkage to chromosome 2p11 and 
suggests a new locus on 7q32.

Kaminen N(1), Hannula-Jouppi K, Kestilä M, Lahermo P, Muller K, Kaaranen M,
Myllyluoma B, Voutilainen A, Lyytinen H, Nopola-Hemmi J, Kere J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Biomedicum, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Developmental dyslexia is a distinct learning disability with unexpected
difficulty in learning to read despite adequate intelligence, education, and
environment, and normal senses. The genetic aetiology of dyslexia is
heterogeneous and loci on chromosomes 2, 3, 6, 15, and 18 have been repeatedly
linked to it. We have conducted a genome scan with 376 markers in 11 families
with 38 dyslexic subjects ascertained in Finland. Linkage of dyslexia to the
vicinity of DYX3 on 2p was confirmed with a non-parametric linkage (NPL) score of
2.55 and a lod score of 3.01 for a dominant model, and a novel locus on 7q32
close to the SPCH1 locus was suggested with an NPL score of 2.77. The SPCH1 locus
has previously been linked with a severe speech and language disorder and autism,
and a mutation in exon 14 of the FOXP2 gene on 7q32 has been identified in one
large pedigree. Because the language disorder associated with the SPCH1 locus has
some overlap with the language deficits observed in dyslexia, we sequenced the
coding region of FOXP2 as a candidate gene for our observed linkage in six
dyslexic subjects. No mutations were identified. We conclude that DYX3 appears to
be important for dyslexia susceptibility in many Finnish families, and a
suggested linkage of dyslexia to chromosome 7q32 will need verification in other 
data sets.

PMCID: PMC1735449
PMID: 12746395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Am J Hum Genet. 2003 Jun;72(6):1536-43. Epub 2003 Apr 29.

Association of specific language impairment (SLI) to the region of 7q31.

O'Brien EK(1), Zhang X, Nishimura C, Tomblin JB, Murray JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

FOXP2 (forkhead box P2) was the first gene characterized in which a mutation
affects human speech and language abilities. A common developmental language
disorder, specific language impairment (SLI), affects 6%-7% of children with
normal nonverbal intelligence and has evidence of a genetic basis in familial and
twin studies. FOXP2 is located on chromosome 7q31, and studies of other disorders
with speech and language impairment, including autism, have found linkage to this
region. In the present study, samples from children with SLI and their family
members were used to study linkage and association of SLI to markers within and
around FOXP2, and samples from 96 probands with SLI were directly sequenced for
the mutation in exon 14 of FOXP2. No mutations were found in exon 14 of FOXP2,
but strong association was found to a marker within the CFTR gene and another
marker on 7q31, D7S3052, both adjacent to FOXP2, suggesting that genetic factors 
for regulation of common language impairment reside in the vicinity of FOXP2.

PMCID: PMC1180313
PMID: 12721956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Heredity (Edinb). 2003 May;90(5):343-4.

Select your words carefully.

Hacia JG, Hey J.

PMID: 12714975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jul 4;278(27):24259-68. Epub 2003 Apr 10.

Multiple domains define the expression and regulatory properties of Foxp1
forkhead transcriptional repressors.

Wang B(1), Lin D, Li C, Tucker P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and the Institute for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology, University of Texas, Austin 78712-0162, USA.

The Foxp subfamily of forkhead/HNF3 transcription factors has recently been
recognized because of its involvement in autoimmune disease, speech and language 
disorders, and lung development. Domains unique to this subfamily include a
divergent DNA-binding winged helix, a leucine zipper, a zinc finger, and a
polyglutamine tract. Little is known about the properties of these proteins that 
are fundamental to their function as transcription factors nor how the Foxp
sequence motifs regulate their transcriptional regulatory properties. We report
here a structure/function analysis of the Foxp1 protein. We have analyzed the
alternative splice isoforms 1A and 1C and also report the cloning and
characterization of a novel isoform Foxp1D that lacks the polyglutamine domain.
We have isolated the preferred DNA-binding sites for Foxp1 transcription factors.
Foxp1A, C, and D isoforms and the related Foxp2 protein repress gene
transcription via binding to this consensus site or to a naturally occurring site
within the SV40 and the interleukin-2 promoters. In some cases the strength of
Foxp1 repression is mediated by the polyglutamine domain. Unlike previously
characterized forkhead factors, Foxp1 proteins can form homodimers or
heterodimers with subfamily members. The dimerization domain was localized to an 
evolutionarily conserved C2H2 zinc finger and leucine zipper motif. Finally, we
demonstrate that Foxp1, although broadly expressed, is further regulated by
tissue-specific alternative splicing of these functionally important sequence
domains. These results suggest that Foxp1 proteins have diverse functional roles 
in different cell and tissue types.

PMID: 12692134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. J Comp Neurol. 2003 May 26;460(2):266-79.

Characterization of Foxp2 and Foxp1 mRNA and protein in the developing and mature
brain.

Ferland RJ(1), Cherry TJ, Preware PO, Morrisey EE, Walsh CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Howard Hughes
Medical Institute, Harvard Medical School, Harvard Institutes of Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Foxp2 and Foxp1 are recently identified members of the Fox family of
winged-helix/forkhead transcription factor genes. A recent study has found that
mutations in human FOXP2 produce a severe language disorder. Since Foxp2 appears 
to be important in language, we wanted to explore the expression of this gene and
a homologous gene, Foxp1, in the developing brain. In the present study, we
investigated the time course and localization of Foxp2 and Foxp1 mRNA and protein
expression in the developing and adult mouse using in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry. Foxp2 and Foxp1 are expressed as early as E12.5 and persist
into adulthood. Foxp2 and Foxp1 were most highly expressed in the developing and 
mature basal ganglia. Expression of Foxp2 was also observed in the cerebral
cortex (layer 6), cerebellum (Purkinje neurons), and thalamus. Foxp1 expression
was observed in the cerebral cortex (layers 3-5), hippocampus (CA1), and
thalamus. Very little ventricular zone expression was observed for Foxp2 and
Foxp1 and the expression of both of these genes occurred following neuronal
migration, suggesting a role for these genes in postmigratory neuronal
differentiation. Furthermore, we demonstrated the expression of FOXP2 in human
fetal brain by RT-PCR, in the perisylvian area of the left and right cerebral
hemispheres, as well as in the frontal and occipital cortices. Overall, the
widespread expression of Foxp2 in the developing brain makes it difficult to draw
specific conclusions about which areas of Foxp2 expression are critical to human 
language function.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12687690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Apr 15;118A(2):172-5.

Mutation screening of FOXP2 in individuals diagnosed with autistic disorder.

Gauthier J(1), Joober R, Mottron L, Laurent S, Fuchs M, De Kimpe V, Rouleau GA.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of the McGill University Health Center, 1650 Cedar Ave,
Montreal, Canada.

Although it is well established that genetic factors play an important role in
the etiology of autistic disorder (AD), no specific genes have as yet been
implicated. Genetic epidemiological data, particularly the sharp fall in
concordance rates from monozygotic to dizygotic twins, indicate that the mode of 
transmission of this disorder is complex and may involve several genes. The 7q31 
locus has been repeatedly linked to AD, suggesting that this chromosomal region
is likely to harbor a susceptibility gene for AD. Recently, variations in the
FOXP2 gene were reported to be responsible for a severe speech and language
disorder. Because of the chromosomal location of FOXP2 (7q31) and the putative
implication of the 7q31 region both in autistic and in language disorders (a
feature of AD), it has been hypothesized that FOXP2 may be implicated in the
pathophysiology of AD. To test this hypothesis, we screened the FOXP2 gene coding
sequence for mutations in subjects diagnosed with AD and in normal controls. We
identified four silent polymorphisms that were equally distributed between
patients and controls. Using an intra-family association design, we identified no
transmission disequilibrium in any of the four identified alleles, suggesting
that the FOXP2 gene does not play a significant role in AD.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12655497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Gene Expr Patterns. 2002 Dec;2(3-4):223-8.

Foxp4: a novel member of the Foxp subfamily of winged-helix genes co-expressed
with Foxp1 and Foxp2 in pulmonary and gut tissues.

Lu MM(1), Li S, Yang H, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

In this study, we describe the isolation and characterization of Foxp4, a new
member of the Foxp subfamily of winged-helix transcription factors. The
full-length mouse Foxp4 cDNA encodes a 685-amino-acid protein that is similar to 
Foxp1 and Foxp2. Foxp4 gene expression is observed primarily in pulmonary,
neural, and gut tissues during embryonic development. To compare the protein
expression patterns of Foxp4 to Foxp1 and Foxp2, specific polyclonal antisera to 
each of these proteins was used in immunohistochemical analysis of mouse
embryonic tissues. All three proteins are expressed in lung epithelium with Foxp1
and Foxp4 expressed in both proximal and distal airway epithelium while Foxp2 is 
expressed primarily in distal epithelium. Foxp1 protein expression is also
observed in the mesenchyme and vascular endothelial cells of the lung. At
embryonic day 12.5, Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed in both the mucosal and
epithelial layers of the intestine. However, Foxp2 is expressed only in the outer
mucosal layer of the intestine and stomach later in development. Finally, Foxp4
is expressed exclusively in the epithelial cells of the developing intestine,
where, in late development, it is expressed in a gradient along the longitudinal 
axis of the villi.

PMID: 12617805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Hum Brain Mapp. 2003 Mar;18(3):194-200.

Bilateral brain abnormalities associated with dominantly inherited verbal and
orofacial dyspraxia.

Belton E(1), Salmond CH, Watkins KE, Vargha-Khadem F, Gadian DG.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience Unit, Institute of Child Health,
University College London, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, NHS Trust, 
The Wolson Centre, Mecklenburgh Square, London, United Kingdom.
E.Belton@ich.ucl.ac.uk

The KE family is a large three-generational pedigree in which half of the members
suffer from a verbal and orofacial dyspraxia in association with a point mutation
in the FOXP2 gene. This report extends previous voxel-based morphometric analyses
of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans (Watkins et al. [2002] Brain
125:465-478) using a bilateral conjunction analysis. This searches specifically
for areas of grey matter density that differ bilaterally in the affected members 
compared with both matched controls and the unaffected family members. 3-D
T1-weighted MRI datasets of 17 family members (10 affected, 7 unaffected) and
matched controls were compared. The most significant findings were reduced grey
matter density bilaterally in the caudate nucleus, the cerebellum, and the left
and right inferior frontal gyrus in the affected members. In addition, increased 
grey matter density was found bilaterally in the planum temporale. These results 
confirm that a point mutation in FOXP2 is associated with several bilateral grey 
matter abnormalities in both motor and language related regions. The results also
demonstrate the advantages of using a conjunction analysis when bilateral
abnormalities are suspected.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12599277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Lakartidningen. 2002 Dec 12;99(50):5099.

[Still to early to tell which "speech genes" direct speech ability of human
beings].

[Article in Swedish]

Kahl U(1).

Author information: 
(1)Human Brain Informatics, institutionen för medicinsk epidemiologi, Karolinska 
institutet. Ulrika.Kahl@cns.ki.se

PMID: 12572303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2003;26:57-80. Epub 2003 Jan 8.

Deciphering the genetic basis of speech and language disorders.

Fisher SE(1), Lai CS, Monaco AP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Headington, Oxford OX3 7BN, United Kingdom. simon.fisher@well.ox.ac.uk

A significant number of individuals have unexplained difficulties with acquiring 
normal speech and language, despite adequate intelligence and environmental
stimulation. Although developmental disorders of speech and language are
heritable, the genetic basis is likely to involve several, possibly many,
different risk factors. Investigations of a unique three-generation family
showing monogenic inheritance of speech and language deficits led to the
isolation of the first such gene on chromosome 7, which encodes a transcription
factor known as FOXP2. Disruption of this gene causes a rare severe speech and
language disorder but does not appear to be involved in more common forms of
language impairment. Recent genome-wide scans have identified at least four
chromosomal regions that may harbor genes influencing the latter, on chromosomes 
2, 13, 16, and 19. The molecular genetic approach has potential for dissecting
neurological pathways underlying speech and language disorders, but such
investigations are only just beginning.

PMID: 12524432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Genetics. 2002 Dec;162(4):1825-35.

Accelerated protein evolution and origins of human-specific features: Foxp2 as an
example.

Zhang J(1), Webb DM, Podlaha O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan 48109, USA. jianzhi@umich.edu

Genes responsible for human-specific phenotypes may have been under altered
selective pressures in human evolution and thus exhibit changes in substitution
rate and pattern at the protein sequence level. Using comparative analysis of
human, chimpanzee, and mouse protein sequences, we identified two genes (PRM2 and
FOXP2) with significantly enhanced evolutionary rates in the hominid lineage.
PRM2 is a histone-like protein essential to spermatogenesis and was previously
reported to be a likely target of sexual selection in humans and chimpanzees.
FOXP2 is a transcription factor involved in speech and language development.
Human FOXP2 experienced a >60-fold increase in substitution rate and incorporated
two fixed amino acid changes in a broadly defined transcription suppression
domain. A survey of a diverse group of placental mammals reveals the uniqueness
of the human FOXP2 sequence and a population genetic analysis indicates possible 
adaptive selection behind the accelerated evolution. Taken together, our results 
suggest an important role that FOXP2 may have played in the origin of human
speech and demonstrate a strategy for identifying candidate genes underlying the 
emergences of human-specific features.

PMCID: PMC1462353
PMID: 12524352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2002 Dec;14(6):696-701.

Molecular genetics of speech and language disorders.

Newbury DF(1), Monaco AP.

Author information: 
(1)Welcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, oxford, United Kingdom. anthony.monaco@well.ox.ac.uk

In 2001, scientists characterized the first gene to be implicated in the cause of
a speech and language disorder (FOXP2). Although FOXP2 was discovered using a
unique family in which a severe speech and language disorder segregates in a
monogenic fashion, at the time this discovery was heralded as "a milestone in
understanding this uniquely human characteristic." Approximately 1 year later, we
discuss the impact of this gene discovery on the study of language and review the
relevance of this gene to both specific language impairment and language aspects 
of the autistic phenotype. We also discuss recent molecular genetic advances made
in the study of generalized specific language impairment.

PMID: 12436038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2002 Oct;3(10):767-80.

Developmental dyslexia: genetic dissection of a complex cognitive trait.

Fisher SE(1), DeFries JC.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK. simon.fisher@well.ox.ac.uk

PMID: 12360321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. US News World Rep. 2002 Sep 16;133(10):64.

We the mutants. On the trail of genes that made us human.

Shute N.

PMID: 12298353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Nature. 2002 Aug 22;418(6900):869-72. Epub 2002 Aug 14.

Molecular evolution of FOXP2, a gene involved in speech and language.

Enard W(1), Przeworski M, Fisher SE, Lai CS, Wiebe V, Kitano T, Monaco AP, Pääbo 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Inselstrasse 22, D-04103
Leipzig, Germany.

Language is a uniquely human trait likely to have been a prerequisite for the
development of human culture. The ability to develop articulate speech relies on 
capabilities, such as fine control of the larynx and mouth, that are absent in
chimpanzees and other great apes. FOXP2 is the first gene relevant to the human
ability to develop language. A point mutation in FOXP2 co-segregates with a
disorder in a family in which half of the members have severe articulation
difficulties accompanied by linguistic and grammatical impairment. This gene is
disrupted by translocation in an unrelated individual who has a similar disorder.
Thus, two functional copies of FOXP2 seem to be required for acquisition of
normal spoken language. We sequenced the complementary DNAs that encode the FOXP2
protein in the chimpanzee, gorilla, orang-utan, rhesus macaque and mouse, and
compared them with the human cDNA. We also investigated intraspecific variation
of the human FOXP2 gene. Here we show that human FOXP2 contains changes in
amino-acid coding and a pattern of nucleotide polymorphism, which strongly
suggest that this gene has been the target of selection during recent human
evolution.

PMID: 12192408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Hum Genet. 2002 Aug;111(2):136-44. Epub 2002 Jul 16.

FOXP2: novel exons, splice variants, and CAG repeat length stability.

Bruce HA(1), Margolis RL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetic Neurobiology, Division of Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287,
USA.

FOXP2 is a transcription factor containing a polyglutamine tract, a zinc-finger
motif, and a forkhead DNA-binding domain. The FOXP2 gene is located on 7q31. A
missense mutation in the forkhead domain (exon 14) and a balanced reciprocal
translocation t(5;7)(q22;q31.2) with a breakpoint between exons 3b and 4 have
recently been associated with a speech and language disorder (SPCH1). The role of
FOXP2 in this neurodevelopmental disorder suggests that mutations in FOXP2 could 
cause other neuropsychiatric disorders. To begin investigation of this
possibility, we examined the genomic structure and CAG/CAA repeat region of
FOXP2. We detected little polymorphism and no expansions in the FOXP2 CAG/CAA
repeat in 142 individuals with progressive movement disorders. We found evidence 
of alternate splice variants and six previously undetected exons: three 5'
untranslated exons (s1, s2, s3), two additional untranslated exons (2a and 2b)
between exons 2 and 3, a translated exon (4a) between exons 4 and 5, and a longer
version of exon 10 (10+) that contains an alternate stop codon and produces a
truncated protein (FOXP2-S). Our results suggest that FOXP2 spans at least 603 kb
of genomic DNA, more than twice the previously defined region, and provide
evidence of a promoter region flanking exon s1. This demonstration of additional 
FOXP2 exons and splice variants should facilitate understanding of FOXP2 function
and the search for additional FOXP2 mutations.

PMID: 12189486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Science. 2002 Aug 16;297(5584):1105.

Language evolution. 'Speech gene' tied to modern humans.

Balter M.

PMID: 12183599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Commun Disord. 2002 Jul-Aug;35(4):329-45.

Finding susceptibility genes for developmental disorders of speech: the long and 
winding road.

Felsenfeld S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Speech-Language Pathology, Duquesne University, Pittsburgh, PA
15282, USA. felsenfeld@duq.edu

Finding susceptibility genes for complex disorders is the next major challenge
facing genetics researchers. The purpose of this paper is to stimulate creative
thinking about the gene-finding process for developmental speech disorders
(DSDs), specifically disorders of articulation/phonology and stuttering. The
paper will begin with a review of existing behavioral genetic studies of these
phenotypes. This will be followed by a discussion of roadblocks that may impede
the molecular study of DSDs, research that is in very early stages of
development. As a third objective, the small number of molecular genetic studies 
of DSDs that have been published or presented will be described. The paper
concludes with a discussion of research strategies that may maximize the success 
of molecular studies of speech phenotypes. It will be argued that progress will
most likely be enhanced if theories about biological systems and processes can be
used to narrow the search for candidate susceptibility genes.LEARNING OUTCOMES:
The reader will be introduced to findings and conceptual issues that relate to
the behavioral and molecular genetic investigation of DSDs. After completing this
paper, readers should be able to (a) identify key epidemiological findings for
the three speech phenotypes that were discussed (DAS, speech delay, and
stuttering); (b) summarize the findings of the behavioral genetic studies of
speech disorders that were presented; (c) identify four specific challenges that 
may impede future molecular genetic studies of these phenotypes; (d) describe the
methodological sequence that led to the discovery of the FOXP2 gene; and (e)
summarize the two research strategies that were presented to potentially reduce
sample heterogeneity for future molecular genetics research.

PMID: 12160352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jul 8;114(5):566-9.

Evaluation of FOXP2 as an autism susceptibility gene.

Wassink TH(1), Piven J, Vieland VJ, Pietila J, Goedken RJ, Folstein SE, Sheffield
VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa City,
Iowa 52242, USA. thomas-wassink@uiowa.edu

A mutation in the gene FOXP2 was recently identified as being responsible for a
complicated speech and language phenotype in a single large extended pedigree.
This gene is of interest to autism because it lies in one of the most
consistently linked autism chromosomal regions of interest. We therefore tested
this gene for its involvement in autism in a large sample of autism families. We 
completely sequenced the exon containing the mutation, screened the remaining
coding sequence using SSCP technology, and identified and genotyped two novel
intronic tetranucleotide repeat polymorphisms that were then analyzed for
evidence of linkage and linkage disequilibrium (LD). We identified two families
in which heterozygous deletions of a small number of glutamines in a long
poly-glutamine stretch were found in one parent and the autistic probands; no
other non-conservative coding sequence changes were identified. Linkage and LD
analyses were performed in 75 affected sibling pair families and in two subgroups
of this sample defined by the presence/absence of severe language impairment. One
allele appeared to have an opposite pattern of transmission in the language based
subgroups, but otherwise the linkage and LD analyses were negative. We conclude
that FOXP2 is unlikely to contribute significantly to autism susceptibility.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12116195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Neuroreport. 2002 Jun 12;13(8):1075-7.

Language-impaired children: No sign of the FOXP2 mutation.

Meaburn E(1), Dale PS, Craig IW, Plomin R.

Author information: 
(1)Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Research Centre, Institute of
Psychiatry, King's College London, 111 Denmark Hill, London SE5 8AF, UK.

A mutation in the FOXP2 gene has been found to be responsible for the autosomal
dominant inheritance of a severe form of speech and language impairment in a
family known as KE. We genotyped the FOXP2 mutation for 270 4-year-old children
selected for low general language scores from a representative community sample
of more than 18,000 children. No language-impaired child had the FOXP2 mutation. 
Although rare severe disorders such as those of the KE family are often caused by
a single gene, common disorders such as language impairment are more likely to be
the quantitative extreme of the same multiple genetic factors responsible for
heritability throughout the distribution.

PMID: 12060812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Development. 2002 May;129(9):2233-46.

GATA6 regulates differentiation of distal lung epithelium.

Yang H(1), Lu MM, Zhang L, Whitsett JA, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Molecular Cardiology Research Center, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

GATA6 is a member of the GATA family of zinc-finger transcriptional regulators
and is the only known GATA factor expressed in the distal epithelium of the lung 
during development. To define the role that GATA6 plays during lung epithelial
cell development, we expressed a GATA6-Engrailed dominant-negative fusion protein
in the distal lung epithelium of transgenic mice. Transgenic embryos lacked
detectable alveolar epithelial type 1 cells in the distal airway epithelium.
These embryos also exhibited increased Foxp2 gene expression, suggesting a
disruption in late alveolar epithelial differentiation. Alveolar epithelial type 
2 cells, which are progenitors of alveolar epithelial type 1 cells, were
correctly specified as shown by normal thyroid transcription factor 1 and
surfactant protein A gene expression. However, attenuated endogenous surfactant
protein C expression indicated that alveolar epithelial type 2 cell
differentiation was perturbed in transgenic embryos. The number of proximal
airway tubules is also reduced in these embryos, suggesting a role for GATA6 in
regulating distal-proximal airway development. Finally, a functional role for
GATA factor function in alveolar epithelial type 1 cell gene regulation is
supported by the ability of GATA6 to trans-activate the mouse aquaporin-5
promoter. Together, these data implicate GATA6 as an important regulator of
distal epithelial cell differentiation and proximal airway development in the
mouse.

PMID: 11959831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Am J Hum Genet. 2002 May;70(5):1318-27. Epub 2002 Mar 13.

FOXP2 is not a major susceptibility gene for autism or specific language
impairment.

Newbury DF(1), Bonora E, Lamb JA, Fisher SE, Lai CS, Baird G, Jannoun L, Slonims 
V, Stott CM, Merricks MJ, Bolton PF, Bailey AJ, Monaco AP; International
Molecular Genetic Study of Autism Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, United
Kingdom. anthony.monaco@well.ox.ac.uk

The FOXP2 gene, located on human 7q31 (at the SPCH1 locus), encodes a
transcription factor containing a polyglutamine tract and a forkhead domain.
FOXP2 is mutated in a severe monogenic form of speech and language impairment,
segregating within a single large pedigree, and is also disrupted by a
translocation in an isolated case. Several studies of autistic disorder have
demonstrated linkage to a similar region of 7q (the AUTS1 locus), leading to the 
proposal that a single genetic factor on 7q31 contributes to both autism and
language disorders. In the present study, we directly evaluate the impact of the 
FOXP2 gene with regard to both complex language impairments and autism, through
use of association and mutation screening analyses. We conclude that
coding-region variants in FOXP2 do not underlie the AUTS1 linkage and that the
gene is unlikely to play a role in autism or more common forms of language
impairment.

PMCID: PMC447606
PMID: 11894222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Brain. 2002 Mar;125(Pt 3):449-51.

Towards the elucidation of the genetic and brain bases of developmental speech
and language disorders.

Harasty J, Hodges JR.

Comment on
    Brain. 2002 Mar;125(Pt 3):452-64.
    Brain. 2002 Mar;125(Pt 3):465-78.

PMID: 11872603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Trends Genet. 2002 Feb;18(2):57-9.

Putting language genes in perspective.

Bishop DV.

PMID: 11818129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Nat Neurosci. 2001 Nov;4(11):1049.

In search of language genes.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 11687807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Science. 2001 Oct 5;294(5540):32.

Genetics. First gene linked to speech identified.

Balter M.

PMID: 11588230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Nature. 2001 Oct 4;413(6855):519-23.

A forkhead-domain gene is mutated in a severe speech and language disorder.

Lai CS(1), Fisher SE, Hurst JA, Vargha-Khadem F, Monaco AP.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford OX3 7BN, UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 2001 Oct 4;413(6855):465-6.

Individuals affected with developmental disorders of speech and language have
substantial difficulty acquiring expressive and/or receptive language in the
absence of any profound sensory or neurological impairment and despite adequate
intelligence and opportunity. Although studies of twins consistently indicate
that a significant genetic component is involved, most families segregating
speech and language deficits show complex patterns of inheritance, and a gene
that predisposes individuals to such disorders has not been identified. We have
studied a unique three-generation pedigree, KE, in which a severe speech and
language disorder is transmitted as an autosomal-dominant monogenic trait. Our
previous work mapped the locus responsible, SPCH1, to a 5.6-cM interval of region
7q31 on chromosome 7 (ref. 5). We also identified an unrelated individual, CS, in
whom speech and language impairment is associated with a chromosomal
translocation involving the SPCH1 interval. Here we show that the gene FOXP2,
which encodes a putative transcription factor containing a polyglutamine tract
and a forkhead DNA-binding domain, is directly disrupted by the translocation
breakpoint in CS. In addition, we identify a point mutation in affected members
of the KE family that alters an invariant amino-acid residue in the forkhead
domain. Our findings suggest that FOXP2 is involved in the developmental process 
that culminates in speech and language.

PMID: 11586359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Nature. 2001 Oct 4;413(6855):465-6.

Talk of genetics and vice versa.

Pinker S.

Comment on
    Nature. 2001 Oct 4;413(6855):519-23.

PMID: 11586336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jul 20;276(29):27488-97. Epub 2001 May 17.

Characterization of a new subfamily of winged-helix/forkhead (Fox) genes that are
expressed in the lung and act as transcriptional repressors.

Shu W(1), Yang H, Zhang L, Lu MM, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

Epithelial gene expression in the lung is thought to be regulated by the
coordinate activity of several different families of transcription factors
including the Fox family of winged-helix/forkhead DNA-binding proteins. In this
report, we have identified and characterized two members of this Fox gene family,
Foxp1 and Foxp2, and show that they comprise a new subfamily of Fox genes
expressed in the lung. Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed at high levels in the lung
as early as E12.5 of mouse development with Foxp2 expression restricted to the
airway epithelium. In addition, Foxp1 and Foxp2 are expressed at lower levels in 
neural, intestinal, and cardiovascular tissues during development. Upon
differentiation of the airway epithelium along the proximal-distal axis, Foxp2
expression becomes restricted to the distal alveolar epithelium whereas Foxp1
expression is observed in the distal epithelium and mesenchyme. Foxp1 and Foxp2
can regulate epithelial lung gene transcription as was demonstrated by their
ability to dramatically repress the mouse CC10 promoter and, to a lesser extent, 
the human surfactant protein C promoter. In addition, GAL4 fusion proteins
encoding subdomains of Foxp1 and Foxp2 demonstrate that an independent and
homologous transcriptional repression domain lies within the N-terminal end of
the proteins. Together, these studies suggest that Foxp1 and Foxp2 are important 
regulators of lung epithelial gene transcription.

PMID: 11358962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


