
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 22;11(3):e0152022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152022.
eCollection 2016.

Proteomic Profiling of Mouse Liver following Acute Toxoplasma gondii Infection.

He JJ(1), Ma J(1,)(2), Elsheikha HM(3), Song HQ(1), Zhou DH(1), Zhu XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR
China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Hunan Agricultural University,
Changsha, Hunan Province 410128, PR China. (3)Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham,
Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom.

Toxoplasma gondii remains a global public health problem. However, its
pathophysiology is still not-completely understood particularly the impact of
infection on host liver metabolism. We performed iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis
to evaluate early liver protein responses in BALB/c mice following infection with
T. gondii PYS strain (genotype ToxoDB#9) infection. Our data revealed
modification of protein expression in key metabolic pathways, as indicated by the
upregulation of immune response and downregulation of mitochondrial respiratory
chain, and the metabolism of fatty acids, lipids and xenobiotics. T. gondii seems
to hijack host PPAR signaling pathway to downregulate the metabolism of fatty
acids, lipids and energy in the liver. The metabolism of over 400 substances was 
affected by the downregulation of genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism. The
top 10 transcription factors used by upregulated genes were Stat2, Stat1, Irf2,
Irf1, Sp2, Egr1, Stat3, Klf4, Elf1 and Gabpa, while the top 10 transcription
factors of downregulated genes were Hnf4A, Ewsr1, Fli1, Hnf4g, Nr2f1, Pparg,
Rxra, Hnf1A, Foxa1 and Foxo1. These findings indicate global reprogramming of the
metabolism of the mouse liver after acute T. gondii infection. Functional
characterization of the altered proteins may enhance understanding of the host
responses to T. gondii infection and lead to the identification of new
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4803215
PMID: 27003162  [PubMed - in process]


2. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2016 Mar 1. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12471. [Epub ahead of
print]

Association of TERT promoter mutations with telomerase expression in melanoma.

Lee S(1), Opresko P(2), Pappo A(3), Kirkwood JM(4), Bahrami A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, 38105, USA. (2)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health,
University of Pittsburgh Cancer Institute, Pittsburgh, PA. (3)Departments of
Oncology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee, 38105, USA. 
(4)Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA.

Recurrent mutations in the promoter of the telomerase reverse transcriptase
(TERT) gene were first discovered in melanoma (Horn et al., 2013; Huang et al.,
2013) and subsequently in several other cancer types (Killela et al., 2013).
These mutations occur mainly at positions -124 bp (chr5, 1,295,228 C>T hg19
coordinate) and -146 bp (chr5, 1,295,250 C>T hg19 coordinate) from the ATG
translation start site (Heidenreich et al., 2014; Horn et al., 2013; Huang
et al., 2013), and are hereafter termed as -124C>T and -146C>T, respectively
(Figure 1a). Mutually exclusive -124C>T and -146C>T mutations have been detected 
in more than 65% of melanomas (Network, 2015). These mutations contribute to TERT
transcriptional upregulation by recruiting the GABPA/B1 transcription factor
(Bell et al., 2015). This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26928778  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Mol Biol Evol. 2016 Jan 26. pii: msw007. [Epub ahead of print]

Human Lineage-Specific Transcriptional Regulation through GA-Binding Protein
Transcription Factor Alpha (GABPa).

Perdomo-Sabogal A(1), Nowick K(2), Piccini I(3), Sudbrak R(4), Lehrach H(5),
Yaspo ML(5), Warnatz HJ(5), Querfurth R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Group, Department of Computer Science, and Interdisciplinary
Center for Bioinformatics, University Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany Paul-Flechsig
Institute for Brain Research, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(2)Bioinformatics Group, Department of Computer Science, and Interdisciplinary
Center for Bioinformatics, University Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany Paul-Flechsig
Institute for Brain Research, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany
nowick@bioinf.uni-leipzig.de Robet.Querfurth@gmx.de. (3)Institute of Genetics of 
Heart Diseases (IfGH), Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, University Hospital
Münster, 48149 Münster, Germany Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck
Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. (4)European Centre for Public 
Heath Genomics, UNU-MERIT, Unsiversity Maastricht,PO Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht,
The Netherlands Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for
Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. (5)Department of Vertebrate Genomics, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany. (6)Department of
Vertebrate Genomics, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany
nowick@bioinf.uni-leipzig.de Robet.Querfurth@gmx.de.

A substantial fraction of phenotypic differences between closely related species 
are likely caused by differences in gene regulation. While this has already been 
postulated over 30 years ago, only few examples of evolutionary changes in gene
regulation have been verified. Here, we identified and investigated binding sites
of the transcription factor GA-binding protein alpha (GABPa) aiming to discover
cis-regulatory adaptations on the human lineage. By performing chromatin
immunoprecipitation-sequencing experiments in a human cell line, we found 11,619 
putative GABPa binding sites. Through sequence comparisons of the human GABPa
binding regions with orthologous sequences from 34 mammals, we identified
substitutions that have resulted in 224 putative human-specific GABPa binding
sites. To experimentally assess the transcriptional impact of those
substitutions, we selected four promoters for promoter-reporter gene assays using
human and African green monkey cells. We compared the activities of wild-type
promoters to mutated forms, where we have introduced one or more substitutions to
mimic the ancestral state devoid of the GABPa consensus binding sequence.
Similarly, we introduced the human-specific substitutions into chimpanzee and
macaque promoter backgrounds. Our results demonstrate that the identified
substitutions are functional, both in human and nonhuman promoters. In addition, 
we performed GABPa knock-down experiments and found 1,215 genes as strong
candidates for primary targets. Further analyses of our data sets link GABPa to
cognitive disorders, diabetes, KRAB zinc finger (KRAB-ZNF), and human-specific
genes. Thus, we propose that differences in GABPa binding sites played important 
roles in the evolution of human-specific phenotypes.

© The Author(s) 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution.

PMID: 26814189  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2015 Mar;5(2):145-50. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.01.002. Epub
2015 Feb 24.

Emerging role of microRNAs in lipid metabolism.

Yang Z(1), Cappello T(2), Wang L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Neurobiology, and the Institute for Systems
Genomics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA ; Veterans Affairs
Connecticut Healthcare System, West Haven, CT 06516, USA. (2)Department of
Physiology and Neurobiology, and the Institute for Systems Genomics, University
of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA. (3)Department of Physiology and
Neurobiology, and the Institute for Systems Genomics, University of Connecticut, 
Storrs, CT 06269, USA ; Veterans Affairs Connecticut Healthcare System, West
Haven, CT 06516, USA ; Department of Internal Medicine, Section of Digestive
Diseases, Yale University, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

microRNAs (miRNAs or miRs) are small non-coding RNAs that are involved in
post-transcriptional regulation of their target genes in a sequence-specific
manner. Emerging evidence demonstrates that miRNAs are critical regulators of
lipid synthesis, fatty acid oxidation and lipoprotein formation and secretion.
Dysregulation of miRNAs disrupts gene regulatory network, leading to metabolic
syndrome and its related diseases. In this review, we introduced epigenetic and
transcriptional regulation of miRNAs expression. We emphasized on several
representative miRNAs that are functionally involved into lipid metabolism,
including miR-33/33(<U+204E>), miR122, miR27a/b, miR378/378(<U+204E>), miR-34a and miR-21.
Understanding the function of miRNAs in lipid homeostasis may provide potential
therapeutic strategies for fatty liver disease.

PMCID: PMC4629215
PMID: 26579440  [PubMed]


5. Oncotarget. 2015 Dec 8;6(39):42197-221. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.6255.

Sense-antisense gene-pairs in breast cancer and associated pathological pathways.

Grinchuk OV(1), Motakis E(1,)(2), Yenamandra SP(1), Ow GS(1), Jenjaroenpun P(1), 
Tang Z(1), Yarmishyn AA(1), Ivshina AV(1), Kuznetsov VA(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research
(A*STAR), Singapore. (2)Current address: RIKEN, Japan. (3)School of Computing
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore.

More than 30% of human protein-coding genes form hereditary complex genome
architectures composed of sense-antisense (SA) gene pairs (SAGPs) transcribing
their RNAs from both strands of a given locus. Such architectures represent
important novel components of genome complexity contributing to gene expression
deregulation in cancer cells. Therefore, the architectures might be involved in
cancer pathways and, in turn, be used for novel drug targets discovery. However, 
the global roles of SAGPs in cancer pathways has not been studied. Here we
investigated SAGPs associated with breast cancer (BC)-related pathways using
systems biology, prognostic survival and experimental methods. Gene expression
analysis identified 73 BC-relevant SAGPs that are highly correlated in BC.
Survival modelling and metadata analysis of the 1161 BC patients allowed us to
develop a novel patient prognostic grouping method selecting the 12
survival-significant SAGPs. The qRT-PCR-validated 12-SAGP prognostic signature
reproducibly stratified BC patients into low- and high-risk prognostic subgroups.
The 1381 SAGP-defined differentially expressed genes common across three studied 
cohorts were identified. The functional enrichment analysis of these genes
revealed the GABPA gene network, including BC-relevant SAGPs, specific gene sets 
involved in cell cycle, spliceosomal and proteasomal pathways. The co-regulatory 
function of GABPA in BC cells was supported using siRNA knockdown studies. Thus, 
we demonstrated SAGPs as the synergistically functional genome architectures
interconnected with cancer-related pathways and associated with BC patient
clinical outcomes. Taken together, SAGPs represent an important component of
genome complexity which can be used to identify novel aspects of coordinated
pathological gene networks in cancers.

PMCID: PMC4747219
PMID: 26517092  [PubMed - in process]


6. Genes Dev. 2015 Nov 1;29(21):2219-24. doi: 10.1101/gad.269498.115. Epub 2015 Oct 
29.

Mutation of the TERT promoter, switch to active chromatin, and monoallelic TERT
expression in multiple cancers.

Stern JL(1), Theodorescu D(2), Vogelstein B(3), Papadopoulos N(3), Cech TR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder,
Colorado 80309, USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Colorado
BioFrontiers Institute, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA; (2)University of Colorado
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA; Department of
Pharmacology, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, Colorado
80045, USA; Department of Surgery (Urology), University of Colorado, Aurora,
Colorado 80045, USA; (3)Ludwig Center, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA; Sidney
Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA. (4)Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado 80309,
USA; Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Colorado BioFrontiers
Institute, Boulder, Colorado 80309, USA; University of Colorado Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Aurora, Colorado 80045, USA;

Somatic mutations in the promoter of the gene for telomerase reverse
transcriptase (TERT) are the most common noncoding mutations in cancer. They are 
thought to activate telomerase, contributing to proliferative immortality, but
the molecular events driving TERT activation are largely unknown. We observed in 
multiple cancer cell lines that mutant TERT promoters exhibit the H3K4me2/3 mark 
of active chromatin and recruit the GABPA/B1 transcription factor, while the
wild-type allele retains the H3K27me3 mark of epigenetic silencing; only the
mutant promoters are transcriptionally active. These results suggest how a
single-base-pair mutation can cause a dramatic epigenetic switch and monoallelic 
expression.

© 2015 Stern et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4647555 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 26515115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Sep;1849(9):1145-54. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.07.005. Epub 2015 Jul 11.

The heteromeric transcription factor GABP activates the ITGAM/CD11b promoter and 
induces myeloid differentiation.

Ripperger T(1), Manukjan G(2), Meyer J(3), Wolter S(4), Schambach A(5), Bohne
J(6), Modlich U(7), Li Z(8), Skawran B(9), Schlegelberger B(10), Steinemann
D(11).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1,
30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: ripperger.tim@mh-hannover.de.
(2)Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1,
30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address: manukjan.georgi@mh-hannover.de.
(3)Institute of Experimental Haematology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
meyer.johann@mh-hannover.de. (4)Institute of Pharmacology, Hannover Medical
School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
wolter.sabine@mh-hannover.de. (5)Institute of Experimental Haematology, Hannover 
Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany; Division of
Hematology/Oncology, Boston Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 300
Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA 02115, USA. Electronic address:
schambach.axel@mh-hannover.de. (6)Institute of Virology, Hannover Medical School,
Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
bohne.jens@mh-hannover.de. (7)Institute of Experimental Haematology, Hannover
Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
ute.modlich@pei.de. (8)Institute of Experimental Haematology, Hannover Medical
School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
li.zhixiong@mh-hannover.de. (9)Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical
School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
skawran.britta@mh-hannover.de. (10)Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical 
School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
schlegelberger.brigitte@mh-hannover.de. (11)Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover
Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Str. 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany. Electronic address:
steinemann.doris@mh-hannover.de.

The heteromeric transcription factor GA-binding protein (GABP) consists of two
subunits, the alpha subunit (GABPA) carrying the DNA-binding ETS domain, and the 
beta subunit (GABPB1) harbouring the transcriptional activation domain. GABP is
involved in haematopoietic stem cell maintenance and differentiation of myeloid
and lymphoid lineages in mice. To elucidate the molecular function of GABP in
human haematopoiesis, the present study addressed effects of ectopic
overexpression of GABP focussing on the myeloid compartment. Combined
overexpression of GABPA and GABPB1 caused a proliferation block in cell lines and
drastically reduced the colony-forming capacity of murine lineage-negative cells.
Impaired proliferation resulted from perturbed cellular cycling and induction of 
myeloid differentiation shown by surface markers and myelomonocytic morphology of
U937 cells. Depending on the dosage and functional integrity of GABP, ITGAM
expression was induced. ITGAM encodes CD11b, the alpha subunit of integrin Mac-1,
whose beta subunit, ITGB2/CD18, was already described to be regulated by GABP.
Finally, Shield1-dependent proteotuning, luciferase reporter assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation showed that GABP activates the ITGAM/CD11b promoter via three
binding sites close to the translational start site. In conclusion, the present
study supports the crucial role of GABP in myeloid cell differentiation and
identified ITGAM/CD11b as a novel GABP target gene.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26170143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. PLoS Genet. 2015 Jun 15;11(6):e1005316. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005316.
eCollection 2015.

Correction: CAPER Is Vital for Energy and Redox Homeostasis by Integrating
Glucose-Induced Mitochondrial Functions via ERR-a-Gabpa and Stress-Induced
Adaptive Responses via NF-<U+03BA>B-cMYC.

PLOS Genetics Staff.

Erratum for
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr;11(4):e1005116.

PMCID: PMC4468271
PMID: 26075908  [PubMed]


9. J Anim Sci Biotechnol. 2015 May 23;6(1):21. doi: 10.1186/s40104-015-0022-3.
eCollection 2015.

Mining the key regulatory genes of chicken inosine 5'-monophosphate metabolism
based on time series microarray data.

Ma T(1), Xu L(1), Wang H(1), Chen J(1), Liu L(1), Chang G(1), Chen G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Genetic Resources Laboratory, College of Animal Science and Technology,
Yangzhou University, 88 South of University Ave., Yangzhou, Jiangsu 225009 P. R. 
China.

IMP (inosine 5'-monophosphate) is a compound that enhances the flavor of poultry 
meat. IMP has become a new breeding trait to improve poultry meat quality. We
tried to identify several potential regulatory genes, and construct their
predicted regulatory relationships. Time series gene expression profiles of thigh
muscle tissues of Rugao chicken, a famous indigenous breed in China, were
performed for analysis of genes that are co-expressed or correlated with the
concentration of IMP. We found 15 crucial co-expression genes, which are Hspa2,
Pten, Gabpa, Bpi, Mkl1, Srf, Cd34, Hspa4, Etv6, Bmpr2, Gde1, Igfbp5, Cd28, Pecam1
and Gja1, that may directly or indirectly regulate IMP metabolism. Eventually, we
computed the correlation coefficient between 19 IMP Genes and 15 CGs (15
co-expression genes), and we identified and constructed a predicted regulation
network. In conclusion, variation of IMP concentration was primarily connected
with the muscle development process. During this process, 15 CGs were identified 
that may have significant influence on IMP metabolism. In particular, Bmpr2, Pten
and co-expression genes correlated with Entpd8 might play important roles in
regulating IMP de novo synthesis, decomposition and salvage synthesis.

PMCID: PMC4464707
PMID: 26075067  [PubMed]


10. Exp Hematol. 2015 Oct;43(10):880-90. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.05.011. Epub 2015
Jun 11.

Expression of the ETS transcription factor GABPa is positively correlated to the 
BCR-ABL1/ABL1 ratio in CML patients and affects imatinib sensitivity in vitro.

Manukjan G(1), Ripperger T(2), Santer L(2), von Neuhoff N(2), Ganser A(3),
Schambach A(4), Schlegelberger B(2), Steinemann D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.
Electronic address: manukjan.georgi@mh-hannover.de. (2)Institute of Human
Genetics, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (3)Department of
Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplantation, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany. (4)Institute of Experimental Hematology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

In Philadelphia-positive chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), imatinib resistance
frequently emerges because of point mutations in the ABL1 kinase domain, but may 
also be the consequence of uncontrolled upstream signaling. Recently, the
heteromeric transcription factor GA-binding protein (GABP) was found to promote
CML-like myeloproliferative disease in mice. In a cohort of 70 CML patients, we
found that expression of the GABP a subunit (GABPa) is positively correlated to
the BCR-ABL1/ABL1 ratio. Moreover, significantly higher GABPa expression was
detected in blast crisis than in chronic phase CML after performing data mining
on 91 CML patients. In functional studies, imatinib sensitivity is enhanced after
GABPa knockdown in tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKI)-sensitive K-562, as well as
by overexpression of a deletion mutant in TKI-resistant NALM-1 cells. Moreover,
in K-562 cells, GABP-dependent expression variations of PRKD2 and RAC2, relevant 
signaling mediators in CML, were observed. Notably, protein kinase D2 (Prkd2) was
reported to be a GABP target gene in mice. In line with this, we detected a
positive correlation between GABPA and PRKD2 expression in primary human CML,
indicating that the effects of GABP are mediated by PRKD2. These findings
illustrate an important role for GABP in disease development and imatinib
sensitivity in human CML.

Copyright © 2015 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26072332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Food Funct. 2015 Jun;6(6):2091-100. doi: 10.1039/c5fo00097a.

Dual protection of hydroxytyrosol, an olive oil polyphenol, against oxidative
damage in PC12 cells.

Peng S(1), Zhang B, Yao J, Duan D, Fang J.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Applied Organic Chemistry and College of Chemistry and
Chemical Engineering, Lanzhou, Gansu 730000, China. fangjg@lzu.edu.cn.

Hydroxytyrosol (3,4-dihydroxyphenylethanol, HT), a major polyphenol in olive
oils, has received increasing attention due to its multiple pharmacological
activities. However, it is not well understood how HT works on the neuronal
system. We report herein that HT efficiently scavenges free radicals in vitro and
displays cytoprotection against oxidative stress-induced damage in PC12 cells. HT
completely protects the cells from hydrogen peroxide-induced death and rescues
the cells from 6-hydroxydopamine-induced damage. Mechanistic studies reveal that 
Nrf2 is a prerequisite for the neuroprotection of HT as knocking down Nrf2
eliminated this action. HT, via activation of the Keap1-Nrf2 pathway, elevates a 
panel of cytoprotective enzymes, including glutamate-cysteine ligase, HO-1, NQO1 
and thioredoxin reductase. Our study reveals that HT provides dual
neuroprotection and cellular antioxidant defense as both a free radical scavenger
and Nrf2 activator, suggesting the potential pharmaceutical usage of HT for the
treatment of neurodegenerative disorders.

PMID: 26037629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Science. 2015 May 29;348(6238):1036-9. doi: 10.1126/science.aab0015. Epub 2015
May 14.

Cancer. The transcription factor GABP selectively binds and activates the mutant 
TERT promoter in cancer.

Bell RJ(1), Rube HT(2), Kreig A(3), Mancini A(4), Fouse SD(4), Nagarajan RP(4),
Choi S(5), Hong C(4), He D(4), Pekmezci M(6), Wiencke JK(7), Wrensch MR(7), Chang
SM(4), Walsh KM(8), Myong S(3), Song JS(9), Costello JF(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San Francisco,
CA. Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA. (2)Department of Physics, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, IL. Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, IL. (3)Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, IL. Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois,
Urbana-Champaign, IL. (4)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of
California, San Francisco, CA. (5)Department of Radiation Oncology, University of
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA. (6)Department of Anatomic Pathology,
University of California San Francisco Medical School, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA. (7)Division of Neuroepidemiology, Department of Neurological Surgery,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. Institute 
for Human Genetics, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA
94143, USA. (8)Division of Neuroepidemiology, Department of Neurological Surgery,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(9)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of California, San
Francisco, CA. Department of Physics, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign,
IL. Institute for Genomic Biology, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL. 
Department of Bioengineering, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, IL.
songj@illinois.edu joseph.costello@ucsf.edu. (10)Department of Neurological
Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, CA. songj@illinois.edu
joseph.costello@ucsf.edu.

Reactivation of telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) expression enables cells 
to overcome replicative senescence and escape apoptosis, which are fundamental
steps in the initiation of human cancer. Multiple cancer types, including up to
83% of glioblastomas (GBMs), harbor highly recurrent TERT promoter mutations of
unknown function but specific to two nucleotide positions. We identified the
functional consequence of these mutations in GBMs to be recruitment of the
multimeric GA-binding protein (GABP) transcription factor specifically to the
mutant promoter. Allelic recruitment of GABP is consistently observed across four
cancer types, highlighting a shared mechanism underlying TERT reactivation.
Tandem flanking native E26 transformation-specific motifs critically cooperate
with these mutations to activate TERT, probably by facilitating GABP
heterotetramer binding. GABP thus directly links TERT promoter mutations to
aberrant expression in multiple cancers.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4456397
PMID: 25977370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Food Funct. 2015 Jun;6(6):1936-43. doi: 10.1039/c4fo01131g.

Induction of the pi class of glutathione S-transferase by carnosic acid in rat
Clone 9 cells via the p38/Nrf2 pathway.

Lin CY(1), Wu CR, Chang SW, Wang YJ, Wu JJ, Tsai CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
cwtsai@mail.cmu.edu.tw.

Induction of phase II enzymes is important in cancer chemoprevention. We compared
the effect of rosemary diterpenes on the expression of the pi class of
glutathione S-transferase (GSTP) in rat liver Clone 9 cells and the signaling
pathways involved. Culturing cells with 1, 5, 10, or 20 µM carnosic acid (CA) or 
carnosol (CS) for 24 h in a dose-dependent manner increased the GSTP expression. 
CA was more potent than CS. The RNA level and the enzyme activity of GSTP were
also enhanced by CA treatment. Treatment with 10 µM CA highly induced the
reporter activity of the enhancer element GPEI. Furthermore, CA markedly
increased the translocation of nuclear factor erythroid-2 related factor 2 (Nrf2)
from the cytosol to the nucleus after 30 to 60 min. CA the stimulated the protein
induction of p38, nuclear Nrf2, and GSTP was diminished in the presence of
SB203580 (a p38 inhibitor). In addition, SB203580 pretreatment or silencing of
Nrf2 by siRNA suppressed the CA-induced GPEI-DNA binding activity and GSTP
protein expression. Knockdown of p38 or Nrf2 by siRNA abolished the activation of
p38 and Nrf2 as well as the protein induction and enzyme activity of GSTP by CA. 
These results suggest that CA up-regulates the expression and enzyme activity of 
GSTP via the p38/Nrf2/GPEI pathway.

PMID: 25974399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. PLoS Genet. 2015 Apr 1;11(4):e1005116. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005116.
eCollection 2015.

CAPER is vital for energy and redox homeostasis by integrating glucose-induced
mitochondrial functions via ERR-a-Gabpa and stress-induced adaptive responses via
NF-<U+03BA>B-cMYC.

Kang YK(1), Putluri N(2), Maity S(2), Tsimelzon A(3), Ilkayeva O(4), Mo Q(5),
Lonard D(1), Michailidis G(6), Sreekumar A(2), Newgard CB(4), Wang M(7), Tsai
SY(1), Tsai MJ(1), O'Malley BW(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Verna and Marrs McLean Department of
Biochemistry and Alkek Center for Molecular Discovery, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (3)Dan L.
Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States
of America; Lester and Sue Smith Breast Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. (4)Sarah W. Stedman Nutrition and
Metabolism Center, Duke University Medical School, Durham, North Carolina, United
States of America. (5)Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America; Department of Medicine, Baylor College 
of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (6)Department of
Statistics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, United States of
America. (7)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston,
Texas, United States of America; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(8)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America; Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor
College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2015 Jun;11(6):e1005316.

Ever since we developed mitochondria to generate ATP, eukaryotes required
intimate mito-nuclear communication. In addition, since reactive oxygen species
are a cost of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation, this demands safeguards as
protection from these harmful byproducts. Here we identified a critical
transcriptional integrator which eukaryotes share to orchestrate both
nutrient-induced mitochondrial energy metabolism and stress-induced nuclear
responses, thereby maintaining carbon-nitrogen balance, and preserving life span 
and reproductive capacity. Inhibition of nutrient-induced expression of CAPER
arrests nutrient-dependent cell proliferation and ATP generation and induces
autophagy-mediated vacuolization. Nutrient signaling to CAPER induces
mitochondrial transcription and glucose-dependent mitochondrial respiration via
coactivation of nuclear receptor ERR-a-mediated Gabpa transcription. CAPER is
also a coactivator for NF-<U+03BA>B that directly regulates c-Myc to coordinate nuclear 
transcriptome responses to mitochondrial stress. Finally, CAPER is responsible
for anaplerotic carbon flux into TCA cycles from glycolysis, amino acids and
fatty acids in order to maintain cellular energy metabolism to counter
mitochondrial stress. Collectively, our studies reveal CAPER as an evolutionarily
conserved 'master' regulatory mechanism by which eukaryotic cells control vital
homeostasis for both ATP and antioxidants via CAPER-dependent coordinated control
of nuclear and mitochondrial transcriptomic programs and their metabolisms. These
CAPER dependent bioenergetic programs are highly conserved, as we demonstrated
that they are essential to preserving life span and reproductive capacity in
human cells-and even in C. elegans.

PMCID: PMC4382186
PMID: 25830341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS Genet. 2015 Mar 24;11(3):e1005062. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1005062.
eCollection 2015.

Opposite phenotypes of muscle strength and locomotor function in mouse models of 
partial trisomy and monosomy 21 for the proximal Hspa13-App region.

Brault V(1), Duchon A(1), Romestaing C(2), Sahun I(3), Pothion S(4), Karout M(1),
Borel C(5), Dembele D(1), Bizot JC(6), Messaddeq N(1), Sharp AJ(7), Roussel D(2),
Antonarakis SE(8), Dierssen M(3), Hérault Y(9).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Illkirch,
France; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR7104, Illkirch, France; 
Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U964, Illkirch,
France; Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France. (2)LEHNA, CNRS UMR502,
Université de Lyon, Villeurbanne, France. (3)Genes and Disease Program, Center
for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, and CIBER de Enfermedades Raras
(CIBERER), Barcelona, Spain. (4)Transgenese et Archivage Animaux Modèles, TAAM,
CNRS, UPS44, Orléans, France. (5)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, 
University of Geneva Medical School, Geneva, Switzerland. (6)Key-Obs S.A., Allée 
du Titane, Orléans, France. (7)Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New York, United States of America.
(8)Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva Medical
School, Geneva, Switzerland; iGE3 Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva,
Geneva, Switzerland. (9)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, Illkirch, France; Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique,
UMR7104, Illkirch, France; Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale, U964, Illkirch, France; Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch, France;
Institut Clinique de la Souris, PHENOMIN, GIE CERBM, Illkirch, France.

The trisomy of human chromosome 21 (Hsa21), which causes Down syndrome (DS), is
the most common viable human aneuploidy. In contrast to trisomy, the complete
monosomy (M21) of Hsa21 is lethal, and only partial monosomy or mosaic monosomy
of Hsa21 is seen. Both conditions lead to variable physiological abnormalities
with constant intellectual disability, locomotor deficits, and altered muscle
tone. To search for dosage-sensitive genes involved in DS and M21 phenotypes, we 
created two new mouse models: the Ts3Yah carrying a tandem duplication and the
Ms3Yah carrying a deletion of the Hspa13-App interval syntenic with
21q11.2-q21.3. Here we report that the trisomy and the monosomy of this region
alter locomotion, muscle strength, mass, and energetic balance. The expression
profiling of skeletal muscles revealed global changes in the regulation of genes 
implicated in energetic metabolism, mitochondrial activity, and biogenesis. These
genes are downregulated in Ts3Yah mice and upregulated in Ms3Yah mice. The shift 
in skeletal muscle metabolism correlates with a change in mitochondrial
proliferation without an alteration in the respiratory function. However, the
reactive oxygen species (ROS) production from mitochondrial complex I decreased
in Ms3Yah mice, while the membrane permeability of Ts3Yah mitochondria slightly
increased. Thus, we demonstrated how the Hspa13-App interval controls metabolic
and mitochondrial phenotypes in muscles certainly as a consequence of change in
dose of Gabpa, Nrip1, and Atp5j. Our results indicate that the copy number
variation in the Hspa13-App region has a peripheral impact on locomotor activity 
by altering muscle function.

PMCID: PMC4372517
PMID: 25803843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Hepatology. 2015 Sep;62(3):851-62. doi: 10.1002/hep.27790. Epub 2015 Apr 22.

Nrf2, but not ß-catenin, mutation represents an early event in rat
hepatocarcinogenesis.

Zavattari P(1), Perra A(1), Menegon S(2), Kowalik MA(1), Petrelli A(2), Angioni
MM(1), Follenzi A(3), Quagliata L(4), Ledda-Columbano GM(1), Terracciano L(4),
Giordano S(2), Columbano A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy.
(2)University of Torino School of Medicine, Candiolo Cancer Institute-FPO, IRCCS 
Candiolo, Torino, Italy. (3)Department of Health Sciences, University of Piemonte
Orientale, Novara, Italy. (4)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital, Basel, 
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2015 Sep;62(3):677-9.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) develops through a multistage process, but the
nature of the molecular changes associated with the different steps, the very
early ones in particular, is largely unknown. Recently, dysregulation of the
NRF2/KEAP1 pathway and mutations of these genes have been observed in
experimental and human tumors, suggesting their possible role in cancer
development. To assess whether Nrf2/Keap1 mutations are early or late events in
HCC development, we investigated their frequency in the rat Resistant Hepatocyte 
model, consisting of the administration of diethylnitrosamine followed by a brief
exposure to 2-acetylaminofluorene. This model enables the dissection of all
stages of hepatocarcinogenesis. We found that Nrf2/Keap1 mutations were present
in 71% of early preneoplastic lesions and in 78.6% and 59.3% of early and
advanced HCCs, respectively. Mutations of Nrf2 were more frequent, missense, and 
located in the Nrf2-Keap1 binding region. Mutations of Keap1 occurred at a much
lower frequency in both preneoplastic lesions and HCCs and were mutually
exclusive with those of Nrf2. Functional in vitro and in vivo studies showed that
Nrf2 silencing inhibited the ability of tumorigenic rat cells to grow in soft
agar and to form tumors. Unlike Nrf2 mutations, those of Ctnnb1, which are
frequent in human HCC, were a later event as they appeared only in fully advanced
HCCs (18.5%).CONCLUSION: In the Resistant Hepatocyte model of
hepatocarcinogenesis the onset of Nrf2 mutations is a very early event, likely
essential for the clonal expansion of preneoplastic hepatocytes to HCC, while
Ctnnb1 mutations occur only at very late stages. Moreover, functional experiments
demonstrate that Nrf2 is an oncogene critical for HCC progression and
development.

© 2015 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 25783764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Food Chem Toxicol. 2015 Jun;80:154-62. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2015.03.002. Epub 2015 
Mar 14.

Protective properties of Salvia lavandulifolia Vahl. essential oil against
oxidative stress-induced neuronal injury.

Porres-Martínez M(1), González-Burgos E(1), Carretero ME(1), Gómez-Serranillos
MP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Complutense of
Madrid, Plaza de Ramón y Cajal s/n 28040, Madrid, Spain. (2)Department of
Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Complutense of Madrid, Plaza de
Ramón y Cajal s/n 28040, Madrid, Spain. Electronic address: pserra@farm.ucm.es.

Salvia lavandulifolia Vahl., known as "Spanish sage", has potential value in
dementia for its sedative, antioxidant, anti-inflammatory and anticholinesterase 
properties. This work aimed to evaluate the in vitro neuroprotective activity of 
S.<U+2009>lavandulifolia essential oils, obtained from plants at different phenological 
stages (vegetative and flowering phases) and plants grown at different densities,
against H2O2-induced oxidative stress in PC12 cells. The effect on cell viability
and morphology, lipid peroxidation, GSH/GSSG ratio, intracellular ROS levels,
antioxidant enzymes (CAT, SOD, GR, GPx, HO-1) and apoptotic enzymes was
investigated. Comparing with H2O2-treated PC12 cells, pretreatments with
essential oil samples attenuated morphological changes and loss of cell
viability, decreased MDA levels and intracellular ROS production and increased
GSH/GSSG ratio. Moreover, Spanish sage increased antioxidant status as evidenced 
in an increase of antioxidant enzyme activity and protein expression and
inhibited caspase-3 activity. Furthermore, our results suggest that
S.<U+2009>lavandulifolia essential oils are able to activate Nrf2 transcription factor. 
Collectively, the sample of essential oil obtained with the highest densities of 
planting and at flowering phase exerted the major neuroprotective activity. Our
findings demonstrate that S.<U+2009>lavandulifolia essential oils may have therapeutic
value for the prevention and treatment of neurodegenerative diseases associated
with oxidative stress-induced neuronal injury.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25778348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. J Mol Neurosci. 2015 Jun;56(2):278-89. doi: 10.1007/s12031-015-0529-2. Epub 2015 
Mar 1.

Cognitive Improvement Induced by Environment Enrichment in Chronic Cerebral
Hypoperfusion Rats: a Result of Upregulated Endogenous Neuroprotection?

Yang Y(1), Zhang J, Xiong L, Deng M, Wang J, Xin J, Liu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Donghu Road
169#, Wuhan, 430071, China.

Environment enrichment (EE) has been demonstrated to improve the cognitive
impairment that is induced by chronic cerebral hypoperfusion (CCH), but the
underlying mechanism has not yet been elucidated. This study aimed to investigate
the role of endogenous neuroprotection in EE-induced cognitive improvement in
rats with CCH. Permanent bilateral common carotid artery occlusions (2-vessel
occlusions (2VOs)) were performed to induce CCH in male adult Wistar rats. Four
weeks after the surgeries, the rats were exposed to enriched environments for 4
weeks (6 h/day). Subsequently, we assessed the effects of EE on cognitive
function, brain histone acetylation levels, neuroprotection-related transcription
factors (i.e., cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB), phospho-CREB
(p-CREB), hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) a, and nuclear regulatory factor 2
(Nrf2)), and oxidative stress and histological changes in the brain. After 2VO,
the rats exposed to the EE treatment exhibited increased acetylation of histone 4
and increased p-CREB and Nrf2 protein levels in the brain. HIF-1a levels were
increased after 2VO and reduced after EE treatment. The oxidative damage,
histopathological changes in the brain, and spatial learning and memory
impairments induced by 2VO were subsequently restored after EE treatment. These
data indicate that EE promotes the acetylation of histone 4, regulates some
neuroprotection-related transcription factors, attenuates oxidative damage, and
protects against the histopathological damage to the brain induced by CCH.
Together, the effects of EE in CCH rats might contribute to the recovery of
spatial learning and memory.

PMID: 25725787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Nov 1;280(3):399-407. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2014.08.029. Epub 2014 Sep 7.

Aldosterone induces fibrosis, oxidative stress and DNA damage in livers of male
rats independent of blood pressure changes.

Queisser N(1), Happ K(1), Link S(1), Jahn D(2), Zimnol A(1), Geier A(2), Schupp
N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg,
Germany. (2)Division of Hepatology, Department of Medicine II, University
Hospital Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. (3)Institute of Pharmacology and
Toxicology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. Electronic address:
schupp@uni-duesseldorf.de.

Mineralocorticoid receptor blockers show antifibrotic potential in hepatic
fibrosis. The mechanism of this protective effect is not known yet, although
reactive oxygen species seem to play an important role. Here, we investigated the
effects of elevated levels of aldosterone (Ald), the primary ligand of the
mineralocorticoid receptor, on livers of rats in a hyperaldosteronism model:
aldosterone-induced hypertension. Male Sprague-Dawley rats were treated for 4
weeks with aldosterone. To distinguish if damage caused in the liver depended on 
increased blood pressure or on increased Ald levels, the mineralocorticoid
receptor antagonist spironolactone was given in a subtherapeutic dose, not
normalizing blood pressure. To investigate the impact of oxidative stress, the
antioxidant tempol was administered. Aldosterone induced fibrosis, detected
histopathologically, and by expression analysis of the fibrosis marker, a-smooth 
muscle actin. Further, the mRNA amount of the profibrotic cytokine TGF-ß was
increased significantly. Fibrosis could be reduced by scavenging reactive oxygen 
species, and also by blocking the mineralocorticoid receptor. Furthermore,
aldosterone treatment caused oxidative stress and DNA double strand breaks in
livers, as well as the elevation of DNA repair activity. An increase of the
transcription factor Nrf2, the main regulator of the antioxidative response could
be observed, and of its target genes heme oxygenase-1 and <U+03B3>-glutamylcysteine
synthetase. All these effects of aldosterone were prevented by spironolactone and
tempol. Already after 4 weeks of treatment, aldosteroneinfusion induced fibrosis 
in the liver. This effect was independent of elevated blood pressure. DNA damage 
caused by aldosterone might contribute to fibrosis progression when aldosterone
is chronically increased.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25204689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Cell Metab. 2014 Nov 4;20(5):856-69. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2014.08.001. Epub 2014
Sep 4.

A SIRT7-dependent acetylation switch of GABPß1 controls mitochondrial function.

Ryu D(1), Jo YS(2), Lo Sasso G(1), Stein S(3), Zhang H(1), Perino A(3), Lee
JU(4), Zeviani M(5), Romand R(6), Hottiger MO(7), Schoonjans K(3), Auwerx J(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Integrative and Systems Physiology, School of Life Sciences,
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
(2)Laboratory of Integrative and Systems Physiology, School of Life Sciences,
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland; Division of
Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of
Medicine, Seoul 120-752, Republic of Korea. (3)Metabolic Signaling, Institute of 
Bioengineering, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne,
Switzerland. (4)Department of Pathology, Daejeon St. Mary's Hospital, College of 
Medicine, the Catholic University of Korea, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea.
(5)Unit of Molecular Neurogenetics, the Carlo Besta Institute of Neurology IRCCS,
20133 Milan, Italy; MRC Mitochondrial Biology Unit, Cambridge CB2 0XY, UK.
(6)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, BP 10142,
67404 Illkirch Cedex, France. (7)Institute of Veterinary Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, University of Zurich, 8057 Zurich, Switzerland. (8)Laboratory 
of Integrative and Systems Physiology, School of Life Sciences, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. Electronic
address: admin.auwerx@epfl.ch.

Mitochondrial activity is controlled by proteins encoded by both nuclear and
mitochondrial DNA. Here, we identify Sirt7 as a crucial regulator of
mitochondrial homeostasis. Sirt7 deficiency in mice induces multisystemic
mitochondrial dysfunction, which is reflected by increased blood lactate levels, 
reduced exercise performance, cardiac dysfunction, hepatic microvesicular
steatosis, and age-related hearing loss. This link between SIRT7 and
mitochondrial function is translatable in humans, where SIRT7 overexpression
rescues the mitochondrial functional defect in fibroblasts with a mutation in
NDUFSI. These wide-ranging effects of SIRT7 on mitochondrial homeostasis are the 
consequence of the deacetylation of distinct lysine residues located in the
hetero- and homodimerization domains of GABPß1, a master regulator of
nuclear-encoded mitochondrial genes. SIRT7-mediated deacetylation of GABPß1
facilitates complex formation with GABPa and the transcriptional activation of
the GABPa/GABPß heterotetramer. Altogether, these data suggest that SIRT7 is a
dynamic nuclear regulator of mitochondrial function through its impact on GABPß1 
function.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25200183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 2;9(9):e106412. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106412. eCollection
2014.

Toxic effects of maternal zearalenone exposure on intestinal oxidative stress,
barrier function, immunological and morphological changes in rats.

Liu M(1), Gao R(1), Meng Q(1), Zhang Y(1), Bi C(1), Shan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Nutrition, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, P.
R. China.

The present study was conducted to investigate the effects of maternal
zearalenone (ZEN) exposure on the intestine of pregnant Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats 
and its offspring. Ninety-six pregnant SD rats were randomly divided into four
groups and were fed with diets containing ZEN at concentrations of 0.3 mg/kg,
48.5 mg/kg, 97.6 mg/kg or 146.0 mg/kg from gestation days (GD) 1 to 7. All rats
were fed with mycotoxin-free diet until their offspring were weaned at three
weeks of age. The small intestinal fragments from pregnant rats at GD8, weaned
dams and pups were collected and studied for toxic effects of ZEN on antioxidant 
status, immune response, expression of junction proteins, and morphology. The
results showed that ZEN induced oxidative stress, affected the villous structure 
and reduced the expression of junction proteins claudin-4, occludin and
connexin43 (Cx43) in a dose-dependent manner in pregnant rats. Different effects 
on the expression of cytokines were also observed both in mRNA and protein levels
in these pregnant groups. Ingestion of high levels of ZEN caused irreversible
damage in weaned dams, such as oxidative stress, decreased villi hight and low
expression of junction proteins and cytokines. Decreased expression of jejunal
interleukin-8 (IL-8) and increased expression of gastrointestinal glutathione
peroxidase (GPx2) mRNA were detected in weaned offspring, indicating long-term
damage caused by maternal ZEN. We also found that the Nrf2 expression both in
mRNA and protein levels were up-regulated in the ZEN-treated groups of pregnant
dams and the high-dose of ZEN group of weaned dams. The data indicate that
modulation of Nrf2-mediated pathway is one of mechanism via which ZEN affects gut
wall antioxidant and inflammatory responses.

PMCID: PMC4152245
PMID: 25180673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Scand J Med Sci Sports. 2015 Apr;25(2):184-95. doi: 10.1111/sms.12188. Epub 2014 
Feb 20.

PGC-related gene variants and elite endurance athletic status in a Chinese
cohort: a functional study.

He ZH(1), Hu Y, Li YC, Gong LJ, Cieszczyk P, Maciejewska-Karlowska A,
Leonska-Duniec A, Muniesa CA, Marín-Peiro M, Santiago C, Garatachea N, Eynon N,
Lucia A.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Centre, China Institute of Sport Science, Beijing, China.

This study aims to examine the association between proliferator-activated
receptor <U+03B3> (PGC)-gene family-related single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and
elite endurance runners' status in a Chinese cohort, and to gain insights into
the functionality of a subset of SNPs. Genotype distributions of 133 SNPs in
PPARGC1A, PPARGC1B, PPRC1, TFAM, TFB1M, TFB2M, NRF1, GABPA, GABPB1, ERRa, and
SIRT1 genes were compared between 235 elite Chinese (Han) endurance runners (127 
women) and 504 healthy non-athletic controls (237 women). Luciferase gene
reporter activity was determined in 20 SNPs. After adjusting for multiple
comparisons (in which threshold P-value was set at 0.00041), no significant
differences were found in allele/genotype frequencies between athletes and
controls (when both sexes were analyzed either together or separately). The
lowest P-value was found in PPARGC1A rs4697425 (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001 for the comparison of
allele frequencies between elite female endurance runners and their
gender-matched controls). However, no association (all P<U+2009>><U+2009>0.05) was observed for
this SNP in a replication cohort from Poland (194 endurance athletes and 190
controls). Using functional genomics tool, the following SNPs were found to have 
functional significance: PPARGC1A rs6821591, rs12650562, rs12374310, rs4697425,
rs13113110, and rs4452416; PPARGC1B rs251466 and rs17110586; and PPRC1 rs17114388
(all P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). This study found no significant association between PGC-related 
SNPs and elite endurance athlete status in the Chinese population, despite some
SNPs showing potential functional significance and the strong biological
rationale to hypothesize that this gene pathway is a candidate to influence
endurance exercise capacity.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25170593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2014 Oct;35(10):1274-84. doi: 10.1038/aps.2014.70. Epub 2014 
Aug 25.

Arctigenin enhances swimming endurance of sedentary rats partially by regulation 
of antioxidant pathways.

Wu RM(1), Sun YY(1), Zhou TT(2), Zhu ZY(2), Zhuang JJ(1), Tang X(2), Chen J(2),
Hu LH(2), Shen X(3).

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 
200237, China. (2)Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China. (3)1] School
of Pharmacy, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai 200237,
China [2] Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia
Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China.

AIM: Arctigenin, a phenylpropanoid dibenzylbutyrolactone lignan found in
traditional Chinese herbs, has been determined to exhibit a variety of
pharmacological activities, including anti-tumor, anti-inflammation,
neuroprotection, and endurance enhancement. In the present study, we investigated
the antioxidation and anti-fatigue effects of arctigenin in rats.
METHODS: Rat L6 skeletal muscle cell line was exposed to H2O2 (700 µmol/L), and
ROS level was assayed using DCFH-DA as a probe. Male SD rats were injected with
arctigenin (15 mg·kg(-1)·d(-1), ip) for 6 weeks, and then the weight-loaded
forced swimming test (WFST) was performed to evaluate their endurance. The levels
of antioxidant-related genes in L6 cells and the skeletal muscles of rats were
analyzed using real-time RT-PCR and Western blotting.
RESULTS: Incubation of L6 cells with arctigenin (1, 5, 20 µmol/L)
dose-dependently decreased the H2O2-induced ROS production. WFST results
demonstrated that chronic administration of arctigenin significantly enhanced the
endurance of rats. Furthermore, molecular biology studies on L6 cells and
skeletal muscles of the rats showed that arctigenin effectively increased the
expression of the antioxidant-related genes, including superoxide dismutase
(SOD), glutathione reductase (Gsr), glutathione peroxidase (GPX1), thioredoxin
(Txn) and uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2), through regulation of two potential
antioxidant pathways: AMPK/PGC-1a/PPARa in mitochondria and AMPK/p53/Nrf2 in the 
cell nucleus.
CONCLUSION: Arctigenin efficiently enhances rat swimming endurance by elevation
of the antioxidant capacity of the skeletal muscles, which has thereby
highlighted the potential of this natural product as an antioxidant in the
treatment of fatigue and related diseases.

PMCID: PMC4186987
PMID: 25152028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Sep;34(17):3194-201. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00492-12. Epub 2014 Jun
23.

GABP transcription factor (nuclear respiratory factor 2) is required for
mitochondrial biogenesis.

Yang ZF(1), Drumea K(2), Mott S(3), Wang J(1), Rosmarin AG(4).

Author information: 
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA.
(2)Rambam Medical Center, Haifa, Israel. (3)Brown University, Rhode Island
Hospital, Providence, Rhode Island, USA. (4)University of Massachusetts Medical
School, Worcester, Massachusetts, USA Alan.Rosmarin@umassmed.edu.

Mitochondria are membrane-bound cytoplasmic organelles that serve as the major
source of ATP production in eukaryotic cells. GABP (also known as nuclear
respiratory factor 2) is a nuclear E26 transformation-specific transcription
factor (ETS) that binds and activates mitochondrial genes that are required for
electron transport and oxidative phosphorylation. We conditionally deleted Gabpa,
the DNA-binding component of this transcription factor complex, from mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) to examine the role of Gabp in mitochondrial
biogenesis, function, and gene expression. Gabpa loss modestly reduced
mitochondrial mass, ATP production, oxygen consumption, and mitochondrial protein
synthesis but did not alter mitochondrial morphology, membrane potential,
apoptosis, or the expression of several genes that were previously reported to be
GABP targets. However, the expression of Tfb1m, a methyltransferase that modifies
ribosomal rRNA and is required for mitochondrial protein translation, was
markedly reduced in Gabpa-null MEFs. We conclude that Gabp regulates Tfb1m
expression and plays an essential, nonredundant role in mitochondrial biogenesis.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4135556
PMID: 24958105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Jul 15;307(2):G205-18. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00105.2014. Epub 2014 May 15.

Biological functional annotation of retinoic acid alpha and beta in mouse liver
based on genome-wide binding.

He Y(1), Tsuei J(1), Wan YJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California
Davis Medical Center, Sacramento, California. (2)Department of Pathology and
Laboratory Medicine, University of California Davis Medical Center, Sacramento,
California yjywan@ucdavis.edu.

Retinoic acid (RA) has diverse biological effects. The liver stores vitamin A,
generates RA, and expresses receptors for RA. The current study examines the
hepatic binding profile of two RA receptor isoforms, RARA (RARa) and RARB (RARß),
in response to RA treatment in mouse livers. Our data uncovered 35,521, and
14,968 genomic bindings for RARA and RARB, respectively. Each expressed unique
and common bindings, implying their redundant and specific roles. RARB has higher
RA responsiveness than RARB. RA treatment generated 18,821 novel RARB bindings
but only 14,798 of RARA bindings, compared with the control group. RAR frequently
bound the consensus hormone response element [HRE; (A/G)G(G/T)TCA], which often
contained the motifs assigned to SP1, GABPA, and FOXA2, suggesting potential
interactions between those transcriptional factors. Functional annotation coupled
with principle component analysis revealed that the function of RAR target genes 
were motif dependent. Taken together, the cistrome of RARA and RARB revealed
their extensive biological roles in the mouse liver. RAR target genes are
enriched in various biological processes. The hepatic RAR genome-wide binding
data can help us understand the global molecular mechanisms underlying RAR and
RA-mediated gene and pathway regulation.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4101682
PMID: 24833708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun;42(10):6256-69. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku281. Epub 2014
Apr 21.

The ETS family member GABPa modulates androgen receptor signalling and mediates
an aggressive phenotype in prostate cancer.

Sharma NL(1), Massie CE(2), Butter F(3), Mann M(3), Bon H(2), Ramos-Montoya A(2),
Menon S(4), Stark R(4), Lamb AD(2), Scott HE(2), Warren AY(5), Neal DE(6), Mills 
IG(7).

Author information: 
(1)Uro-oncology Research Group, CRUK Cambridge Institute, University of
Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK Department of 
Urology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK.
(2)Uro-oncology Research Group, CRUK Cambridge Institute, University of
Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK. (3)Department
of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Am
Klopferspitz 18, D-82152 Martinsried, Germany. (4)Department of Bioinformatics,
Cambridge Research Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2
0RE, UK. (5)Department of Pathology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road,
Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK. (6)Uro-oncology Research Group, CRUK Cambridge Institute, 
University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK 
Department of Urology, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK 
Department of Oncology, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, Hills
Road, Cambridge CB2 2QQ, UK den22@medschl.cam.ac.uk. (7)Uro-oncology Research
Group, CRUK Cambridge Institute, University of Cambridge, Li Ka Shing Centre,
Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0RE, UK Prostate Cancer Research Group, Centre for
Molecular Medicine (Norway), Nordic EMBL Partnership, University of Oslo and Oslo
University Hospital, Gaustadalleen 21, Oslo N-0349, Norway Department of Cancer
Prevention and Department of Urology, Oslo University Hospital, Oslo N-0349,
Norway.

In prostate cancer (PC), the androgen receptor (AR) is a key transcription factor
at all disease stages, including the advanced stage of castrate-resistant
prostate cancer (CRPC). In the present study, we show that GABPa, an ETS factor
that is up-regulated in PC, is an AR-interacting transcription factor. Expression
of GABPa enables PC cell lines to acquire some of the molecular and cellular
characteristics of CRPC tissues as well as more aggressive growth phenotypes.
GABPa has a transcriptional role that dissects the overlapping cistromes of the
two most common ETS gene fusions in PC: overlapping significantly with ETV1 but
not with ERG target genes. GABPa bound predominantly to gene promoters, regulated
the expression of one-third of AR target genes and modulated sensitivity to AR
antagonists in hormone responsive and castrate resistant PC models. This study
supports a critical role for GABPa in CRPC and reveals potential targets for
therapeutic intervention.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4041454
PMID: 24753418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2014 Aug 15;279(1):63-75. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2014.03.026. Epub 2014 Apr 12.

Attenuation of Aß25-35-induced parallel autophagic and apoptotic cell death by
gypenoside XVII through the estrogen receptor-dependent activation of Nrf2/ARE
pathways.

Meng X(1), Wang M(1), Sun G(2), Ye J(3), Zhou Y(4), Dong X(5), Wang T(1), Lu
S(1), Sun X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Resources Utilization of Chinese
Herbal Medicine, Ministry of Education, Institute of Medicinal Plant Development,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100193, PR China. (2)Key Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Resources
Utilization of Chinese Herbal Medicine, Ministry of Education, Institute of
Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing 100193, PR China. Electronic address: sunguibo@126.com. 
(3)Jilin Agricultural University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, PR China. (4)Center of
Cardiology, People's Hospital of Jilin Province, Changchun, 130021, Jilin, PR
China. (5)Wenzhou Medical University, Wenzhou, Zhejiang 325035, PR China. (6)Key 
Laboratory of Bioactive Substances and Resources Utilization of Chinese Herbal
Medicine, Ministry of Education, Institute of Medicinal Plant Development,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
100193, PR China. Electronic address: sun_xiaobo163@163.com.

Amyloid-beta (Aß) has a pivotal function in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's
disease. To investigate Aß neurotoxicity, we used an in vitro model that involves
Aß25-35-induced cell death in the nerve growth factor-induced differentiation of 
PC12 cells. Aß25-35 (20µM) treatment for 24h caused apoptotic cell death, as
evidenced by significant cell viability reduction, LDH release,
phosphatidylserine externalization, mitochondrial membrane potential disruption, 
cytochrome c release, caspase-3 activation, PARP cleavage, and DNA fragmentation 
in PC12 cells. Aß25-35 treatment led to autophagic cell death, as evidenced by
augmented GFP-LC3 puncta, conversion of LC3-I to LC3-II, and increased
LC3-II/LC3-I ratio. Aß25-35 treatment induced oxidative stress, as evidenced by
intracellular ROS accumulation and increased production of mitochondrial
superoxide, malondialdehyde, protein carbonyl, and 8-OHdG. Phytoestrogens have
been proved to be protective against Aß-induced neurotoxicity and regarded as
relatively safe targets for AD drug development. Gypenoside XVII (GP-17) is a
novel phytoestrogen isolated from Gynostemma pentaphyllum or Panax notoginseng.
Pretreatment with GP-17 (10µM) for 12h increased estrogen response element
reporter activity, activated PI3K/Akt pathways, inhibited GSK-3ß, induced Nrf2
nuclear translocation, augmented antioxidant responsive element enhancer
activity, upregulated heme oxygenase 1 (HO-1) expression and activity, and
provided protective effects against Aß25-35-induced neurotoxicity, including
oxidative stress, apoptosis, and autophagic cell death. In conclusion, GP-17
conferred protection against Aß25-35-induced neurotoxicity through estrogen
receptor-dependent activation of PI3K/Akt pathways, inactivation of GSK-3ß and
activation of Nrf2/ARE/HO-1 pathways. This finding might provide novel insights
into understanding the mechanism for neuroprotective effects of phytoestrogens or
gypenosides.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24726523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Genes Nutr. 2014 May;9(3):397. doi: 10.1007/s12263-014-0397-3. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Adenosine triphosphate concentrations are higher in the brain of APOE3- compared 
to APOE4-targeted replacement mice and can be modulated by curcumin.

Chin D(1), Hagl S, Hoehn A, Huebbe P, Pallauf K, Grune T, Frank J, Eckert GP,
Rimbach G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Nutrition and Food Science, Christian-Albrechts-University 
Kiel, Hermann-Rodewald-Strasse 6-8, 24118, Kiel, Germany,
chin@foodsci.uni-kiel.de.

Curcumin from Curcuma longa may exert putative neuroprotective properties in the 
brain. Impaired mitochondrial function is implicated in Alzheimer's disease and
the presence of the apolipoprotein (APO) E4 genotype, which is a risk factor for 
late-onset Alzheimer's disease, may aggravate mitochondrial malfunction. Here, we
report that in the brain of 16-month-old APOE4-targeted replacement mice,
adenosine triphosphate (ATP) concentrations were significantly lower than in
APOE3 mice. A 3-month dietary supplementation of 0.2 % curcumin numerically
increased ATP concentrations in APOE3 and significantly in APOE4 mice compared to
the respective controls. Curcumin significantly induced the transcription of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) <U+03B3> and mitochondrial
transcription factor A (TFAM) in APOE3, but not in APOE4 mice. Moreover, PPAR<U+03B3>
coactivator (PGC)-1a and guanine-adenine repeat binding protein a (GABPa) mRNA
was only increased in APOE3 mice. Consistent with these observations, protein
expression of mitochondrial respiratory complexes, especially of complex IV, also
appeared to be increased in APOE3 mice. In conclusion, we provide evidence that
curcumin affects mitochondrial function and gene and protein expression in the
murine brain despite its low bioavailability and carriers of the Alzheimer's
disease-risk genotype APOE4 may be less responsive to dietary curcumin than APOE3
carriers.

PMCID: PMC4026431
PMID: 24671632  [PubMed]


29. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jul 1;23(13):3456-66. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu054. Epub 2014 Feb 
5.

METTL23, a transcriptional partner of GABPA, is essential for human cognition.

Reiff RE(1), Ali BR(2), Baron B(3), Yu TW(4), Ben-Salem S(2), Coulter ME(1),
Schubert CR(5), Hill RS(6), Akawi NA(2), Al-Younes B(7), Kaya N(7), Evrony GD(8),
Al-Saffar M(9), Felie JM(6), Partlow JN(6), Sunu CM(6), Schembri-Wismayer P(3),
Alkuraya FS(10), Meyer BF(7), Walsh CA(11), Al-Gazali L(12), Mochida GH(13).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of Medicine Manton Center for
Orphan Disease Research and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA Harvard-Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT) Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine and Health Sciences.
(3)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine and Surgery, University of Malta,
Msida MSD2080, Malta. (4)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of
Medicine Department of Pediatrics Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of
Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA Program in
Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (5)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of
Medicine Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA Department of
Pediatrics Research Laboratory of Electronics and Department of Electrical
Engineering and Computer Science, Harvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and
Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (6)Division of Genetics and Genomics,
Department of Medicine Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(7)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre,
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia. (8)Division of Genetics and Genomics, Department of
Medicine Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research and Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA Program in
Biological and Biomedical Sciences and. (9)Division of Genetics and Genomics,
Department of Medicine Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research and Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Department of Paediatrics, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab
Emirates University, PO Box 17666, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates. (10)Department
of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh 11211,
Saudi Arabia Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Medicine,
Alfaisal University, Riyadh 11533, Saudi Arabia. (11)Division of Genetics and
Genomics, Department of Medicine Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research and
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115,
USA Department of Pediatrics Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute
of MIT and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA. (12)Department of
Paediatrics, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, United Arab Emirates
University, PO Box 17666, Al-Ain, United Arab Emirates. (13)Division of Genetics 
and Genomics, Department of Medicine Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research
and Department of Pediatrics Pediatric Neurology Unit, Department of Neurology,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA
ganesh.mochida@childrens.harvard.edu.

Whereas many genes associated with intellectual disability (ID) encode synaptic
proteins, transcriptional defects leading to ID are less well understood. We
studied a large, consanguineous pedigree of Arab origin with seven members
affected with ID and mild dysmorphic features. Homozygosity mapping and linkage
analysis identified a candidate region on chromosome 17 with a maximum multipoint
logarithm of odds score of 6.01. Targeted high-throughput sequencing of the exons
in the candidate region identified a homozygous 4-bp deletion (c.169_172delCACT) 
in the METTL23 (methyltransferase like 23) gene, which is predicted to result in 
a frameshift and premature truncation (p.His57Valfs*11). Overexpressed METTL23
protein localized to both nucleus and cytoplasm, and physically interacted with
GABPA (GA-binding protein transcription factor, alpha subunit). GABP, of which
GABPA is a component, is known to regulate the expression of genes such as THPO
(thrombopoietin) and ATP5B (ATP synthase, H+ transporting, mitochondrial F1
complex, beta polypeptide) and is implicated in a wide variety of important
cellular functions. Overexpression of METTL23 resulted in increased
transcriptional activity at the THPO promoter, whereas knockdown of METTL23 with 
siRNA resulted in decreased expression of ATP5B, thus revealing the importance of
METTL23 as a regulator of GABPA function. The METTL23 mutation highlights a new
transcriptional pathway underlying human intellectual function.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4049305
PMID: 24501276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Oncotarget. 2014 Jan 30;5(2):417-27.

Preferred binding of gain-of-function mutant p53 to bidirectional promoters with 
coordinated binding of ETS1 and GABPA to multiple binding sites.

Vaughan CA(1), Deb SP, Deb S, Windle B.

Author information: 
(1)Integrative Life Sciences, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA.

Gain-of-function mutant p53 is thought to induce gene expression in part by
binding transcription factors bound to promoters for genes that mediate
oncogenesis. We investigated the mechanism of mutant p53 binding by mapping the
human genomic binding sites for p53 R273H using ChIP-Seq and showed them to
localize to ETS DNA sequence motifs and locations with ETS1 and GABPA binding,
both within promoters and distal to promoters. Strikingly, p53 R273H showed
statistically significant and substantial binding to bidirectional promoters,
which are enriched for inverted repeated ETS DNA sequence motifs. p53 R273H
exhibited an exponential increase in probability of binding promoters with a
higher number of ETS motifs. Both ETS1 and GABPA also showed an increase in the
probability of binding to promoters with a higher number of ETS motifs. However, 
despite this increase in probability of binding by p53 R273H and ETS1, there was 
no increase in the binding signal, suggesting that the number of ETS1 and p53
R273H proteins bound per promoter is being limited. In contrast, GABPA did
exhibit an increase in binding signal with higher numbers of ETS motifs per
promoter. Analysis of the distance between inverted pairs of ETS motifs within
promoters and binding by p53 R273H, ETS1 and GABPA, showed a novel coordination
of binding for the three proteins. Both ETS1 and p53 R273H exhibited preference
for binding promoters with distantly spaced ETS motifs in face-to-face and
back-to-back orientations, and low binding preference to promoters with closely
spaced ETS motifs. GABPA exhibited the inverse pattern of binding by preferring
to bind promoters with closely spaced ETS motifs. Analysis of the helical phase
between ETS motifs showed that ETS1 and p53 R273H exhibited a low preference for 
binding promoters with ETS motifs on the same face of the DNA helix. We propose a
model for the binding of ETS1 and p53 R273H in which two inverted ETS motifs on a
looped DNA helix are juxtaposed for ETS1 binding as a homodimer, with p53 R273H
bound to ETS1. We propose that the formation of this DNA loop and protein-bound
complex prevents additional binding of ETS1 and p53 R273H proteins to other
proximal binding sites.

PMCID: PMC3964217
PMID: 24481480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Free Radic Biol Med. 2014 Apr;69:198-207. doi:
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2014.01.013. Epub 2014 Jan 15.

Oxymatrine prevents hypoxia- and monocrotaline-induced pulmonary hypertension in 
rats.

Zhang B(1), Niu W(2), Xu D(2), Li Y(2), Liu M(2), Wang Y(2), Luo Y(2), Zhao P(2),
Liu Y(2), Dong M(2), Sun R(3), Dong H(4), Li Z(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Xijing Hospital and Department of Pathology and
Pathophysiology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, People's
Republic of China. Electronic address: luckzb@fmmu.edu.cn. (2)Department of
Pathology, Xijing Hospital and Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology,
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, People's Republic of China.
(3)Xi'an YiLe Bio-Tech Laboratory, Xi'an 710075, People's Republic of China.
(4)Department of Pathology, Xijing Hospital and Department of Pathology and
Pathophysiology, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, People's
Republic of China. Electronic address: liyun8@fmmu.edu.cn. (5)Department of
Pathology, Xijing Hospital and Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology,
Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an 710032, People's Republic of China.
Electronic address: lizhic@fmmu.edu.cn.

Pulmonary hypertension is a progressive disease characterized by marked pulmonary
arterial remodeling and increased vascular resistance. Inflammation and oxidative
stress promote the development of pulmonary hypertension. Oxymatrine, one of the 
main active components of the Chinese herb Sophora flavescens Ait. (Kushen),
plays anti-inflammatory and antioxidant protective roles, which effects on
pulmonary arteries remain unclear. This study aimed to investigate the effects of
oxymatrine on pulmonary hypertension development. Sprague-Dawley rats were
exposed to hypoxia for 28 days or injected with monocrotaline, to develop
pulmonary hypertension, along with administration of oxymatrine (50mg/kg/day).
Hemodynamics and pulmonary arterial remodeling data from the rats were then
obtained. The antiproliferative effect of oxymatrine was verified by in vitro
assays. The inflammatory cytokine mRNA levels and leukocyte and T cell
accumulation in lung tissue were detected. The antioxidative effects of
oxymatrine were explored in vitro. Our study shows that oxymatrine treatment
attenuated right-ventricular systolic pressure and pulmonary arterial remodeling 
induced by hypoxia or monocrotaline and inhibited proliferation of pulmonary
arterial smooth muscle cells (PASMCs). Increased expression of inflammatory
cytokine mRNA and accumulation of leukocytes and T cells around the pulmonary
arteries were suppressed with oxymatrine administration. Under hypoxic
conditions, oxymatrine significantly upregulated Nrf2 and antioxidant protein
SOD1 and HO-1 expression, but downregulated hydroperoxide levels in PASMCs. In
summary, this study indicates that oxymatrine may prevent pulmonary hypertension 
through its antiproliferative, anti-inflammatory, and antioxidant effects, thus
providing a promising pharmacological avenue for treating pulmonary hypertension.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24440469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Neurol Sci. 2014 Mar 15;338(1-2):112-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2013.12.027. Epub
2013 Dec 27.

Formononetin protects TBI rats against neurological lesions and the underlying
mechanism.

Li Z(1), Dong X(2), Zhang J(1), Zeng G(1), Zhao H(1), Liu Y(3), Qiu R(4), Mo
L(5), Ye Y(6).

Author information: 
(1)Emergency Department, Western Hospital, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region 530007, PR China.
(2)Department of Physiology and Neurobiology, Xinxiang Medical University,
Xinxiang 453003, PR China. (3)Spine and Osteopathy Surgery Division, First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang
Autonomous Region 530021, PR China. (4)Guangxi Matemal and Child Health Hospital,
Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region 530003, PR China. (5)Institute of
Urology and Nephrology, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, 
Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region 530021, PR China. (6)Emergency
Department, Western Hospital, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical
University, Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region 530007, PR China.
Electronic address: yeyu_doctor@126.com.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a major cause of disability or death worldwide,
especially in the young. Thus, effective medication with few side effects needs
to be developed. This work aimed to explore the potential benefits of
formononetin (FN) on TBI rodent model and to discuss the regarding mechanism.
These findings showed that FN effectively increased the activities of glutathione
peroxidase (GSH-Px) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) in brain tissue of TBI rats
(P<0.01), while it reduced intracephalic malonaldehyde (MDA), tumor necrosis
factor-a (TNF-a) and interleukin-6 (IL-6) concentrations (P<0.01). Meanwhile, the
hydrocephalus in the TBI rat was alleviated, and the injured nerve cell of the
lesioned brain was reduced as showed in hematoxylin-eosin (HE) staining assay. In
addition, the endogenous mRNA level of cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) in the brain of
the TBI rat was significantly down-regulated (P<0.01). Furthermore, the protein
expression of nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) was effectively
up-regulated (P<0.01). Taken together, we conclude that formononetin mediates the
promising anti-TBI effects against neurocyte damage, which the underlying
mechanisms are associated with inhibiting intracephalic inflammatory response and
oxidative stress for neuroprotection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24411660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Dec;24(23):3634-50. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E13-05-0264. Epub 2013
Oct 9.

Identification of cell cycle-regulated genes periodically expressed in U2OS cells
and their regulation by FOXM1 and E2F transcription factors.

Grant GD(1), Brooks L 3rd, Zhang X, Mahoney JM, Martyanov V, Wood TA, Sherlock G,
Cheng C, Whitfield ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH
03755 Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA 94305.

We identify the cell cycle-regulated mRNA transcripts genome-wide in the
osteosarcoma-derived U2OS cell line. This results in 2140 transcripts mapping to 
1871 unique cell cycle-regulated genes that show periodic oscillations across
multiple synchronous cell cycles. We identify genomic loci bound by the G2/M
transcription factor FOXM1 by chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by
high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq) and associate these with cell
cycle-regulated genes. FOXM1 is bound to cell cycle-regulated genes with peak
expression in both S phase and G2/M phases. We show that ChIP-seq genomic loci
are responsive to FOXM1 using a real-time luciferase assay in live cells, showing
that FOXM1 strongly activates promoters of G2/M phase genes and weakly activates 
those induced in S phase. Analysis of ChIP-seq data from a panel of cell cycle
transcription factors (E2F1, E2F4, E2F6, and GABPA) from the Encyclopedia of DNA 
Elements and ChIP-seq data for the DREAM complex finds that a set of core cell
cycle genes regulated in both U2OS and HeLa cells are bound by multiple cell
cycle transcription factors. These data identify the cell cycle-regulated genes
in a second cancer-derived cell line and provide a comprehensive picture of the
transcriptional regulatory systems controlling periodic gene expression in the
human cell division cycle.

PMCID: PMC3842991
PMID: 24109597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Int J Neurosci. 2014 May;124(5):362-8. doi: 10.3109/00207454.2013.848439. Epub
2013 Oct 31.

Erythropoietin activates Keap1-Nrf2/ARE pathway in rat brain after ischemia.

Meng H(1), Guo J, Wang H, Yan P, Niu X, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University ,
Shanxi , China.

rhEPO has previously been shown to exert neuroprotective action in focal cerebral
ischemia. However, its mechanism is not clear. We established the model of
permanent focal cerebral ischemia. rhEPO was administered (5000 IU/kg i.p.) 2 h
later after the successful ischemia model in rhEPO group and increased
translation of Nrf2 and HO-1 and decreased the H2O2 concentration in the brain
confirming activation of the Keap1-Nrf2/ARE pathway. The results show that rhEPO 
activate Keap1-Nrf2/ARE pathway after ischemia to protect the brain tissue.

PMID: 24063261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Gene. 2013 Nov 15;531(1):64-70. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.054. Epub 2013 Aug 9.

Screening of transcription factors with transcriptional initiation activity.

Zhang L(1), Yu H, Wang P, Ding Q, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Science Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education, Department of
Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
Electronic address: zhanglang08@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn.

A majority of mammalian promoters are associated with CpG islands. CpG island
promoters frequently lack common core promoter elements, such as the TATA box,
and often have dispersed transcription start sites. The mechanism through which
CpG island promoters are transcriptionally initiated remains unclear. We
speculate that some transcription factors can direct transcription initiation by 
themselves. To test this hypothesis, we screened a variety of transcription
factors to see whether they could initiate transcription. Most transcription
factors, including specificity protein 1 (Sp1) and nuclear factor Y (NF-Y),
showed little transcriptional initiation activity. However, nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (NRF-1), the basic helix-loop-helix/leucine zipper (bHLH/ZIP) family of 
proteins and the E-twenty six (Ets) family of proteins had strong transcriptional
activity. We further demonstrated that these transcription factors initiate
dispersed transcription. Our studies provide perspectives to the mechanism of
transcription initiation from CpG island promoters.

© 2013.

PMID: 23933270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Life Sci. 2013 Aug 28;93(7):288-305. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.07.003. Epub 2013
Jul 16.

Beneficial effects of (RS)-glucoraphanin on the tight junction dysfunction in a
mouse model of restraint stress.

Foti Cuzzola V(1), Galuppo M, Iori R, De Nicola GR, Cassata G, Giacoppo S,
Bramanti P, Mazzon E.

Author information: 
(1)IRCCS Centro Neurolesi Bonino-Pulejo, Via Provinciale Palermo, contrada
Casazza, 98124 Messina, Italy.

AIMS: The purpose of this work is to evaluate the effects of (RS)-glucoraphanin, 
a glucosinolate present in Brassicaceae, notably in Tuscan black kale, and
bioactivated with myrosinase enzyme (bioactive RS-GRA) (10mg/kg
intraperitoneally), and to assess its capacity to prevent the dysfunction of the 
blood-brain barrier (BBB), a fundamental structure for brain homeostasis, in a
mouse model of restraint stress.
MAIN METHODS: CD1 mice were subjected to restraint stress by blocking the body
with a tape on a table for 150 min at the four extremities. After the sacrifice
of the animals, stomachs and brains were collected to perform histological
evaluation, Evan's blue dye, immunohistochemistry and western blotting analysis, 
to evaluate whether immobilization stress leads to alterations of tight junction 
(TJ) components, such as claudin-1, claudin-3 and ZO-1.
KEY FINDINGS: Immobilization causes considerable damage to BBB as shown by
detection of Evan's blue dye, indicating a high level of extravasation due to
stress. BBB alterations were accompanied by an enhancement of GFAP expression,
IkB-alpha degradation followed by increased NF-kBp65 nuclear translocation, as
well as caspase 3 overexpression. Conversely, our results revealed that bioactive
RS-GRA treatment significantly counteracts the changes in all these parameters
and preserves TJ integrity reducing the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines,
such as TNF-a and IL-1ß, and increasing the production of IL-10, an
anti-inflammatory cytokine. Additionally, bioactive RS-GRA shows antioxidant
properties modulating iNOS and nitrotyrosine expression.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our results clearly show that bioactive RS-GRA could represent a
possible treatment during pharmacological therapy of stress.

© 2013.

PMID: 23871805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Brain Inj. 2013;27(7-8):924-33. doi: 10.3109/02699052.2013.793397. Epub 2013 Jun 
19.

Regulation of endoplasmic reticulum stress in rat cortex by p62/ZIP through the
Keap1-Nrf2-ARE signalling pathway after transient focal cerebral ischaemia.

Wang W(1), Kang J, Li H, Su J, Wu J, Xu Y, Yu H, Xiang X, Yi H, Lu Y, Sun L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Norman Bethune College of Medicine, Jilin
University, 126 Xinmin Street, Changchun, Jilin, China.

PRIMARY OBJECTIVE: p62/ZIP as the autophagy receptor can transport the misfolded 
proteins to a macroautophagy-lysosome system for degradation and also create a
positive feedback loop between p62/ZIP and Nrf2. However, the role of p62/ZIP on 
cerebral ischaemia is unclear. The aim of this study was to evaluate the role of 
p62/ZIP in the regulation of endoplasmic reticulum(ER) stress induced by cerebral
ischaemia/reperfusion.
RESEARCH DESIGN: Different ischemic periods were designed by transient middle
cerebral artery occlusion (tMCAO) using the suture method.
METHODS AND PROCEDURES: At 24 hours after reperfusion, the ischaemic brain tissue
was studied histologically and biochemically for autophagic, ER stress and
Keap1-Nrf2-ARE signalling pathway markers.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND RESULTS: Prolongation of ischaemia significantly increased the 
cortical injury observed in rats and was associated with a gradual increase in
the protein expression of ubiquitin-aggregates, Grp78, GADD153/CHOP and p62/ZIP. 
Autophagy marker Atg12-Atg5 and LC3-PE increased and then decreased. Moreover,
p62/ZIP mRNA expression increased and then decreased and was consistent with Nrf2
activation.
CONCLUSIONS: p62/ZIP not only plays a key role in scavenging protein aggregates
during autophagy, but it may also be involved in preventing oxidative injury and 
alleviating ER stress through the Keap1-Nrf2-ARE signalling pathway during
cerebral ischaemia/reperfusion injury.

PMID: 23782269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Aug 26;548:159-64. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.05.061. Epub
2013 Jun 6.

Dietary whey protein stimulates mitochondrial activity and decreases oxidative
stress in mouse female brain.

Shertzer HG(1), Krishan M, Genter MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health and Center for Environmental Genetics,
University of Cincinnati Medical Center, P.O. Box 670056, Cincinnati, OH 45267,
USA. shertzhg@ucmail.uc.edu

In humans and experimental animals, protein-enriched diets are beneficial for
weight management, muscle development, managing early stage insulin resistance
and overall health. Previous studies have shown that in mice consuming a high fat
diet, whey protein isolate (WPI) reduced hepatosteatosis and insulin resistance
due in part to an increase in basal metabolic rate. In the current study, we
examined the ability of WPI to increase energy metabolism in mouse brain. Female 
C57BL/6J mice were fed a normal AIN-93M diet for 12 weeks, with (WPI group) or
without (Control group) 100g WPI/L drinking water. In WPI mice compared to
controls, the oxidative stress biomarkers malondialdehyde and 4-hydroxyalkenals
were 40% lower in brain homogenates, and the production of hydrogen peroxide and 
superoxide were 25-35% less in brain mitochondria. Brain mitochondria from WPI
mice remained coupled, and exhibited higher rates of respiration with
proportionately greater levels of cytochromes a+a3 and c+c1. These results
suggested that WPI treatment increased the number or improved the function of
brain mitochondria. qRT-PCR revealed that the gene encoding a master regulator of
mitochondrial activity and biogenesis, Pgc-1alpha (peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator-1alpha) was elevated 2.2-fold, 
as were the PGC-1alpha downstream genes, Tfam (mitochondrial transcription factor
A), Gabpa/Nrf-2a (GA-binding protein alpha/nuclear respiratory factor-2a), and
Cox-6a1 (cytochrome oxidase-6a1). Each of these genes had twice the levels of
transcript in brain tissue from WPI mice, relative to controls. There was no
change in the expression of the housekeeping gene B2mg (beta-2 microglobulin). We
conclude that dietary whey protein decreases oxidative stress and increases
mitochondrial activity in mouse brain. Dietary supplementation with WPI may be a 
useful clinical intervention to treat conditions associated with oxidative stress
or diminished mitochondrial activity in the brain.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3749878
PMID: 23748211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Brain Res. 2013 Jul 26;1523:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.05.046. Epub 2013
Jun 5.

Puerarin attenuates neuronal degeneration in the substantia nigra of
6-OHDA-lesioned rats through regulating BDNF expression and activating the
Nrf2/ARE signaling pathway.

Li R(1), Liang T, Xu L, Zheng N, Zhang K, Duan X.

Author information: 
(1)Guilin Medical University, Guilin, Guangxi 541004, PR China.

An increasing number of studies suggest that oxidative stress is associated with 
the Parkinsonian process. This study evaluated the potential neuroprotective role
of puerarin (PR) on lesioned substantia nigra (SN) induced by 6-hydroxydopamine
(6-OHDA). Data from a rotational test showed that PR treatment significantly
decreased apomorphine-induced rotations. Both the dopamine (DA) content in the SN
and the endogenous expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) were
also elevated by the treatment. Pathological examination showed that dopaminergic
neuronal degeneration in the SN was attenuated by PR treatment. Meanwhile, the
contents of <U+03B3>-glutamylcysteine synthetase (<U+03B3>-GCS), glutathione (GSH) and catalase
(CAT) in SN tissue were gradually elevated. Additionally, cytochrome c oxidase
(COX) mRNA expression in the SN was markedly up-regulated. At the same time,
nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) and Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1
(Keapl) levels were progressively increased by the PR treatment. Our findings
indicated that puerarin effectively protects against 6-OHDA-mediated oxidative
stress injury in SN neurons, in which the underlying mechanisms are involved in
modulating BDNF expression and activating the Nrf2/ARE signaling pathway.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23747813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1830(8):4137-46. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagen.2013.04.006. Epub 2013 Apr 15.

Punctum on two different transcription factors regulated by PGC-1a: nuclear
factor erythroid-derived 2-like 2 and nuclear respiratory factor 2.

Baldelli S(1), Aquilano K, Ciriolo MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department Biology, University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor nuclear factor-erythroid-derived 2-like 2
(official symbol: NFE2L2, alias: Nrf2) is a master regulator of antioxidant
defense system, which makes it an attractive target for manipulations that aim to
increase cellular resistance to oxidative stress. Nuclear respiratory factor 2 or
GA binding protein transcription factor alpha (official symbol: GABPA, alias:
NRF2) functions as a transcription factor that activates the expression of some
key metabolic genes regulating cellular growth and nuclear genes required for
mitochondrial respiration as well as mitochondrial DNA transcription and
replication.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: Despite the evident structural and functional differences,
confusion has occurred in bibliographic databases due to the shared symbol NRF2
for these transcription factors. Such confusion has worsened after the discovery 
that the transcriptional co-activator peroxisome proliferator activated receptor 
gamma co-activator 1 alpha (PGC-1a) could control the signaling pathway of both
NFE2L2 and GABPA through distinct molecular mechanisms. This review will
summarize the implications of NFE2L2 and GABPA in various human
patho-physiological conditions and how PGC-1a can regulate their different
signaling axis.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: This review underlines the overlapping functions between
PGC-1a, NFE2L2 and GABPA, which alteration could induce the development of human 
pathological states.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: The comprehension of molecular mechanisms that modulate the
intersection between these proteins will be important to identify new signaling
axis involved in lifespan extension as well as novel targets for therapeutic
interventions.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23597778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59843. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059843. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Neuroprotection by curcumin in ischemic brain injury involves the Akt/Nrf2
pathway.

Wu J(1), Li Q, Wang X, Yu S, Li L, Wu X, Chen Y, Zhao J, Zhao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, People's
Republic of China.

Oxidative damage plays a critical role in many diseases of the central nervous
system. This study was conducted to determine the molecular mechanisms involved
in the putative anti-oxidative effects of curcumin against experimental stroke.
Oxygen and glucose deprivation/reoxygenation (OGD/R) was used to mimic ischemic
insult in primary cultured cortical neurons. A rapid increase in the
intracellular expression of NAD(P)H: quinone oxidoreductase1 (NQO1) induced by
OGD was counteracted by curcumin post-treatment, which paralleled attenuated cell
injury. The reduction of phosphorylation Akt induced by OGD was restored by
curcumin. Consequently, NQO1 expression and the binding activity of nuclear
factor-erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) to antioxidant response element (ARE) 
were increased. LY294002 blocked the increase in phospho-Akt evoked by curcumin
and abolished the associated protective effect. Adult male Sprague-Dawley rats
were subjected to transient middle cerebral artery occlusion for 60 minutes.
Curcumin administration significantly reduced infarct size. Curcumin also
markedly reduced oxidative stress levels in middle cerebral artery occlusion
(MCAO) rats; hence, these effects were all suppressed by LY294002. Taken
together, these findings provide evidence that curcumin protects neurons against 
ischemic injury, and this neuroprotective effect involves the Akt/Nrf2 pathway.
In addition, Nrf2 is involved in the neuroprotective effects of curcumin against 
oxidative damage.

PMCID: PMC3610879
PMID: 23555802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1588. doi: 10.1038/srep01588.

The interactomes of POU5F1 and SOX2 enhancers in human embryonic stem cells.

Gao F(1), Wei Z, An W, Wang K, Lu W.

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern
California, 1425 San Pablo Street, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

The genes POU5F1 and SOX2 are critical for pluripotency and reprogramming, yet
the chromosomal organization around these genes remains poorly understood. We
assayed long-range chromosomal interactions on putative enhancers of POU5F1 and
SOX2 genes in human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) using 4C-Seq technique. We
discovered that their frequent interacting regions mainly overlap with early DNA 
replication domains. The interactomes are associated with active histone marks
and enriched with 5-hydroxymethylcytosine sites. In hESCs, genes within the
interactomes have elevated expression. Additionally, some genes associated with
the POU5F1 enhancer contribute to pluripotency. Binding sites for multiple DNA
binding proteins, including ATF3, CTCF, GABPA, JUND, NANOG, RAD21 and YY1, are
enriched in both interactomes. The RARG locus, frequently interacting with the
POU5F1 locus, has abundant RAD21 binding sites co-localized with other protein
binding sites. Thus the interactomes of these two pluripotency genes could be an 
important part of the regulatory network in hESCs.

PMCID: PMC4070749
PMID: 23549118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 5;110(6):2312-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1212904110.
Epub 2013 Jan 23.

GABP transcription factor is required for development of chronic myelogenous
leukemia via its control of PRKD2.

Yang ZF(1), Zhang H, Ma L, Peng C, Chen Y, Wang J, Green MR, Li S, Rosmarin AG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are the source of all blood lineages, and HSCs
must balance quiescence, self-renewal, and differentiation to meet lifelong needs
for blood cell development. Transformation of HSCs by the breakpoint cluster
region-ABL tyrosine kinase (BCR-ABL) oncogene causes chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CML). The E-twenty six (ets) transcription factor GA binding protein (GABP) is a
tetrameric transcription factor complex that contains GABPa and GABPß proteins.
Deletion in bone marrow of Gabpa, the gene that encodes the DNA-binding
component, caused cell cycle arrest in HSCs and profound loss of hematopoietic
progenitor cells. Loss of Gabpa prevented development of CML, although mice
continued to generate BCR-ABL-expressing Gabpa-null cells for months that were
serially transplantable and contributed to all lineages in secondary recipients. 
A bioinformatic screen identified the serine-threonine kinase protein kinase D2
(PRKD2) as a potential effector of GABP in HSCs. Prkd2 expression was markedly
reduced in Gabpa-null HSCs and progenitor cells. Reduced expression of PRKD2 or
pharmacologic inhibition decreased cell cycling, and PRKD2 rescued growth of
Gabpa-null BCR-ABL-expressing cells. Thus, GABP is required for HSC cell cycle
entry and CML development through its control of PRKD2. This offers a potential
therapeutic target in leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3568343
PMID: 23345428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e49892. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049892. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

The ETS transcription factors ELK1 and GABPA regulate different gene networks to 
control MCF10A breast epithelial cell migration.

Odrowaz Z(1), Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Members of the ETS transcription factor family often target the same binding
regions and hence have the potential to regulate the same genes and downstream
biological processes. However, individual family members also preferentially bind
to other genomic regions, thus providing the potential for controlling distinct
transcriptional programmes and generating specific biological effects. The ETS
transcription factor ELK1 controls cell migration in breast epithelial cells
through targeting a cohort of genes, independently from another family member
GABPA, and therefore achieves biological specificity. Here, we demonstrate that
GABPA also controls cell migration in breast epithelial cells. However, GABPA
controls the expression of a different network of target genes to ELK1. Both
direct and indirect target genes for GABPA are identified and amongst the direct 
targets we confirm the importance of RAC1 and KIF20A for cell migration.
Therefore, although ELK1 and GABPA ultimately control the same biological
process, they do so by regulating different cohorts of target genes associated
with cytoskeletal functions and cell migration control.

PMCID: PMC3527487
PMID: 23284628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Br J Ophthalmol. 2013 Mar;97(3):247. doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2012-302703. Epub 
2012 Dec 13.

Childhood retinal dystrophies: what's in a name?

Traboulsi EI.

Comment on
    Br J Ophthalmol. 2013 Mar;97(3):262-5.

PMID: 23242674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Nov 23;428(3):389-94. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.10.064. Epub 2012 Oct 24.

L-Arginine ameliorates cardiac left ventricular oxidative stress by upregulating 
eNOS and Nrf2 target genes in alloxan-induced hyperglycemic rats.

Ramprasath T(1), Kumar PH, Puhari SS, Murugan PS, Vasudevan V, Selvam GS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Unit, Department of Biochemistry, Center for Excellence
in Genomic Sciences, School of Biological Sciences, Madurai Kamaraj University,
Madurai 625 021, Tamilnadu, India.

Hyperglycemia is independently related with excessive morbidity and mortality in 
cardiovascular disorders. L-Arginine-nitric oxide (NO) pathway and the
involvement of NO in modulating nuclear factor-E2-related factor-2 (Nrf2)
signaling were well established. In the present study we investigated, whether
L-arginine supplementation would improve the myocardial antioxidant defense under
hyperglycemia through activation of Nrf2 signaling. Diabetes was induced by
alloxan monohydrate (90 mg kg(-1) body weight) in rats. Both non-diabetic and
diabetic group of rats were divided into three subgroups and they were
administered either with L-arginine (2.25%) or L-NAME (0.01%) in drinking water
for 12 days. Results showed that L-arginine treatment reduced the metabolic
disturbances in diabetic rats. Antioxidant enzymes and glutathione levels were
found to be increased in heart left ventricles, thereby reduction of lipid
peroxidation by L-arginine treatment. Heart histopathological analysis further
validates the reversal of typical diabetic characteristics consisting of
alterations in myofibers and myofibrillary degeneration. qRT-PCR studies revealed
that L-arginine treatment upregulated the transcription of Akt and downregulated 
NF-<U+03BA>B. Notably, transcription of eNOS and Nrf2 target genes was also upregulated,
which were accompanied by enhanced expression of Nrf2 in left ventricular tissue 
from diabetic and control rats. Under these findings, we suggest that targeting
of eNOS and Nrf2 signaling by L-arginine supplementation could be used as a
potential treatment method to alleviate the late diabetic complications.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23103544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Br J Ophthalmol. 2013 Mar;97(3):262-5. doi: 10.1136/bjophthalmol-2012-302186.
Epub 2012 Oct 25.

Clinical characterisation of the CABP4-related retinal phenotype.

Khan AO(1), Alrashed M, Alkuraya FS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital,
Riyadh 11462, Saudi Arabia. arif.khan@mssm.edu

Comment in
    Br J Ophthalmol. 2013 Mar;97(3):247.

BACKGROUND: Calcium binding protein 4 (CABP4), specifically located in
photoreceptor synaptic terminals, has been associated with congenital stationary 
night blindness based on this clinical diagnosis being made for three individuals
from two Swiss families with CABP4 mutations; however, the few reported cases
limit phenotype-genotype correlation. We expand the number of reported patients
with CABP4 mutations and clinically characterise the CABP4-related phenotype.
METHODS: A retrospective case series of 11 individuals (age 2â 26 years; four
consanguineous families) with early-onset retinal dysfunction found to harbour
CABP4 mutations after a strategy of homozygosity analysis and/or candidate gene
testing.
RESULTS: The 11 patients from four families harboured the same homozygous CABP4
mutation (c.81_82insA; p.Pro28Thrfs*4) and shared a common haplotype. All
patients had congenital nystagmus, stable low vision, photophobia and a normal or
near-normal fundus appearance. None complained of night blindness when
specifically questioned. Eight had hyperopic cycloplegic refractions (=+ 1.00
dioptre). Electroretinography showed an electronegative waveform response to
scotopic bright flash, near-normal to subnormal rod function, and delayed and/or 
decreased cone responses or was non-recordable. Although these and previously
reported families with homozygous mutations were labelled with different clinical
diagnoses, all had similar clinical features.
CONCLUSION: These typical clinical features, which do not include a symptom of
night blindness, suggest CABP4 mutations. The phenotype is best uniformly termed 
congenital cone-rod synaptic disorder. In Saudi Arabia a founder homozygous
c.81_82insA CABP4 mutation is a recurrent cause.

PMID: 23099293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. G3 (Bethesda). 2012 Oct;2(10):1243-56. doi: 10.1534/g3.112.004002. Epub 2012 Oct 
1.

Overlapping ETS and CRE Motifs ((G/C)CGGAAGTGACGTCA) preferentially bound by
GABPa and CREB proteins.

Chatterjee R(1), Zhao J, He X, Shlyakhtenko A, Mann I, Waterfall JJ, Meltzer P,
Sathyanarayana BK, FitzGerald PC, Vinson C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Previously, we identified 8-bps long DNA sequences (8-mers) that localize in
human proximal promoters and grouped them into known transcription factor binding
sites (TFBS). We now examine split 8-mers consisting of two 4-mers separated by
1-bp to 30-bps (X(4)-N(1-30)-X(4)) to identify pairs of TFBS that localize in
proximal promoters at a precise distance. These include two overlapping TFBS: the
ETS<U+21D4>ETS motif ((C/G)CCGGAAGCGGAA) and the ETS<U+21D4>CRE motif ((C/G)CGGAAGTGACGTCAC).
The nucleotides in bold are part of both TFBS. Molecular modeling shows that the 
ETS<U+21D4>CRE motif can be bound simultaneously by both the ETS and the B-ZIP domains
without protein-protein clashes. The electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) 
shows that the ETS protein GABPa and the B-ZIP protein CREB preferentially bind
to the ETS<U+21D4>CRE motif only when the two TFBS overlap precisely. In contrast, the
ETS domain of ETV5 and CREB interfere with each other for binding the ETS<U+21D4>CRE.
The 11-mer (CGGAAGTGACG), the conserved part of the ETS<U+21D4>CRE motif, occurs 226
times in the human genome and 83% are in known regulatory regions. In vivo GABPa 
and CREB ChIP-seq peaks identified the ETS<U+21D4>CRE as the most enriched motif
occurring in promoters of genes involved in mRNA processing, cellular catabolic
processes, and stress response, suggesting that a specific class of genes is
regulated by this composite motif.

PMCID: PMC3464117
PMID: 23050235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. BMC Neurosci. 2012 Oct 3;13:118. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-13-118.

A genome-wide signature of glucocorticoid receptor binding in neuronal PC12
cells.

Polman JA(1), Welten JE, Bosch DS, de Jonge RT, Balog J, van der Maarel SM, de
Kloet ER, Datson NA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Pharmacology, Leiden/Amsterdam Center for Drug Research,
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, 2333 CC, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Glucocorticoids, secreted by the adrenals in response to stress,
profoundly affect structure and plasticity of neurons. Glucocorticoid action in
neurons is mediated by glucocorticoid receptors (GR) that operate as
transcription factors in the regulation of gene expression and either bind
directly to genomic glucocorticoid response elements (GREs) or indirectly to the 
genome via interactions with bound transcription factors. These two modes of
action, respectively called transactivation and transrepression, result in the
regulation of a wide variety of genes important for neuronal function. The
objective of the present study was to identify genome-wide glucocorticoid
receptor binding sites in neuronal PC12 cells using Chromatin ImmunoPrecipitation
combined with next generation sequencing (ChIP-Seq).
RESULTS: In total we identified 1183 genomic binding sites of GR, the majority of
which were novel and not identified in other ChIP-Seq studies on GR binding. More
than half (58%) of the binding sites contained a GRE. The remaining 42% of the
GBS did not harbour a GRE and therefore likely bind GR via an intermediate
transcription factor tethering GR to the DNA. While the GRE-containing binding
sites were more often located nearby genes involved in general cell functions and
processes such as apoptosis, cell motion, protein dimerization activity and
vasculature development, the binding sites without a GRE were located nearby
genes with a clear role in neuronal processes such as neuron projection
morphogenesis, neuron projection regeneration, synaptic transmission and
catecholamine biosynthetic process. A closer look at the sequence of the GR
binding sites revealed the presence of several motifs for transcription factors
that are highly divergent from those previously linked to GR-signaling, including
Gabpa, Prrx2, Zfp281, Gata1 and Zbtb3. These transcription factors may represent 
novel crosstalk partners of GR in a neuronal context.
CONCLUSIONS: Here we present the first genome-wide inventory of GR-binding sites 
in a neuronal context. These results provide an exciting first global view into
neuronal GR targets and the neuron-specific modes of GR action and potentially
contributes to our understanding of glucocorticoid action in the brain.

PMCID: PMC3519639
PMID: 23031785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2012 Aug 15;303(4):R408-17. doi:
10.1152/ajpregu.00085.2012. Epub 2012 Jun 20.

mRNA stability as a function of striated muscle oxidative capacity.

D'souza D(1), Lai RY, Shuen M, Hood DA.

Author information: 
(1)School of Kinesiology and Health Science, York University, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

A change in mRNA stability alters the abundance of mRNA available for translation
and is emerging as a critical pathway influencing gene expression. Variations in 
the stability of functional and regulatory mitochondrial proteins may contribute 
to the divergent mitochondrial densities observed in striated muscle. Thus we
hypothesized that the stability of mRNAs encoding for regulatory nuclear and
mitochondrial transcription factors would be inversely proportional to muscle
oxidative capacity and would be facilitated by the activity of RNA binding
proteins (RBPs). The stability of mitochondrial transcription factor A (Tfam),
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1a (PGC-1a), and
nuclear respiratory factor 2a (NRF-2a) mRNA was assessed in striated muscles with
distinct oxidative capacities using in vitro decay assays. All three
mitochondrial regulators were rapidly degraded in cardiac and slow-twitch red
(STR) muscle, resulting in a ~60-65% lower (P < 0.05) mRNA half-life (t(1/2))
compared with fast-twitch white (FTW) fibers. This accelerated rate of Tfam mRNA 
decay was matched by a 2.5-fold increase in Tfam transcription in slow- compared 
with fast-twitch muscle (P = 0.05). Protein expression of four unique RBPs
[AU-rich binding factor 1 (AUF1), human antigen R (HuR), KH-homology splicing
regulatory protein (KSRP), and CUG binding protein 1 (CUGBP1)] believed to
modulate mRNA stability was elevated in cardiac and STR muscles (P < 0.05) and
was moderately associated with the decay of Tfam, PGC-1a, and NRF-2a mRNA.
Variable rates of transcript degradation were apparent when comparing all
transcripts within the same muscle type. Thus the distribution of RBPs appears to
follow a fiber-type specific pattern and subsequently functions to alter the
stability of specific mitochondrial regulators in a transcript- and
tissue-specific fashion.

PMID: 22718808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS Genet. 2012 May;8(5):e1002724. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002724. Epub 2012 
May 31.

The App-Runx1 region is critical for birth defects and electrocardiographic
dysfunctions observed in a Down syndrome mouse model.

Raveau M(1), Lignon JM, Nalesso V, Duchon A, Groner Y, Sharp AJ, Dembele D,
Brault V, Hérault Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Department of 
Translational Medicine and Neurogenetics, CNRS, INSERM, Université de Strasbourg,
UMR7104, UMR964, Illkirch, France.

Down syndrome (DS) leads to complex phenotypes and is the main genetic cause of
birth defects and heart diseases. The Ts65Dn DS mouse model is trisomic for the
distal part of mouse chromosome 16 and displays similar features with post-natal 
lethality and cardiovascular defects. In order to better understand these
defects, we defined electrocardiogram (ECG) with a precordial set-up, and we
found conduction defects and modifications in wave shape, amplitudes, and
durations in Ts65Dn mice. By using a genetic approach consisting of crossing
Ts65Dn mice with Ms5Yah mice monosomic for the App-Runx1 genetic interval, we
showed that the Ts65Dn viability and ECG were improved by this reduction of gene 
copy number. Whole-genome expression studies confirmed gene dosage effect in
Ts65Dn, Ms5Yah, and Ts65Dn/Ms5Yah hearts and showed an overall perturbation of
pathways connected to post-natal lethality (Coq7, Dyrk1a, F5, Gabpa, Hmgn1,
Pde10a, Morc3, Slc5a3, and Vwf) and heart function (Tfb1m, Adam19, Slc8a1/Ncx1,
and Rcan1). In addition cardiac connexins (Cx40, Cx43) and sodium channel
sub-units (Scn5a, Scn1b, Scn10a) were found down-regulated in Ts65Dn atria with
additional down-regulation of Cx40 in Ts65Dn ventricles and were likely
contributing to conduction defects. All these data pinpoint new cardiac
phenotypes in the Ts65Dn, mimicking aspects of human DS features and pathways
altered in the mouse model. In addition they highlight the role of the App-Runx1 
interval, including Sod1 and Tiam1, in the induction of post-natal lethality and 
of the cardiac conduction defects in Ts65Dn. These results might lead to new
therapeutic strategies to improve the care of DS people.

PMCID: PMC3364940
PMID: 22693452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Genome Res. 2012 Aug;22(8):1407-18. doi: 10.1101/gr.132878.111. Epub 2012 Jun 8.

Genome-wide DNA methylation profiles in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells
reveal overrepresentation of ETS transcription factor binding sites.

Hogart A(1), Lichtenberg J, Ajay SS, Anderson S; NIH Intramural Sequencing
Center, Margulies EH, Bodine DM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

DNA methylation is an essential epigenetic mark that is required for normal
development. Knockout of the DNA methyltransferase enzymes in the mouse
hematopoietic compartment reveals that methylation is critical for hematopoietic 
differentiation. To better understand the role of DNA methylation in
hematopoiesis, we characterized genome-wide DNA methylation in primary mouse
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), common myeloid progenitors (CMPs), and
erythroblasts (ERYs). Methyl binding domain protein 2 (MBD) enrichment of DNA
followed by massively parallel sequencing (MBD-seq) was used to map genome-wide
DNA methylation. Globally, DNA methylation was most abundant in HSCs, with a 40% 
reduction in CMPs, and a 67% reduction in ERYs. Only 3% of peaks arise during
differentiation, demonstrating a genome-wide decline in DNA methylation during
erythroid development. Analysis of genomic features revealed that 98% of promoter
CpG islands are hypomethylated, while 20%-25% of non-promoter CpG islands are
methylated. Proximal promoter sequences of expressed genes are hypomethylated in 
all cell types, while gene body methylation positively correlates with gene
expression in HSCs and CMPs. Elevated genome-wide DNA methylation in HSCs and the
positive association between methylation and gene expression demonstrates that
DNA methylation is a mark of cellular plasticity in HSCs. Using de novo motif
discovery, we identified overrepresented transcription factor consensus binding
motifs in methylated sequences. Motifs for several ETS transcription factors,
including GABPA and ELF1, are overrepresented in methylated regions. Our
genome-wide survey demonstrates that DNA methylation is markedly altered during
myeloid differentiation and identifies critical regions of the genome and
transcription factor programs that contribute to hematopoiesis.

PMCID: PMC3409254
PMID: 22684279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2013 Jul;65(5):549-57. doi: 10.1016/j.etp.2012.04.001. Epub
2012 Apr 28.

Responses of brown adipose tissue to diet-induced obesity, exercise, dietary
restriction and ephedrine treatment.

Slocum N(1), Durrant JR, Bailey D, Yoon L, Jordan H, Barton J, Brown RH, Clifton 
L, Milliken T, Harrington W, Kimbrough C, Faber CA, Cariello N, Elangbam CS.

Author information: 
(1)Safety Assessment, GlaxoSmithKline, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709-3398,
USA.

Drug-induced weight loss in humans has been associated with undesirable side
effects not present in weight loss from lifestyle interventions (caloric
restriction or exercise). To investigate the mechanistic differences of weight
loss by drug-induced and lifestyle interventions, we examined the gene expression
(mRNA) in brown adipose tissue (BAT) and conducted histopathologic assessments in
diet-induced obese (DIO) mice given ephedrine (18 mg/kg/day orally), treadmill
exercise (10 m/min, 1-h/day), and dietary restriction (DR: 26% dietary
restriction) for 7 days. Exercise and DR mice lost more body weight than controls
and both ephedrine and exercise reduced percent body fat. All treatments reduced 
BAT and liver lipid accumulation (i.e., cytoplasmic lipids in brown adipocytes
and hepatocytes) and increased oxygen consumption (VO2 ml/kg/h) compared with
controls. Mitochondrial biogenesis/function-related genes (TFAM, NRF1 and GABPA) 
were up-regulated in the BAT of all groups. UCP-1 was up-regulated in exercise
and ephedrine groups, whereas MFSD2A was up-regulated in ephedrine and DR groups.
PGC-1a up-regulation was observed in exercise and DR groups but not in ephedrine 
group. In all experimental groups, except for ephedrine, fatty acid transport and
metabolism genes were up-regulated, but the magnitude of change was higher in the
DR group. PRKAA1 was up-regulated in all groups but not significantly in the
ephedrine group. ADRß3 was slightly up-regulated in the DR group only, whereas
ESRRA remained unchanged in all groups. Although our data suggest a common
pathway of BAT activation elicited by ephedrine treatment, exercise or DR, mRNA
changes were indicative of additional nutrient-sensing pathways in exercise and
DR.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22542811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Anim Genet. 2012 Aug;43(4):392-400. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2052.2011.02265.x. Epub
2011 Oct 12.

A genome-wide association study for quantitative trait loci of show-jumping in
Hanoverian warmblood horses.

Schröder W(1), Klostermann A, Stock KF, Distl O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Animal Breeding and Genetics, University of Veterinary Medicine 
Hannover, Germany.

Show-jumping is an economically important breeding goal in Hanoverian warmblood
horses. The aim of this study was a genome-wide association study (GWAS) for
quantitative trait loci (QTL) for show-jumping in Hanoverian warmblood horses,
employing the Illumina equine SNP50 Beadchip. For our analyses, we genotyped 115 
stallions of the National State stud of Lower Saxony. The show-jumping talent of 
a horse includes style and ability in free-jumping. To control spurious
associations based on population stratification, two different mixed linear
animal model (MLM) approaches were employed, besides linear models with fixed
effects only and adaptive permutations for correcting multiple testing.
Population stratification was explained best in the MLM considering Hanoverian,
Thoroughbred, Trakehner and Holsteiner genes and the marker identity-by-state
relationship matrix. We identified six QTL for show-jumping on horse chromosomes 
(ECA) 1, 8, 9 and 26 (-log(10) P-value >5) and further putative QTL with -log(10)
P-values of 3-5 on ECA1, 3, 11, 17 and 21. Within six QTL regions, we identified 
human performance-related genes including PAPSS2 on ECA1, MYL2 on ECA8, TRHR on
ECA9 and GABPA on ECA26 and within the putative QTL regions NRAP on ECA1, and
TBX4 on ECA11. The results of our GWAS suggest that genes involved in muscle
structure, development and metabolism are crucial for elite show-jumping
performance. Further studies are required to validate these QTL in larger data
sets and further horse populations.

© 2011 The Authors, Animal Genetics © 2011 Stichting International Foundation for
Animal Genetics.

PMID: 22497689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Phytomedicine. 2012 Jun 15;19(8-9):756-62. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2012.02.014.
Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Triptolide inhibits colon-rectal cancer cells proliferation by induction of G1
phase arrest through upregulation of p21.

Liu J(1), Shen M, Yue Z, Yang Z, Wang M, Li C, Xin C, Wang Y, Mei Q, Wang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gastrointestinal Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica of
the State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Department of
Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an,
China.

Triptolide, a diterpene triepoxide compound extracted from the traditional
Chinese medicine herb Tripterygium wilfordii Hook F., is a potential cancer
chemotherapeutic for tumors. However, the mechanism of anti-proliferative
mechanism of triptolide in colon cancer cells is not entirely clear. Triptolide
markedly inhibited HT29 and SW480 cells proliferation in a dose- and
time-dependent manner. Triptolide decreased ERK and AKT phosphorylation, and
GABPa expression in colon cancer cells. Beta-catenin expression and
phosphorylation were not altered by incubation of triptolide. However, we found
that triptolide repressed expression of LEF/TCF. Although it did not
significantly affect cells apoptosis, triptolide induced G1 phase arrest
dose-dependently. Further detection for the expression of cell cycle-related
proteins suggesting that triptolide stimulate expression of p21 and repress
cyclin A1. Increased p21 binded to CDK4/CDK6, therefore blocked function of
CDK4/CDK6, and subsequently contribute to the G1 arrest. These data suggested
that triptolide is a potential agent for treatment of colon cancer, and its
anti-proliferation effect mainly occur through G1 phase arrest.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22464014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 Apr 15;260(2):201-8. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2012.02.014. Epub 2012 Mar 1.

Protective role for ovarian glutathione S-transferase isoform pi during
7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene-induced ovotoxicity.

Bhattacharya P(1), Keating AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.
poulomib@iastate.edu

7,12-Dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA) destroys ovarian follicles at all
developmental stages. This study investigated a role for the glutathione
S-transferase (Gst) isoforms alpha (a), mu (m) and pi (p) and the transcription
factors, Ahr and Nrf2, during DMBA-induced ovotoxicity, and their regulation by
phosphatidylinositol-3 kinase (PI3K) signaling. Negative regulation of JNK by
GSTP during DMBA exposure was also studied. Post-natal day (PND) 4 Fischer 344
rat ovaries were exposed to vehicle control (1% DMSO)±DMBA (1 µM) or vehicle
control (1% DMSO)±LY294002 (PI3K inhibitor; 20 µM) for 1, 2, 4, or 6 days. Total 
RNA or protein was isolated, followed by RT-PCR or Western blotting to determine 
mRNA or protein level, respectively. Immunoprecipitation using an anti-GSTP
antibody was performed to determine interaction between GSTP and JNK, followed by
Western blotting to determine JNK and p-c-Jun protein level. DMBA had no impact
on Gsta, Gstm or Nrf2 mRNA level, but increased Gstp mRNA and protein after 2
days. Ahr mRNA and protein increased after 2 and 4 days of DMBA exposure,
respectively and DMBA increased NRF2 protein level after 4 days. JNK bound to
GSTP was increased during DMBA exposure, with a concomitant decrease in unbound
JNK and p-c-Jun. Ahr and Gstp mRNA were decreased (2 days) and increased (4 days)
by PI3K inhibition, while Gstm mRNA increased (P<0.05) after both time points,
and there was no effect on Nrf2 mRNA. PI3K inhibition increased AHR, NRF2 and
GSTP protein level. These findings support involvement of ovarian GSTP during
DMBA exposure, and indicate a regulatory role for the PI3K signaling pathway on
ovarian xenobiotic metabolism gene expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3319246
PMID: 22406437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Sci Rep. 2011;1:201. doi: 10.1038/srep00201. Epub 2011 Dec 19.

Triterpenoid modulation of IL-17 and Nrf-2 expression ameliorates
neuroinflammation and promotes remyelination in autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Pareek TK(1), Belkadi A, Kesavapany S, Zaremba A, Loh SL, Bai L, Cohen ML, Meyer 
C, Liby KT, Miller RH, Sporn MB, Letterio JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics/Division of Pediatric Hematology-Oncology, University
Hospitals Case Medical Center and The Case Comprehensive Cancer Center, Case
Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Inflammatory cytokines and endogenous anti-oxidants are variables affecting
disease progression in multiple sclerosis (MS). Here we demonstrate the dual
capacity of triterpenoids to simultaneously repress production of IL-17 and other
pro-inflammatory mediators while exerting neuroprotective effects directly
through Nrf2-dependent induction of anti-oxidant genes. Derivatives of the
natural triterpene oleanolic acid, namely CDDO-trifluoroethyl-amide (CDDO-TFEA), 
completely suppressed disease in a murine model of MS, experimental autoimmune
encephalomyelitis (EAE), by inhibiting Th1 and Th17 mRNA and cytokine production.
Encephalitogenic T cells recovered from treated mice were hypo-responsive to
myelin antigen and failed to adoptively transfer the disease. Microarray analyses
showed significant suppression of pro-inflammatory transcripts with concomitant
induction of anti-inflammatory genes including Ptgds and Hsd11b1. Finally,
triterpenoids induced oligodendrocyte maturation in vitro and enhanced myelin
repair in an LPC-induced non-inflammatory model of demyelination in vivo. These
results demonstrate the unique potential of triterpenoid derivatives for the
treatment of neuroinflammatory disorders such as MS.

PMCID: PMC3242013
PMID: 22355716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Dev Cell. 2012 Feb 14;22(2):459-67. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.12.010.

Opposing functions of the ETS factor family define Shh spatial expression in limb
buds and underlie polydactyly.

Lettice LA(1), Williamson I, Wiltshire JH, Peluso S, Devenney PS, Hill AE, Essafi
A, Hagman J, Mort R, Grimes G, DeAngelis CL, Hill RE.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU,
UK.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) expression during limb development is crucial for specifying
the identity and number of digits. The spatial pattern of Shh expression is
restricted to a region called the zone of polarizing activity (ZPA), and this
expression is controlled from a long distance by the cis-regulator ZRS. Here,
members of two groups of ETS transcription factors are shown to act directly at
the ZRS mediating a differential effect on Shh, defining its spatial expression
pattern. Occupancy at multiple GABPa/ETS1 sites regulates the position of the ZPA
boundary, whereas ETV4/ETV5 binding restricts expression outside the ZPA. The ETS
gene family is therefore attributed with specifying the boundaries of the
classical ZPA. Two point mutations within the ZRS change the profile of ETS
binding and activate Shh expression at an ectopic site in the limb bud. These
molecular changes define a pathogenetic mechanism that leads to preaxial
polydactyly (PPD).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3314984
PMID: 22340503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012 Apr 15;185(8):851-61. doi:
10.1164/rccm.201106-1152OC. Epub 2012 Feb 3.

Activation of mitochondrial biogenesis by heme oxygenase-1-mediated NF-E2-related
factor-2 induction rescues mice from lethal Staphylococcus aureus sepsis.

MacGarvey NC(1), Suliman HB, Bartz RR, Fu P, Withers CM, Welty-Wolf KE,
Piantadosi CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2012 Apr 15;185(8):800-1.

RATIONALE: Mitochondrial damage is an important component of multiple organ
failure syndrome, a highly lethal complication of severe sepsis that lacks
specific therapy. Mitochondrial quality control is regulated in part by the heme 
oxygenase-1 (HO-1; Hmox1) system through the redox-regulated NF-E2-related
factor-2 (Nrf2) transcription factor, but its role in mitochondrial biogenesis in
Staphylococcus aureus sepsis is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To test the hypothesis that Nrf2-dependent up-regulation of the
HO-1/carbon monoxide (CO) system would preserve mitochondrial biogenesis and
rescue mice from lethal S. aureus sepsis.
METHODS: A controlled murine S. aureus peritonitis model with and without inhaled
CO was examined for HO-1 and Nrf2 regulation of mitochondrial biogenesis and the 
resolution of hepatic mitochondrial damage.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Sepsis survival was significantly enhanced using
inhaled CO (250 ppm once-daily for 1 h), and linked mechanistically to Hmox1
induction and mitochondrial HO activity through Nrf2 transcriptional and Akt
kinase activity. HO-1/CO stimulated Nrf2-dependent gene expression and nuclear
accumulation of nuclear respiratory factor-1, -2a (Gabpa), and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1a; increased mitochondrial
transcription factor-A and citrate synthase protein levels; and augmented mtDNA
copy number. CO enhanced antiinflammatory IL-10 and reduced proinflammatory tumor
necrosis factor-a production. By contrast, Nrf2(-/-) and Akt1(-/-) mice lacked CO
induction of Hmox1 and mitochondrial biogenesis, and CO rescued neither strain
from S. aureus sepsis.
CONCLUSIONS: We identify an inducible Nrf2/HO-1 regulatory cycle for
mitochondrial biogenesis that is prosurvival and counter-inflammatory in sepsis, 
and describe targeted induction of mitochondrial biogenesis as a potential
multiple organ failure therapy.

PMCID: PMC3360573
PMID: 22312014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;28(2):303-8. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110911.

Breakpoint sequence analysis of an AßPP locus duplication associated with
autosomal dominant Alzheimer's disease and severe cerebral amyloid angiopathy.

Antonell A(1), Gelpi E, Sánchez-Valle R, Martínez R, Molinuevo JL, Lladó A.

Author information: 
(1)Alzheimer's Disease and other Cognitive Disorders Unit, Neurology Service,
Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), 
Barcelona, Spain.

AßPP locus duplications have been recently identified in early-onset Alzheimer's 
disease. We describe a patient who initiated memory problems and behavioral
disturbances at 57 years, with a progressive cognitive decline, who died at the
age of 68 years with dementia. Neuropathological examination revealed a
temporobasal hemorrhage, extensive Alzheimer-type pathology, and severe cerebral 
amyloid angiopathy. We observed a chromosomal 21 region duplication spanning 0.59
Mb, which comprised JAM2, ATP5J, GABPA, and AßPP genes. We propose a replication 
based mutational mechanism (single Fork-Stalling and Template-Switching) or a
recombination based one (non-homologous end-joining repair) for the AßPP locus
duplication in this case.

PMID: 22008262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Surg Obes Relat Dis. 2013 May-Jun;9(3):429-35. doi: 10.1016/j.soard.2011.06.012. 
Epub 2011 Jul 6.

Roux-en-Y gastric bypass improves hepatic mitochondrial function in obese rats.

Peng Y(1), Murr MM.

Author information: 
(1)James A. Haley Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Department of Surgery,
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33601, USA.

BACKGROUND: Obesity-related fatty liver disease is linked to mitochondrial
dysfunction and oxidative stress. Nuclear factor (erythroid-derived 2)-like 2
(Nrf2) regulates mitochondrial function and is a transcriptor of multiple genes
that produce antioxidants. Because Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) improves fatty
liver and decreases the oxidative stress in the liver, we hypothesized that RYGB 
activates Nrf2 and increases cytochrome C oxidase subunit II (COX-II) in the
liver of obese rats.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats were fed a high-fat diet for 16 weeks. The obese
rats underwent either RYGB (n = 20) or a sham operation (n = 20). The tissues
were harvested 13 weeks postoperatively. The nuclear fraction and mitochondrial
extracts were used for protein analysis with immunoblotting. Immunostaining was
done on liver sections for COX-II, Nrf2, and the macrophage marker ED2 and F4/80.
The gels were quantified using densitometry; P = .05 was considered significant.
RESULTS: RYGB increased COX-II expression in the liver sections (3330 ± 56 versus
2056 ± 37 for RYGB versus sham, P < .001). The total (nuclear and cytoplasmic)
Nrf2 expression was high in the obese sham-operated control (2456 ± 45 versus
4352 ± 76, RYGB versus sham, P < .001). However, the nuclear fraction of Nrf2 was
significantly increased in the RYGB liver (2341 ± 46 versus 1352 ± 35, RYGB
versus sham, P < .001). Furthermore, Nrf2 protein co-localized with the molecular
markers of Kupffer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Diet-induced fatty liver is associated with mitochondrial
dysfunction. RYGB increases COX-II, which is involved in mitochondrial
respiration, and increases the nuclear translocation of the Nrf2 transcriptional 
factor, which is involved in mitochondrial biogenesis and function. Taken
together, these data suggest that surgically induced weight loss is associated
with improved mitochondrial function in obese rats.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21890425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Blood. 2011 Aug 25;118(8):2243-53. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-298802. Epub 2011
Jun 24.

GABP transcription factor is required for myeloid differentiation, in part,
through its control of Gfi-1 expression.

Yang ZF(1), Drumea K, Cormier J, Wang J, Zhu X, Rosmarin AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology-Oncology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.

GABP is an ets transcription factor that regulates genes that are required for
myeloid differentiation. The tetrameric GABP complex includes GABPa, which binds 
DNA via its ets domain, and GABPß, which contains the transcription activation
domain. To examine the role of GABP in myeloid differentiation, we generated mice
in which Gabpa can be conditionally deleted in hematopoietic tissues. Gabpa
knockout mice rapidly lost myeloid cells, and residual myeloid cells were
dysplastic and immunophenotypically abnormal. Bone marrow transplantation
demonstrated that Gabpa null cells could not contribute to the myeloid
compartment because of cell intrinsic defects. Disruption of Gabpa was associated
with a marked reduction in myeloid progenitor cells, and Gabpa null myeloid cells
express reduced levels of the transcriptional repressor, Gfi-1. Gabp bound and
activated the Gfi1 promoter, and transduction of Gabpa knockout bone marrow with 
Gfi1 partially rescued defects in myeloid colony formation and myeloid
differentiation. We conclude that Gabp is required for myeloid differentiation
due, in part, to its regulation of the tran-scriptional repressor Gfi-1.

PMCID: PMC3162354
PMID: 21705494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;27(1):115-9.

[The pathway of PI3k/Akt-aPKCiota/zeta-Nrf2 regulating the expression of
gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase in the bronchial epithelial cells of rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang G(1), Dai AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory, Hunan Provincial People's Hospital, Changsha
410005, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of the signal pathway of
phosphoinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt-antypical protein kinase C(iotazeta)
(aPKC(iotazeta))-Nuclear factor-E2 related factor (Nrf2) on
gamma-glutamylcysteine synthetase (gamma-GCS) of the bronchial epithelial cells
of rats after exposure to cigarette smoke extracts (CSE).
METHODS: gamma-GCS, Nrf2, p-Akt and p-aPKC(iotazeta) proteins were
semi-quantified by Western blot. gamma-GCS protein expression was assessed by
immunocytochemistry. gamma-GCS mRNA expression was detected by reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Nrf2 protein was observed by
immunofluorescence. The rate of the cells expressed p-Akt were analyzed by flow
cytometry. GSH content and gamma-GCS activity were measured.
RESULTS: GSH content, Nrf2 protein of nucleus, p-aPKC(iotazeta) protein, p-Akt
protein and positive cells, gamma-GCS protein and mRNA and activity were
significantly increased after exposure to CSE for 3 hours. aPK(iotazeta)
inhibitor RO813220 significantly reduced the expression of p-aPKC(iotazeta)
protein, gamma-GCS protein and mRNA and activity, but enhanced Nrf2 protein of
cytoplasm expression, had no effect on p-Akt. p-Akt inhibitor LY294002 and
RO813220 + LY294002 decreased p-aPKC(iotazeta) protein, p-Akt protein and
positive cells, gamma-GCS protein and mRNA and activity expression, increased
Nrf2 protein of cytoplasm expression. The correlation analysises demonstrated
that there were a positive correlation between Nrf2 and gamma-GCS, p-Akt,
p-aPKC(iotazeta), between p-Akt and Nrf2, p-aPKC(iotazeta), gamma-GCS, between
p-aPKC(iotazeta) and Nrf2, p-Akt, gamma-GCS.
CONCLUSION: CSE might upregulate gamma-GCS expression through
PI3K/Akt-aPKC(iotazeta)-Nrf2 signaling pathway in the bronchial epithelial cells 
of rats.

PMID: 21560358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 6;286(18):16374-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.207738. Epub 2011
Mar 18.

Heme oxygenase-1 couples activation of mitochondrial biogenesis to
anti-inflammatory cytokine expression.

Piantadosi CA(1), Withers CM, Bartz RR, MacGarvey NC, Fu P, Sweeney TE,
Welty-Wolf KE, Suliman HB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina
27710, USA. piant001@mc.duke.edu

The induction of heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1; Hmox1) by inflammation, for instance in 
sepsis, is associated both with an anti-inflammatory response and with
mitochondrial biogenesis. Here, we tested the idea that HO-1, acting through the 
Nfe2l2 (Nrf2) transcription factor, links anti-inflammatory cytokine expression
to activation of mitochondrial biogenesis. HO-1 induction after LPS stimulated
anti-inflammatory IL-10 and IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) expression in mouse
liver, human HepG2 cells, and mouse J774.1 macrophages but blunted tumor necrosis
factor-a expression. This was accompanied by nuclear Nfe2l2 accumulation and led 
us to identify abundant Nfe2l2 and other mitochondrial biogenesis transcription
factor binding sites in the promoter regions of IL10 and IL1Ra compared with
pro-inflammatory genes regulated by NF-<U+03BA><U+0392>. Mechanistically, HO-1, through its CO 
product, enabled these transcription factors to bind the core IL10 and IL1Ra
promoters, which for IL10 included Nfe2l2, nuclear respiratory factor (NRF)-2
(Gabpa), and MEF2, and for IL1Ra, included NRF-1 and MEF2. In cells, Hmox1 or
Nfe2l2 RNA silencing prevented IL-10 and IL-1Ra up-regulation, and HO-1 induction
failed post-LPS in Nfe2l2-silenced cells and post-sepsis in Nfe2l2(-/-) mice.
Nfe2l2(-/-) mice compared with WT mice, showed more liver damage, higher
mortality, and ineffective CO rescue in sepsis. Nfe2l2(-/-) mice in sepsis also
generated higher hepatic TNF-a mRNA levels, lower NRF-1 and PGC-1a mRNA levels,
and no enhancement of anti-inflammatory Il10, Socs3, or bcl-x(L) gene expression.
These findings disclose a highly structured transcriptional network that couples 
mitochondrial biogenesis to counter-inflammation with major implications for
immune suppression in sepsis.

PMCID: PMC3091243
PMID: 21454555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2011 Jul;301(1):G119-27. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00253.2010. Epub 2011 Mar 17.

Mitochondrial biogenesis fails in secondary biliary cirrhosis in rats leading to 
mitochondrial DNA depletion and deletions.

Arduini A(1), Serviddio G, Escobar J, Tormos AM, Bellanti F, Viña J, Monsalve M, 
Sastre J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Valencia, Spain.

Chronic cholestasis is characterized by mitochondrial dysfunction, associated
with loss of mitochondrial membrane potential, decreased activities of
respiratory chain complexes, and ATP production. Our aim was to determine the
molecular mechanisms that link long-term cholestasis to mitochondrial
dysfunction. We studied a model of chronic cholestasis induced by bile duct
ligation in rats. Key sensors and regulators of the energetic state and
mitochondrial biogenesis, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-to-nuclear DNA (nDNA) ratio
(mtDNA/nDNA) relative copy number, mtDNA deletions, and indexes of apoptosis
(BAX, BCL-2, and cleaved caspase 3) and cell proliferation (PCNA) were evaluated.
Our results show that long-term cholestasis is associated with absence of
activation of key sensors of the energetic state, evidenced by decreased SIRT1
and pyruvate dehydrogenase kinase levels and lack of AMPK activation. Key
mitochondrial biogenesis regulators (PGC-1a and GABP-a) decreased and NRF-1 was
not transcriptionally active. Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) protein
levels increased transiently in liver mitochondria at 2 wk after bile duct
ligation, but they dramatically decreased at 4 wk. Reduced TFAM levels at this
stage were mirrored by a marked decrease (65%) in mtDNA/nDNA relative copy
number. The blockade of mitochondrial biogenesis should not be ascribed to
activation of apoptosis or inhibition of cell proliferation. Impaired
mitochondrial turnover and loss of the DNA stabilizing effect of TFAM are likely 
the causative event involved in the genetic instability evidenced by accumulation
of mtDNA deletions. In conclusion, the lack of stimulation of mitochondrial
biogenesis leads to mtDNA severe depletion and deletions in long-term
cholestasis. Hence, long-term cholestasis should be considered a secondary
mitochondrial hepatopathy.

PMID: 21415417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Theriogenology. 2011 Jun;75(9):1582-95. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2010.12.019. Epub 2011 Mar 15.

Transcriptomic analysis of in vivo and in vitro produced bovine embryos revealed 
a developmental change in cullin 1 expression during maternal-to-embryonic
transition.

Kepkova KV(1), Vodicka P, Toralova T, Lopatarova M, Cech S, Dolezel R, Havlicek
V, Besenfelder U, Kuzmany A, Sirard MA, Laurincik J, Kanka J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Physiology and Genetics, The Academy of Sciences of the
Czech Republic, Libechov, Czech Republic. kepkova@iapg.cas.cz

Pre-implantation embryos derived by in vitro fertilization differ in their
developmental potential from embryos obtained in vivo. In order to characterize
changes in gene expression profiles caused by in vitro culture environment, we
employed microarray constructed from bovine oocyte and preimplantation
embryo-specific cDNAs (BlueChip, Université Laval, Québec). The analysis revealed
changes in the level of 134 transcripts between in vitro derived (cultured in
COOK BVC/BVB media) and in vivo derived 4-cell stage embryos and 97 transcripts
were differentially expressed between 8-cell stage in vitro and in vivo embryos. 
The expression profiles of 7 selected transcripts (BUB3, CUL1, FBL, NOLC1, PCAF, 
GABPA and CNOT4) were studied in detail. We have identified a switch from Cullin 
1-like transcript variant 1 to Cullin 1 transcript variant 3 (UniGene IDs
BT.36789 and BT.6490, respectively) expressions around the time of bovine major
gene activation (8-cell stage). New fibrillarin protein was detected by
immunofluorescence already in early 8-cell stage and this detection correlated
with increased level of fibrillarin mRNA. The qRT-PCR analysis revealed
significant differences in the level of BUB3, NOLC1, PCAF, GABPA and CNOT4 gene
transcripts between in vivo derived (IVD) and in vitro produced (IVP) embryos in 
late 8-cell stage. The combination of these genes represents a suitable tool for 
addressing questions concerning normal IVD embryo development and can be
potentially useful as a marker of embryo quality in future attempts to optimize
in vitro culture conditions.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21411133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Jun;32(6):888-96. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr045. Epub 2011 Mar 
9.

Pomegranate-mediated chemoprevention of experimental hepatocarcinogenesis
involves Nrf2-regulated antioxidant mechanisms.

Bishayee A(1), Bhatia D, Thoppil RJ, Darvesh AS, Nevo E, Lansky EP.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Therapeutics and Chemoprevention Group, Department of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Northeastern Ohio Universities Colleges of Medicine and Pharmacy, OH
44272, USA. abishayee@neoucom.edu

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), one of the most prevalent and lethal cancers, has
shown an alarming rise in the USA. Without effective therapy for HCC, novel
chemopreventive strategies may effectively circumvent the current morbidity and
mortality. Oxidative stress predisposes to hepatocarcinogenesis and is the major 
driving force of HCC. Pomegranate, an ancient fruit, is gaining tremendous
attention due to its powerful antioxidant properties. Here, we examined
mechanism-based chemopreventive potential of a pomegranate emulsion (PE) against 
dietary carcinogen diethylnitrosamine (DENA)-induced rat hepatocarcinogenesis
that mimics human HCC. PE treatment (1 or 10 g/kg), started 4 weeks prior to the 
DENA challenge and continued for 18 weeks thereafter, showed striking
chemopreventive activity demonstrated by reduced incidence, number, multiplicity,
size and volume of hepatic nodules, precursors of HCC. Both doses of PE
significantly attenuated the number and area of <U+03B3>-glutamyl
transpeptidase-positive hepatic foci compared with the DENA control. PE also
attenuated DENA-induced hepatic lipid peroxidation and protein oxidation.
Mechanistic studies revealed that PE elevated gene expression of an array of
hepatic antioxidant and carcinogen detoxifying enzymes in DENA-exposed animals.
PE elevated protein and messenger RNA expression of the hepatic nuclear factor
E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2). Our results provide substantial evidence, for the
first time, that pomegranate constituents afford chemoprevention of
hepatocarcinogenesis possibly through potent antioxidant activity achieved by
upregulation of several housekeeping genes under the control of Nrf2 without
toxicity. The outcome of this study strongly supports the development of
pomegranate-derived products in the prevention and treatment of human HCC, which 
remains a devastating disease.

PMCID: PMC3314278
PMID: 21389260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Blood. 2011 Feb 17;117(7):2166-78. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-09-306563. Epub 2010
Dec 7.

GABP controls a critical transcription regulatory module that is essential for
maintenance and differentiation of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells.

Yu S(1), Cui K, Jothi R, Zhao DM, Jing X, Zhao K, Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA, USA.

Maintaining a steady pool of self-renewing hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is
critical for sustained production of multiple blood lineages. Many transcription 
factors and molecules involved in chromatin and epigenetic modifications have
been found to be critical for HSC self-renewal and differentiation; however,
their interplay is less understood. The transcription factor GA binding protein
(GABP), consisting of DNA-binding subunit GABPa and transactivating subunit
GABPß, is essential for lymphopoiesis as shown in our previous studies. Here we
demonstrate cell-intrinsic, absolute dependence on GABPa for maintenance and
differentiation of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. Through genome-wide
mapping of GABPa binding and transcriptomic analysis of GABPa-deficient HSCs, we 
identified Zfx and Etv6 transcription factors and prosurvival Bcl-2 family
members including Bcl-2, Bcl-X(L), and Mcl-1 as direct GABP target genes,
underlying its pivotal role in HSC survival. GABP also directly regulates Foxo3
and Pten and hence sustains HSC quiescence. Furthermore, GABP activates
transcription of DNA methyltransferases and histone acetylases including p300,
contributing to regulation of HSC self-renewal and differentiation. These
systematic analyses revealed a GABP-controlled gene regulatory module that
programs multiple aspects of HSC biology. Our studies thus constitute a critical 
first step in decoding how transcription factors are orchestrated to regulate
maintenance and multipotency of HSCs.

PMCID: PMC3062326
PMID: 21139080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cell Metab. 2010 Oct 6;12(4):352-61. doi: 10.1016/j.cmet.2010.09.002.

miR-378(*) mediates metabolic shift in breast cancer cells via the PGC-1ß/ERR<U+03B3>
transcriptional pathway.

Eichner LJ(1), Perry MC, Dufour CR, Bertos N, Park M, St-Pierre J, Giguère V.

Author information: 
(1)Rosalind and Morris Goodman Cancer Research Centre, McGill University,
Montreal, QC H3A 1A3, Canada.

Cancer cell metabolism is often characterized by a shift from an oxidative to a
glycolytic bioenergetics pathway, a phenomenon known as the Warburg effect.
miR-378(*) is embedded within PPARGC1b which encodes PGC-1ß, a transcriptional
regulator of oxidative energy metabolism. Here we show that miR-378(*) expression
is regulated by ERBB2 and induces a metabolic shift in breast cancer cells.
miR-378(*) performs this function by inhibiting the expression of two PGC-1ß
partners, ERR<U+03B3> and GABPA, leading to a reduction in tricarboxylic acid cycle gene
expression and oxygen consumption as well as an increase in lactate production
and in cell proliferation. In situ hybridization experiments show that miR-378(*)
expression correlates with progression of human breast cancer. These results
identify miR-378(*) as a molecular switch involved in the orchestration of the
Warburg effect in breast cancer cells via interference with a well-integrated
bioenergetics transcriptional pathway.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20889127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2011 Jan 15;183(2):226-33. doi:
10.1164/rccm.200911-1709OC. Epub 2010 Aug 23.

Staphylococcus aureus sepsis and mitochondrial accrual of the 8-oxoguanine DNA
glycosylase DNA repair enzyme in mice.

Bartz RR(1), Suliman HB, Fu P, Welty-Wolf K, Carraway MS, MacGarvey NC, Withers
CM, Sweeney TE, Piantadosi CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, DUMC Box 3094, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
bartz001@mc.duke.edu

RATIONALE: Damage to mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) by the production of reactive
oxygen species during inflammatory states, such as sepsis, is repaired by poorly 
understood mechanisms.
OBJECTIVES: To test the hypothesis that the DNA repair enzyme, 8-oxoguanine DNA
glycosylase (OGG1), contributes to mtDNA repair in sepsis.
METHODS: Using a well-characterized mouse model of Staphylococcus aureus sepsis, 
we analyzed molecular markers for mitochondrial biogenesis and OGG1 translocation
into liver mitochondria as well as OGG1 mRNA expression at 0, 24, 48, and 72
hours after infection. The effects of OGG1 RNA silencing on mtDNA content were
determined in control, tumor necrosis factor-a, and peptidoglycan-exposed rat
hepatoma cells. Based on in situ analysis of the OGG1 promoter region, chromatin 
immunoprecipitation assays were performed for nuclear respiratory factor (NRF)-1 
and NRF-2a GA-binding protein (GABP) binding to the promoter of OGG1.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Mice infected with 10(7) cfu S. aureus
intraperitoneally demonstrated hepatic oxidative mtDNA damage and significantly
lower hepatic mtDNA content as well as increased mitochondrial OGG1 protein and
enzyme activity compared with control mice. The infection also caused increases
in hepatic OGG1 transcript levels and NRF-1 and NRF-2a transcript and protein
levels. A bioinformatics analysis of the Ogg1 gene locus identified several
promoter sites containing NRF-1 and NRF-2a DNA binding motifs, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays confirmed in situ binding of both transcription
factors to the Ogg1 promoter within 24 hours of infection.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies identify OGG1 as an early mitochondrial response
protein during sepsis under regulation by the NRF-1 and NRF-2a transcription
factors that regulate mitochondrial biogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3040391
PMID: 20732986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Neuroinflammation. 2010 May 19;7:30. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-7-30.

Dimethylfumarate inhibits microglial and astrocytic inflammation by suppressing
the synthesis of nitric oxide, IL-1beta, TNF-alpha and IL-6 in an in-vitro model 
of brain inflammation.

Wilms H(1), Sievers J, Rickert U, Rostami-Yazdi M, Mrowietz U, Lucius R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 400,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany. henrik.wilms@med.uni-heidelberg.de

BACKGROUND: Brain inflammation plays a central role in multiple sclerosis (MS).
Dimethylfumarate (DMF), the main ingredient of an oral formulation of fumaric
acid esters with proven therapeutic efficacy in psoriasis, has recently been
found to ameliorate the course of relapsing-remitting MS. Glial cells are the
effector cells of neuroinflammation; however, little is known of the effect of
DMF on microglia and astrocytes. The purpose of this study was to use an
established in vitro model of brain inflammation to determine if DMF modulates
the release of neurotoxic molecules from microglia and astrocytes, thus
inhibiting glial inflammation.
METHODS: Primary microglial and astrocytic cell cultures were prepared from
cerebral cortices of neonatal rats. The control cells were treated with LPS, an
accepted inducer of pro-inflammatory properties in glial cells, and the
experimental groups with LPS and DMF in different concentrations. After
stimulation/incubation, the generation of nitric oxide (NO) in the cell culture
supernatants was determined by measuring nitrite accumulation in the medium using
Griess reagent. After 6 hours of treatment RT-PCR was used to determine
transcription levels of iNOS, IL-1beta, IL-6 and TNF-alpha mRNA in microglial and
astrocytic cell cultures initially treated with DMF, followed after 30 min by LPS
treatment. Moreover, we investigated possible involvement of the ERK and Nrf-2
transduction pathway in microglia using western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Pretreatment with DMF decreased synthesis of the proinflammatory
mediators iNOS, TNF-alpha, IL-1beta and IL-6 at the RNA level in activated
microglia and astrocytes in vitro, associated with a decrease in ERK
phosphorylation in microglia.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these results suggest that the neuroprotective effects
of DMF may be in part functionally attributable to the compound's ability to
inhibit expression of multiple neuroinflammatory mediators in brain of MS
patients.

PMCID: PMC2880998
PMID: 20482831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 2;285(14):10179-88. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.088740. Epub 2010
Feb 5.

Critical requirement of GABPalpha for normal T cell development.

Yu S(1), Zhao DM, Jothi R, Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

GA binding protein (GABP) consists of GABPalpha and GABPbeta subunits. GABPalpha 
is a member of Ets family transcription factors and binds DNA via its conserved
Ets domain, whereas GABPbeta does not bind DNA but possesses transactivation
activity. In T cells, GABP has been demonstrated to regulate the gene expression 
of interleukin-7 receptor alpha chain (IL-7Ralpha) and postulated to be critical 
in T cell development. To directly investigate its function in early thymocyte
development, we used GABPalpha conditional knock-out mice where the exons
encoding the Ets DNA-binding domain are flanked with LoxP sites. Ablation of
GABPalpha with the Lck-Cre transgene greatly diminished thymic cellularity,
blocked thymocyte development at the double negative 3 (DN3) stage, and resulted 
in reduced expression of T cell receptor (TCR) beta chain in DN4 thymocytes. By
chromatin immunoprecipitation, we demonstrated in DN thymocytes that GABPalpha is
associated with transcription initiation sites of genes encoding key molecules in
TCR rearrangements. Among these GABP-associated genes, knockdown of GABPalpha
expression by RNA interference diminished expression of DNA ligase IV, Artemis,
and Ku80 components in DNA-dependent protein kinase complex. Interestingly,
forced expression of prearranged TCR but not IL-7Ralpha can alleviate the DN3
block in GABPalpha-targeted mice. Our observations collectively indicate that in 
addition to regulating IL-7Ralpha expression, GABP is critically required for TCR
rearrangements and hence normal T cell development.

PMCID: PMC2856223
PMID: 20139079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS Genet. 2009 Dec;5(12):e1000778. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000778. Epub 2009
Dec 18.

DNA specificity determinants associate with distinct transcription factor
functions.

Hollenhorst PC(1), Chandler KJ, Poulsen RL, Johnson WE, Speck NA, Graves BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Huntsman Cancer Institute, Department of Oncological Sciences, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

To elucidate how genomic sequences build transcriptional control networks, we
need to understand the connection between DNA sequence and transcription factor
binding and function. Binding predictions based solely on consensus predictions
are limited, because a single factor can use degenerate sequence motifs and
because related transcription factors often prefer identical sequences. The ETS
family transcription factor, ETS1, exemplifies these challenges. Unexpected,
redundant occupancy of ETS1 and other ETS proteins is observed at promoters of
housekeeping genes in T cells due to common sequence preferences and the presence
of strong consensus motifs. However, ETS1 exhibits a specific function in T cell 
activation; thus, unique transcriptional targets are predicted. To uncover the
sequence motifs that mediate specific functions of ETS1, a genome-wide approach, 
chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with high-throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq),
identified both promoter and enhancer binding events in Jurkat T cells. A
comparison with DNase I sensitivity both validated the dataset and also improved 
accuracy. Redundant occupancy of ETS1 with the ETS protein GABPA occurred
primarily in promoters of housekeeping genes, whereas ETS1 specific occupancy
occurred in the enhancers of T cell-specific genes. Two routes to ETS1
specificity were identified: an intrinsic preference of ETS1 for a variant of the
ETS family consensus sequence and the presence of a composite sequence that can
support cooperative binding with a RUNX transcription factor. Genome-wide
occupancy of RUNX factors corroborated the importance of this partnership.
Furthermore, genome-wide occupancy of co-activator CBP indicated tight
co-localization with ETS1 at specific enhancers, but not redundant promoters. The
distinct sequences associated with redundant versus specific ETS1 occupancy were 
predictive of promoter or enhancer location and the ontology of nearby genes.
These findings demonstrate that diversity of DNA binding motifs may enable
variable transcription factor function at different genomic sites.

PMCID: PMC2787013
PMID: 20019798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Gen Virol. 2010 Apr;91(Pt 4):893-7. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.017590-0. Epub 2009 Dec 
9.

Antibody to parvovirus B19 nonstructural protein is associated with chronic
arthralgia in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis.

Kerr JR(1), Gough J, Richards SC, Main J, Enlander D, McCreary M, Komaroff AL,
Chia JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular & Molecular Medicine, St George's University of London,
London, UK. jkerr@sgul.ac.uk

Chronic fatigue syndrome/myalgic encephalomyelitis (CFS/ME) is a neuro-immune
disease of uncertain pathogenesis. Human parvovirus B19 infection has been shown 
to occur just prior to development of the onset of CFS/ME in several cases,
although B19 seroprevalence studies do not show any significant differences
between CFS/ME and controls. In this study, we analysed parvovirus B19 markers in
CFS/ME patients (n=200), diagnosed according to Fukuda CDC criteria, and normal
blood donors (n=200). Serum from each subject was tested for anti-B19 VP2 IgM and
IgG (by Biotrin ELISA), anti-B19 NS1 IgM and IgG (by immunofluorescence), and B19
DNA (by real-time PCR). CFS/ME patients and normal blood donors had a similar B19
seroprevalence (75 % versus 78 %, respectively). Eighty-three CFS patients (41.5 
%) as compared with fourteen (7 %) normal blood donors tested positive for
anti-B19 NS1 IgG (chi(2)=64.8; P<0.0001; odds ratio=9.42, CI 5.11-17.38). Of
these 83 patients, 61 complained of chronic joint pain, while 22 did not.
Parvovirus B19 DNA was detected in serum of 11 CFS patients and none of the
controls by Taqman real-time PCR (chi(2)=9.35, P<0.002). Positivity for anti-B19 
NS1 IgG was associated with higher expression levels of the human CFS-associated 
genes NHLH1 and GABPA. As NS1 antibodies are thought to indicate chronic or
severe courses of B19 infection, these findings suggest that although the
seroprevalence of B19 in CFS patients is similar to controls, the immune control 
of the virus in these patients may not be efficient.

PMID: 20007355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2009 Nov;297(5):F1174-80. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00397.2009. Epub 2009 Sep 16.

Exercise activates redox-sensitive transcription factors and restores renal D1
receptor function in old rats.

George L(1), Lokhandwala MF, Asghar M.

Author information: 
(1)Heart and Kidney Institute, College of Pharmacy, University of Houston,
Houston, TX 77204, USA.

We have previously reported that age-associated oxidative stress via protein
kinase C (PKC) increases D1 receptor (D1R) phosphorylation and causes D1R-G
protein uncoupling in renal proximal tubules (RPTs) of old Fischer 344 rats. This
results in reduced ability of D1R agonist SKF-38393 to inhibit Na+-K+-ATPase in
RPTs of old rats. Here, we studied the effect of treadmill exercise on markers of
oxidative stress, PKC, D1R phosphorylation, D1R-G protein coupling, and
Na+-K+-ATPase activity in RPTs of adult and old rats. We found increased levels
of malondialdehyde, a marker of oxidative stress, in RPTs of old rats, which
decreased during exercise. Nuclear levels of nuclear erythroid-related factor
(Nrf)-2 and nuclear factor (NF)-kappaB in RPTs, transcription factors involved in
antioxidant enzyme gene transcription, increased in exercised old rats. This was 
accompanied by an increase in the activity and expression of antioxidant enzymes,
superoxide dismutase and heme oxygenase-1. Age-related decrease in the levels of 
D1R mRNAs and proteins was attenuated during exercise. Furthermore, exercise in
old rats decreased PKC activity and D1R phosphorylation and increased
SKF-38393-mediated [35S]guanosine 5'-O-(3-thiotriphosphate) binding (an index of 
D1R-G protein coupling). SKF-38393 also caused inhibition of Na+-K+-ATPase in
these animals. Also, exercise caused a decrease in proteinuria and increase in
phosphaturia in old rats. These results suggest beneficial effects of exercise in
terms of increasing antioxidant defenses, decreasing oxidative stress, and
improving kidney function in general and D1R function in particular in aging.
Both Nrf-2 and NF-kappaB seem to play key role in this phenomenon.

PMCID: PMC2781333
PMID: 19759268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Genome Res. 2009 Nov;19(11):1963-73. doi: 10.1101/gr.093047.109. Epub 2009 Aug
17.

Elucidation of the ELK1 target gene network reveals a role in the coordinate
regulation of core components of the gene regulation machinery.

Boros J(1), Donaldson IJ, O'Donnell A, Odrowaz ZA, Zeef L, Lupien M, Meyer CA,
Liu XS, Brown M, Sharrocks AD.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, United
Kingdom.

Transcription factors play an important role in orchestrating the activation of
specific networks of genes through targeting their proximal promoter and distal
enhancer regions. However, it is unclear how the specificity of downstream
responses is maintained by individual members of transcription-factor families
and, in most cases, what their target repertoire is. We have used ChIP-chip
analysis to identify the target genes of the ETS-domain transcription factor
ELK1. Two distinct modes of ELK1 target gene selection are identified; the first 
involves redundant promoter binding with other ETS-domain family members; the
second occurs through combinatorial binding with a second transcription factor
SRF, which specifies a unique group of target genes. One of the most prominent
groups of genes forming the ELK1 target network includes classes involved in core
gene expression control, namely, components of the basal transcriptional
machinery, the spliceosome and the ribosome. Amongst the set of genes encoding
the basal transcription machinery components, are a functionally linked subset of
GTFs and TAFs. Our study, therefore, reveals an unsuspected level of coordinate
regulation of components of the core gene expression control machinery and also
identifies two different modes of promoter targeting through binding with a
second transcription factor or redundant binding with other ETS-domain family
members.

PMCID: PMC2775591
PMID: 19687146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Br J Cancer. 2009 Jul 7;101(1):132-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.bjc.6605111. Epub 2009 Jun 
16.

Death-associated protein 3 is overexpressed in human thyroid oncocytic tumours.

Jacques C(1), Fontaine JF, Franc B, Mirebeau-Prunier D, Triau S, Savagner F,
Malthiery Y.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U694, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire d'Angers, Laboratoire de
Biochimie et Biologie Moléculaire, Angers, France.
caroline.jacques@univ-angers.fr

BACKGROUND: The human death-associated protein 3 (hDAP3) is a GTP-binding
constituent of the small subunit of the mitochondrial ribosome with a
pro-apoptotic function.
METHODS: A search through publicly available microarray data sets showed 337
genes potentially coregulated with the DAP3 gene. The promoter sequences of these
337 genes and 70 out of 85 mitochondrial ribosome genes were analysed in silico
with the DAP3 gene promoter sequence. The mitochondrial role of DAP3 was also
investigated in the thyroid tumours presenting various mitochondrial contents.
RESULTS: The study revealed nine transcription factors presenting enriched motifs
for these gene promoters, five of which are implicated in cellular growth (ELK1, 
ELK4, RUNX1, HOX11-CTF1, TAL1-ternary complex factor 3) and four in mitochondrial
biogenesis (nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1), GABPA, PPARG-RXRA and
estrogen-related receptor alpha (ESRRA)). An independent microarray data set
showed the overexpression of ELK1, RUNX1 and ESRRA in the thyroid oncocytic
tumours. Exploring the thyroid tumours, we found that DAP3 mRNA and protein
expression is upregulated in tumours presenting a mitochondrial biogenesis
compared with the normal tissue. ELK1 and ESRRA were also showed upregulated with
DAP3.
CONCLUSION: ELK1 and ESRRA may be considered as potential regulators of the DAP3 
gene expression. DAP3 may participate in mitochondrial maintenance and play a
role in the balance between mitochondrial homoeostasis and tumourigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2713694
PMID: 19536094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 29;284(22):14698-709. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M901104200. Epub
2009 Mar 25.

Methylation-sensitive regulation of TMS1/ASC by the Ets factor, GA-binding
protein-alpha.

Lucas ME(1), Crider KS, Powell DR, Kapoor-Vazirani P, Vertino PM.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Genetics and Molecular Biology, the Winship Cancer
Institute, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Epigenetic silencing involving the aberrant DNA methylation of
promoter-associated CpG islands is one mechanism leading to the inactivation of
tumor suppressor genes in human cancers. However, the molecular mechanisms
underlying this event remains poorly understood. TMS1/ASC is a novel proapoptotic
signaling factor that is subject to epigenetic silencing in human breast and
other cancers. The TMS1 promoter is embedded within a CpG island that is
unmethylated in normal cells and is spanned by three DNase I-hypersensitive sites
(HS). Silencing of TMS1 in cancer cells is accompanied by local alterations in
histone modification, remodeling of the HS, and hypermethylation of DNA. In this 
study, we probed the functional significance of the CpG island-specific HS. We
identified a methylation-sensitive complex that bound a 55-bp intronic element
corresponding to HS2. Affinity chromatography and mass spectrometry identified a 
component of this complex to be the GA-binding protein (GABP) alpha. Supershift
analysis indicated that the GABPalpha binding partner, GABPbeta1, was also
present in the complex. The HS2 element conferred a 3-fold enhancement in TMS1
promoter activity, which was dependent on both intact tandem ets binding sites
and the presence of GABPalpha/beta1 in trans. GABPalpha was selectively enriched 
at HS2 in human cells, and its occupancy was inversely correlated with CpG island
methylation. Down-regulation of GABPalpha led to a concomitant decrease in TMS1
expression. These data indicate that the intronic HS2 element acts in cis to
maintain transcriptional competency at the TMS1 locus and that this activity is
mediated by the ets transcription factor, GABPalpha.

PMCID: PMC2685652
PMID: 19324871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Carcinogenesis. 2009 Mar;30(3):480-6. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgn292. Epub 2009 Jan
6.

Chemical genomics of cancer chemopreventive dithiolethiones.

Tran QT(1), Xu L, Phan V, Goodwin SB, Rahman M, Jin VX, Sutter CH, Roebuck BD,
Kensler TW, George EO, Sutter TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Mathematical Sciences, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN 38152,
USA.

3H-1,2-dithiole-3-thione (D3T) and its analogues
4-methyl-5-pyrazinyl-3H-1,2-dithiole-3-thione (OLT) and
5-tert-butyl-3H-1,2-dithiole-3-thione (TBD) are chemopreventive agents that block
or diminish early stages of carcinogenesis by inducing activities of detoxication
enzymes. While OLT has been used in clinical trials, TBD has been shown to be
more efficacious and possibly less toxic than OLT in animals. Here, we utilize a 
robust and high-resolution chemical genomics procedure to examine the
pharmacological structure-activity relationships of these compounds in livers of 
male rats by microarray analyses. We identified 226 differentially expressed
genes that were common to all treatments. Functional analysis identified the
relation of these genes to glutathione metabolism and the nuclear factor,
erythroid derived 2-related factor 2 pathway (Nrf2) that is known to regulate
many of the protective actions of dithiolethiones. OLT and TBD were shown to have
similar efficacies and both were weaker than D3T. In addition, we identified 40
genes whose responses were common to OLT and TBD, yet distinct from D3T. As
inhibition of cytochrome P450 (CYP) has been associated with the effects of OLT
on CYP expression, we determined the half maximal inhibitory concentration
(IC(50)) values for inhibition of CYP1A2. The rank order of inhibitor potency was
OLT >> TBD >> D3T, with IC(50) values estimated as 0.2, 12.8 and >100 microM,
respectively. Functional analysis revealed that OLT and TBD, in addition to their
effects on CYP, modulate liver lipid metabolism, especially fatty acids.
Together, these findings provide new insight into the actions of clinically
relevant and lead dithiolethione analogues.

PMCID: PMC2650797
PMID: 19126641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Immunol. 2008 Apr 15;180(8):5309-19.

Formation of IL-7Ralphahigh and IL-7Ralphalow CD8 T cells during infection is
regulated by the opposing functions of GABPalpha and Gfi-1.

Chandele A(1), Joshi NS, Zhu J, Paul WE, Leonard WJ, Kaech SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale Medical School, New Haven, CT 06511, USA.

IL-7 is essential for the survival of naive and memory T cells, and IL-7 receptor
alpha-chain (IL-7Ralpha) expression is dynamically regulated in activated CD8 T
cells during acute viral and bacterial infections. Most virus-specific CD8 T
cells become IL-7Ralpha(low) and are relatively short-lived, but some escape
IL-7Ralpha repression (referred to as IL-7Ralpha(high) memory precursor effector 
cells) and preferentially enter the memory CD8 T cell pool. How antiviral
effector CD8 T cells regulate IL-7Ralpha expression in an "on and off" fashion
remains to be characterized. During lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection,
we found that opposing actions of the transcription factors GABPalpha (GA binding
protein alpha) and Gfi-1 (growth factor independence 1) control IL-7Ralpha
expression in effector CD8 T cells. Specifically, GABPalpha was required for
IL-7Ralpha expression in memory precursor effector cells, and this correlated
with hyperacetylation of the Il7ra promoter. In contrast, Gfi-1 was required for 
stable IL-7Ralpha repression in effector CD8 T cells and acted by antagonizing
GABPalpha binding and recruiting histone deacetylase 1, which deacetylated the
Il7ra promoter. Thus, Il7ra promoter acetylation and activity was dependent on
the reciprocal binding of GABPalpha and Gfi-1, and these data provide a
biochemical mechanism for the generation of stable IL-7Ralpha(high) and
IL-7Ralpha(low) states in virus-specific effector CD8 T cells.

PMCID: PMC2792750
PMID: 18390712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2008 May 30;283(22):15134-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800498200. Epub 2008
Mar 31.

Cooperative regulation of Fc receptor gamma-chain gene expression by multiple
transcription factors, including Sp1, GABP, and Elf-1.

Takahashi K(1), Hayashi N, Shimokawa T, Umehara N, Kaminogawa S, Ra C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Immunology and Allergology, Nihon University
Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 30-1 Oyaguchi Kamima-chi, Itabashi-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. fcericra@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

The Fc receptor gamma-chain (FcRgamma), which was first identified as a
constituent of the high affinity IgE receptor, associates with various cell
surface receptors to mediate intracellular signals. We identified three
transcriptional enhancer elements in the 5' region of the human FcRgamma gene;
one of the cis-elements was recognized by the transcription factor Sp-1 and
another was recognized by GABP or Elf-1. The sequence of the other element was
similar to a binding motif of the C/EBP family. Overexpression experiments showed
that these transcription factors cooperatively activated the FcRgamma promoter.
Furthermore, inactivation of the GABP-binding site by nucleotide substitutions as
well as repression of GABPalpha expression by RNA interference reduced
Sp1-mediated transactivation of the FcRgamma promoter, demonstrating that Sp1 and
GABP synergistically activated the FcRgamma promoter. This synergistic activation
was suggested to require physical interaction between the two transcription
factors, because the Ets domain of GABPalpha was demonstrated to directly bind
Sp1. On the other hand, GABP and Elf-1, whose recognition sequences overlapped,
were shown to bind the FcRgamma gene with similar affinity in the context of
chromatin, although Elf-1 exerted weaker enhancer activity for FcRgamma gene
expression than did GABP. Both were thought to compete for binding to the
element, because additional expression of Elf-1 in combination with Sp1 and GABP 
reduced FcRgamma promoter activity. Such functional and physical interactions
among transcription factors involved in the cooperative regulation of FcRgamma
gene expression as revealed in this study will become promising targets for
medical applications against various immune diseases involving FcRgamma.

PMCID: PMC3258888
PMID: 18378679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Antimicrob Agents Chemother. 2008 May;52(5):1670-6. doi: 10.1128/AAC.01449-07.
Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Mitochondrial DNA content, an inaccurate biomarker of mitochondrial alteration in
human immunodeficiency virus-related lipodystrophy.

Kim MJ(1), Jardel C, Barthélémy C, Jan V, Bastard JP, Fillaut-Chapin S, Houry S, 
Capeau J, Lombès A.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U582, Paris, F-75013 France.

Lipoatrophy is a prevalent side effect of antiretroviral treatment of human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Its mechanisms are still disputed but
include mitochondrial toxicity and, in particular, mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
depletion induced by nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors. To obtain an
integrated evaluation of the mitochondrial alteration in lipoatrophy, we
investigated the DNA, RNA, and protein levels in 15 samples of abdominal
subcutaneous adipose tissue from HIV-infected patients with peripheral
lipoatrophy and compared the results with those for 15 samples from age- and body
mass index-matched controls. The DNA and RNA analyses used PCR-based techniques, 
while proteins were quantified with enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay and
measurement of activities with spectrophotometric assays. Depletion of mtDNA and 
mtDNA-encoded MT-CO2 mRNA was present, but normal levels of mtDNA-dependent
activity (cytochrome c oxidase) and protein (MT-CO2p) showed that it was
compensated for. An increase in nuclear-DNA-dependent mitochondrial activities
(citrate synthase and malate dehydrogenase) and protein (COX4I1p), as well as
transcriptional up-regulation of nuclear-DNA-encoded mitochondrial genes (COX4I1 
and UCP2), demonstrated increased mitochondrial biogenesis. However, the
expression of the known transcription factors of mitochondrial biogenesis (TFAM, 
NRF1, GABPA, PPARGC1A, PPARGC1B, and PPRC1) was normal or decreased. Increased
amounts of activated caspase 3 and of DDIT3 mRNA showed the induction of
apoptosis and oxidative stress, respectively. The mtDNA content did not correlate
with any other mitochondrial parameter. In conclusion, mtDNA content does not
appear to be an accurate biomarker of mitochondrial alteration in lipoatrophic
adipose tissue. The preservation of mtDNA-dependent mitochondrial functions
occurred despite severe mtDNA depletion. The presence of significant oxidative
stress and apoptosis did not correlate with the mtDNA content.

PMCID: PMC2346614
PMID: 18332166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Genome Res. 2008 Mar;18(3):380-92. doi: 10.1101/gr.6880908. Epub 2008 Jan 29.

Whole-genome maps of USF1 and USF2 binding and histone H3 acetylation reveal new 
aspects of promoter structure and candidate genes for common human disorders.

Rada-Iglesias A(1), Ameur A, Kapranov P, Enroth S, Komorowski J, Gingeras TR,
Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden

Transcription factors and histone modifications are crucial regulators of gene
expression that mutually influence each other. We present the DNA binding
profiles of upstream stimulatory factors 1 and 2 (USF1, USF2) and acetylated
histone H3 (H3ac) in a liver cell line for the whole human genome using ChIP-chip
at a resolution of 35 base pairs. We determined that these three proteins bind
mostly in proximity of protein coding genes transcription start sites (TSSs), and
their bindings are positively correlated with gene expression levels. Based on
the spatial and functional relationship between USFs and H3ac at protein coding
gene promoters, we found similar promoter architecture for known genes and the
novel and less-characterized transcripts human mRNAs and spliced ESTs.
Furthermore, our analysis revealed a previously underestimated abundance of genes
in a bidirectional conformation, where USFs are bound in between TSSs. After
taking into account this promoter conformation, the results indicate that H3ac is
mainly located downstream of TSS, and it is at this genomic location where it
positively correlates with gene expression. Finally, USF1, which is associated to
familial combined hyperlipidemia, was found to bind and potentially regulate
nuclear mitochondrial genes as well as genes for lipid and cholesterol
metabolism, frequently in collaboration with GA binding protein transcription
factor alpha (GABPA, nuclear respiratory factor 2 [NRF-2]). This expands our
understanding about the transcriptional control of metabolic processes and its
alteration in metabolic disorders.

PMCID: PMC2259102
PMID: 18230803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Neurosci Res. 2008 Apr;86(5):982-91.

Neuregulin-1 induces acetylcholine receptor transcription in the absence of
GABPalpha phosphorylation.

Herndon CA(1), Fromm L.

Author information: 
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine-Muncie and Ball State University,
Muncie, Indiana 47306, USA.

Localization of acetylcholine receptors (AChRs) to the postsynaptic region of
muscle is mediated in part by transcriptional mechanisms, because the genes
encoding AChR subunits are transcribed selectively in synaptic myofiber nuclei.
Neuregulin-1 (NRG-1) is a synaptic signal and induces transcription of AChRs in
muscle cells. Signaling by NRG-1 is thought to involve the transcription factor
GA-binding protein (GABP), a heterodimer of GABPalpha, which is a member of the
Ets family, and GABPbeta. Phosphorylation of certain other Ets proteins outside
the Ets DNA-binding domain serves to stimulate transcriptional activation in
response to extracellular signals. According to previous studies, NRG-1
stimulates phosphorylation of GABPalpha at threonine 280 in the N-terminal region
adjacent to the Ets domain, suggesting that GABPalpha phosphorylation might
contribute to NRG-1 responsiveness. To determine the functional importance of the
N-terminal region of GABPalpha and whether its function is regulated by
phosphorylation, we generated muscle cell lines in which the endogenous GABPalpha
gene was deleted and replaced by variants of GABPalpha mutated in the N-terminal 
region. We found that NRG-1 can induce transcription in cells with mutated T280
phosphorylation site, indicating that T280 phosphorylation does not contribute to
NRG-1 responsiveness. We also found that NRG-1-induced transcription occurs in
cells missing the entire N-terminal region of GABPalpha. Because NRG-1 signaling 
is not expected to alter the function of the C-terminal region, which remains in 
these cells, these results suggest that GABPbeta, or other interacting
components, rather than GABPalpha directly, is targeted by NRG-1 signaling.

PMID: 17975830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. FEBS J. 2007 Nov;274(22):5804-14. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Mitochondrial targeting of human peroxiredoxin V protein and regulation of PRDX5 
gene expression by nuclear transcription factors controlling biogenesis of
mitochondria.

Kropotov A(1), Usmanova N, Serikov V, Zhivotovsky B, Tomilin N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St Petersburg, Russia.

Peroxiredoxin V (PRDX5) is a member of the family of mammalian proteins that
neutralize reactive oxygen species. The PRDX5 gene is constitutively expressed at
a high level in many human tissues, but functional elements of its promoter
responsible for a high basal activity in the absence of oxidative stress have
still not been identified. Among predicted binding sites for transcription
factors in the human PRDX5 promoter are binding sites for nuclear respiratory
factor 1 (NFR-1) and nuclear respiratory factor 2 (also called GABPA), which
regulate the biogenesis of mitochondria. We constructed luciferase reporter gene 
plasmids containing stepwise deletions of the PRDX5 promoter and examined their
activities in transient transfections. Our results suggest that basal PRDX5
promoter activity mostly depends on NFR-1 and GABPA sites. The latter, in the
PRDX5 promoter, were conserved in the six mammalian genomes analyzed (human,
chimpanzee, cow, mouse, rat and dog) and a fraction of human PRDX5 associates
with the mitochondrial matrix. We also found that the N-terminal 50 amino acids
of the full-length human PRDX5 (24 kDa) translated from its first AUG codon
targets this protein exclusively to mitochondria. However, the short form of
PRDX5 (17 kDa), translated from its second AUG codon, has cytoplasmic and nuclear
localization, which is also typical for endogenously expressed protein. Together,
our results indicate that high basal expression of the PRDX5 gene is coordinated 
with the expression of nuclear genes encoding mitochondrial proteins and that the
PRDX5 protein might play a major role in permanent defense against reactive
oxygen species produced by mitochondria.

PMID: 17937766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Genome Res. 2007 Jun;17(6):818-27.

Transcription factor binding and modified histones in human bidirectional
promoters.

Lin JM(1), Collins PJ, Trinklein ND, Fu Y, Xi H, Myers RM, Weng Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts, 02215, USA.

Bidirectional promoters have received considerable attention because of their
ability to regulate two downstream genes (divergent genes). They are also highly 
abundant, directing the transcription of approximately 11% of genes in the human 
genome. We categorized the presence of DNA sequence motifs, binding of
transcription factors, and modified histones as overrepresented, shared, or
underrepresented in bidirectional promoters with respect to unidirectional
promoters. We found that a small set of motifs, including GABPA, MYC, E2F1, E2F4,
NRF-1, CCAAT, YY1, and ACTACAnnTCC are overrepresented in bidirectional
promoters, while the majority (73%) of known vertebrate motifs are
underrepresented. We performed chromatin-immunoprecipitation (ChIP), followed by 
quantitative PCR for GABPA, on 118 regions in the human genome and showed that it
binds to bidirectional promoters more frequently than unidirectional promoters,
and its position-specific scoring matrix is highly predictive of binding.
Signatures of active transcription, such as occupancy of RNA polymerase II and
the modified histones H3K4me2, H3K4me3, and H3ac, are overrepresented in regions 
around bidirectional promoters, suggesting that a higher fraction of divergent
genes are transcribed in a given cell than the fraction of other genes.
Accordingly, analysis of whole-genome microarray data indicates that 68% of
divergent genes are transcribed compared with 44% of all human genes. By
combining the analysis of publicly available ENCODE data and a detailed study of 
GABPA, we survey bidirectional promoters with breadth and depth, leading to
biological insights concerning their motif composition and bidirectional
regulatory mode.

PMCID: PMC1891341
PMID: 17568000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Biol Cell. 2007 Aug;18(8):2864-72. Epub 2007 May 16.

Ets-2 repressor factor silences extrasynaptic utrophin by N-box mediated
repression in skeletal muscle.

Perkins KJ(1), Basu U, Budak MT, Ketterer C, Baby SM, Lozynska O, Lunde JA,
Jasmin BJ, Rubinstein NA, Khurana TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pennsylvania Muscle Institute, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6085, USA.

Utrophin is the autosomal homologue of dystrophin, the protein product of the
Duchenne's muscular dystrophy (DMD) locus. Utrophin expression is temporally and 
spatially regulated being developmentally down-regulated perinatally and enriched
at neuromuscular junctions (NMJs) in adult muscle. Synaptic localization of
utrophin occurs in part by heregulin-mediated extracellular signal-regulated
kinase (ERK)-phosphorylation, leading to binding of GABPalpha/beta to the
N-box/EBS and activation of the major utrophin promoter-A expressed in myofibers.
However, molecular mechanisms contributing to concurrent extrasynaptic silencing 
that must occur to achieve NMJ localization are unknown. We demonstrate that the 
Ets-2 repressor factor (ERF) represses extrasynaptic utrophin-A in muscle. Gel
shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation studies demonstrated physical association
of ERF with the utrophin-A promoter N-box/EBS site. ERF overexpression repressed 
utrophin-A promoter activity; conversely, small interfering RNA-mediated ERF
knockdown enhanced promoter activity as well as endogenous utrophin mRNA levels
in cultured muscle cells in vitro. Laser-capture microscopy of tibialis anterior 
NMJ and extrasynaptic transcriptomes and gene transfer studies provide spatial
and direct evidence, respectively, for ERF-mediated utrophin repression in vivo. 
Together, these studies suggest "repressing repressors" as a potential strategy
for achieving utrophin up-regulation in DMD, and they provide a model for
utrophin-A regulation in muscle.

PMCID: PMC1949368
PMID: 17507653  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;27(13):5040-6. Epub 2007 May 7.

GA-binding protein is dispensable for neuromuscular synapse formation and
synapse-specific gene expression.

Jaworski A(1), Smith CL, Burden SJ.

Author information: 
(1)The Helen L. and Martin S. Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine, Skirball
Institute of Biomoledular Medicine, NYU School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016,
USA.

The mRNAs encoding postsynaptic components at the neuromuscular junction are
concentrated in the synaptic region of muscle fibers. Accumulation of these RNAs 
in the synaptic region is mediated, at least in part, by selective transcription 
of the corresponding genes in synaptic myofiber nuclei. The transcriptional
mechanisms that are responsible for synapse-specific gene expression are largely 
unknown, but an Ets site in the promoter regions of acetylcholine receptor (AChR)
subunit genes and other "synaptic" genes is required for synapse-specific
transcription. The Ets domain transcription factor GA-binding protein (GABP) has 
been implicated to mediate synapse-specific gene expression. Inactivation of
GABPalpha, the DNA-binding subunit of GABP, leads to early embryonic lethality,
preventing analysis of synapse formation in gabpalpha mutant mice. To study the
role of GABP at neuromuscular synapses, we conditionally inactivated gabpalpha in
skeletal muscle and studied synaptic differentiation and muscle gene expression. 
Although expression of rb, a target of GABP, is elevated in muscle tissue
deficient in GABPalpha, clustering of synaptic AChRs at synapses and
synapse-specific gene expression are normal in these mice. These data indicate
that GABP is dispensable for synapse-specific transcription and maintenance of
normal AChR expression at synapses.

PMCID: PMC1951497
PMID: 17485447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Immunity. 2007 Apr;26(4):421-31.

The transcription factor GABP is a critical regulator of B lymphocyte
development.

Xue HH(1), Bollenbacher-Reilley J, Wu Z, Spolski R, Jing X, Zhang YC, McCoy JP,
Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1674, USA.

GA binding protein (GABP) is a ubiquitously expressed Ets-family transcription
factor that critically regulates the expression of the interleukin-7 receptor
alpha chain (IL-7Ralpha) in T cells, whereas it is dispensable for IL-7Ralpha
expression in fetal liver B cells. Here we showed that deficiency of GABPalpha,
the DNA-binding subunit of GABP, resulted in profoundly defective B cell
development and a compromised humoral immune response, in addition to thymic
developmental defects. Furthermore, the expression of Pax5 and Pax5 target genes 
such as Cd79a was greatly diminished in GABPalpha-deficient B cell progenitors,
pro-B, and mature B cells. GABP could bind to the regulatory regions of Pax5 and 
Cd79a in vivo. Thus, GABP is a key regulator of B cell development, maturation,
and function.

PMID: 17442597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Biochemistry. 2007 Apr 24;46(16):4763-74. Epub 2007 Apr 3.

The role of Ets transcription factors in the basal transcription of the
translocator protein (18 kDa).

Giatzakis C(1), Batarseh A, Dettin L, Papadopoulos V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular and Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University Medical Center, 3900 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20057, USA.

The translocator protein (18 kDa; TSPO), previously known as peripheral-type
benzodiazepine receptor, is a high-affinity cholesterol- and drug-binding
mitochondrial protein involved in various cell functions including
steroidogenesis, apoptosis, and proliferation. TSPO is highly expressed in
secretory and glandular tissues, especially in steroidogenic cells, and its
expression is altered in certain pathological conditions such as cancer and
neurological diseases. In this study, we characterized the regulatory elements
present in the region of the TPSO promoter extending from 515 to 805 bp upstream 
of the transcription start site, an area previously identified as being important
for transcription. Promoter fragments extending 2.7 kb and 805 bp upstream of the
transcription start site were able to direct enhanced green fluorescent protein
expression to Leydig cells of the testis, theca cells of the ovary, and cells of 
the adrenal cortex in transgenic animals. This expression pattern perfectly
mimicked endogenous TSPO expression. Functional characterization of the 515-805
bp region revealed the presence of one specificity protein 1/specificity protein 
3 (Sp1/Sp3) and two v-ets erythroblastosis virus E26 oncogene homologue (Ets)
binding sites that are important for transcriptional activity in both MA-10 mouse
Leydig tumor cells and NIH/3T3 whole mouse embryo fibroblasts. GA-binding protein
alpha (GABPalpha), a member of the Ets family of transcription factors, was found
to be associated with the endogenous TSPO promoter. We conclude that Sp1/Sp3 and 
members of the Ets family of transcription factors bind to specific binding sites
in the TSPO promoter to drive basal TSPO gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2529463
PMID: 17402746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Int J Sports Med. 2007 Sep;28(9):717-21. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

NRF2 genotype improves endurance capacity in response to training.

He Z(1), Hu Y, Feng L, Lu Y, Liu G, Xi Y, Wen L, McNaughton LR.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Center, China Institute of Sport Science, Beijing, China.

The aim of this work was to examine the association between the polymorphisms in 
nuclear respiratory factor (NRF2) gene and endurance capacity measured prior to
and after an 18-wk endurance training program in young Chinese men. The
phenotypes measured were running economy (RE) and VO(2max). The RE was determined
by measuring submaximal VO(2) for 5 min at a constant running speed of 12 km x h 
(-1) and VO(2max) was measured during an incremental test to volitional
exhaustion. Genomic DNA was extracted from white cells of peripheral blood and
the genotypes were examined in SNPrs12594956, rs8031031 and rs7181866 by
PCR-RFLP. Genotype distributions were in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium at three
loci, and linkage disequilibrium was observed (LD D' = 1 and r (2) = 0.903)
between rs8031031 and rs7181866. The VO(2max) was associated with rs12594956 at
baseline while the training response of VO(2) at RE, was associated with
rs12594956, rs8031031 and rs7181866. When the three SNPs were considered
together, those carrying the ATG haplotype had 57.5 % higher training response in
VO(2) at RE (p = 0.006) than non-carriers. In conclusion, polymorphisms in NRF2
gene may explain some of the between-person variance in endurance capacity.

PMID: 17357964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(9):3470-80. Epub 2007 Feb 26.

Targeting of the ETS factor GABPalpha disrupts neuromuscular junction synaptic
function.

O'Leary DA(1), Noakes PG, Lavidis NA, Kola I, Hertzog PJ, Ristevski S.

Author information: 
(1)Monash Institute of Medical Research, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria
3168, Australia.

The GA-binding protein (GABP) transcription factor has been shown in vitro to
regulate the expression of the neuromuscular proteins utrophin, acetylcholine
esterase, and acetylcholine receptor subunits delta and epsilon through the N-box
promoter motif (5'-CCGGAA-3'), but its in vivo function remains unknown. A single
point mutation within the N-box of the gene encoding the acetylcholine receptor
epsilon subunit has been identified in several patients suffering from
postsynaptic congenital myasthenic syndrome, implicating the GA-binding protein
in neuromuscular function and disease. Since conventional gene targeting results 
in an embryonic-lethal phenotype, we used conditional targeting to investigate
the role of GABPalpha in neuromuscular junction and skeletal muscle development. 
The diaphragm and soleus muscles from mutant mice display alterations in
morphology and distribution of acetylcholine receptor clusters at the
neuromuscular junction and neurotransmission properties consistent with reduced
receptor function. Furthermore, we confirmed decreased expression of the
acetylcholine receptor epsilon subunit and increased expression of the gamma
subunit in skeletal muscle tissues. Therefore, the GABP transcription factor aids
in the structural formation and function of neuromuscular junctions by regulating
the expression of postsynaptic genes.

PMCID: PMC1899955
PMID: 17325042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Mar;9(3):339-46. Epub 2007 Feb 4.

The Ets transcription factor GABP is required for cell-cycle progression.

Yang ZF(1), Mott S, Rosmarin AG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, and Biochemistry, Brown
University, Providence, RI 02912, USA.

The transition from cellular quiescence (G0) into S phase is regulated by the
mitogenic-activation of D-type cyclins and cyclin-dependent kinases (Cdks), the
sequestration of the Cdk inhibitors (CDKIs), p21 and p27, and the
hyperphosphorylation of Rb with release of E2F transcription factors. However,
fibroblasts that lack all D-type cyclins can still undergo serum-induced
proliferation and key E2F targets are expressed at stable levels despite cyclical
Rb-E2F activity. Here, we show that serum induces expression of the Ets
transcription factor, Gabpalpha, and that its ectopic expression induces
quiescent cells to re-enter the cell cycle. Genetic disruption of Gabpalpha
prevents entry into S phase, and selectively reduces expression of genes that are
required for DNA synthesis and degradation of CDKIs, yet does not alter
expression of D-type cyclins, Cdks, Rb or E2Fs. Thus, GABP is necessary and
sufficient for re-entry into the cell cycle and it regulates a pathway that is
distinct from that of D-type cyclins and CDKs.

PMID: 17277770  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jan 23;104(4):1418-23. Epub 2007 Jan 17.

Orphan nuclear receptor estrogen-related receptor alpha is essential for adaptive
thermogenesis.

Villena JA(1), Hock MB, Chang WY, Barcas JE, Giguère V, Kralli A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

Survival of organisms requires the ability to adapt to changes in the
environment. Adaptation of oxidative metabolism is essential for meeting
increased energy demands in response to stressors, such as exposure to cold
temperatures or increased physical activity. Adaptive changes in metabolism are
often achieved at the level of gene expression, and nuclear receptors have
prevalent roles in mediating such responses. Estrogen-related receptor alpha
(ERRalpha) was the first orphan nuclear receptor to be identified, and yet its
physiologic function remains unknown. Here, we show that mice lacking ERRalpha
are unable to maintain body temperature when exposed to cold. Surprisingly, the
inability to adapt to cold is not due to defects in the acute transcriptional
induction of genes important for thermogenesis. Rather, we show that ERRalpha is 
needed for the high levels of mitochondrial biogenesis and oxidative capacity
characteristic of brown adipose tissue (BAT), and thus for providing the energy
necessary for thermogenesis. ERRalpha fulfills this role by acting directly at
genes important for mitochondrial function, parallel to other factors controlling
mitochondrial gene expression, such as NRF1 and NRF2/GABPA. Our findings
demonstrate that ERRalpha is a key regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis and
oxidative metabolism, and essential for adaptive thermogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1783094
PMID: 17229846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Feb 16;353(3):686-91. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

GABPalpha regulates Oct-3/4 expression in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Kinoshita K(1), Ura H, Akagi T, Usuda M, Koide H, Yokota T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa 
University, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells are pluripotent cells derived from the inner cell mass 
of blastocysts, and transcription factors Oct-3/4, Nanog, Sox2, and STAT3, are
essential for their self-renewal. In this study, we searched for molecules
downstream of STAT3 in ES cells. Using DNA chip analysis, we obtained GA-repeat
binding protein (GABP) alpha. Expression of GABPalpha was restricted to
undifferentiated ES cells and controlled by STAT3. We found that the expression
level of Oct-3/4 is reduced by knockdown of GABPalpha. On the other hand,
GABPalpha-overexpressing ES cells maintained the expression level of Oct-3/4 even
in the absence of LIF. Moreover, the induction of Oct-3/4 repressors Cdx-2,
Coup-tf1, and GCNF was stimulated by GABPalpha knockdown. These data suggest that
GABPalpha upregulates the expression of Oct-3/4 via downregulation of Oct-3/4
repressors.

PMID: 17194449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jan;292(1):E340-6. Epub 2006 Sep 5.

Expression of mitochondrial biogenesis-signaling factors in brown adipocytes is
influenced specifically by 17beta-estradiol, testosterone, and progesterone.

Rodríguez-Cuenca S(1), Monjo M, Gianotti M, Proenza AM, Roca P.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Biologia Fonamental i Ciències de la Salut, Ed. Guillem Colom. 
Universitat de les Illes Balears, Cra. Valldemossa, Km 7.5, 07122-Palma de
Mallorca, Spain.

Control of mitochondrial biogenesis in brown adipose tissue (BAT), as part of the
thermogenesis program, is a complex process that requires the integration of
multiple transcription factors to orchestrate mitochondrial and nuclear gene
expression. Despite the knowledge of the role of sex hormones on BAT physiology, 
little is known about the effect of these hormones on the mitochondrial biogenic 
program. The aim of this study was to determine the effect of testosterone,
17beta-estradiol, and progesterone on the expression of nuclear factors involved 
in the control of mitochondrial biogenesis and thermogenic function such as
ppargamma, pgc1alpha, nrf1, gabpa, and tfam, and also an inhibitor of PI3K-Akt
pathway, recently found to be involved in the control of mitochondrial
recruitment (pten). For this purpose, an in vitro assay using cell-cultured brown
adipocytes was used to address the role of steroid hormones, progesterone,
testosterone, and 17beta-estradiol on the mRNA expression of these factors by
real-time PCR. Thus 17beta-estradiol seemed to exert a dual effect, activating
the PI3K-Akt pathway by inhibiting pten mRNA expression and also inhibiting nrf1 
and tfam mRNA expression. Progesterone seemed to positively stimulate
mitochondriogenesis and BAT differentiation by increasing the mRNA expression of 
the gabpa-tfam axis and ppargamma, respectively, but also exerted a negative
output by increasing pten mRNA levels. Finally, testosterone inhibited the
transcription of pgc1alpha, the master factor involved in UCP1 expression and
mitochondrial biogenesis. In conclusion, our results support the idea that sex
hormones have direct effects on different mediators of the mitochondriogenesis
program.

PMID: 16954335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Appl Physiol (1985). 2006 Aug;101(2):385-91. Epub 2006 Apr 13.

ACE inhibition prevents myocardial infarction-induced skeletal muscle
mitochondrial dysfunction.

Zoll J(1), Monassier L, Garnier A, N'Guessan B, Mettauer B, Veksler V, Piquard F,
Ventura-Clapier R, Geny B.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Physiologie, Faculté de Médecine, 11, rue Humann, 67000
Strasbourg, France. Zolljoffrey@yahoo.com

Heart failure is associated with alterations in cardiac and skeletal muscle
energy metabolism resulting in a generalized myopathy. We investigated the
molecular and cellular effects of angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibition (ACEi)
on skeletal muscle metabolism in infarcted animals. Myocardial infarction (MI)
was obtained by left descending coronary artery ligation. Sham, MI, and
MI-treated rats (perindopril, 2 mg.kg(-1).day(-1) given 7 days after MI) were
studied 1 and 4 mo after surgery. Oxygen consumption of white gastrocnemius (Gas)
muscle was studied in saponin-permeabilized fibers, using the main substrates of 
mitochondrial respiration. mRNA expression of nuclear factors (PGC-1alpha,
NRF-2alpha, and mtTFA), involved in the transcription of mitochondrial proteins, 
and of MCIP1, a marker of calcineurin activation, were also determined.
Echocardiographic left ventricular fractional shortening was reduced in both MI
and perindopril group after 1 and 4 mo, whereas systemic blood pressure was
reduced by 16% only in the MI group after 4 mo. The capacity of Gas to oxidize
glutamate-malate, glycerol-triphosphate, or pyruvate (-30%, P < 0.01; -32%, P <
0.05; -33%, P < 0.01, respectively), was greatly decreased. Furthermore,
PGC-1alpha (-54%), NRF-2alpha (-45%), and MCIP1 (-84%) gene expression were
significantly downregulated. ACEi improved survival, left ventricular function,
and blood pressure. Perindopril protected also totally the Gas mitochondrial
function and preserved the mRNAs concentration of the mitochondrial
transcriptional factors. Moreover, PGC-1alpha correlated with Gas oxidative
capacity (r = 0.48), mitochondrial cytochrome-c oxidase (r = 0.65), citrate
synthase (r = 0.45) activities, and MCIP1 expression (r = 0.44). Thus ACEi
totally prevented MI-induced alterations of skeletal muscle mitochondrial
function and protein expression, halting the development of this metabolic
myopathy.

PMID: 16614354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Behav Genet. 2006 May;36(3):439-53. Epub 2006 Feb 24.

Transcriptional dysregulation in Down syndrome: predictions for altered protein
complex stoichiometries and post-translational modifications, and consequences
for learning/behavior genes ELK, CREB, and the estrogen and glucocorticoid
receptors.

Gardiner K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Eleanor Roosevelt Institute at the University of Denver, CO 80045, USA.
kgardine@du.edu

The phenotype of Down syndrome, trisomy of chromosome 21, is hypothesized to be
produced by the increased expression due to gene dosage of normal chromosome 21
genes. Chromosome 21 encodes a number of proteins that, based on experimental
evidence or domain composition, are classed as transcription factors or their
co-regulators. Other chromosome 21 proteins contribute to post-translational
modification of transcription factors, including their phosphorylation,
dephosphorylation and sumoylation. Several of these chromosome 21 proteins and
the pathways in which they function have overlapping transcription factor
specificities. Thus, altered stoichiometry in complexes and altered levels of
activation of individual transcription factors may contribute to the Down
syndrome phenotype by perturbation of downstream gene expression. Here we review 
recent data on four chromosome 21 proteins: NRIP1, GABPA, DYRK1A and SUMO3. We
discuss the implications for activation of ELK, CREB, C/EBP alpha, beta estrogen 
and glucocorticoid receptors, and for expression of BDNF. Each of these proteins 
is relevant to learning, behavior and/or development and therefore perturbation
of their activation may contribute to the Down syndrome phenotype.

PMID: 16502135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Gene. 2006 Mar 15;369:35-44. Epub 2005 Nov 23.

Identification of functional elements in the murine Gabp alpha/ATP synthase
coupling factor 6 bi-directional promoter.

Patton J(1), Block S, Coombs C, Martin ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO 65212, USA.

The GA-repeat binding protein (GABP) is a ubiquitous transcription factor
involved in transcriptional regulation of genes encoding proteins involved in a
variety of cellular processes including adipocyte differentiation, mitochondrial 
respiration, and neuromuscular signaling. GABP is composed of two subunits; the
GABP alpha subunit is a member of the Ets-family of transcription factors, and
the unrelated ankyrin repeat containing GABP beta subunit. We previously
identified a bidirectional promoter directing the expression of Gabpa (GAA) gene 
in one direction and ATP Synthase Coupling Factor 6 (Atp5j) (CF6) gene in the
other [Chinenov, Y., Coombs, C. and Martin, M. E., 2000a. "Isolation of a
bi-directional promoter directing the expression of the mouse GABP alpha and ATP 
Synthase Coupling Factor 6 genes. Gene 261:311-320.]. In this study we
characterize sequence elements and regulatory factors contributing to the
promoter activities of the GAA/CF6 bidirectional promoter. The core of the
GAA/CF6 bidirectional promoter is retained within a 400 bp sequence and contains 
four GABP binding sites, a Sp1/3 binding site and an YY1 binding site.
Site-directed mutagenesis demonstrated that while no single factor binding site
was essential for promoter activity in either direction, the GA1 site located
proximal to the previously mapped transcription start sites functioned
cooperatively with the other GABP binding sites and with the Sp1/3 and YY1 sites 
to provide transcriptional activation of the GAA and CF6 promoters. The other
GABP sites and the Sp1/3 and YY1 binding sites were functionally redundant for
basal promoter activities in both directions. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays identified multiple DNA-protein complexes containing GABP alpha, GABP
beta, Sp1, Sp3 or YY1 proteins, including one ternary complex containing GABP
alpha, GABP beta and Sp1 proteins. Binding of GABP to the GAA/CF6 bi-directional 
promoter provides the potential for autoregulation of GABP alpha expression and
confirms the importance of GABP in the coordinate expression of respiratory chain
components.

PMID: 16309857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2005 Oct;289(4):C908-17. Epub 2005 Jun 1.

Calcineurin-NFAT signaling, together with GABP and peroxisome PGC-1{alpha},
drives utrophin gene expression at the neuromuscular junction.

Angus LM(1), Chakkalakal JV, Méjat A, Eibl JK, Bélanger G, Megeney LA, Chin ER,
Schaeffer L, Michel RN, Jasmin BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, and Centre for Neuromuscular
Disease, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5.

We examined whether calcineurin-NFAT (nuclear factors of activated T cells)
signaling plays a role in specifically directing the expression of utrophin in
the synaptic compartment of muscle fibers. Immunofluorescence experiments
revealed the accumulation of components of the calcineurin-NFAT signaling cascade
within the postsynaptic membrane domain of the neuromuscular junction. RT-PCR
analysis using synaptic vs. extrasynaptic regions of muscle fibers confirmed
these findings by showing an accumulation of calcineurin transcripts within the
synaptic compartment. We also examined the effect of calcineurin on utrophin gene
expression. Pharmacological inhibition of calcineurin in mice with either
cyclosporin A or FK506 resulted in a marked decrease in utrophin A expression at 
synaptic sites, whereas constitutive activation of calcineurin had the opposite
effect. Mutation of the previously identified NFAT binding site in the utrophin A
promoter region, followed by direct gene transfer studies in mouse muscle, led to
an inhibition in the synaptic expression of a lacZ reporter gene construct.
Transfection assays performed with cultured myogenic cells indicated that
calcineurin acted additively with GA binding protein (GABP) to transactivate
utrophin A gene expression. Because both GABP- and calcineurin-mediated pathways 
are targeted by peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha), we examined whether this coactivator contributes
to utrophin gene expression. In vitro and in vivo transfection experiments showed
that PGC-1alpha alone induces transcription from the utrophin A promoter.
Interestingly, this induction is largely potentiated by coexpression of
PGC-1alpha with GABP. Together, these studies indicate that the synaptic
expression of utrophin is also driven by calcineurin-NFAT signaling and occurs in
conjunction with signaling events that involve GABP and PGC-1alpha.

PMID: 15930144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Vis Neurosci. 2005 Jan-Feb;22(1):1-18.

Quantitative immuno-electron microscopic analysis of nuclear respiratory factor 2
alpha and beta subunits: Normal distribution and activity-dependent regulation in
mammalian visual cortex.

Wong-Riley MT(1), Yang SJ, Liang HL, Ning G, Jacobs P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee 53226, USA. MWR@MCW.edu

The macaque visual cortex is exquisitely organized into columns, modules, and
streams, much of which can be correlated with its metabolic organization revealed
by cytochrome oxidase (CO). Plasticity in the adult primate visual system has
also been documented by changes in CO activity. Yet, the molecular mechanism of
regulating this enzyme remains not well understood. Being one of only four
bigenomic enzymes in mammalian cells, the transcriptional regulation of this
enzyme necessitates a potential bigenomic coordinator. Nuclear respiratory factor
2 (NRF-2) or GA-binding protein is a transcription factor that may serve such a
critical role. The goal of the present study was to determine if the two major
subunits of NRF-2, 2alpha and 2beta, had distinct subcellular distribution in
neurons of the rat and monkey visual cortex, if major metabolic neuronal types in
the macaque exhibited different levels of the two subunits, and if they would
respond differently to monocular impulse blockade. Quantitative immuno-electron
microscopy was used. In both rats and monkeys, nuclear labeling of alpha and beta
subunits was mainly over euchromatin rather than heterochromatin, consistent with
their active participation in transcriptional activity. Cytoplasmic labeling was 
over free ribosomes, the Golgi apparatus, and occasionally the nuclear envelope, 
signifying sites of synthesis and possible posttranslational modifications. The
density of both subunits was much higher in the nucleus than in the cytoplasm for
all neurons examined, again indicating that their major sites of cellular action 
is in the nucleus.

PMID: 15842736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Gene. 2005 Jan 3;344:79-92. Epub 2004 Nov 23.

Identification and expression analysis of alternative transcripts of the mouse
GA-binding protein (Gabp) subunits alpha and beta1.

O'Leary DA(1), Koleski D, Kola I, Hertzog PJ, Ristevski S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Functional Genomics and Human Disease, Monash Institute of
Reproduction and Development, Monash Medical Centre, Monash University, Clayton
246 Clayton Road, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia.

The erythroblast transformation specific (ETS) transcription factor GA-binding
protein (Gabp) is widely expressed and acts on a diverse range of target genes,
including nuclear-encoded mitochondrial proteins and neuromuscular-specific
genes. The GABPalpha subunit contains an ETS DNA binding domain and the beta
subunit contains a nuclear localization signal (NLS) and transactivation domain. 
Here, we show coincident expression of Gabpalpha and beta1 throughout mouse
embryogenesis, consistent with the gene products functioning in a complex. We
have also identified 2 alternatively spliced, tissue-specific exons 1 (5'
untranslated regions) of mouse Gabpalpha and 4 alternative 3' polyadenylation
signals that, in combination, result in 12 transcripts for Gabpalpha. These
alternative transcripts are suggested to have altered stability, subcellular
localization and/or translation efficiency. Further, we identified nine
differentially expressed splice variants of mouse Gabpbeta1 that encode beta
protein forms lacking functional domains, suggesting a dominant negative
function. Together, alternative transcripts of Gabpalpha and beta1 provide a
mechanism for tissue-specific regulation of Gabp activity.

PMID: 15656975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nat Immunol. 2004 Oct;5(10):1036-44. Epub 2004 Sep 7.

GA binding protein regulates interleukin 7 receptor alpha-chain gene expression
in T cells.

Xue HH(1), Bollenbacher J, Rovella V, Tripuraneni R, Du YB, Liu CY, Williams A,
McCoy JP, Leonard WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Immunology, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Building 10, Room 7N252, Bethesda, Maryland
20892-1674, USA.

The interleukin 7 receptor alpha-chain (IL-7Ralpha) is essential for T cell
development in both humans and mice and for B cell development in mice. Whereas
the transcription factor PU.1 regulates IL-7Ralpha expression in mouse pro-B
cells via a GGAA motif, we demonstrate here that GA binding protein (GABP) bound 
to this site and was essential in the regulation of IL-7Ralpha expression in T
cells, where PU.1 is not expressed. Moreover, IL-7Ralpha expression was
diminished substantially in thymocytes but was normal on B220(+) fetal liver
cells from mouse embryos with diminished expression of GABPalpha. Thus, GABP is
essential for the regulation of IL-7Ralpha expression in T cells, and the
differential regulation of IL-7Ralpha in distinct lymphoid lineages is achieved
at least in part by differential recruitment of factors to the same GGAA motif.

PMID: 15361867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2004 Apr 27;101(17):6570-5. Epub 2004 Apr 20.

Erralpha and Gabpa/b specify PGC-1alpha-dependent oxidative phosphorylation gene 
expression that is altered in diabetic muscle.

Mootha VK(1), Handschin C, Arlow D, Xie X, St Pierre J, Sihag S, Yang W,
Altshuler D, Puigserver P, Patterson N, Willy PJ, Schulman IG, Heyman RA, Lander 
ES, Spiegelman BM.

Author information: 
(1)The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02139-1561, USA. vmootha@broad.mit.edu

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Jul 19;102(29):10405.

Recent studies have shown that genes involved in oxidative phosphorylation
(OXPHOS) exhibit reduced expression in skeletal muscle of diabetic and
prediabetic humans. Moreover, these changes may be mediated by the
transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha). By combining PGC-1alpha-induced genome-wide
transcriptional profiles with a computational strategy to detect cis-regulatory
motifs, we identified estrogen-related receptor alpha (Erralpha) and GA
repeat-binding protein alpha as key transcription factors regulating the OXPHOS
pathway. Interestingly, the genes encoding these two transcription factors are
themselves PGC-1alpha-inducible and contain variants of both motifs near their
promoters. Cellular assays confirmed that Erralpha and GA-binding protein a
partner with PGC-1alpha in muscle to form a double-positive-feedback loop that
drives the expression of many OXPHOS genes. By using a synthetic inhibitor of
Erralpha, we demonstrated its key role in PGC-1alpha-mediated effects on gene
regulation and cellular respiration. These results illustrate the dissection of
gene regulatory networks in a complex mammalian system, elucidate the mechanism
of PGC-1alpha action in the OXPHOS pathway, and suggest that Erralpha agonists
may ameliorate insulin-resistance in individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC404086
PMID: 15100410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Eur J Neurosci. 2004 Mar;19(5):1153-62.

Ultrastructural study of depolarization-induced translocation of NRF-2
transcription factor in cultured rat visual cortical neurons.

Yang SJ(1), Liang HL, Ning G, Wong-Riley MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank
Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Nuclear respiratory factor (NRF)-2 or GA-binding protein is a potential
transcriptional, bigenomic coordinator of mitochondrial and nuclear-encoded
subunits of cytochrome oxidase genes. It is composed of an alpha subunit that
binds DNA and a beta subunit that has the transactivating domain. Previously, we 
found that the level of NRF-2 paralleled that of cytochrome oxidase under normal 
and functionally altered states. The goal of our present study was to increase
the resolution to the ultrastructural level and to quantify changes before and
after depolarizing stimulation. We used a pre-embedding immunogold-silver method 
for the two subunits of NRF-2 in cultured rat visual cortical neurons. NRF-2alpha
and beta were normally located in both the nucleus and the cytoplasm. In the
nucleus, both subunits were associated primarily with euchromatin rather than
heterochromatin, consistent with active involvement in transcription. In the
cytoplasm, they were associated mainly with free ribosomes and occasionally with 
the Golgi apparatus and the outer membrane of the nuclear envelope. Labelling was
not found in the mitochondria, confirming the specificity of the antibodies.
Neuronal depolarization by KCl for 5 h induced a six- to seven-fold increase in
the nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio of both subunits (P < 0.001) without increases
in total labelling densities. These results strongly indicate that both
NRF-2alpha and NRF-2beta respond to increased neuronal activity by translocating 
from the cytoplasm to the nucleus, where they engage in transcriptional
activation of target genes. Our results also indicate that the cytoplasmic to
nuclear movement of transcription factors is a dynamic process induced by
neuronal activity.

PMID: 15016074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. FEBS Lett. 2002 Mar 13;514(2-3):309-14.

Thyroid hormone increases transcription of GA-binding protein/nuclear respiratory
factor-2 alpha-subunit in rat liver.

Rodríguez-Peña A(1), Escrivá H, Handler AC, Vallejo CG.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas Alberto Sols (CSIC-UAM), Arturo
Duperier 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Thyroid hormone (TH) regulates mitochondrial respiratory rate by activating
coordinated transcription in the nucleus and mitochondria. Whereas TH activates
transcription of mitochondrial genes directly, the activation of nuclear-encoded 
mitochondrial genes is probably executed by indirect unknown mechanisms. Nuclear 
respiratory factors (NRF)-1 and GA-binding protein (BP)/NRF-2 may function as
transacting genes, but regulation of these genes by TH is not demonstrated. We
show that TH administration to hypothyroid rats promptly increases GABP/NRF-2
alpha-subunit mRNA levels in the liver, without significant changes in beta,
gamma subunits. In run-on and time-course experiments, the transcription rate and
protein levels increased three-fold in response to TH, indicating GABP/NRF-2
transcriptional regulation. The results also support the notion that ATP synthase
beta-subunit is regulated by TH through the indirect activation of GABP/NRF-2.

PMID: 11943172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2001;93(3-4):270-6.

Ts65Dn -- localization of the translocation breakpoint and trisomic gene content 
in a mouse model for Down syndrome.

Akeson EC(1), Lambert JP, Narayanswami S, Gardiner K, Bechtel LJ, Davisson MT.

Author information: 
(1)The Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor ME 04609, USA.

Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) -- using mouse chromosome paints, probes
for the mouse major centromeric satellite DNA, and probes for genes on
chromosomes (Chr) 16 and 17 -- was employed to locate the breakpoint in a
translocation used to produce a mouse model for Down syndrome. The Ts65Dn trisomy
is derived from the reciprocal translocation T(16;17)65Dn. The Ts65Dn mouse
carries a marker chromosome containing the distal segment of Chr 16, a region
that shows linkage conservation with human Chr 21, and the proximal end of Chr
17. This chromosome confers trisomy for most of the genes in the Chr 16 segment
and Ts65Dn mice show many of the phenotypic features characteristic of Down
syndrome. We used FISH on metaphase chromosomes from translocation T65Dn/+
heterozygotes and Ts65Dn mice to show that the Chr 17 breakpoint is distal to the
heterochromatin of Chr 17, that the Ts65Dn marker chromosome contains a small
portion of Chr 17 euchromatin, that the Chr 16 breakpoint lies between the Ncam2 
and Gabpa/App genes, and that the Ts65Dn chromosome contains >80% of the human
Chr 21 homologs. The significance of this finding is discussed in terms of the
utility of this mouse model.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11528125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Gene. 2000 Dec 31;261(2):311-20.

Isolation of a bi-directional promoter directing expression of the mouse
GABPalpha and ATP synthase coupling factor 6 genes.

Chinenov Y(1), Coombs C, Martin ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri at Columbia, MO, Columbia
65212, USA.

The GA-binding protein (GABP) is a ubiquitous heteromeric transcription factor
implicated in the regulation of several genes involved in mitochondrial energy
metabolism including subunits of cytochrome c oxidase, ATP synthase, and
mitochondrial transcription factor 1 (mtTF1). GABPalpha subunit binds the
PEA3/Ets binding sites (EBS), while GABPbeta contains a transcription activation 
domain and mediates alphabeta dimer and alpha(2)beta(2) tetramer formation
essential for activation of transcription. Here we report the cloning of 2449 bp 
of the mouse (m) GABPalpha promoter region including 201 bp of the 5' end of the 
published mGABPalpha cDNA sequence. Surprisingly, sequences homologous to the
5'UTR of mouse, rat and human mitochondrial ATP synthase coupling factor 6
(ATPsynCF6) cDNAs were found165-240 bp upstream of the mGABPalpha cDNA. A search 
of the non-redundant nucleotide database revealed a human genomic sequence
derived from chromosome 21 (21q22) bearing significant homology to the
mGABPalpha/ATPsynCF6 promoter region and encompassed the entire hGABPalpha and
hATPsynCF6 genes. Primer extension analysis revealed multiple transcription start
sites for both mGABPalpha and mATPsynCF6 mRNAs that mapped near the published
cDNA 5' ends. Sequence analysis identified several binding sites upstream of the 
GABPalpha cDNA sequence including sites for GABP (-86, -104, -169, -257, and
-994), YY1 (-57), Sp1 (-242 and -226), and NRF1 (-5). No 'TATA' motif was
identified near either the GABPalpha or ATPsynCF6 transcription start sites. The 
human and mouse promoters retain significant sequence identity including binding 
sites for several tissue-specific transcription factors. Transient transfection
assays using Luciferase reporter constructs containing the intergenic region and 
flanking sequences confirmed that this region of DNA promotes transcription in
both directions.

PMID: 11167019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biochimie. 2000 Dec;82(12):1129-33.

Evidence of tissue-specific, post-transcriptional regulation of NRF-2 expression.

Vallejo CG(1), Escrivá H, Rodríguez-Peña A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 'Alberto Sols' (CSIC-UAM), Arturo
Duperier, 4, 28029, Madrid, Spain. cvallejo@iib.uam.es

Mitochondrial respiratory function requires the expression of genes both from the
mitochondrial and nuclear genomes. Nuclear respiratory factor 2 (NRF-2) is a
transcription factor required for the expression of several nuclear-encoded
mitochondrial proteins, including the specific mitochondrial transcription factor
Tfam. This makes NRF-2 a likely candidate to coordinate expression of
mitochondrial components. NRF-2 is a multisubunit complex of which the alpha
subunit binds DNA and the beta subunit enhances this binding, respectively. We
have analysed in vivo the expression patterns of NRF-2 subunits both at the mRNA 
and protein level, in three rat tissues, liver, testis and brain. In contrast
with Tfam or the 'housekeeping' beta-actin expressions in which a parallel
gradient was observed, no correlation was found between NRF-2 mRNAs and proteins 
levels, thus suggesting post-transcriptional regulation.

PMID: 11120355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Oncogene. 2000 Apr 6;19(15):1933-40.

GA-binding protein alpha/beta is a critical regulator of the BRCA1 promoter.

Atlas E(1), Stramwasser M, Whiskin K, Mueller CR.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Laboratories, Department of Biochemistry, Queen's University, 
Kingston, Ontario, K7L 3N6, Canada.

Decreased expression of BRCA1 may play a role in the etiology of sporadic breast 
cancer. Deletion and point mutant analysis of proximal promoter elements in the
BRCA1 1a promoter revealed a 22 bp region which was critical for the expression
of the promoter in MCF-7 cells, but had a much reduced effect in T47D cells. The 
main transcription factor interacting with this site was identified as
GABPalpha/beta, and a discrete DNA binding complex was only observed in nuclear
extracts from MCF-7 cells. Cotransfection experiments with GABPalpha and beta1
expression vectors produced transactivation of this element in both lines. These 
results suggest that GABPalpha/beta is a critical activator of BRCA1 expression, 
and that its activity may differ in human breast cell lines.

PMID: 10773883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Eur J Neurosci. 2000 Mar;12(3):1013-23.

Depolarizing stimulation upregulates GA-binding protein in neurons: a
transcription factor involved in the bigenomic expression of cytochrome oxidase
subunits.

Zhang C(1), Wong-Riley MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Neurons are unique in having dendrites that extend far away from their cell
bodies. Mitochondria located in the dendrites can be separated from the nucleus
for long distances. The mechanism of bigenomic coordination is of particular
importance to cytochrome oxidase (CO), which has subunits that are encoded in
both the nuclear and mitochondrial DNA. GA-binding protein (GABP) is a
transcription factor that is required for the promoter activity of mitochondrial 
transcription factor A as well as several nuclear-encoded CO subunits. Thus, GABP
may play a key role in coordinating the transcription of both mitochondrial and
nuclear-encoded subunits of CO. The goal of the present study was to determine if
GABP was expressed in neurons and whether and how it responded to increased
neuronal activity. Using primary neuronal cultures, the beta-subunit of GABP was 
localized immunocytochemically to both the cytoplasm and the nucleus, whereas the
alpha-subunit was expressed mainly in the nucleus. In KCl-treated cultures,
immunoreactivity for both alpha- and beta-subunits was significantly increased in
the nucleus compared with untreated sister cultures. The induction of GABP
preceded that of CO gene expression from the two genomes, which, in turn,
preceded that of CO activity. Thus, our data suggest that neuronal activity
regulates subunit concentrations of GABP in the nucleus, and GABP may be a
critical sensor of changes in neuronal activity. Our data are also consistent
with the postulated role of GABP as a coordinator of both mitochondrial and
nuclear transcription for subunits of CO in neurons.

PMID: 10762332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Biochimie. 1999 Oct;81(10):965-71.

Expression of mitochondrial genes and of the transcription factors involved in
the biogenesis of mitochondria Tfam, NRF-1 and NRF-2, in rat liver, testis and
brain.

Escrivá H(1), Rodríguez-Peña A, Vallejo CG.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Biomédicas 'Alberto Sols'(CSIC-UAM), Arturo
Duperier, 4, 28029 Madrid, Spain.

Mitochondrial function requires genes encoded in both mitochondrial and nuclear
genomes. Tfam, the activator of mammalian mitochondrial transcription, is encoded
in the nucleus and its expression has been shown in in vitro studies to be
controlled by nuclear respiratory factors NRF-1 and NRF-2. In order to understand
the physiological dependence of mitochondrial gene expression, we have analyzed
in rat liver, testis and brain the expression level of mitochondrial genes in
parallel with those of the three transcription factors. We found that: a) Tfam
expression is down-regulated in rat testis, both at the protein and transcript
level. The three-fold reduction in the abundance of Tfam protein in rat testis
does not result in low steady-state levels of mitochondrial gene transcripts,
suggesting that Tfam is in excess and does not limit transcription in vivo; and
b) NRF-1 and NRF-2 (alpha, beta and gamma subunits) mRNAs were analyzed by
Northern blotting; for each mRNA, several transcripts were observed as well as
tissue-specific patterns of expression. The mRNA steady-state levels of NRF-1 and
NRF-2 were higher in testis than in liver or brain. These data suggest that the
low expression level of Tfam found in testis is not due to decreased NRF-1 and/or
NRF-2 expression and further suggest the existence of tissue-specific
post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms for the expression of NRF-1/NRF-2
genes.

PMID: 10575350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Leukoc Biol. 1999 Jul;66(1):183-93.

ETS transcription factors regulate an enhancer activity in the third intron of
TNF-alpha.

Tomaras GD(1), Foster DA, Burrer CM, Taffet SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, State University of New York Health
Science Center at Syracuse, 13210, USA.

We describe an enhancer site in the third intron of tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-alpha). A reporter construct containing the 5'-flanking region of the mouse 
TNF-alpha gene displayed weak activity when transfected into RAW264.7
macrophage-like cells. The addition of the third intron of TNF-alpha to this
construct resulted in an enhancement of CAT protein. This enhancement was
eliminated if a conserved 20-bp sequence was removed from the intron or if a
dominant-negative ets-binding factor was co-transfected with the reporter gene.
Mutations of this site that destroyed potential ets transcription factor binding 
sites had reduced transcriptional activity. The major transcription factor that
bound to the oligonucleotide was confirmed to be GABP by supershift and
competition analysis. In RAW264.7 cells, the binding was constitutive, however,
in bone marrow-derived macrophages binding activity was shown to be
interferon-gamma inducible. This may imply a role for ets transcription factors
in the production of TNF-alpha.

PMID: 10411007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Biol Cell. 1999 Jun;10(6):2075-86.

Activation of utrophin promoter by heregulin via the ets-related transcription
factor complex GA-binding protein alpha/beta.

Khurana TS(1), Rosmarin AG, Shang J, Krag TO, Das S, Gammeltoft S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University of Copenhagen Medical School, 
The Glostrup Hospital, Glostrup DK 2600, Denmark. tsk@dcb-glostrup.dk

Utrophin/dystrophin-related protein is the autosomal homologue of the chromosome 
X-encoded dystrophin protein. In adult skeletal muscle, utrophin is highly
enriched at the neuromuscular junction. However, the molecular mechanisms
underlying regulation of utrophin gene expression are yet to be defined. Here we 
demonstrate that the growth factor heregulin increases de novo utrophin
transcription in muscle cell cultures. Using mutant reporter constructs of the
utrophin promoter, we define the N-box region of the promoter as critical for
heregulin-mediated activation. Using this region of the utrophin promoter for DNA
affinity purification, immunoblots, in vitro kinase assays, electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, and in vitro expression in cultured muscle cells, we
demonstrate that ets-related GA-binding protein alpha/beta transcription factors 
are activators of the utrophin promoter. Taken together, these results suggest
that the GA-binding protein alpha/beta complex of transcription factors binds and
activates the utrophin promoter in response to heregulin-activated extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase in muscle cell cultures. These findings suggest methods
for achieving utrophin up-regulation in Duchenne's muscular dystrophy as well as 
mechanisms by which neurite-derived growth factors such as heregulin may
influence the regulation of utrophin gene expression and subsequent enrichment at
the neuromuscular junction of skeletal muscle.

PMCID: PMC25417
PMID: 10359616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. EMBO J. 1998 Jun 1;17(11):3078-90.

Implication of a multisubunit Ets-related transcription factor in synaptic
expression of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.

Schaeffer L(1), Duclert N, Huchet-Dymanus M, Changeux JP.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UA D 1284 'Neurobiologie Moléculaire', Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr
Roux, F-75724 Cedex 15, Paris, France.

In adult muscle, transcription of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (AChR) is 
restricted to the nuclei located at the neuromuscular junction. The N-box, a new 
promoter element, was identified recently and shown to contribute to this
compartmentalized synaptic expression of the AChR delta- and epsilon-subunits. We
demonstrate that the N-box mediates transcriptional activation in cultured
myotubes and identify the transcription factor that binds to the N-box as a
heterooligomer in myotubes and adult muscle. The GABP (GA-binding protein)
alpha-subunit belongs to the Ets family of transcription factors, whereas the
beta-subunit shares homology with IkappaB and Drosophila Notch protein. GABP
binding specificity to mutated N-box in vitro strictly parallels the sequence
requirement for beta-galactosidase targeting to the endplate in vivo. In situ
hybridization studies reveal that the mRNAs of both GABP subunits are abundant in
mouse diaphragm, with preferential expression of the alpha-subunit at motor
endplates. In addition, heregulin increases GABPalpha protein levels and
regulates phosphorylation of both subunits in cultured chick myotubes. Finally,
dominant-negative mutants of either GABPalpha or GABPbeta block
heregulin-elicited transcriptional activation of the AChR delta and epsilon
genes. These findings establish the expected connection with a presynaptic
trophic factor whose release contributes to the accumulation of AChR subunit
mRNAs at the motor endplate.

PMCID: PMC1170647
PMID: 9606190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Blood. 1998 May 1;91(9):3459-66.

Erythroid maturation and globin gene expression in mice with combined deficiency 
of NF-E2 and nrf-2.

Martin F(1), van Deursen JM, Shivdasani RA, Jackson CW, Troutman AG, Ney PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saint Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, 
TN, USA.

NF-E2 binding sites, located in distant regulatory sequences, may be important
for high level alpha- and beta-globin gene expression. Surprisingly, targeted
disruption of each subunit of NF-E2 has either little or no effect on erythroid
maturation in mice. For p18 NF-E2, this lack of effect is due, at least in part, 
to the presence of redundant proteins. For p45 NF-E2, one possibility is that
NF-E2-related factors, Nrf-1 or Nrf-2, activate globin gene expression in the
absence of NF-E2. To test this hypothesis for Nrf-2, we disrupted the Nrf-2 gene 
by homologous recombination. Nrf-2-deficient mice had no detectable hematopoietic
defect. In addition, no evidence was found for reciprocal upregulation of NF-E2
or Nrf-2 protein in fetal liver cells deficient for either factor. Fetal liver
cells deficient for both NF-E2 and Nrf-2 expressed normal levels of alpha- and
beta-globin. Mature mice with combined deficiency of NF-E2 and Nrf-2 did not
exhibit a defect in erythroid maturation beyond that seen with loss of NF-E2
alone. Thus, the presence of a mild erythroid defect in NF-E2-deficient mice is
not the result of compensation by Nrf-2.

PMID: 9558405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Blood. 1997 Jun 15;89(12):4546-54.

GABP cooperates with c-Myb and C/EBP to activate the neutrophil elastase
promoter.

Nuchprayoon I(1), Simkevich CP, Luo M, Friedman AD, Rosmarin AG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, The Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Neutrophil elastase (NE) is a serine protease that is transcriptionally regulated
during early myeloid differentiation. The murine NE (mNE) promoter contains
functionally important c-Myb, C/EBP, and ets binding sites. Deletion of the ets
site reduced promoter activity by 90%. Although the ets transcription factor,
PU.1, bound to this ets site, it only modestly activated the mNE promoter. Here, 
we show that a second transcription factor from myeloid cells-GABP-binds to the
mNE ets site but strongly activates the mNE promoter. GABP is a heteromeric
transcription factor complex that consists of GABP alpha, an ets factor, and GABP
beta, a Notch-related protein. GABP alpha bound to the mNE ets site and, in turn,
recruited GABP beta to form a transcriptionally active complex. GABP alpha and
PU.1 competed with each other for binding to the mNE ets site. GABP increased the
activity of the mNE promoter sevenfold in U937 myeloid cells. GABP cooperated
with c-Myb and C/EBP alpha to activate the mNE promoter more than 85-fold in
otherwise nonpermissive, nonhematopoietic NIH 3T3 cells. Thus, GABP binds to the 
crucial mNE promoter ets site and powerfully activates its expression alone and
in cooperation with the transcription factors c-Myb and C/EBP.

PMID: 9192779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. J Cell Biochem. 1997 Jun 1;65(3):287-307.

GA-binding protein is involved in altered expression of ribosomal protein L32
gene.

Curcic D(1), Glibetic M, Larson DE, Sells BH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, University of Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

Differentiation of BC3H1 myoblasts to myocytes is accompanied by a 67% drop in
the rate of rpL32 gene transcription. Addition of high concentrations of serum to
resting myocyte populations stimulates cell growth and subsequent
dedifferentiation to proliferating myoblasts with a return to the normal rate of 
rpL32 gene transcription. During these growth rate changes the binding activities
of previously identified factors (beta, gamma, delta) which interact with the
rpL32 gene promoter were examined by mobility shift assays. Binding of the beta
factor (an Ets related protein) to an oligonucleotide containing the beta element
was reduced significantly in myocyte nuclear extracts, but subsequent
dedifferentiation increased binding within 30 min in either the presence or
absence of the cycloheximide. Binding of the gamma and delta factors to their
respective elements changed only slightly during these processes.
Dephosphorylation of either myoblast or myocyte extracts resulted in increased
binding of the beta factor suggesting that binding activity of the beta factor is
modulated by phosphorylation during the changes in BC3H1 myoblasts growth rate.
In addition, mobility shift assays with recombinant GABP alpha and beta proteins 
and their specific antibodies revealed that GABP proteins bind to the rpL32 gene 
promoter in a sequence dependent manner, and that similar proteins are present in
BC3H1 myoblast/myocyte extracts. These results support the premise that the GABP 
heterodimer is the rpL32 beta factor. Furthermore, during BC3H1 myoblast
differentiation and dedifferentiation neither the levels of the GABP alpha and
beta proteins nor their respective mRNAs change. These results suggest that GABP 
is a constitutively expressed protein and is involved in regulating rpL32 gene by
post-transcriptional modifications.

PMID: 9138087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Biol Chem. 1996 Oct 11;271(41):25617-23.

Redox regulation of GA-binding protein-alpha DNA binding activity.

Martin ME(1), Chinenov Y, Yu M, Schmidt TK, Yang XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65212, 
USA.

We have investigated the reduction/oxidation (redox) regulation of the
heteromeric transcription factor GA-binding protein (GABP). GABP, also known as
nuclear respiratory factor 2, regulates the expression of nuclear encoded
mitochondrial proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation, including
cytochrome c oxidase subunits IV and Vb, as well as the expression of
mitochondrial transcription factor 1. GABP is composed of two subunits, the
Ets-related GABP-alpha, which mediates specific DNA binding, and GABP-beta, which
forms heterodimers and heterotetramers on DNA sequences containing the PEA3/Ets
motif ((C/A)GGA(A/T)(G/A)). We demonstrate here that GABP DNA binding activity
and GABP-dependent gene expression in 3T3 cells are inhibited by pro-oxidant
conditions. DNA binding of recombinant GABP-alpha was activated by chemical
reduction (dithiothreitol) and by thioredoxin; however, GSSG inhibited GABP DNA
binding activity. Treatment of GABP-alpha, but not GABP-beta1, with
sulfhydryl-alkylating agents also inhibited GABP DNA binding activity. Our
results suggest that GABP DNA binding activity is redox-regulated in vivo,
possibly by thioredoxin-mediated reduction and by GSSG-mediated oxidation of the 
GABP-alpha subunit. The regulation of GABP (nuclear respiratory factor 2) DNA
binding activity by cellular redox changes provides an important link between
mitochondrial and nuclear gene expression and the redox state of the cell.

PMID: 8810337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Virol. 1996 Apr;70(4):2260-8.

Raf-1 kinase targets GA-binding protein in transcriptional regulation of the
human immunodeficiency virus type 1 promoter.

Flory E(1), Hoffmeyer A, Smola U, Rapp UR, Bruder JT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Radiobiology and Cell Research, University of Würzburg, Germany.

The serine/threonine protein kinase Raf-1 is a component of a conserved
intracellular signaling cascade that controls responses to various extracellular 
stimuli. Transcription from several promoters, including the oncogene-responsive 
element in the polyomavirus enhancer, the c-fos promoter, as well as other AP-1- 
and Ets-dependent promoters, can be induced by Raf-1 kinase. Previously, we have 
shown that activated Raf-1 kinase transactivates the human immunodeficiency virus
type 1 (HIV-1) long terminal repeat and have identified the NF-kappaB binding
motif as a Raf-1-responsive element (RafRE). We now report that Raf-1
kinase-induced transactivation from the HIV RafRE involves the
purine-rich-repeat-binding protein (GABP), which is composed of two distinct
subunits (alpha and beta). GABP alpha is an Ets oncogene-related DNA-binding
protein, and GABP beta contains four ankyrin-like repeats that have been shown to
be essential in protein-protein interactions. In electrophoretic mobility shift
assays using nuclear extracts from human Jurkat T cells, a protein-DNA complex
which was supershifted with antiserum against GABP alpha and GABP beta was
observed. Purified recombinant GABP alpha and beta interact with the HIV RafRE as
judged from DNA binding assays. Cotransfection experiments with GABP alpha and
beta and Raf-1 kinase demonstrate synergistic transactivation of the HIV-1
promoter. Point mutations in the HIV RafRE abolished the Raf-1 kinase as well as 
GABP alpha- and beta-induced transactivation. The observed Raf-1-GABP synergism
presumably involves phosphorylation of GABP subunits, as treatment of cells with 
Raf-1 kinase activators serum and 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate increases 
phosphorylation of GABP in vivo. However, GABP is not a target of Raf-1 kinase;
instead, it is a substrate of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK/ERK), since 
in vitro phosphorylation of GABP alpha and beta was achieved by the reconstituted
protein kinase cascade but not with purified Raf-1 or MEK. These results suggest 
that Raf-1 kinase- induced activation of the HIV-1 promoter is mediated by the
classical cytoplasmic cascade resulting in MAPK/ERK-mediated phosphorylation of
GABP alpha and beta. Because the HIV RafRE corresponds to a region within the
promoter which is essential for regulation of HIV-1 expression, the data indicate
that in addition to NK-kappaB, GABP transcription factors are important for
induced expression of HIV.

PMCID: PMC190067
PMID: 8642652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 23;271(8):4388-95.

The GA-binding protein can serve as both an activator and repressor of ribosomal 
protein gene transcription.

Genuario RR(1), Perry RP.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

The GA-binding protein (GABP), a heterodimeric transcription factor with
widespread tissue distribution, has been found to be a strong positive regulator 
of several ribosomal protein (rp)-encoding genes. In such genes, e.g. the mouse
rpL30 gene, the GABP-binding sites are located 40-80 base pairs upstream of the
transcriptional start point. Potential GABP-binding sites are present in the
promoters of numerous other rp genes, not only in upstream regions, but also in
the immediate vicinity of the transcriptional start point. The mouse rpS16 gene
is an example of the latter type. We demonstrate here that GABP binds to the
rpS16 initiation region, and in so doing down-regulates rpS16 transcription both 
in vivo and in vitro. Supplementation of cell-free extracts with GABP inhibits
transcription on rpS16 templates while concomitantly stimulating transcription on
rpL30 templates. The repressive and stimulatory effects, which were proportional 
to the amount of GABP added, required both the GABP alpha subunit and either a
beta1 or beta2 subunit. Mutations of the rpS16 GABP-binding sites that abolish
binding increased rpS16 promoter activity in vivo and in vitro, whereas mutations
that strengthen GABP binding caused a reduction in promoter activity. The binding
of GABP to the rpS16 initiation region does not significantly affect the
positioning of the transcriptional start points. Taken together with earlier
studies, these new findings indicate that GABP can have a dual role as repressor 
or activator of rp gene transcription.

PMID: 8626789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Oct;15(10):5355-62.

A DNA methylation site in the male-specific P450 (Cyp 2d-9) promoter and binding 
of the heteromeric transcription factor GABP.

Yokomori N(1), Kobayashi R, Moore R, Sueyoshi T, Negishi M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenetics Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

The Cyp 2d-9 gene encodes the male-specific steroid 16 alpha-hydroxylase in mouse
liver and shares a conserved regulatory element (-100TTCCGGGC-93) with another
male-specific Slp promoter. As shown with the Slp promoter (N. Yokomori, R.
Moore, and M. Negishi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 92:1302-1306, 1995), the
male-preferential demethylation also occurs at CpG/-97 in the Cyp 2d-9 promoter. 
The transcription factor which specifically binds to the demethylated element has
been purified. The peptide sequences reveal that the factor consists of GABP
alpha and GABP beta 1 with Ets and Notch motifs, respectively. Both DNase I
footprinting and gel shift assays indicate that the bacterially expressed
glutathione S-transferase-GABP fusion proteins bind to the regulatory element
only when CpG/-97 is demethylated. Moreover, Cyp 2d-9 promoter is trans-activated
by coexpression of GABP proteins in HepG2 cells. Given the additional results
that CpG/-50 of the female-specific steroid 15 alpha-hydroxylase (Cyp 2a-4)
promoter is preferentially demethylated in the females, the sex-specific
expressions of the P450 genes correlate very well with DNA demethylation. We also
conclude that GABP is a methylation-sensitive transcription factor and is a
potential transcription activator of the male-specific Cyp 2d-9 promoter.

PMCID: PMC230784
PMID: 7565685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Genomics. 1995 Jul 1;28(1):119-22.

Mapping of the human transcription factor GABPA (E4TF1-60) gene to chromosome 21.

Chrast R(1), Chen H, Morris MA, Antonarakis SE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Microbiology, University of Geneva Medical School, 
Switzerland.

Exon trapping/amplification was used to clone portions of genes from human
chromosome 21. One trapped sequence showed complete homology with nucleotide
sequence D13318 of GenBank, which corresponds to the gene for human transcription
factor E4TF1-60 (HGMW-approved nomenclature GABPA). We mapped this gene to human 
chromosome 21 by FISH, somatic cell hybrids, and hybridization to chromosome
21-specific YACs. The GABPA gene localizes to YACs 816B7 and 848G1 of the
Chumakov et al. (Nature 359: 380, 1992) YAC contig, near the APP gene in
21q21-q22.1. This transcription factor, which is an ETS-related DNA-binding
protein and forms heterodimers with other polypeptides, may contribute in a gene 
dosage-dependent manner to the phenotype of Down syndrome.

PMID: 7590737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Gene Expr. 1995;5(2):93-111.

A novel transcriptional initiator activity of the GABP factor binding ets
sequence repeat from the murine cytochrome c oxidase Vb gene.

Sucharov C(1), Basu A, Carter RS, Avadhani NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia
19104-6047, USA.

The murine cytochrome c oxidase (COX) subunit Vb mRNA contains heterogeneous 5'
ends mapping to +1, +6, +12, +17-22, +24-29, and +32-35 positions of the gene. We
have previously shown that initiation of RNA at the +1 position of the promoter
depends upon a YY-1 (NF-E1) binding initiator motif. In this article we show that
the GABP factor binding duplicated ets motif, GTTCCCGGAAG, at +16 to +26 position
functions as an independent initiator for transcription of RNAs mapping to the
+18-19 and +23-26 regions. The initiation region ets sequence repeat (ets-ets
sequence) can drive the transcription of the CAT reporter gene. The upstream ets 
site of the ets-ets sequence exhibits a low affinity for binding to purified GABP
factors, whereas the downstream site exhibits high affinity. S1 analyses of RNA
from transfected COS cells demonstrate that the initiation region ets-ets
sequence can accurately initiate transcription at the +18-19 and +24-25 regions. 
Transcriptional initiation at these two positions, but not at +1, +12, and +31-32
positions, show a selective dependence for intact downstream ets site and GABP
alpha and beta factors as tested in an in vitro reconstituted system. The
activities of both COX IV and COX Vb single site ets initiators are induced in
vivo by coexpression with GABP alpha and beta cDNAs. These results provide
evidence that the 5' heterogeneity of the COX Vb mRNA is largely due to
independent transcription initiators at multiple initiator motifs that bind to
various transcription factors.

PMID: 8821623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Jan;15(1):102-11.

Four structurally distinct, non-DNA-binding subunits of human nuclear respiratory
factor 2 share a conserved transcriptional activation domain.

Gugneja S(1), Virbasius JV, Scarpulla RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Northwestern University Medical
School, Chicago, Illinois 60611.

Nuclear respiratory factor 2 (NRF-2) was previously purified to near homogeneity 
from HeLa cells on the basis of its ability to bind tandem recognition sites in
the rat cytochrome oxidase subunit IV (RCO4) promoter. It consisted of five
subunits, alpha, beta 1, beta 2, gamma 1, and gamma 2. Sequencing of tryptic
peptides from alpha and from mixtures of the two beta or two gamma subunits
revealed sequence identities with subunits of the mouse GA-binding protein
(GABP), a ubiquitously expressed ETS domain activator composed of three subunits,
alpha, beta 1, and beta 2. To understand the precise relationship between NRF-2
and GABP, cDNAs for all five NRF-2 subunits have now been cloned and their
products have been overexpressed. The results establish that the two additional
NRF-2 subunits are molecular variants that differ from GABP beta 1 and beta 2 by 
having a 12-amino-acid insertion containing two serine doublets. PCR and RNase
protection assays show that mRNAs for these variants are expressed in the human
but not the rodent cells and tissues examined. The insertion did not alter the
ability of the beta and gamma subunits to associate with alpha, the DNA-binding
subunit, nor did it affect the ability of NRF-2 beta 1 or beta 2 to direct
high-affinity binding of alpha to tandem sites in the RCO4 promoter. In addition,
the four NRF-2 beta and gamma subunits were equally proficient in activating
transcription in transfected cells when fused to a GAL4 DNA-binding domain. The
domain responsible for this transcriptional activation was localized by deletion 
mapping to a region of approximately 70 amino acids that is conserved in all four
NRF-2 beta and gamma subunits. The repeated glutamine-containing hydrophobic
clusters within this region bear a strong resemblance to those recently
implicated in protein-protein interactions within the transcriptional apparatus.

PMCID: PMC231915
PMID: 7799916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Genes Dev. 1994 Aug 1;8(15):1853-65.

Molecular and genetic characterization of GABP beta.

de la Brousse FC(1), Birkenmeier EH, King DS, Rowe LB, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Tularik, Inc., South San Francisco, California 94080.

This report outlines three observations relating to GABP beta, a polypeptide
constituent of the heterotetrameric transcription factor GABP. Evidence is
presented showing that the mouse genome encodes two highly related GABP beta
polypeptides, designated GABP beta 1-1 and GABP beta 2-1. Genomic and cDNA copies
of the newly defined Gabpb2 gene were cloned and characterized, providing the
conceptually translated amino acid sequence of GABP beta 2-1. The genes encoding 
these two proteins, as well as GABP alpha, were mapped to three unlinked
chromosomal loci. Although physically unlinked, the patterns of expression of the
three genes were strikingly concordant. Finally, the molecular basis of GABP beta
dimerization was resolved. Carboxy-terminal regions of the two GABP beta
polypeptides, which mediate dimerization, bear highly related primary amino acid 
sequences. Both sequences are free of alpha-helix destabilizing residues and,
when displayed on idealized alpha-helical projections, reveal marked amphipathy. 
Two observations indicate that these regions adopt an alpha-helical conformation 
and intertwine as coiled-coils. First, the dimer-forming region of GABP beta 2-1 
can functionally replace the leucine zipper of a bZIP transcription factor.
Second, a synthetic peptide corresponding to this region shows distinctive
helical properties when examined by circular dichroism spectroscopy. Finally,
evidence is presented showing that GABP beta 1-1 and GABP beta 2-1 can
heterodimerize through this carboxy-terminal domain, but neither protein can
heterodimerize via the dimer-forming region of the bZIP protein C/EBP beta.

PMID: 7958862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Biol Chem. 1994 Feb 11;269(6):4381-7.

Cooperative binding of GA-binding protein transcription factors to duplicated
transcription initiation region repeats of the cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV
gene.

Carter RS(1), Avadhani NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104-6046.

Transcriptional activity of the TATA-less cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV (COXIV)
gene promoter depends upon two tandemly repeated sequence elements, each mapping 
immediately downstream of major loci of transcriptional initiation. In this
paper, we demonstrate that binding of the GA-binding protein (GABP) to ets
sequence motifs within each repeated unit is required for transcriptional
activation of the COXIV promoter. High affinity binding of GABP to the COXIV
promoter required both the DNA-binding GABP alpha subunit and the non-DNA-binding
GABP beta subunit. Binding of the heteromeric GABP complex to sequences
containing two GABP binding sites was shown to have a 10-20-fold greater affinity
than to DNA sequences with a single site. GABP binding was necessary for promoter
function of a 33-base pair fragment of the COXIV initiation region in transfected
3T3 or COS cells. Binding of GABP to the COXIV initiation region was also
required for maximal transcriptional stimulation by an upstream Sp1 binding site.
The initiation region was demonstrated to direct accurate transcriptional
initiation in vitro, and mutations to the GABP binding sites affected not only
transcriptional activity but also initiation site selection. These results
indicate that the initiation region repeats of the COXIV promoter may function as
GABP-dependent initiator motifs that position mRNA start sites in the absence of 
a TATA box or other promoter elements.

PMID: 8308008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Mar;13(3):1385-91.

cDNA cloning of transcription factor E4TF1 subunits with Ets and notch motifs.

Watanabe H(1), Sawada J, Yano K, Yamaguchi K, Goto M, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Japan.

E4TF1 was originally identified as one of the transcription factors responsible
for adenovirus E4 gene transcription. It is composed of two subunits, a DNA
binding protein with a molecular mass of 60 kDa and a 53-kDa
transcription-activating protein. Heterodimerization of these two subunits is
essential for the protein to function as a transcription factor. In this study,
we identified a new E4TF1 subunit, designated E4TF1-47, which has no DNA binding 
activity but can associate with E4TF1-60. We then cloned the cDNAs for each of
the E4TF1 subunits. E4TF1 was purified, and the partial amino acid sequence of
each subunit was determined. The predicted amino acid sequence of each cDNA clone
revealed that E4TF1-60 had an ETS domain, which is a DNA binding domain common to
ets-related transcription factors. E4TF1-53 had four tandemly repeated
notch-ankyrin motifs. The putative cDNA of E4TF1-47 coded almost the same amino
acid sequences as E4TF1-53. Three hundred and thirty-two amino acids of the N
termini of E4TF1-47 and -53 were identical except for one amino acid insertion in
E4TF1-53, and they differ from each other at the C terminus. These three
recombinant cDNA clones were expressed in Escherichia coli, and the proteins
behaved in the same manner as purified proteins in a gel retardation assay.
Nucleotide and predicted amino acid sequences were highly homologous to
GABP-alpha and -beta, which is further supported by the observation that
GABP-specific antibody can recognize human E4TF1.

PMCID: PMC359448
PMID: 8441384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Gene Expr. 1993;3(3):279-88.

Comparative utilization of transcription factor GABP by the promoters of
ribosomal protein genes rpL30 and rpL32.

Genuario RR(1), Kelley DE, Perry RP.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111.

The promoters of two mouse ribosomal protein genes, rpL30 and rpL32, contain a
similarly located element, called beta, which was previously shown to interact
with the same nuclear protein. This protein has now been identified as the
GA-binding protein (GABP) on the basis of studies with recombinant GABP subunits 
and GABP-specific antibodies. The rpL30 element consists of two contiguous GABP
binding sites that can form a tetrameric complex with two alpha and two beta 1
subunits of GABP, as well as dimeric complexes with alpha and either the beta 1
or beta 2 subunit. The rpL32 element consists of a solitary GABP binding site
that can form only dimeric complexes with alpha and beta 1 or beta 2. Footprint
analysis and a comparison of the effects of mutations in each of the tandem rpL30
binding sites demonstrated that the site nearest to the transcriptional start
point is strongly favored for dimeric complex formation and is correspondingly
more important for rpL30 promoter function. The contributions to overall promoter
activity of the proximal rpL30 site and the solitary rpL32 site are virtually the
same. Paradoxically, the potential for tetramer formation afforded by the tandem 
sites in rpL30 has a relatively minor effect on overall promoter strength. These 
findings illustrate the subtlety of mechanisms by which fine-tuning of rp
promoters is achieved.

PMID: 8019128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Genes Dev. 1992 Dec;6(12B):2502-12.

Specificities of protein-protein and protein-DNA interaction of GABP alpha and
two newly defined ets-related proteins.

Brown TA(1), McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Research Laboratories, Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Department of Embryology, Baltimore, Maryland 21210.

The ets-related protein GABP alpha interacts with the four ankyrin-type (ANK)
repeats of GABP beta to form a high-affinity DNA-binding complex that recognizes 
a site important for herpes simplex virus type I immediate early gene activation.
To investigate the selectivity and specificity of the GABP complex, we have
isolated two new ETS family members, termed ER81 and ER71. ER81 and GABP alpha
were present in most tissues of adult mice, whereas ER71 was restricted to
testis. We have compared the DNA-binding specificities of these proteins by
binding site selection. GABP alpha, ER71, and ER81 recognized the common
pentanucleotide DNA sequence 5'-CGGAA/T-3'. Although subtle differences were
observed for nucleotide preferences flanking this pentanucleotide core, the
overall similarity of the selected sequences was most striking. Given the
observation that GABP alpha interaction with GABP beta requires its intact ETS
domain, we further compared the ability of GABP beta to interact with other ETS
proteins. GABP beta did not augment the DNA-binding activity of the highly
similar ETS domains of ER81, ER71, or Ets-1. Moreover, probing of total tissue
extracts with radiolabeled GABP beta demonstrated its exceedingly stringent
specificity for GABP alpha. Given that the DNA-binding specificities of these ETS
proteins are similar and that the protein-protein interactions between GABP beta 
and GABP alpha are highly specific, we conclude that the protein interactions
determine the target site selection by GABP alpha.

PMID: 1340465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 1992 Nov 15;267(32):23418-26.

The basal promoter elements of murine cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV gene
consist of tandemly duplicated ets motifs that bind to GABP-related transcription
factors.

Carter RS(1), Bhat NK, Basu A, Avadhani NG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104.

DNA sequences required for expression of the mouse cytochrome c oxidase subunit
IV (COXIV) promoter were identified by transient expression of recombinant
COXIV-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase constructs in COS and NIH-3T3 cells.
Activity of the COXIV promoter is shown to depend upon upstream Sp1 binding
sequences and two tandemly repeated 21-base pair sequence elements each mapping
to sites of mRNA initiation. Each initiation region repeat contains a binding
site for an ets-related transcription factor which demonstrates specificity for
the characteristic GGAA ets sequence motif and reactivity with an ets
domain-directed monoclonal pan ets antibody. The two 21-base pair repeats are
sufficient for transcriptional activity suggesting that the ets-related factor
may be involved in both transcriptional activation and start site positioning.
The ets-related protein found in COS nuclear extracts is shown to be identical or
closely related to the GA-binding protein (GABP) by comparison of electrophoretic
mobilities and immunological reactivities of DNA-protein complexes formed with
purified recombinant expressed GABP alpha and beta subunits. Sp1 and the
GABP-related factors also bind to another mouse cytochrome oxidase subunit gene
COXVb. The similar promoter features of these two genes suggests a possible means
of coordinate transcriptional regulation among such respiratory proteins.

PMID: 1331086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Science. 1991 Aug 16;253(5021):789-92.

Identification of Ets- and notch-related subunits in GA binding protein.

LaMarco K(1), Thompson CC, Byers BP, Walton EM, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Research Laboratories, Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Department of Embryology, Baltimore, MD 21210.

Comment in
    Science. 1991 Aug 16;253(5021):742.

Recombinant cDNA clones that encode two distinct subunits of the transcription
factor GA binding protein (GABP) have been isolated. The predicted amino acid
sequence of one subunit, GABP alpha, exhibits similarity to the sequence of the
product of the ets-1 protooncogene in a region known to encompass the Ets DNA
binding domain. The sequence of the second subunit, GABP beta, contains four
33-amino acid repeats located close to the NH2-terminus of the subunit. The
sequences of these repeats are similar to repeats in several transmembrane
proteins, including Notch from Drosophila melanogaster and Glp-1 and Lin-12 from 
Caenorhabditis elegans. Avid, sequence-specific binding to DNA required the
presence of both polypeptides, revealing a conceptual convergence of nuclear
transforming proteins and membrane-anchored proteins implicated in
developmentally regulated signal transduction processes.

PMID: 1876836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Science. 1991 Aug 16;253(5021):762-8.

Convergence of Ets- and notch-related structural motifs in a heteromeric DNA
binding complex.

Thompson CC(1), Brown TA, McKnight SL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Research Laboratories, Carnegie Institution of Washington,
Department of Embryology, Baltimore, MD 21210.

Comment in
    Science. 1991 Aug 16;253(5021):742.

Analysis of the heteromeric DNA binding protein GABP has revealed the interaction
of two distinct peptide sequence motifs normally associated with proteins located
in different cellular compartments. The alpha subunit of GABP contains an
85-amino acid segment related to the Ets family of DNA binding proteins. The ETS 
domain of GABP alpha facilitates weak binding to DNA and, together with an
adjacent segment of 37 amino acids, mediates stable interaction with GABP beta.
The beta subunit of GABP contains four imperfect repeats of a sequence present in
several transmembrane proteins including the product of the Notch gene of
Drosophila melanogaster. These amino-terminal repeats of GABP beta mediate stable
interaction with GABP alpha and, when complexed with GABP alpha, directly contact
DNA. These observations provide evidence for a distinct biochemical role for the 
33-amino acid repeats, and suggest that they may serve as a module for the
generation of specific dimerization interfaces.

PMID: 1876833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


