
1. Differentiation. 2016 Mar 21. pii: S0301-4681(15)30098-0. doi:
10.1016/j.diff.2016.02.005. [Epub ahead of print]

Key transcription factors in the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells.

Almalki SG(1), Agrawal DK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biomedical Sciences, Creighton University School of Medicine,
Omaha, NE, USA. (2)Clinical and Translational Science, Creighton University
School of Medicine, Omaha, NE, USA. Electronic address: dkagr@creighton.edu.

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent cells that represent a promising
source for regenerative medicine. MSCs are capable of osteogenic, chondrogenic,
adipogenic and myogenic differentiation. Efficacy of differentiated MSCs to
regenerate cells in the injured tissues requires the ability to maintain the
differentiation toward the desired cell fate. Since MSCs represent an attractive 
source for autologous transplantation, cellular and molecular signaling pathways 
and micro-environmental changes have been studied in order to understand the role
of cytokines, chemokines, and transcription factors on the differentiation of
MSCs. The differentiation of MSC into a mesenchymal lineage is genetically
manipulated and promoted by specific transcription factors associated with a
particular cell lineage. Recent studies have explored the integration of
transcription factors, including Runx2, Sox9, PPAR<U+03B3>, MyoD, GATA4, and GATA6 in
the differentiation of MSCs. Therefore, the overexpression of a single
transcription factor in MSCs may promote trans-differentiation into specific cell
lineage, which can be used for treatment of some diseases. In this review, we
critically discussed and evaluated the role of transcription factors and related 
signaling pathways that affect the differentiation of MSCs toward adipocytes,
chondrocytes, osteocytes, skeletal muscle cells, cardiomyocytes, and smooth
muscle cells.

Copyright © 2016 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27012163  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Cytotechnology. 2016 Mar 17. [Epub ahead of print]

Exogenous expression of homeoprotein EGAM1N prevents in vitro cardiomyogenesis by
impairing expression of T and Nkx2.5, but not Mef2c, in mouse embryonic stem
cells.

Nonaka A(1), Yoshida M(1), Iha M(1), Kubo Y(1), Kihara Y(1), Kikuchi T(1),
Kumagai Y(1), Sasaki A(1,)(2), Kobayashi M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Animal Cell Technology, Graduate School of Bioresource
Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, Akita, 010-0195, Japan. (2)Akita Research
Institute of Food and Brewing, Akita, 010-1623, Japan. (3)Laboratory for Advanced
Animal Cell Technology, Graduate School of Bioresource Sciences, Akita
Prefectural University, Akita, 010-0195, Japan. makoba@akita-pu.ac.jp.

Generation of multiple cell types from embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced
pluripotent stem cells is crucial to provide materials for regenerative medicine.
EGAM1N has been found in preimplantation mouse embryos and mouse ES cells as a
functionally unclassified homeoprotein. Recently, we reported that expression of 
EGAM1N suppressed the in vitro differentiation of ES cells into progenitor cells 
that arise in early embryogenesis. To clarify the effect of EGAM1N on terminal
differentiation, embryoid bodies (EBs) were prepared from ES cells expressing
exogenous Egam1n. In EBs expressing Egam1n, cardiomyogenesis was inhibited by
impairing the expression of crucial transcription factors Brachyury T and Nkx2.5 
in the generation of mesoderm and cardiomyocytes, respectively. Expression levels
of Mef2c, another crucial gene for cardiomyogenesis, were unaffected. Conversely,
the expression levels of Gata6 and Plat, markers for the primitive endoderm
lineage, and Cdx2, a marker for the trophectoderm lineage, were increased. These 
results suggested that certain cell populations in EBs expressing Egam1n
preferentially differentiated to such cell lineages. Our results suggest that
EGAM1N not only affects the generation of progenitor cells during early
embryogenesis, but also the progression of terminal differentiation, such as
cardiomyogenesis, in mouse ES cells.

PMID: 26983934  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Med Sci (Paris). 2016 Feb;32(2):192-7. doi: 10.1051/medsci/20163202013. Epub 2016
Mar 2.

[Epiblast and primitive endoderm cell specification during mouse preimplantation 
development: a combination between biology and mathematical modeling].

[Article in French]

Bessonnard S(1), Gonze D(2), Dupont G(2).

Author information: 
(1)GReD, Inserm U1103, CNRS UMR6293, Clermont Université, 28, place Henri Dunant,
BP38, 63001 Clermont-Ferrand Cedex, France. (2)Unité de chronobiologie théorique,
faculté des Sciences, université libre de Bruxelles (ULB), campus Plaine, CP 231,
B-1050 Bruxelles, Belgique.

Upon its implantation in the uterus of the mother in mammals, the embryo is
composed by three morphologically distinct tissues: the Epiblast (Epi), the
Trophectoderm (TE) and the Primitive Endoderm (PrE). Both Epi and PrE are formed 
from the same cell homogeneous population called the Inner Cell Mass (ICM). Based
on our studies, we discuss in this review what molecular interactions are
necessary for the specification of these two lineages. For this, we have combined
a biological approach with mathematical modeling. We have shown the central role 
of the gene regulation group composed by NANOG, FGF4, GATA6 and FGFR2 for Epi/PrE
cell specification.

© 2016 médecine/sciences – Inserm.

PMID: 26936177  [PubMed - in process]


4. Development. 2016 Mar 1;143(5):780-6. doi: 10.1242/dev.127217.

GATA4 and GATA6 regulate pancreatic endoderm identity through inhibition of
hedgehog signaling.

Xuan S(1), Sussel L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY
10032, USA. (2)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New
York, NY 10032, USA lgs2@cumc.columbia.edu.

GATA4 and GATA6 are zinc finger transcription factors that have important
functions in several mesodermal and endodermal organs, including heart, liver and
pancreas. In humans, heterozygous mutations of either factor are associated with 
pancreatic agenesis; however, homozygous deletion of both Gata4 and Gata6 is
necessary to disrupt pancreas development in mice. In this study, we demonstrate 
that arrested pancreatic development in Gata4(fl/fl); Gata6(fl/fl); Pdx1:Cre
(pDKO) embryos is accompanied by the transition of ventral and dorsal pancreatic 
fates into intestinal or stomach lineages, respectively. These results indicate
that GATA4 and GATA6 play essential roles in maintaining pancreas identity by
regulating foregut endodermal fates. Remarkably, pancreatic anlagen derived from 
pDKO embryos also display a dramatic upregulation of hedgehog pathway components,
which are normally absent from the presumptive pancreatic endoderm. Consistent
with the erroneous activation of hedgehog signaling, we demonstrate that GATA4
and GATA6 are able to repress transcription through the sonic hedgehog (Shh)
endoderm-specific enhancer MACS1 and that GATA-binding sites within this enhancer
are necessary for this repressive activity. These studies establish the
importance of GATA4/6-mediated inhibition of hedgehog signaling as a major
mechanism regulating pancreatic endoderm specification during patterning of the
gut tube.

© 2016. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26932670  [PubMed - in process]


5. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Mar 8;6(3):357-67. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.01.007.
Epub 2016 Feb 11.

Early Developmental Perturbations in a Human Stem Cell Model of MODY5/HNF1B
Pancreatic Hypoplasia.

Teo AK(1), Lau HH(2), Valdez IA(3), Dirice E(3), Tjora E(4), Raeder H(4),
Kulkarni RN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA;
Discovery Research Division, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis
Drive, Proteos #06-07, Singapore 138673, Singapore; School of Biological
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637551, Singapore;
Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore 117596, Singapore; Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 308232, Singapore. Electronic
address: ateo@imcb.a-star.edu.sg. (2)Discovery Research Division, Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos #06-07, Singapore 138673, 
Singapore. (3)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes
Center, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway; 
Department of Clinical Science, KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research,
University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway. (5)Section of Islet Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin
Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address:
rohit.kulkarni@joslin.harvard.edu.

Patients with an HNF1B(S148L/+) mutation (MODY5) typically exhibit pancreatic
hypoplasia. However, the molecular mechanisms are unknown due to inaccessibility 
of patient material and because mouse models do not fully recapitulate MODY5.
Here, we differentiated MODY5 human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) into 
pancreatic progenitors, and show that the HNF1B(S148L/+) mutation causes a
compensatory increase in several pancreatic transcription factors, and
surprisingly, a decrease in PAX6 pancreatic gene expression. The lack of
suppression of PDX1, PTF1A, GATA4, and GATA6 indicates that MODY5-mediated
pancreatic hypoplasia is mechanistically independent. Overexpression studies
demonstrate that a compensatory increase in PDX1 gene expression is due to mutant
HNF1B(S148L/+) but not wild-type HNF1B or HNF1A. Furthermore, HNF1B does not
appear to directly regulate PAX6 gene expression necessary for glucose tolerance.
Our results demonstrate compensatory mechanisms in the pancreatic transcription
factor network due to mutant HNF1B(S148L/+) protein. Thus, patients typically
develop MODY5 but not neonatal diabetes despite exhibiting pancreatic hypoplasia.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4788763
PMID: 26876668  [PubMed - in process]


6. Cell Med. 2014 Dec 12;7(2):83-93. doi: 10.3727/215517914X685178. eCollection
2015.

Potential Factors for the Differentiation of ESCs/iPSCs Into Insulin-Producing
Cells.

Tsugata T(1), Nikoh N(1), Kin T(2), Saitoh I(3), Noguchi Y(4), Ueki H(5),
Watanabe M(5), James Shapiro AM(2), Noguchi H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Natural and Environmental Sciences Program, The Open University of Japan ,
Chiba , Japan. (2)† Clinical Islet Transplant Program, University of Alberta ,
Edmonton, Alberta , Canada. (3)‡ Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Graduate School
of Medical and Dental Science, Niigata University , Niigata , Japan. (4)§
Department of Socio-environmental Design, Hiroshima International University ,
Hiroshima , Japan. (5)¶ Department of Urology, Okayama University Graduate School
of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences , Okayama , Japan. (6)Natural 
and Environmental Sciences Program, The Open University of Japan, Chiba, Japan;
#Department of Regenerative Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
the Ryukyus, Okinawa, Japan.

The low efficiency of in vitro differentiation of human embryonic stem cells
(ESCs) or human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) into insulin-producing
cells thus creates a crucial hurdle for the clinical implementation of human
pluripotent stem cells (PSCs). In this study, we investigated the key factors for
the differentiation of PSCs into insulin-producing cells. We obtained microarray 
data of HUES8 and HUES6 from two GeneChips (GPL3921: Affymetrix HT Human Genome
U133A Array, GPL570: Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 Array) in a database
of GEO (NCBI), since HUES8 can differentiate into pancreatic cells, while HUES6
hardly demonstrates any differentiation at all. The genes with more than fourfold
higher expressions in HUES8 compared to HUES6 included RPS4Y1, DDX3Y, EIF1AY,
GREM1, GATA6, and NLGN4Y. Since there were four genes, RPS4Y1, DDX3Y, EIF1AY, and
NLGN4Y, on the Y chromosome and HUES8 was a male cell line and HUES6 was a female
cell line, we excluded these genes in this study. On the other hand, genes with
more than fourfold higher expressions in HUES6 compared to HUES8 included NLRP2, 
EGR1, and SMC3. We next compared iPSCs derived from pancreatic cells (PiPSCs) and
iPSCs derived from fibroblasts (FiPSCs). PiPSCs differentiated into
insulin-producing cells more easily than FiPSCs because of their epigenetic
memory. The gene expressions of GREM1, GATA6, NLRP2, EGR1, and SMC3 in PiPSCs and
FiPSCs were also investigated. The expression level of GREM1 and GATA6 in PiPSCs 
were higher than in FiPSCs. On the other hand, EGR1, which was lower in HUES8
than in HUES6, was predictably lower in PiPSCs than FiPSCs, while NLRP2 and SMC3 
were higher in PiPSCs than FiPSCs. These data suggest that the expression of
GATA6 and GREM1 and the inhibition of EGR1 may be important factors for the
differentiation of PSCs into insulin-producing cells.

PMCID: PMC4733840
PMID: 26858897  [PubMed]


7. Sci Rep. 2016 Jan 19;6:19648. doi: 10.1038/srep19648.

Conversion of embryonic stem cells into extraembryonic lineages by
CRISPR-mediated activators.

Wei S(1,)(2), Zou Q(1,)(2), Lai S(1,)(2), Zhang Q(1,)(2), Li L(1,)(2), Yan
Q(1,)(2), Zhou X(1,)(2), Zhong H(1,)(2), Lai L(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)CAS Key Laboratory of Regenerative Biology, South China Institute for Stem
Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes of Biomedicine and
Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou, 510530, China. (2)Guangdong
Provincial Key Laboratory of Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine, South China
Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine, Guangzhou Institutes
of Biomedicine and Health, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Guangzhou 510530, China. 
(3)Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Embryo Engineering, Institute of
Zoonosis, College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, 130062,
China.

The recently emerged CRISPR/Cas9 technique has opened a new perspective on
readily editing specific genes. When combined with transcription activators, it
can precisely manipulate endogenous gene expression. Here, we enhanced the
expression of endogenous Cdx2 and Gata6 genes by CRISPR-mediated activators, thus
mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) were directly converted into two extraembryonic
lineages, i.e., typical trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) and extraembryonic endoderm
cells (XENCs), which exhibited characters of TSC or XENC derived from the
blastocyst extraembryonic lineages such as cell morphology, specific gene
expression, and differentiation ability in vitro and in vivo. This study
demonstrates that the cell fate can be effectively manipulated by directly
activating of specific endogenous gene expression with CRISPR-mediated activator.

PMCID: PMC4726097
PMID: 26782778  [PubMed - in process]


8. Nat Commun. 2016 Jan 6;7:10243. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10243.

Genetically engineering self-organization of human pluripotent stem cells into a 
liver bud-like tissue using Gata6.

Guye P(1,)(2,)(3), Ebrahimkhani MR(1,)(2), Kipniss N(1,)(2,)(3), Velazquez JJ(1),
Schoenfeld E(1,)(2,)(3), Kiani S(1,)(3), Griffith LG(1,)(2), Weiss R(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
(MIT), Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. (2)MIT Emergent Behaviors of
Integrated Cellular Systems (EBICS) Center, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA. 
(3)Synthetic Biology Center, MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) have potential for personalized and
regenerative medicine. While most of the methods using these cells have focused
on deriving homogenous populations of specialized cells, there has been modest
success in producing hiPSC-derived organotypic tissues or organoids. Here we
present a novel approach for generating and then co-differentiating hiPSC-derived
progenitors. With a genetically engineered pulse of GATA-binding protein 6
(GATA6) expression, we initiate rapid emergence of all three germ layers as a
complex function of GATA6 expression levels and tissue context. Within 2 weeks we
obtain a complex tissue that recapitulates early developmental processes and
exhibits a liver bud-like phenotype, including haematopoietic and stromal cells
as well as a neuronal niche. Collectively, our approach demonstrates derivation
of complex tissues from hiPSCs using a single autologous hiPSCs as source and
generates a range of stromal cells that co-develop with parenchymal cells to form
tissues.

PMCID: PMC4729822
PMID: 26732624  [PubMed - in process]


9. Gene. 2016 Feb 15;577(2):265-74. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2015.12.013. Epub 2015 Dec
9.

Characterization of the zebrafish cx36.7 gene promoter: Its regulation of
cardiac-specific expression and skeletal muscle-specific repression.

Miyagi H(1), Nag K(2), Sultana N(3), Munakata K(4), Hirose S(5), Nakamura N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B13
Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
miyagi.h.aa@m.titech.ac.jp. (2)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute
of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan.
Electronic address: kakon@fais.or.jp. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501,
Japan. Electronic address: sultana.n.aa@m.titech.ac.jp. (4)Department of
Biological Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho,
Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. Electronic address:
munakata.k.aa@m.titech.ac.jp. (5)Department of Biological Sciences, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8501,
Japan. Electronic address: shirose@bio.titech.ac.jp. (6)Department of Biological 
Sciences, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 4259-B13 Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku,
Yokohama 226-8501, Japan. Electronic address: nnakamur@bio.titech.ac.jp.

Zebrafish connexin 36.7 (cx36.7/ecx) has been identified as a key molecule in the
early stages of heart development in this species. A defect in cx36.7 causes
severe heart malformation due to the downregulation of nkx2.5 expression, a
result which resembles congenital heart disease in humans. It has been shown that
cx36.7 is expressed specifically in early developing heart cardiomyocytes.
However, the regulatory mechanism for the cardiac-restricted expression of cx36.7
remains to be elucidated. In this study we isolated the 5'-flanking promoter
region of the cx36.7 gene and characterized its promoter activity in zebrafish
embryos. Deletion analysis showed that a 316-bp upstream region is essential for 
cardiac-restricted expression. This region contains four GATA elements, the
proximal two of which are responsible for promoter activation in the embryonic
heart and serve as binding sites for gata4. When gata4, gata5 and gata6 were
simultaneously knocked down, the promoter activity was significantly decreased.
Moreover, the deletion of the region between -316 and -133bp led to EGFP
expression in the embryonic trunk muscle. The distal two GATA and A/T-rich
elements in this region act as repressors of promoter activity in skeletal
muscle. These results suggest that cx36.7 expression is directed by cardiac
promoter activation via the two proximal GATA elements as well as by skeletal
muscle-specific promoter repression via the two distal GATA elements.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26692140  [PubMed - in process]


10. Dev Biol. 2016 Feb 15;410(2):213-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.12.007. Epub 2015 
Dec 11.

Unique functions of Gata4 in mouse liver induction and heart development.

Borok MJ(1), Papaioannou VE(1), Sussel L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, NY,
USA. (2)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York,
NY, USA. Electronic address: lgs2@columbia.edu.

Gata4 and Gata6 are closely related transcription factors that are essential for 
the development of a number of embryonic tissues. While they have nearly
identical DNA-binding domains and similar patterns of expression, Gata4 and Gata6
null embryos have strikingly different embryonic lethal phenotypes. To determine 
whether the lack of redundancy is due to differences in protein function or Gata4
and Gata6 expression domains, we generated mice that contained the Gata6 cDNA in 
place of the Gata4 genomic locus. Gata4(Gata6/Gata6) embryos survived through
embryonic day (E)12.5 and successfully underwent ventral folding morphogenesis,
demonstrating that Gata6 is able to replace Gata4 function in extraembryonic
tissues. Surprisingly, Gata6 is unable to replace Gata4 function in the septum
transversum mesenchyme or the epicardium, leading to liver agenesis and lethal
heart defects in Gata4(Gata6/Gata6) embryos. These studies suggest that Gata4 has
evolved distinct functions in the development of these tissues that cannot be
performed by Gata6, even when it is provided in the identical expression domain. 
Our work has important implications for the respective mechanisms of Gata
function during development, as well as the functional evolution of these
essential transcription factors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4758879 [Available on 2017-02-15]
PMID: 26687508  [PubMed - in process]


11. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 1;76(3):749-61. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-2198. Epub
2015 Dec 16.

Integrated Genomic Analysis of Pancreatic Ductal Adenocarcinomas Reveals Genomic 
Rearrangement Events as Significant Drivers of Disease.

Murphy SJ(1), Hart SN(2), Halling GC(1), Johnson SH(1), Smadbeck JB(1), Drucker
T(3), Lima JF(3), Rohakhtar FR(4), Harris FR(1), Kosari F(1), Subramanian S(5),
Petersen GM(2), Wiltshire TD(6), Kipp BR(6), Truty MJ(7), McWilliams RR(8), Couch
FJ(9), Vasmatzis G(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomarker Discovery, Center for Individualized Medicine,
Rochester, Minnesota. Department of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota. (2)Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(3)Department of Biomarker Discovery, Center for Individualized Medicine,
Rochester, Minnesota. (4)Medical Genomics Facility, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota. (5)Department of Surgery, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis,
Minnesota. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota. (7)Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic, Rochester,
Minnesota. (8)Department of Oncology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Minnesota. (9)Health
Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota. Department of Laboratory
Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
vasmatzis.george@mayo.edu couch.fergus@mayo.edu. (10)Department of Biomarker
Discovery, Center for Individualized Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota. Department
of Molecular Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
vasmatzis.george@mayo.edu couch.fergus@mayo.edu.

Many somatic mutations have been detected in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC), leading to the identification of some key drivers of disease progression,
but the involvement of large genomic rearrangements has often been overlooked. In
this study, we performed mate pair sequencing (MPseq) on genomic DNA from 24 PDAC
tumors, including 15 laser-captured microdissected PDAC and 9 patient-derived
xenografts, to identify genome-wide rearrangements. Large genomic rearrangements 
with intragenic breakpoints altering key regulatory genes involved in PDAC
progression were detected in all tumors. SMAD4, ZNF521, and FHIT were among the
most frequently hit genes. Conversely, commonly reported genes with copy number
gains, including MYC and GATA6, were frequently observed in the absence of direct
intragenic breakpoints, suggesting a requirement for sustaining oncogenic
function during PDAC progression. Integration of data from MPseq, exome
sequencing, and transcriptome analysis of primary PDAC cases identified limited
overlap in genes affected by both rearrangements and point mutations. However,
significant overlap was observed in major PDAC-associated signaling pathways,
with all PDAC exhibiting reduced SMAD4 expression, reduced SMAD-dependent TGFß
signaling, and increased WNT and Hedgehog signaling. The frequent loss of SMAD4
and FHIT due to genomic rearrangements strongly implicates these genes as key
drivers of PDAC, thus highlighting the strengths of an integrated genomic and
transcriptomic approach for identifying mechanisms underlying disease initiation 
and progression. Cancer Res; 76(3); 749-61. ©2015 AACR.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26676757  [PubMed - in process]


12. Am J Cancer Res. 2015 Aug 15;5(9):2605-25. eCollection 2015.

Differential network analysis reveals dysfunctional regulatory networks in
gastric carcinogenesis.

Cao MS(1), Liu BY(2), Dai WT(3), Zhou WX(4), Li YX(5), Li YY(4).

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji University Shanghai 200092, P.
R. China ; Shanghai Center for Bioinformation Technology Shanghai 200235, P. R.
China ; Shanghai Industrial Technology Institute 1278 Keyuan Road, Shanghai
201203, P. R. China. (2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Gastric Neoplasms, Shanghai
Institute of Digestive Surgery, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine Shanghai 200025, P. R. China. (3)Shanghai Center for
Bioinformation Technology Shanghai 200235, P. R. China ; Shanghai Industrial
Technology Institute 1278 Keyuan Road, Shanghai 201203, P. R. China. (4)Shanghai 
Center for Bioinformation Technology Shanghai 200235, P. R. China ; Shanghai
Industrial Technology Institute 1278 Keyuan Road, Shanghai 201203, P. R. China ; 
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Pharmaceutical Translation 1278 Keyuan
Road, Shanghai 201203, P. R. China. (5)School of Life Science and Technology,
Tongji University Shanghai 200092, P. R. China ; Shanghai Center for
Bioinformation Technology Shanghai 200235, P. R. China ; Shanghai Industrial
Technology Institute 1278 Keyuan Road, Shanghai 201203, P. R. China ; Shanghai
Engineering Research Center of Pharmaceutical Translation 1278 Keyuan Road,
Shanghai 201203, P. R. China.

Gastric Carcinoma is one of the most common cancers in the world. A large number 
of differentially expressed genes have been identified as being associated with
gastric cancer progression, however, little is known about the underlying
regulatory mechanisms. To address this problem, we developed a differential
networking approach that is characterized by including a nascent methodology,
differential coexpression analysis (DCEA), and two novel quantitative methods for
differential regulation analysis. We first applied DCEA to a gene expression
dataset of gastric normal mucosa, adenoma and carcinoma samples to identify gene 
interconnection changes during cancer progression, based on which we inferred
normal, adenoma, and carcinoma-specific gene regulation networks by using linear 
regression model. It was observed that cancer genes and drug targets were
enriched in each network. To investigate the dynamic changes of gene regulation
during carcinogenesis, we then designed two quantitative methods to prioritize
differentially regulated genes (DRGs) and gene pairs or links (DRLs) between
adjacent stages. It was found that known cancer genes and drug targets are
significantly higher ranked. The top 4% normal vs. adenoma DRGs (36 genes) and
top 6% adenoma vs. carcinoma DRGs (56 genes) proved to be worthy of further
investigation to explore their association with gastric cancer. Out of the 16
DRGs involved in two top-10 DRG lists of normal vs. adenoma and adenoma vs.
carcinoma comparisons, 15 have been reported to be gastric cancer or cancer
related. Based on our inferred differential networking information and known
signaling pathways, we generated testable hypotheses on the roles of GATA6, ESRRG
and their signaling pathways in gastric carcinogenesis. Compared with established
approaches which build genome-scale GRNs, or sub-networks around differentially
expressed genes, the present one proved to be better at enriching cancer genes
and drug targets, and prioritizing disease-related genes on the dataset we
considered. We propose this extendable differential networking framework as a
promising way to gain insights into gene regulatory mechanisms underlying cancer 
progression and other phenotypic changes.

PMCID: PMC4633893
PMID: 26609471  [PubMed]


13. Apoptosis. 2016 Feb;21(2):130-42. doi: 10.1007/s10495-015-1193-2.

Chemotherapeutic agent CPT-11 eliminates peritoneal resident macrophages by
inducing apoptosis.

Huang MY(1), Pan H(1), Liang YD(1), Wei HX(1), Xu LH(2), Zha QB(3), He XH(4),
Ouyang DY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan
University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Cell Biology, College of Life
Science and Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Department of
Fetal Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou,
China. (4)Department of Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology,
Jinan University, Guangzhou, China. thexh@jnu.edu.cn. (5)Department of
Immunobiology, College of Life Science and Technology, Jinan University,
Guangzhou, China. dongyun1967@aliyun.com.

CPT-11 (Irinotecan) is a first-line chemotherapeutic agent in clinic, but it may 
induce side effects including diarrhea and enteritis in patients. The underlying 
mechanism of CPT-11's intestinal toxicity is unclear. Peritoneal resident
macrophages have been reported to be important for the maintenance of intestinal 
homeostasis. In this study, we evaluated the cytotoxic effects of CPT-11 on mouse
peritoneal resident macrophages. CPT-11 was administered intraperitoneally to
mice and their peritoneal exudate cells were isolated for evaluation. CPT-11
treatment strikingly decreased the ratio of F4/80(hi)MHCII(low) large peritoneal 
macrophages (LPMs), which are regarded as prenatally-originated peritoneal
resident macrophages. Consistent with this, the transcription factor GATA6
specifically expressed in LPMs was barely detectable in the macrophages from
CPT-11-treated mice, indicative of elimination of LPMs. Such elimination of LPMs 
was at least partly due to CPT-induced apoptosis in macrophages, because
inhibition of apoptosis by caspase-3 inhibitor z-DEVD-fmk significantly
diminished the loss of GATA6(+) LPMs. As GATA6 is a transcription factor that
controls expression of multiple genes regulating peritoneal B-1 cell development 
and translocation, elimination of GATA6(+) LPMs led to a great reduction in B-1
cells in the peritoneal cavity after CPT-11 treatment. These results indicated
that CPT-11-induced apoptosis contributed to the elimination of peritoneal
resident macrophages, which might in turn impair the function of peritoneal B-1
cells in maintaining intestinal homeostasis. Our findings may at least partly
explain why CPT-11 treatment in cancer patients induces diarrhea and enteritis,
which may provide a novel avenue to prevent such side effects.

PMID: 26531131  [PubMed - in process]


14. Biol Reprod. 2015 Dec;93(6):133. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.132969. Epub 2015
Oct 28.

GATA4 and GATA6 Knockdown During Luteinization Inhibits Progesterone Production
and Gonadotropin Responsiveness in the Corpus Luteum of Female Mice.

Convissar SM(1), Bennett J(1), Baumgarten SC(1), Lydon JP(2), DeMayo FJ(2),
Stocco C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular
Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas. (3)Department of Physiology 
and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, 
Illinois costocco@uic.edu.

The surge of luteinizing hormone triggers the genomic reprogramming, cell
differentiation, and tissue remodeling of the ovulated follicle, leading to the
formation of the corpus luteum. During this process, called luteinization,
follicular granulosa cells begin expressing a new set of genes that allow the
resulting luteal cells to survive in a vastly different hormonal environment and 
to produce the extremely high amounts of progesterone (P4) needed to sustain
pregnancy. To better understand the molecular mechanisms involved in the
regulation of luteal P4 production in vivo, the transcription factors GATA4 and
GATA6 were knocked down in the corpus luteum by crossing mice carrying Gata4 and 
Gata6 floxed genes with mice carrying Cre recombinase fused to the progesterone
receptor. This receptor is expressed exclusively in granulosa cells after the
luteinizing hormone surge, leading to recombination of floxed genes during
follicle luteinization. The findings demonstrated that GATA4 and GATA6 are
essential for female fertility, whereas targeting either factor alone causes
subfertility. When compared to control mice, serum P4 levels and luteal
expression of key steroidogenic genes were significantly lower in conditional
knockdown mice. The results also showed that GATA4 and GATA6 are required for the
expression of the receptors for prolactin and luteinizing hormone, the main
luteotropic hormones in mice. The findings demonstrate that GATA4 and GATA6 are
crucial regulators of luteal steroidogenesis and are required for the normal
response of luteal cells to luteotropins.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4712692 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26510866  [PubMed - in process]


15. Exp Mol Pathol. 2015 Dec;99(3):617-27. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.10.005. Epub
2015 Oct 23.

GATA6 is overexpressed in breast cancer and promotes breast cancer cell
epithelial-mesenchymal transition by upregulating slug expression.

Song Y(1), Tian T(2), Fu X(2), Wang W(2), Li S(3), Shi T(2), Suo A(2), Ruan Z(2),
Guo H(2), Yao Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China. (2)Department of Oncology, First
Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China.
(3)Department of Oncology, Shaanxi Provincial Tumor Hospital, Xi'an, Shaanxi
710061, China. (4)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an
Jiaotong University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710061, China. Electronic address:
yaoyudoc@163.com.

Metastasis is the leading cause of death in breast cancer (BC) patients. However,
until now, the mechanisms of BC metastasis remain elusive. GATA6 is a member of
the GATA transcription factor family that plays critical regulatory roles in
tissue development, which has been proposed as an oncogene in many types of
tumors; however, its role and underlying mechanisms in BC remain unclear. Here we
show that GATA6 is elevated in BC and its expression level is positively
correlated with metastasis. In addition Kaplan-Meier survival analysis showed
that high expression of GATA6 was associated with decreased overall survival of
BC patients. Overexpression of GATA6 in BC cells increased epithelial-mesenchymal
transition. In contrast, silencing GATA6 in aggressive BC cells inhibited this
process. Mechanistically, we found GATA6 exerts its function through active slug 
transcription. Slug knockdown blocked the GATA6-driven EMT. Furthermore, slug
expression in human BC is positively correlated with GATA6 expression. Our
results, for the first time, portray a pivotal role of GATA6 in regulating
metastatic behaviors of BC cells, suggesting GATA6 is a potential therapeutic
target in metastatic BCs.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26505174  [PubMed - in process]


16. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Oct 24;15:38. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0086-5.

A loss-of-function and H2B-Venus transcriptional reporter allele for Gata6 in
mice.

Freyer L(1), Schröter C(2), Saiz N(1), Schrode N(1), Nowotschin S(1),
Martinez-Arias A(2), Hadjantonakis AK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, 10065, USA. (2)Department of Genetics,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, CB2 3EH, UK. (3)Developmental Biology
Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY, 10065, USA. hadj@mskcc.org.

BACKGROUND: The GATA-binding factor 6 (Gata6) gene encodes a zinc finger
transcription factor that often functions as a key regulator of lineage
specification during development. It is the earliest known marker of the
primitive endoderm lineage in the mammalian blastocyst. During gastrulation,
GATA6 is expressed in early cardiac mesoderm and definitive endoderm progenitors,
and is necessary for development of specific mesoderm and endoderm-derived organs
including the heart, liver, and pancreas. Furthermore, reactivation or silencing 
of the Gata6 locus has been associated with certain types of cancer affecting
endodermal organs.
RESULTS: We have generated a Gata6(H2B-Venus) knock-in reporter mouse allele for 
the purpose of labeling GATA6-expressing cells with a bright nuclear-localized
fluorescent marker that is suitable for live imaging at single-cell resolution.
CONCLUSIONS: Expression of the Venus reporter was characterized starting from
embryonic stem (ES) cells, through mouse embryos and adult animals. The Venus
reporter was not expressed in ES cells, but was activated upon endoderm
differentiation. Gata6(H2B-Venus/H2B-Venus) homozygous embryos did not express
GATA6 protein and failed to specify the primitive endoderm in the blastocyst.
However, null blastocysts continued to express high levels of Venus in the
absence of GATA6 protein, suggesting that early Gata6 transcription is
independent of GATA6 protein expression. At early post-implantation stages of
embryonic development, there was a strong correlation of Venus with endogenous
GATA6 protein in endoderm and mesoderm progenitors, then later in the heart,
midgut, and hindgut. However, there were discrepancies in reporter versus
endogenous protein expression in certain cells, such as the body wall and
endocardium. During organogenesis, detection of Venus in specific organs
recapitulated known sites of endogenous GATA6 expression, such as in the lung bud
epithelium, liver, pancreas, gall bladder, stomach epithelium, and vascular
endothelium. In adults, Venus was observed in the lungs, pancreas, liver, gall
bladder, ovaries, uterus, bladder, skin, adrenal glands, small intestine and
corpus region of the stomach. Overall, Venus fluorescent protein under regulatory
control of the Gata6 locus was expressed at levels that were easily visualized
directly and could endure live and time-lapse imaging techniques. Venus is
co-expressed with endogenous GATA6 throughout development to adulthood, and
should provide an invaluable tool for examining the status of the Gata6 locus
during development, as well as its silencing or reactivation in cancer or other
disease states.

PMCID: PMC4619391
PMID: 26498761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Oct 16;15:37. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0079-4.

Sox7 is dispensable for primitive endoderm differentiation from mouse ES cells.

Kinoshita M(1), Shimosato D(2,)(3), Yamane M(4), Niwa H(5,)(6,)(7).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan.
mk704@cam.ac.uk. (2)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre for
Developmental Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo,
650-0047, Japan. d56t10@hotmail.co.jp. (3)Laboratory for Development and
Regenerative Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1
Kusunokicho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan. d56t10@hotmail.co.jp.
(4)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0047, Japan.
m-yamane@cdb.riken.jp. (5)Laboratory for Pluripotent cell studies, RIKEN, Centre 
for Developmental Biology, 2-2-3, Minatojima-Minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo,
650-0047, Japan. niwa@kumamoto-u.ac.jp. (6)Laboratory for Development and
Regenerative Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1
Kusunokicho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, 650-0017, Japan. niwa@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.
(7)Present address: Department of Pluripotent Stem Cell Biology, Institure of
Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Kumamoto University, 2-2-1 Honjo, Chuo-ku,
Kumamoto, 860-0811, Japan. niwa@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Primitive endoderm is a cell lineage segregated from the epiblast in 
the blastocyst and gives rise to parietal and visceral endoderm. Sox7 is a member
of the SoxF gene family that is specifically expressed in primitive endoderm in
the late blastocyst, although its function in this cell lineage remains unclear.
RESULTS: Here we characterize the function of Sox7 in primitive endoderm
differentiation using mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells as a model system. We show 
that ectopic expression of Sox7 in ES cells has a marginal effect on triggering
differentiation into primitive endoderm-like cells. We also show that targeted
disruption of Sox7 in ES cells does not affect differentiation into primitive
endoderm cells in embryoid body formation as well as by forced expression of
Gata6.
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that Sox7 function is supplementary and not
essential for this differentiation from ES cells.

PMCID: PMC4609079
PMID: 26475439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 Dec;21(12):894-904. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav054. Epub 2015
Oct 3.

Coordination of AUF1 and miR-148a destabilizes DNA methyltransferase 1 mRNA under
hypoxia in endometriosis.

Hsiao KY(1), Wu MH(2), Chang N(1), Yang SH(1), Wu CW(1), Sun HS(3), Tsai SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University,
1 University Road, Tainan 70101, Taiwan. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101,
Taiwan. (3)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan seantsai@mail.ncku.edu.tw
hssun@mail.ncku.edu.tw. (4)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University, 1 University Road, Tainan 70101, Taiwan
seantsai@mail.ncku.edu.tw hssun@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

STUDY HYPOTHESIS: DNA methylation is regulated by hypoxia in endometriosis.
STUDY FINDING: Hypoxia causes global hypomethylation through AU-rich element
binding factor 1 (AUF1)/microRNA-148a (miR-148a)-mediated destabilization of DNA 
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) mRNA.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Eutopic endometrial and ectopic endometriotic stromal
cells have the same genetic background, but differ in several cellular and
molecular responses. Both hypoxia and DNA methylation regulate several genes
involved in the development of endometriosis.
STUDY DESIGN, SAMPLES/MATERIALS, METHODS: This laboratory study included 15
patients of reproductive age with endometriosis or normal menstrual cycles.
Paired endometrial and endometriotic tissues were collected for assaying the
levels of DNMT1, 3a and 3b using quantitative RT-PCR, western blot and
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. Primary cultured endometrial stromal cells
maintained in normoxia/hypoxia (1% O2) or treated with hypoxia-mimetic compounds 
were also assayed. The levels of DNA 5-methylcytosine were assayed by using IHC
in clinical specimens and murine tissues, and by ELISA in cultured stromal cells.
The 3'-untranslated region reporter assay was used to evaluate the effect of
hypoxia, microRNAs (miRNAs) and human antigen R (HuR)/AUF1 on DNMT1 mRNA
stability. RNA immunoprecipitation was used to assess the interaction of HuR/AUF1
and miR-148a/DNMT1 mRNA under hypoxia. Finally, a transplant-induced mouse model 
of endometriosis using 20 mice was used to elucidate the alteration of Dnmt1
levels and DNA methylation in the endometriotic tissues.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Levels of DNMT1 mRNA and protein and
5-methylcytosine were lower in the ectopic stromal cells (P < 0.05) than in the
eutopic cells. Treatment with hypoxia and its mimetic compounds recapitulated the
reduced levels of DNMT1 and 5-methylcytosine levels (P < 0.05 versus control).
Hypoxia treatment destabilized DNMT1 mRNA through recruitment of miR-148a and
AUF1. Mutations introduced to the miR-148a targeting site or AU-rich element
(ARE) restored the hypoxia-suppressed DNMT1 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR)
reporter activity (P < 0.05 versus control). Levels of proteins of three
hypermethylated genes in endometrial stroma cells, GATA6, HOXA3 and SLC16A5, were
elevated after 72 h of hypoxia treatment (P < 0.05 versus control). Finally, a
transplant-induced model of endometriosis demonstrated the down-regulation of
DNMT1 and a decrease in 5-methylcytosine in the endometriotic tissues (P < 0.05, 
eutopic versus ectopic).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Primary human cell cultures and a murine model 
were used in this study, and thus the results may not fully represent the
situation in vivo.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: This is the first study to elucidate how
microenvironmental hypoxia links to the epigenetic effects of DNA methylation in 
the endometriosis, and to delineate the molecular mechanism of
hypoxia-coordinated AUF1/miR-148a interaction and recruitment to DNMT1 mRNA
during the pathogenesis of endometriosis. The development of future therapeutics 
in endometriosis may aim at disrupting this specific interaction and eventually
restore the epigenetic regulation.
STUDY FUNDING AND COMPETING INTERESTS: This work was supported by the National
Science Council of Taiwan (NSC101-2320-B-006-030-MY3). The author declares that
there are no conflicts of interest.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26433194  [PubMed - in process]


19. Mol Cancer. 2015 Sep 22;14(1):173. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0441-y.

BMP4 depletion by miR-200 inhibits tumorigenesis and metastasis of lung
adenocarcinoma cells.

Kim JS(1), Kurie JM(2), Ahn YH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Tissue Injury Defense Research Center,
Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
jeongseonkim821@gmail.com. (2)Department of Thoracic/Head and Neck Medical
Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.
jkurie@mdanderson.org. (3)Department of Molecular Medicine and Tissue Injury
Defense Research Center, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul, South 
Korea. yahn@ewha.ac.kr.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNA-200 (miR-200) suppresses the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition of various cancer cells, including lung adenocarcinoma cells. We found
that bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) was decreased in miR-200-overexpressing 
cells and epithelial-like lung cancer cells. In this study, we investigated the
mechanism and role of BMP4 depletion by miR-200 in murine lung adenocarcinoma
cells.
METHODS: BMP4 expression levels in murine lung cancer cells were measured by
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR (qRT-PCR) and Western blotting. Promoter
and 3'-untranslated region (UTR) luciferase reporter assays were performed to
discover the mechanism of regulation of BMP4 by miR-200. Murine lung cancer cells
were transfected with Bmp4 shRNAs, which were then injected into syngeneic mice
to measure their tumorigenic and metastatic potential and cultured on Matrigel to
study the influence of BMP4 on 3-D acinus formation.
RESULTS: miR-200 down-regulated BMP4 via direct targeting of the GATA4 and GATA6 
transcription factors that stimulate Bmp4 transcription. BMP4 up-regulated JAG2, 
an upstream factor of miR-200; therefore, JAG2, miR-200, and BMP4 form a
regulatory loop. Bmp4 knockdown suppressed cancer cell growth, migration, and
invasion and inhibited tumorigenesis and metastasis of lung cancer cells when
injected into syngeneic mice. In addition, BMP4 was required for normal acinus
formation in Matrigel 3-D culture of murine lung cancer cells, which may be
mediated by MYH10, a downstream target of BMP4.
CONCLUSION: BMP4 functions as a pro-tumorigenic factor in a murine lung cancer
model, and its transcription is regulated by miR-200 and GATA4/6. Thus, we
propose that BMP4 and its antagonists may be suitable therapeutic targets for the
treatment of lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC4580148
PMID: 26395571  [PubMed - in process]


20. Development. 2015 Oct 15;142(20):3488-99. doi: 10.1242/dev.125021. Epub 2015 Sep 
22.

LIF supports primitive endoderm expansion during pre-implantation development.

Morgani SM(1), Brickman JM(2).

Author information: 
(1)The Danish Stem Cell Centre, DanStem, University of Copenhagen, 3B
Blegdamsvej, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark. (2)The Danish Stem Cell Centre,
DanStem, University of Copenhagen, 3B Blegdamsvej, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark 
joshua.brickman@sund.ku.dk.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) are pluripotent cell lines that can be maintained
indefinitely in an early developmental state. ESC culture conditions almost
always require the cytokine LIF to maintain self-renewal. As ESCs are not
homogeneous but contain multiple populations reminiscent of the blastocyst,
identifying the target cells of LIF is necessary to understand the propagation of
pluripotency. We recently found that LIF acts under self-renewing conditions to
stimulate the fraction of ESCs that express extraembryonic markers, but has
little impact on pluripotent gene expression. Here, we report that LIF has two
distinct roles: it blocks early epiblast (Epi) differentiation, and it supports
the expansion of primitive endoderm (PrE)-primed ESCs and PrE in vivo. We find
that activation of JAK/STAT signalling downstream of LIF occurs initially
throughout the pre-implantation embryo, but later marks the PrE. Moreover, the
addition of LIF to cultured embryos increases the GATA6(+) PrE population,
whereas inhibition of JAK/STAT signalling reduces both NANOG(+) epiblast and
GATA6(+) PrE. The reduction of the NANOG(+) Epi might be explained by its
precocious differentiation to later Epi derivatives, whereas the increase in PrE 
is mediated both by an increase in proliferation and inhibition of PrE apoptosis 
that is normally triggered in embryos with an excess of GATA6(+) cells. Thus, it 
appears that the relative size of the PrE is determined by the number of
LIF-producing cells in the embryo. This suggests a mechanism by which the embryo 
adjusts the relative ratio of the primary lineages in response to experimental
manipulation.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 26395492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 21;5:14291. doi: 10.1038/srep14291.

REG4 is a transcriptional target of GATA6 and is essential for colorectal
tumorigenesis.

Kawasaki Y(1), Matsumura K(1), Miyamoto M(1), Tsuji S(1), Okuno M(1), Suda S(1), 
Hiyoshi M(2), Kitayama J(2), Akiyama T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo,
113-0032, Japan. (2)Department of Surgical Oncology, Graduate school of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, 113-8655, Japan.

The transcription factor GATA6 is a critical regulator of cell proliferation and 
development in the gastrointestinal tract. We have recently reported that GATA6
induces the expression of the intestinal stem cell marker LGR5 and enhances the
clonogenicity and tumorigenicity of colon cancer cells, but not the growth of
these cells cultured under adherent conditions. Here we show that REG4, a member 
of the regenerating islet-derived (REG) family, is also a target of GATA6. We
further demonstrate that REG4 is downregulated by overexpression of miR-363,
which suppresses GATA6 expression. Moreover, we show that GATA6-mediated
activation of REG4 enhances the growth of colon cancer cells under adherent
conditions and is required for their tumorigenicity. Taken together, our findings
demonstrate that GATA6 simultaneously induces the expression of genes essential
for the growth of colon cancer cells under adherent conditions (REG4) and genes
required for their clonogenicity (LGR5), and that the miR-363-GATA6-REG4/LGR5
signaling cascade promotes the tumorigenicity of colon cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC4585703
PMID: 26387746  [PubMed - in process]


22. Cancer Med. 2015 Nov;4(11):1700-4. doi: 10.1002/cam4.500. Epub 2015 Aug 15.

Supportive evidence for FOXP1, BARX1, and FOXF1 as genetic risk loci for the
development of esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Becker J(1,)(2), May A(3), Gerges C(4), Anders M(5,)(6), Veits L(7), Weise
K(1,)(2), Czamara D(8), Lyros O(9), Manner H(10), Terheggen G(4), Venerito M(11),
Noder T(5), Mayershofer R(12), Hofer JH(13), Karch HW(14), Ahlbrand CJ(15), Arras
M(15), Hofer S(15), Mangold E(1,)(2), Heilmann-Heimbach S(1,)(2), Heinrichs
SK(1,)(2), Hess T(1,)(2), Kiesslich R(10), Izbicki JR(16), Hölscher AH(17),
Bollschweiler E(17), Malfertheiner P(11), Lang H(15), Moehler M(18), Lorenz
D(19), Müller-Myhsok B(8), Ott K(20,)(21), Schmidt T(21), Whiteman DC(22),
Vaughan TL(23,)(24), Nöthen MM(1,)(2), Hackelsberger A(25), Schumacher B(4,)(26),
Pech O(27), Vashist Y(16), Vieth M(7), Weismüller J(28), Neuhaus H(4), Rösch
T(5), Ell C(3), Gockel I(9,)(15), Schumacher J(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany. (2)Department 
of Genomics, Life & Brain Center, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(3)Department of Medicine II, Sana Klinikum, Offenbach, Germany. (4)Department of
Internal Medicine II, Evangelisches Krankenhaus, Düsseldorf, Germany.
(5)Department of Interdisciplinary Endoscopy, University Hospital
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany. (6)Department of Gastroenterology and
Interdisciplinary Endoscopy, Vivantes Wenckebach-Kinikum, Berlin, Germany.
(7)Institute of Pathology, Klinikum Bayreuth, Bayreuth, Germany. (8)Statistical
Genetics, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany. (9)Department of
Visceral, Transplant, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital of
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany. (10)Department of Internal Medicine II, HSK Hospital, 
Wiesbaden, Germany. (11)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Infectious
Diseases, Otto-von-Guericke University Hospital, Magdeburg, Germany.
(12)Gastroenterologie am Burgweiher, Bonn, Germany. (13)Magen Darm Zentrum Wiener
Platz, Cologne, Germany. (14)Gastroenterologische Schwerpunktpraxis, Baumholder, 
Germany. (15)Department of General, Visceral and Transplant Surgery, University
Medical Center, University of Mainz, Mainz, Germany. (16)Department of General,
Visceral and Thoracic Surgery, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf,
University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany. (17)Department of General, Visceral and 
Cancer Surgery, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (18)First Department of 
Internal Medicine, University Medical Center, University of Mainz, Mainz,
Germany. (19)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, Sana Klinikum,
Offenbach, Germany. (20)Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation
Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (21)Department of
General, Visceral and Thorax Surgery, RoMed Klinikum Rosenheim, Rosenheim,
Germany. (22)Cancer Control, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute, Brisbane,
Australia. (23)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, School of
Public Health, Seattle, Washington. (24)Division of Public Health Sciences, Fred 
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington. (25)Gastropraxis,
Wiesbaden, Germany. (26)Department of Internal Medicine and Gastroenterology,
Elisabeth Hospital, Essen, Germany. (27)Department of Gastroenterology and
Interventional Endoscopy, St. John of God Hospital, Regensburg, Germany.
(28)Gastroenterologische Gemeinschaftspraxis, Koblenz, Germany.

The Barrett's and Esophageal Adenocarcinoma Consortium (BEACON) recently
performed a genome-wide association study (GWAS) on esophageal adenocarcinoma
(EAC) and Barrett's esophagus. They identified genome-wide significant
association for variants at three genes, namely CRTC1, FOXP1, and BARX1.
Furthermore, they replicated an association at the FOXF1 gene that has been
previously found in a GWAS on Barrett's esophagus. We aimed at further
replicating the association at these and other loci that showed suggestive
association with P < 10(-4) in the BEACON sample. In total, we tested 88 SNPs in 
an independent sample consisting of 1065 EAC cases and 1019 controls of German
descent. We could replicate the association at FOXP1, BARX1, and FOXF1 with
nominal significance and thereby confirm that genetic variants at these genes
confer EAC risk. In addition, we found association of variants near the genes
XRCC2 and GATA6 that were strongly (P < 10(-5) ) although not genome-wide
significantly associated with the BEACON GWAS. Therefore, both variants and
corresponding genes represent promising candidates for future EAC association
studies on independent samples.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4673997
PMID: 26383589  [PubMed - in process]


23. Cytotherapy. 2015 Nov;17(11):1627-37. doi: 10.1016/j.jcyt.2015.07.012. Epub 2015 
Aug 31.

In vitro cardiomyocyte differentiation of umbilical cord blood cells: crucial
role for c-kit(+) cells.

Iachininoto MG(1), Capodimonti S(1), Podda MV(2), Valentini CG(1), Bianchi M(1), 
Leone AM(3), Teofili L(4), Leone G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy.
(2)Institute of Human Physiology, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, 
Italy. (3)Department of Cardiovascular Sciences, Catholic University of the
Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. (4)Institute of Hematology, Catholic University of the
Sacred Heart, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: lteofili@rm.unicatt.it.

BACKGROUND AIMS: Although bone marrow c-kit(+) progenitor cells support
myocardial regeneration, the cardiomyocyte differentiation potential of umbilical
cord blood (UCB) c-kit(+) cells is unknown.
METHODS: UCB mononuclear cells (MNCs) and c-kit(+) cells purified by use of
immunomagnetic beads were used. Cardiomyocyte differentiation was induced with
(i) a-minimum essential medium (MEM) with cyclosporine A, (ii) a-MEM with bone
morphogenic protein 4 (BMP-4) and transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) or (iii)
MEM with dexamethasone. The expression of cardiac markers (GATA4, GATA6, ß-myosin
heavy chain, a-sarcomeric actin and cardiac Troponin T) was investigated, and
whole-cell current and voltage-clamp recordings were performed.
RESULTS: Although c-kit(+) cells revealed an immature gene profile, with high
expression of CD34, CD133, aldehyde dehydrogenase-A1 and c-myc RNAs, purified
c-kit(+) cells did not succeed in differentiating into cardiomyocyte-like cells
in culture. In contrast, MNCs (either in a-MEM plus cyclosporine A or in a-MEM
plus BMP-4 and TGF-ß) produced large, adherent cells expressing several cardiac
genes and exhibiting an excitable phenotype. Cardiomyocyte-like cell formation
was prevented by removing the c-kit(+) cell fraction from MNCs. Furthermore,
after co-culturing carboxyfluorescein diacetate succynimidyl ester (CFSE)-tracked
c-kit(+) cells together with c-kit(-) cells, we found that cardiac Troponin
T--expressing cells were also CFSE(+).
CONCLUSIONS: We show that UCB contains progenitors endowed with differentiation
potential into cardiomyocytes: these cells reside in the c-kit(+) fraction and
require the presence of abundant accessory cells to accomplish the
differentiation. These preliminary observations provide the basis for consider
the storage of autologous UCB in patients with prenatal diagnosis of congenital
heart diseases potentially amenable by myocardial regenerative approaches.

Copyright © 2015 International Society for Cellular Therapy. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26338480  [PubMed - in process]


24. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 Aug 26;11(8):e1004476. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004476. 
eCollection 2015.

Pluripotency, Differentiation, and Reprogramming: A Gene Expression Dynamics
Model with Epigenetic Feedback Regulation.

Miyamoto T(1), Furusawa C(2), Kaneko K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Science, The University of Tokyo, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Quantitative Biology Center (QBiC), RIKEN, Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Embryonic stem cells exhibit pluripotency: they can differentiate into all types 
of somatic cells. Pluripotent genes such as Oct4 and Nanog are activated in the
pluripotent state, and their expression decreases during cell differentiation.
Inversely, expression of differentiation genes such as Gata6 and Gata4 is
promoted during differentiation. The gene regulatory network controlling the
expression of these genes has been described, and slower-scale epigenetic
modifications have been uncovered. Although the differentiation of pluripotent
stem cells is normally irreversible, reprogramming of cells can be experimentally
manipulated to regain pluripotency via overexpression of certain genes. Despite
these experimental advances, the dynamics and mechanisms of differentiation and
reprogramming are not yet fully understood. Based on recent experimental
findings, we constructed a simple gene regulatory network including pluripotent
and differentiation genes, and we demonstrated the existence of pluripotent and
differentiated states from the resultant dynamical-systems model. Two
differentiation mechanisms, interaction-induced switching from an expression
oscillatory state and noise-assisted transition between bistable stationary
states, were tested in the model. The former was found to be relevant to the
differentiation process. We also introduced variables representing epigenetic
modifications, which controlled the threshold for gene expression. By assuming
positive feedback between expression levels and the epigenetic variables, we
observed differentiation in expression dynamics. Additionally, with numerical
reprogramming experiments for differentiated cells, we showed that pluripotency
was recovered in cells by imposing overexpression of two pluripotent genes and
external factors to control expression of differentiation genes. Interestingly,
these factors were consistent with the four Yamanaka factors, Oct4, Sox2, Klf4,
and Myc, which were necessary for the establishment of induced pluripotent stem
cells. These results, based on a gene regulatory network and expression dynamics,
contribute to our wider understanding of pluripotency, differentiation, and
reprogramming of cells, and they provide a fresh viewpoint on robustness and
control during development.

PMCID: PMC4550282
PMID: 26308610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Pediatr Clin North Am. 2015 Aug;62(4):1037-53. doi: 10.1016/j.pcl.2015.04.012.
Epub 2015 May 11.

Genome, Exome, and Targeted Next-Generation Sequencing in Neonatal Diabetes.

De Franco E(1), Ellard S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical
School, Barrack Road, Exeter EX2 5DW, UK. (2)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical
Science, University of Exeter Medical School, Barrack Road, Exeter EX2 5DW, UK.
Electronic address: sian.ellard@nhs.net.

The use of targeted gene panels now allows the analysis of all the genes known to
cause a disease in a single test. For neonatal diabetes, this has resulted in a
paradigm shift with patients receiving a genetic diagnosis early and the genetic 
results guiding their clinical management. Exome and genome sequencing are
powerful tools to identify novel genetic causes of known diseases. For neonatal
diabetes, the use of these technologies has resulted in the identification of 2
novel disease genes (GATA6 and STAT3) and a novel regulatory element of PTF1A, in
which mutations cause pancreatic agenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26210631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 21;10(7):e0133587. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133587.
eCollection 2015.

Influence of Sex on Basal and Dickkopf-1 Regulated Gene Expression in the Bovine 
Morula.

Denicol AC(1), Leão BC(2), Dobbs KB(1), Mingoti GZ(2), Hansen PJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, D.H. Barron Reproductive and Perinatal Biology 
Research Program, and Genetics Institute, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida, United States of America. (2)Laboratory of Physiology of Reproduction,
School of Veterinary Medicine, Universidade Estadual Paulista-UNESP, Araçatuba,
SP, Brazil.

Sex affects function of the developing mammalian embryo as early as the
preimplantation period. There were two goals of the current objective. The first 
was to determine the degree and nature of differences in gene expression between 
female and male embryos in the cow at the morula stage of development. The second
objective was to determine whether DKK1, a molecule known to alter
differentiation of the blastocyst, would affect gene expression differently for
female and male morulae. In Experiment 1, female and male embryos were treated
with DKK1 at Day 5 after insemination. Morulae were harvested 24 h after
treatment, pooled in groups of 20 for microarray analysis and RNA subjected to
analysis of gene expression by microarray hybridization. There were 662
differentially expressed genes between females and males and 128 of these genes
had a fold change = 1.5 between the two sexes. Of the genes upregulated in
females, 49.5% were located in the X chromosome. Functional analysis predicted
that cell survival was greater in female embryos. Experiment 2 involved a similar
design except that transcripts for 12 genes previously reported to be affected by
sex, DKK1 or the interaction were quantified by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. Expression of all genes tested that were affected by sex in experiment 
1 was affected in a similar manner in Experiment 2. In contrast, effects of DKK1 
on gene expression were largely not repeatable in Experiment 2. The exception was
for the Hippo signaling gene AMOT, which was inhibited by DKK1. In Experiment 3, 
embryos produced by fertilization with unsorted sperm were treated with DKK1 at
Day 5 and abundance of transcripts for CDX2, GATA6, and NANOG determined at Days 
5, 6 and 7 after insemination. There was no effect of DKK1 on expression of any
of the three genes. In conclusion, female and male bovine embryos have a
different pattern of gene expression as early as the morula stage, and this is
due to a large extent to expression of genes in the X chromosomes in females.
Differential gene expression between female and male embryos is likely the basis 
for increased resistance to cell death signals in female embryos and disparity in
responses of female and male embryos to changes in the maternal environment.

PMCID: PMC4510475
PMID: 26196299  [PubMed - in process]


27. Yonago Acta Med. 2015 Mar;58(1):15-22. Epub 2015 Mar 27.

P19 Cells Overexpressing Lhx1 Differentiate into the Definitive Endoderm by
Recapitulating an Embryonic Developmental Pathway.

Hasegawa A(1), Shirayoshi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regenerative Medicine and Therapeutics, Department of Genetic
Medicine and Regenerative Therapeutics, Institute of Regenerative Medicine and
Biofunction, Tottori University Graduate School of Medical Science, Yonago
683-8503, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Epiblasts occur at the last pluripotent stage of embryonic
development and are important in elucidating how the three germ layers are
formed. However, little is known of the molecular mechanisms of their
development. We have shown that LIM homeobox 1 (Lhx1) was involved in epiblast
development in embryonic stem cells, especially meso- and endodermal
differentiation. However, since epiblasts in embryoid bodies spontaneously
develop into a further stage, it is difficult to study their development in this 
system.
METHODS: Mouse embryonal carcinoma P19 cells which have properties similar to
those of epiblasts provided new avenues of investigation into the regulatory
mechanism of epiblasts.
RESULTS: Overexpression of Lhx1 in P19 cells induced expression of organizer
marker genes (Cer1, Gsc) and endoderm marker genes (Gata6, Foxa2, Sox17) but not 
extra-embryonic endoderm marker genes (Sox7 or Hnf4alpha).
CONCLUSION: This study suggested that Lhx1 overexpression caused P19 cells to
differentiate into an endodermal lineage. Thus, P19 cells and their derivatives
can be a useful model system to study how the three germ layers are formed.

PMCID: PMC4502295
PMID: 26190893  [PubMed]


28. Genes Dev. 2015 Jun 15;29(12):1239-55. doi: 10.1101/gad.257071.114.

Gata6 potently initiates reprograming of pluripotent and differentiated cells to 
extraembryonic endoderm stem cells.

Wamaitha SE(1), del Valle I(1), Cho LT(1), Wei Y(2), Fogarty NM(1), Blakeley
P(1), Sherwood RI(3), Ji H(2), Niakan KK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Mill Hill Laboratory, The Francis Crick Institute, London NW7 1AA, United
Kingdom; (2)Department of Biostatistics, Bloomberg School of Public Health, Johns
Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA; (3)Brigham and Women's
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Transcription factor-mediated reprograming is a powerful method to study cell
fate changes. In this study, we demonstrate that the transcription factor Gata6
can initiate reprograming of multiple cell types to induced extraembryonic
endoderm stem (iXEN) cells. Intriguingly, Gata6 is sufficient to drive iXEN cells
from mouse pluripotent cells and differentiated neural cells. Furthermore, GATA6 
induction in human embryonic stem (hES) cells also down-regulates pluripotency
gene expression and up-regulates extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn) genes, revealing 
a conserved function in mediating this cell fate switch. Profiling
transcriptional changes following Gata6 induction in mES cells reveals step-wise 
pluripotency factor disengagement, with initial repression of Nanog and Esrrb,
then Sox2, and finally Oct4, alongside step-wise activation of ExEn genes.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and subsequent high-throughput sequencing analysis 
shows Gata6 enrichment near pluripotency and endoderm genes, suggesting that
Gata6 functions as both a direct repressor and activator. Together, this
demonstrates that Gata6 is a versatile and potent reprograming factor that can
act alone to drive a cell fate switch from diverse cell types.

© 2015 Wamaitha et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4495396
PMID: 26109048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Jul 31;463(3):466-71. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.05.121. Epub 2015 Jun 3.

Hepassocin is required for hepatic outgrowth during zebrafish hepatogenesis.

Gao M(1), Yan H(2), Yin RH(3), Wang Q(4), Zhan YQ(3), Yu M(3), Ge CH(3), Li
CY(3), Wang XH(3), Ge ZQ(5), Yang XM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin University, Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Tianjin 300072, 
China; Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China. (2)Beijing
Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Beijing 100850, China. (3)Beijing
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China; State Key Laboratory of
Proteomics, Beijing 100850, China. (4)Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (5)Tianjin University, Department of
Pharmaceutical Engineering, Tianjin 300072, China. (6)Tianjin University,
Department of Pharmaceutical Engineering, Tianjin 300072, China; Beijing
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China; State Key Laboratory of
Proteomics, Beijing 100850, China. Electronic address: xiaomingyang@sina.com.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepassocin (HPS) is a hepatotrophic growth factor that
specifically stimulates hepatocyte proliferation and promotes liver regeneration 
after liver damage. In this paper, zebrafish were used to investigate the role of
HPS in liver development.
METHODS AND RESULTS: During zebrafish development, HPS expression is enriched in 
liver throughout hepatogenesis. Knockdown of HPS using its specific morpholino
leads to a smaller liver phenotype. Further results showed that the HPS knockdown
has no effect on the expression of the early endoderm marker gata6 and early
hepatic marker hhex. In addition, results showed that the smaller-liver phenotype
in HPS morphants was caused by suppression of cell proliferation, not induction
of cell apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Current findings indicated that HPS is essential to the later stages
of development in vertebrate liver organogenesis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26047702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Semin Reprod Med. 2015 May;33(3):220-4. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1554053. Epub 2015
Jun 2.

Molecular biology of endometriosis: from aromatase to genomic abnormalities.

Bulun SE(1), Monsivais D(1), Kakinuma T(1), Furukawa Y(1), Bernardi L(1), Pavone 
ME(1), Dyson M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Northwestern University Feinberg
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.

Endometriosis has been initially described as the presence of ectopic endometrial
tissue on pelvic organs or in extrapelvic sites; and this has been used as its
key pathologic feature ever since. Endometriosis responds to fluctuations in
estrogen and progesterone by growth and inflammation, leading to pain aggravated 
by menses. It was proposed that pelvic endometriosis primarily originate from
retrograde menstruation of a critical number of eutopic endometrial cells with
stem characteristics. This postulate is supported by the molecular defects found 
in ectopic endometriotic tissue. Genome-wide differences in CpG methylation
between eutopic endometrial and endometriotic stromal cells are present.
Defective CpG methylation affecting several genes that encode key transcription
factors such as GATA6, steroidogenic factor-1, and estrogen receptor-ß in
endometriosis gives rise to overproduction of local estrogen and prostaglandins
and suppression of progesterone receptor. Progesterone receptor deficiency leads 
to progesterone resistance, resulting in decreased retinol uptake and retinoic
acid production and altered retinoic acid action. These molecular defects
collectively give rise to poor cellular differentiation, enhanced survival, and
increased inflammation, which are the biological hallmarks of endometriotic
tissue.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

PMID: 26036904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Mech Dev. 2015 Nov;138 Pt 3:375-98. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2015.05.002. Epub 2015 May
27.

The p38 MAPK signalling pathway is required for glucose metabolism, lineage
specification and embryo survival during mouse preimplantation development.

Sozen B(1), Ozturk S(1), Yaba A(2), Demir N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Akdeniz University, School of
Medicine, Campus, 07070, Antalya, Turkey. (2)Department of Histology and
Embryology, Istanbul Medipol University, School of Medicine, 34810, Beykoz,
Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Department of Histology and Embryology, Akdeniz University, 
School of Medicine, Campus, 07070, Antalya, Turkey. Electronic address:
necdet08@yahoo.com.

Preimplantation embryo development is an important and unique period and is
strictly controlled. This period includes a series of critical events that are
regulated by multiple signal-transduction pathways, all of which are crucial in
the establishment of a viable pregnancy. The p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) signalling pathway is one of these pathways, and inhibition of its
activity during preimplantation development has a deleterious effect. The
molecular mechanisms underlying the deleterious effects of p38 MAPK suppression
in early embryo development remain unknown. To investigate of the effect of p38
MAPK inhibition on late preimplantation stages in detail, we cultured 2-cell
stage embryos in the presence of SB203580 for 48h and analysed the 8-cell,
morula, and blastocyst stages. We determined that prolonged inhibition of the p38
MAPK altered the expression levels of Glut1 and Glut4, decreased glucose uptake
during the 8-cell to blastocyst transition, changed the expression levels of
transcripts which will be important to lineage commitment, including Oct4/Pou5f1,
Nanog, Sox2, and Gata6, and increased cell death in 8-16 cell stage embryos
onwards. Strikingly, while the expression levels of Nanog, Gata6 and Oct4/Pou5f1 
mRNAs were significantly decreased, Sox2 mRNA was increased in SB203580-treated
blastocysts. Taken together, our results provide important insight into the
biological processes controlled by the p38 MAPK pathway and its critical role
during preimplantation development.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26025760  [PubMed - in process]


32. PLoS One. 2015 May 29;10(5):e0128105. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128105.
eCollection 2015.

Novel Roles of GATA4/6 in the Postnatal Heart Identified through Temporally
Controlled, Cardiomyocyte-Specific Gene Inactivation by Adeno-Associated Virus
Delivery of Cre Recombinase.

Prendiville TW(1), Guo H(2), Lin Z(1), Zhou P(1), Stevens SM(1), He A(3),
VanDusen N(1), Chen J(1), Zhong L(4), Wang DZ(5), Gao G(4), Pu WT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
United States of America. (2)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Department of Anatomy,
School of Basic Medicine, Shanghai University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Shanghai, China. (3)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States of America; Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(4)Gene Therapy Center, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,
Massachusetts, United States of America. (5)Department of Cardiology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Harvard
Stem Cell Institute, 1350 Massachusetts Ave, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United
States of America. (6)Department of Cardiology, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America; Gene Therapy Center, University 
of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts, United States of
America.

GATA4 and GATA6 are central cardiac transcriptional regulators. The postnatal,
stage-specific function of the cardiac transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 have
not been evaluated. In part, this is because current Cre-loxP approaches to
cardiac gene inactivation require time consuming and costly breeding of
Cre-expressing and "floxed" mouse lines, often with limited control of the extent
or timing of gene inactivation. We investigated the stage-specific functions of
GATA4 and GATA6 in the postnatal heart by using adeno-associated virus serotype 9
to control the timing and extent of gene inactivation by Cre. Systemic delivery
of recombinant, adeno-associated virus 9 (AAV9) expressing Cre from the cardiac
specific Tnnt2 promoter was well tolerated and selectively and efficiently
recombined floxed target genes in cardiomyocytes. AAV9:Tnnt2-Cre efficiently
inactivated Gata4 and Gata6. Neonatal Gata4/6 inactivation caused severe, rapidly
lethal systolic heart failure. In contrast, Gata4/6 inactivation in adult heart
caused only mild systolic dysfunction but severe diastolic dysfunction. Reducing 
the dose of AAV9:Tnnt2-Cre generated mosaics in which scattered cardiomyocytes
lacked Gata4/6. This mosaic knockout revealed that Gata4/6 are required cell
autonomously for physiological cardiomyocyte growth. Our results define novel
roles of GATA4 and GATA6 in the neonatal and adult heart. Furthermore, our data
demonstrate that evaluation of gene function hinges on controlling the timing and
extent of gene inactivation. AAV9:Tnnt2-Cre is a powerful tool for controlling
these parameters.

PMCID: PMC4449121
PMID: 26023924  [PubMed - in process]


33. Sci Signal. 2015 May 12;8(376):ra44. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2005482.

Phosphorylation of GATA-6 is required for vascular smooth muscle cell
differentiation after mTORC1 inhibition.

Xie Y(1), Jin Y(1), Merenick BL(2), Ding M(3), Fetalvero KM(2), Wagner RJ(4), Mai
A(4), Gleim S(1), Tucker DF(5), Birnbaum MJ(5), Ballif BA(6), Luciano AK(1),
Sessa WC(1), Rzucidlo EM(4), Powell RJ(4), Hou L(7), Zhao H(7), Hwa J(8), Yu
J(1), Martin KA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Vascular Biology and Therapeutics
Program, and Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology, Yale University School of 
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology,
The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH 03755, USA. Department of
Surgery, Section of Vascular Surgery, The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth,
Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. (3)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Vascular Biology 
and Therapeutics Program, and Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover,
NH 03755, USA. Department of Surgery, Section of Vascular Surgery, The Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. (4)Department of
Surgery, Section of Vascular Surgery, The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth,
Lebanon, NH 03756, USA. (5)Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA. (6)Department of Biology, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT 05405, USA. 
(7)Department of Biostatistics, Yale School of Public Health, New Haven, CT
06510, USA. (8)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Vascular Biology and
Therapeutics Program, and Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover,
NH 03755, USA. (9)Yale Cardiovascular Research Center, Vascular Biology and
Therapeutics Program, and Departments of Medicine and Pharmacology, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06511, USA. Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, The Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover,
NH 03755, USA. Department of Surgery, Section of Vascular Surgery, The Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Lebanon, NH 03756, USA.
kathleen.martin@yale.edu.

Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) undergo transcriptionally regulated
reversible differentiation in growing and injured blood vessels. This
dedifferentiation also contributes to VSMC hyperplasia after vascular injury,
including that caused by angioplasty and stenting. Stents provide mechanical
support and can contain and release rapamycin, an inhibitor of the mechanistic
target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1). Rapamycin suppresses VSMC hyperplasia and
promotes VSMC differentiation. We report that rapamycin-induced differentiation
of VSMCs required the transcription factor GATA-6. Inhibition of mTORC1
stabilized GATA-6 and promoted the nuclear accumulation of GATA-6, its binding to
DNA, its transactivation of promoters encoding contractile proteins, and its
inhibition of proliferation. These effects were mediated by phosphorylation of
GATA-6 at Ser(290), potentially by Akt2, a kinase that is activated in VSMCs when
mTORC1 is inhibited. Rapamycin induced phosphorylation of GATA-6 in wild-type
mice, but not in Akt2(-/-) mice. Intimal hyperplasia after arterial injury was
greater in Akt2(-/-) mice than in wild-type mice, and the exacerbated response in
Akt2(-/-) mice was rescued to a greater extent by local overexpression of the
wild-type or phosphomimetic (S290D) mutant GATA-6 than by that of the
phosphorylation-deficient (S290A) mutant. Our data indicated that GATA-6 and Akt2
are involved in the mTORC1-mediated regulation of VSMC proliferation and
differentiation. Identifying the downstream transcriptional targets of mTORC1 may
provide cell type-specific drug targets to combat cardiovascular diseases
associated with excessive proliferation of VSMCs.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4560350
PMID: 25969542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cell Death Dis. 2015 May 7;6:e1754. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2015.89.

Myocardial MiR-30 downregulation triggered by doxorubicin drives alterations in
ß-adrenergic signaling and enhances apoptosis.

Roca-Alonso L(1), Castellano L(1), Mills A(2), Dabrowska AF(1), Sikkel MB(2),
Pellegrino L(1), Jacob J(1), Frampton AE(3), Krell J(1), Coombes RC(1), Harding
SE(2), Lyon AR(4), Stebbing J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Oncology, Department of Surgery and Cancer, 1st Floor, Imperial
Centre for Translational and Experimental Medicine (ICTEM), Imperial College,
Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK. (2)National Heart and
Lung Institute, Imperial College, 4th Floor, ICTEM, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane
Road, London W12 0NN, UK. (3)1] Division of Oncology, Department of Surgery and
Cancer, 1st Floor, Imperial Centre for Translational and Experimental Medicine
(ICTEM), Imperial College, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK
[2] Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Surgical Unit, Department of Surgery and Cancer,
Imperial College, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK. (4)1]
National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College, 4th Floor, ICTEM,
Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK [2] NIHR Cardiovascular
Biomedical Research Unit, Royal Brompton Hospital, Imperial college, London SW3
6NP, UK.

The use of anthracyclines such as doxorubicin (DOX) has improved outcome in
cancer patients, yet associated risks of cardiomyopathy have limited their
clinical application. DOX-associated cardiotoxicity is frequently irreversible
and typically progresses to heart failure (HF) but our understanding of molecular
mechanisms underlying this and essential for development of cardioprotective
strategies remains largely obscure. As microRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to play
potent regulatory roles in both cardiovascular disease and cancer, we
investigated miRNA changes in DOX-induced HF and the alteration of cellular
processes downstream. Myocardial miRNA profiling was performed after DOX-induced 
injury, either via acute application to isolated cardiomyocytes or via chronic
exposure in vivo, and compared with miRNA profiles from remodeled hearts
following myocardial infarction. The miR-30 family was downregulated in all three
models. We describe here that miR-30 act regulating the ß-adrenergic pathway,
where preferential ß1- and ß2-adrenoceptor (ß1AR and ß2AR) direct inhibition is
combined with Gia-2 targeting for fine-tuning. Importantly, we show that miR-30
also target the pro-apoptotic gene BNIP3L/NIX. In aggregate, we demonstrate that 
high miR-30 levels are protective against DOX toxicity and correlate this in turn
with lower reactive oxygen species generation. In addition, we identify GATA-6 as
a mediator of DOX-associated reductions in miR-30 expression. In conclusion, we
describe that DOX causes acute and sustained miR-30 downregulation in
cardiomyocytes via GATA-6. miR-30 overexpression protects cardiac cells from
DOX-induced apoptosis, and its maintenance represents a potential
cardioprotective and anti-tumorigenic strategy for anthracyclines.

PMCID: PMC4669718
PMID: 25950484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Stem Cells Int. 2015;2015:219514. doi: 10.1155/2015/219514. Epub 2015 Apr 5.

Cell Cycle-Driven Heterogeneity: On the Road to Demystifying the Transitions
between "Poised" and "Restricted" Pluripotent Cell States.

Singh AM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Paul D. Coverdell Center for
Biomedical and Health Sciences, The University of Georgia, 500 D.W. Brooks Drive,
Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Cellular heterogeneity is now considered an inherent property of most stem cell
types, including pluripotent stem cells, somatic stem cells, and cancer stem
cells, and this heterogeneity can exist at the epigenetic, transcriptional, and
posttranscriptional levels. Several studies have indicated that the stochastic
activation of signaling networks may promote heterogeneity and further that this 
heterogeneity may be reduced by their inhibition. But why different cells in the 
same culture respond in a nonuniform manner to the identical exogenous signals
has remained unclear. Recent studies now demonstrate that the cell cycle position
directly influences lineage specification and specifically that pluripotent stem 
cells initiate their differentiation from the G1 phase. These studies suggest
that cells in G1 are uniquely "poised" to undergo cell specification. G1 cells
are therefore more prone to respond to differentiation cues, which may explain
the heterogeneity of developmental factors, such as Gata6, and pluripotency
factors, such as Nanog, in stem cell cultures. Overall, this raises the
possibility that G1 serves as a "Differentiation Induction Point." In this
review, we will reexamine the literature describing heterogeneity of pluripotent 
stem cells, while highlighting the role of the cell cycle as a major determinant.

PMCID: PMC4402182
PMID: 25945098  [PubMed]


36. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2015 Jul 1;309(1):L84-97. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00275.2014. Epub 2015 May 1.

Increased lung prolyl hydroxylase and decreased glucocorticoid receptor are
related to decreased surfactant protein in the growth-restricted sheep fetus.

Orgeig S(1), McGillick EV(2), Botting KJ(3), Zhang S(3), McMillen IC(3), Morrison
JL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Evolutionary Physiology of the Lung Laboratory, School of
Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Sansom Institute for Health Research, University
of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. (2)Early Origins of
Adult Health Research Group, School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Sansom
Institute for Health Research, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South
Australia, Australia; Molecular and Evolutionary Physiology of the Lung
Laboratory, School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Sansom Institute for Health 
Research, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia.
(3)Early Origins of Adult Health Research Group, School of Pharmacy and Medical
Sciences, Sansom Institute for Health Research, University of South Australia,
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia; (4)Early Origins of Adult Health Research
Group, School of Pharmacy and Medical Sciences, Sansom Institute for Health
Research, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, Australia;
Janna.Morrison@unisa.edu.au.

Experimental placental restriction (PR) by carunclectomy in fetal sheep results
in intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), chronic hypoxemia, increased plasma
cortisol, and decreased lung surfactant protein (SP) expression. The mechanisms
responsible for decreased SP expression are unknown but may involve decreased
glucocorticoid (GC) action or changes in hypoxia signaling. Endometrial caruncles
were removed from nonpregnant ewes to induce PR. Lungs were collected from
control and PR fetuses at 130-135 (n = 19) and 139-145 (n = 28) days of
gestation. qRT-PCR and Western blotting were used to quantify lung mRNA and
protein expression, respectively, of molecular regulators and downstream targets 
of the GC and hypoxia-signaling pathways. We confirmed a decrease in SP-A, -B,
and -C, but not SP-D, mRNA expression in PR fetuses at both ages. There was a net
downregulation of GC signaling with a reduction in GC receptor (GR)-a and -ß
protein expression and a decrease in the cofactor, GATA-6. GC-responsive genes
including transforming growth factor-ß1, IL-1ß, and ß2-adrenergic receptor were
not stimulated. Prolyl hydroxylase domain (PHD)2 mRNA and protein and PHD3 mRNA
expression increased with a concomitant increase in hypoxia-inducible factor-1a
(HIF-1a) and HIF-1ß mRNA expression. There was an increase in mRNA expression of 
several, but not all, hypoxia-responsive genes. Hence, both GC and hypoxia
signaling may contribute to reduced SP expression. Although acute hypoxia
normally inactivates PHDs, chronic hypoxemia in the PR fetus increased PHD
abundance, which normally prevents HIF signaling. This may represent a mechanism 
by which chronic hypoxemia contributes to the decrease in SP production in the
IUGR fetal lung.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25934670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Endocrinology. 2015 Jul;156(7):2503-17. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1815. Epub 2015 May 
1.

Adrenal Development in Mice Requires GATA4 and GATA6 Transcription Factors.

Tevosian SG(1), Jiménez E(1), Hatch HM(1), Jiang T(1), Morse DA(1), Fox SC(1),
Padua MB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences (S.G.T., E.J., H.M.H., T.J., S.C.F.,
M.B.P.), College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida 32610-0144; and Department of Applied Physiology and Kinesiology
(D.A.M.), College of Health and Human Performance, University of Florida,
Gainesville, Florida 32611-8200.

The adrenal glands consist of an outer cortex and an inner medulla, and their
primary purposes include hormone synthesis and secretion. The adrenal cortex
produces a complex array of steroid hormones, whereas the medulla is part of the 
sympathetic nervous system and produces the catecholamines epinephrine and
norepinephrine. In the mouse, GATA binding protein (GATA) 4 and GATA6
transcription factors are coexpressed in several embryonic tissues, including the
adrenal cortex. To explore the roles of GATA4 and GATA6 in mouse adrenal
development, we conditionally deleted these genes in adrenocortical cells using
the Sf1Cre strain of animals. We report here that mice with Sf1Cre-mediated
double deletion of Gata4 and Gata6 genes lack identifiable adrenal glands,
steroidogenic factor 1-positive cortical cells and steroidogenic gene expression 
in the adrenal location. The inactivation of the Gata6 gene alone
(Sf1Cre;Gata6(flox/flox)) drastically reduced the adrenal size and corticosterone
production in the adult animals. Adrenocortical aplasia is expected to result in 
the demise of the animal within 2 weeks after birth unless glucocorticoids are
provided. In accordance, Sf1Cre;Gata4(flox/flox)Gata6(flox/flox) females depend
on steroid supplementation to survive after weaning. Surprisingly,
Sf1Cre;Gata4(flox/flox)Gata6(flox/flox) males appear to live normal lifespans as 
vital steroidogenic synthesis shifts to their testes. Our results reveal a
requirement for GATA factors in adrenal development and provide a novel tool to
characterize the transcriptional network controlling adrenocortical cell fates.

PMCID: PMC4475720 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25933105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2015 Feb 15;8(2):1862-70. eCollection 2015.

MicroRNA-506 suppresses growth and metastasis of oral squamous cell carcinoma via
targeting GATA6.

Deng L(1), Liu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stomatology, Jining NO. 1 People's Hospital Jining 272011,
Shandong, China.

Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) remains the main cause of cancer mortality,
accounts for 90% of oral cancers. Increasing evidence reveals that aberrant
expression of microRNA contributes to the development and progression of OSCC,
but the roles of microRNA-506 (miR-506) in OSCC remain elusive. Here, we found
that the expression of miR-506 was decreased in 21 OSCC tissues and SCC-4 and
SCC-9 cells. miR-506 overexpression suppressed proliferation, migration and
invasion capabilities of OSCC cells. Moreover, miR-506 overexpression suppressed 
the luciferase activity of the GATA6-Wt 3'-UTR and decreased the mRNA and protein
levels of GATA6. GATA6 overexpression attenuated the suppressive effects of
miR-506. Furthermore, GATA6 was increased in OSCC tissues compared with the
adjacent normal tissues and inversely associated with miR-506. Taken together,
these results suggest that miR-506 is an important suppressor and could be a
novel prognostic factor and therapeutic target for OSCC patients.

PMCID: PMC4402761
PMID: 25932114  [PubMed]


39. Stem Cells Int. 2015;2015:657325. doi: 10.1155/2015/657325. Epub 2015 Mar 31.

Targeted Knockdown of RNA-Binding Protein TIAR for Promoting Self-Renewal and
Attenuating Differentiation of Mouse Embryonic Stem Cells.

Geng Z(1), Li P(2), Tan L(2), Song H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, China ; Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School 
of Basic Medical Sciences, Lanzhou University, Gansu 730000, China. (2)Key
Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200032, China.

RNA-binding protein TIAR has been suggested to mediate the translational
silencing of ARE-containing mRNAs. To analyze the functions of TIAR, we
established RNAi and genetic rescue assays. We evaluated the expression of
neuroectoderm markers Pax6 and nestin, mesoderm markers brachyury and Flk1, and
hypoblast and definitive endoderm markers Sox17 and Gata6 during EB
differentiation and found that knockdown TIAR expression restrained the
differentiation of E14 cells. We assessed gene expression levels of Flk-1 and
VE-cadherin and observed attenuated differentiation of E14 cells into endothelial
cells upon downregulation of TIAR gene expression. As such, we hypothesized an
essential role of TIAR related to EB differentiation. As TIAR inhibits the
translation of c-myc, we proposed that downregulation of TIAR results in
restrained differentiation of E14 cells, due in part to the function of c-myc. We
found that TIAR inhibited c-myc expression at the translational level in E14
cells; accordingly, a reduction of TIAR expression promoted self-renewal of
pluripotent cells and attenuated differentiation. Additionally, we established
that TIAR inhibited TIA-1 expression at the translational level in E14 cells.
Taken together, we have contributed to the understanding of the regulatory
relationships between TIAR and both c-myc and TIA-1.

PMCID: PMC4396887
PMID: 25918534  [PubMed]


40. Reproduction. 2015 Jul;150(1):21-30. doi: 10.1530/REP-15-0019. Epub 2015 Apr 27.

Histone methyltransferase Smyd3 regulates early embryonic lineage commitment in
mice.

Suzuki S(1), Nozawa Y(1), Tsukamoto S(1), Kaneko T(1), Imai H(1), Minami N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive BiologyGraduate School of Agriculture, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8052, JapanLaboratory of Animal and Genome Sciences
SectionNational Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba 263-8555, JapanGraduate
School of MedicineInstitute of Laboratory Animals, Kyoto University, Kyoto
606-8501, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Reproductive BiologyGraduate School of
Agriculture, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8052, JapanLaboratory of Animal and
Genome Sciences SectionNational Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba
263-8555, JapanGraduate School of MedicineInstitute of Laboratory Animals, Kyoto 
University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan oog1nao@kais.kyoto-u.ac.jp.

SET and MYND domain-containing protein 3 (Smyd3) is a histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) 
di- and tri-methyltransferase that forms a transcriptional complex with RNA
polymerase II and activates the transcription of oncogenes and cell cycle genes
in human cancer cells. However, the study of Smyd3 in mammalian early embryonic
development has not yet been addressed. In the present study, we investigated the
expression pattern of Smyd3 in mouse preimplantation embryos and the effects of
RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated Smyd3 repression on the development of mouse
embryos. We showed that Smyd3 mRNA levels increased after the two-cell stage,
peaked at the four-cell stage, and gradually decreased thereafter. Moreover, in
two-cell to eight-cell embryos, SMYD3 staining was more intense in the nuclei
than it was in the cytoplasm. In Smyd3-knockdown embryos, the percentage of inner
cell mass (ICM)-derived colony formation and trophectoderm (TE)-derived cell
attachment were significantly decreased, which resulted in a reduction in the
number of viable offspring. Furthermore, the expression of Oct4 and Cdx2 during
mid-preimplantation gene activation was significantly decreased in
Smyd3-knockdown embryos. In addition, the transcription levels of ICM and
epiblast markers, such as Oct4, Nanog, and Sox2, the transcription levels of
primitive endoderm markers, such as Gata6, and the transcription levels of TE
markers, such as Cdx2 and Eomes, were significantly decreased in Smyd3-knockdown 
blastocysts. These findings indicate that SMYD3 plays an important role in early 
embryonic lineage commitment and peri-implantation development through the
activation of lineage-specific genes.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25918436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Apr;8(2):247-9. doi: 10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.115.001039.

Guiding Cardiac Conduction With GATA.

Nemer M(1), Gharibeh L(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Genetics and Cardiac Regeneration Laboratory, Department of
Biochemistry, Microbiology, and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa,
Ontario, Canada. mona.nemer@uottawa.ca. (2)From the Molecular Genetics and
Cardiac Regeneration Laboratory, Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology, and
Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Comment on
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Apr;8(2):284-93.

PMID: 25901035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. BMC Genomics. 2015 Apr 10;16:277. doi: 10.1186/s12864-015-1448-x.

A mRNA landscape of bovine embryos after standard and MAPK-inhibited culture
conditions: a comparative analysis.

Brinkhof B(1), van Tol HT(2), Groot Koerkamp MJ(3), Riemers FM(4), IJzer SG(5),
Mashayekhi K(6,)(7), Haagsman HP(8), Roelen BA(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Yalelaan 104, Utrecht, 3584 CM, The Netherlands. b.brinkhof@uu.nl.
(2)Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Yalelaan 104, Utrecht, 3584 CM, The Netherlands. H.T.A.vanTol@uu.nl. 
(3)University Medical Center Utrecht, Molecular Cancer Research, PO Box 85060,
Utrecht, 3508 AB, The Netherlands. M.J.A.GrootKoerkamp@umcutrecht.nl.
(4)Department of Clinical Sciences of Companion Animals, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, University Utrecht, Yalelaan 108, Utrecht, 3584 CM, The Netherlands.
F.M.Riemers@uu.nl. (5)Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 104, Utrecht, 3584 CM, The Netherlands.
sascha_ijzer@hotmail.com. (6)Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 104, Utrecht, 3584 CM, The
Netherlands. kavehm@kth.se. (7)BioTalentum Ltd, Aulich L u.26, Gödöllo, 2100,
Hungary. kavehm@kth.se. (8)Department of Infectious Diseases and Immunology,
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 1, Utrecht, 3584 CL,
The Netherlands. H.P.Haagsman@uu.nl. (9)Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty
of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht University, Yalelaan 104, Utrecht, 3584 CM, The
Netherlands. B.A.J.Roelen@uu.nl.

BACKGROUND: Genes and signalling pathways involved in pluripotency have been
studied extensively in mouse and human pre-implantation embryos and embryonic
stem (ES) cells. The unsuccessful attempts to generate ES cell lines from other
species including cattle suggests that other genes and pathways are involved in
maintaining pluripotency in these species. To investigate which genes are
involved in bovine pluripotency, expression profiles were generated from morula, 
blastocyst, trophectoderm and inner cell mass (ICM) samples using microarray
analysis. As MAPK inhibition can increase the NANOG/GATA6 ratio in the inner cell
mass, additionally blastocysts were cultured in the presence of a MAPK inhibitor 
and changes in gene expression in the inner cell mass were analysed.
RESULTS: Between morula and blastocyst 3,774 genes were differentially expressed 
and the largest differences were found in blastocyst up-regulated genes. Gene
ontology (GO) analysis shows lipid metabolic process as the term most enriched
with genes expressed at higher levels in blastocysts. Genes with higher
expression levels in morulae were enriched in the RNA processing GO term. Of the 
497 differentially expressed genes comparing ICM and TE, the expression of NANOG,
SOX2 and POU5F1 was increased in the ICM confirming their evolutionary preserved 
role in pluripotency. Several genes implicated to be involved in differentiation 
or fate determination were also expressed at higher levels in the ICM. Genes
expressed at higher levels in the ICM were enriched in the RNA splicing and
regulation of gene expression GO term. Although NANOG expression was elevated
upon MAPK inhibition, SOX2 and POU5F1 expression showed little increase.
Expression of other genes in the MAPK pathway including DUSP4 and SPRY4, or
influenced by MAPK inhibition such as IFNT, was down-regulated.
CONCLUSION: The data obtained from the microarray studies provide further insight
in gene expression during bovine embryonic development. They show an expression
profile in pluripotent cells that indicates a pluripotent, epiblast-like state.
The inability to culture ICM cells as stem cells in the presence of an inhibitor 
of MAPK activity together with the reported data indicates that MAPK inhibition
alone is not sufficient to maintain a pluripotent character in bovine cells.

PMCID: PMC4397860
PMID: 25888366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Endocrinology. 2015 May;156(5):1616-9. doi: 10.1210/en.2015-1222.

Testicular steroidogenic cells to the rescue.

Heikinheimo M(1), Pihlajoki M, Schrade A, Kyrönlahti A, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Developmental Biology (M.H., D.B.W.), Washington
University School of Medicine and St Louis Children's Hospital, St Louis,
Missouri 63110; and Children's Hospital (M.H., M.P., A.S., A.K.), University of
Helsinki and Helsinki Central Hospital, 00290 Helsinki, Finland.

PMID: 25886071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Oncol Rep. 2015 Jun;33(6):2789-96. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.3900. Epub 2015 Apr 7.

Hypoxia-induced miR-181b enhances angiogenesis of retinoblastoma cells by
targeting PDCD10 and GATA6.

Xu X(1), Ge S(1), Jia R(1), Zhou Y(1), Song X(1), Zhang H(1), Fan X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200011, P.R. China.

Previous findings showed that miR-181b is upregulated under hypoxic conditions in
retinoblastoma cells. Since hypoxia is a common feature of retinoblastoma that
affects tumor progression as well as tumor therapy, in the present study, we
investigated the regulatory mechanism of miR-181b under hypoxic conditions, and
examined the role of miR-181b in retinoblastoma responses to hypoxia
(chemoresistance and angiogenesis) and possible downstream genes. The level of
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) and miR-181b was detected to examine the
link between them. Tube formation and cell cytotoxicity assays were used to
clarify the effects of miR-181b on hypoxic responses of retinoblastoma cells.
Bioinformatics analysis was performed to predict potential targets of miR-181b
and western blotting was used to verify these targets. The results showed a
significantly increased expression of HIF-1a in hypoxia-treated retinoblastoma
cells. Downregulation of HIF-1a using a small-interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown
technology did not decrease the expression of miR-181b. Through gain- and
loss-of-function studies, miR-181b was demonstrated to significantly stimulate
the ability of capillary tube formation of endothelial cells. Programmed cell
death-10 (PDCD10) and GATA binding protein 6 (GATA6) were identified as the
target genes of miR-181b. To the best of our knowledge, results of the present
study provide the first evidence that miR-181b was upregulated by hypoxia in
retinoblastoma in an HIF-1a-independent manner. miR-181b increased tumor
angiogenesis of retinoblastoma cells. Additionally, miR-181b exerts its
angiogenic function, at least in part, by inhibiting PDCD10 and GATA6. Thus, it
is a new potentially useful therapeutic target for retinoblastoma.

PMID: 25872572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Reproduction. 2015 Jul;150(1):31-41. doi: 10.1530/REP-14-0662. Epub 2015 Apr 7.

Cell lineage allocation in equine blastocysts produced in vitro under varying
glucose concentrations.

Choi YH(1), Ross P(1), Velez IC(1), Macías-García B(1), Riera FL(1), Hinrichs
K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and PharmacologyCollege of Veterinary
Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas
77843-4466, USADepartment of Animal ScienceUniversity of California, Davis,
Davis, California 95616, USALaboratorio de Reproducción Equina Prof. Robert M.
KenneyDoña Pilar Embriones SRL, Lincoln, Argentina. (2)Department of Veterinary
Physiology and PharmacologyCollege of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, 
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-4466, USADepartment of Animal 
ScienceUniversity of California, Davis, Davis, California 95616, USALaboratorio
de Reproducción Equina Prof. Robert M. KenneyDoña Pilar Embriones SRL, Lincoln,
Argentina khinrichs@cvm.tamu.edu.

Equine embryos develop in vitro in the presence of high glucose concentrations,
but little is known about their requirements for development. We evaluated the
effect of glucose concentrations in medium on blastocyst development after ICSI. 
In experiment 1, there were no significant differences in rates of blastocyst
formation among embryos cultured in our standard medium (DMEM/F-12), which
contained >16<U+200A>mM glucose, and those cultured in a minimal-glucose embryo culture 
medium (<1<U+200A>mM; Global medium, GB), with either 0 added glucose for the first 5
days, then 20<U+200A>mM (0-20) or 20<U+200A>mM for the entire culture period (20-20). In
experiment 2, there were no significant differences in the rates of blastocyst
development (31-46%) for embryos cultured in four glucose treatments in GB (0-10,
0-20, 5-10, or 5-20). Blastocysts were evaluated by immunofluorescence for
lineage-specific markers. All cells stained positively for POU5F1. An inner
cluster of cells was identified that included presumptive primitive endoderm
cells (GATA6-positive) and presumptive epiblast (EPI) cells. The 5-20 treatment
resulted in a significantly lower number of presumptive EPI-lineage cells than
the 0-20 treatment did. GATA6-positive cells appeared to be allocated to the
primitive endoderm independent of the formation of an inner cell mass, as was
previously hypothesized for equine embryos. These data demonstrate that equine
blastocyst development is not dependent on high glucose concentrations during
early culture; rather, environmental glucose may affect cell allocation. They
also present the first analysis of cell lineage allocation in in vitro-fertilized
equine blastocysts. These findings expand our understanding of the factors that
affect embryo development in the horse.

© 2015 Society for Reproduction and Fertility.

PMID: 25852156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cell Stem Cell. 2015 Apr 2;16(4):346-7. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2015.03.005.

Epiblast and primitive endoderm differentiation: fragile specification ensures
stable commitment.

Nakai-Futatsugi Y(1), Niwa H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.
(2)Laboratory for Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan. Electronic 
address: niwa@cdb.riken.jp.

Specification of the epiblast and primitive endoderm is one of the earliest
differentiation steps during embryogenesis. In vitro tracking of pluripotency
markers in ESCs suggests that epiblast specification may be plastic; however,
live imaging of blastocysts, as detailed in a recent paper from Xenopoulos et al 
(2015), showed that, unlike in ESCs, fate commitment in vivo is largely
irreversible.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25842972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Cardiol. 2015 Dec;66(6):527-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jjcc.2014.12.022. Epub 2015 Mar 
24.

The expression profile analysis of NKX2-5 knock-out embryonic mice to explore the
pathogenesis of congenital heart disease.

Li J(1), Cao Y(2), Wu Y(2), Chen W(2), Yuan Y(2), Ma X(3), Huang G(4).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Heart Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
201102, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Birth Defect, Shanghai 201102, China.
(2)Pediatric Heart Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai
201102, China. (3)Pediatric Heart Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan
University, Shanghai 201102, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Birth Defect,
Shanghai 201102, China. Electronic address: xiaojingma021@163.com. (4)Pediatric
Heart Center, Children's Hospital of Fudan University, Shanghai 201102, China;
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Birth Defect, Shanghai 201102, China. Electronic
address: gyhuang@shmu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Mutation of NKX2-5 could lead to the development of congenital heart 
disease (CHD) which is a common inherited disease. This study aimed to
investigate the pathogenesis of CHD in NKX2-5 knock-out embryonic mice.
METHODS: The expression profile in the NKX2-5 knock-out embryonic mice (GSE528)
was downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus. The heart tissues from the
null/heterozygous embryonic day 12.5 mice were compared with wild-type mice to
identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs), and then DEGs corresponding to
the transcriptional factors were filtered out based on the information in the
TRANSFAC database. In addition, a transcriptional regulatory network was
constructed according to transcription factor binding site information from the
University of California Santa Cruz database. A pathway interaction network was
constructed by latent pathways identification analysis.
RESULTS: The 42 DEGs corresponding to transcriptional factors from the null and
heterozygous embryos were identified. The transcriptional regulatory networks
included five down-regulated DEGs (SP1, SRY, JUND, STAT6, and GATA6), and six
up-regulated DEGs [POU2F1, NFY (NFYA/NFYB/NFYC), USF2 and MAX]. Latent pathways
analysis demonstrated that ribosome, glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, and dilated
cardiomyopathy pathways significantly interacted.
CONCLUSION: The identified DEGs and latent pathways could provide new
comprehensive view for understanding the pathogenesis of CHD.

Copyright © 2015 Japanese College of Cardiology. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25818641  [PubMed - in process]


48. J Invest Dermatol. 2015 Aug;135(8):2084-92. doi: 10.1038/jid.2015.116. Epub 2015 
Mar 25.

Promoter-Specific Hypomethylation Is Associated with Overexpression of PLS3,
GATA6, and TWIST1 in the Sezary Syndrome.

Wong HK(1), Gibson H(1), Hake T(1), Geyer S(2), Frederickson J(3), Marcucci G(4),
Caligiuri MA(4), Porcu P(4), Mishra A(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Division of Dermatology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, Ohio, USA [2] The Comprehensive Cancer Center and The James
Cancer Hospital and Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA. (2)1] The Comprehensive Cancer Center and The James Cancer
Hospital and Solove Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio, USA [2] Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. (3)Division of Dermatology, Department of 
Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. (4)1] The
Comprehensive Cancer Center and The James Cancer Hospital and Solove Research
Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA [2] Division of
Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus,
Ohio, USA [3] Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical Genetics, 
The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA. (5)1] Division of Dermatology,
Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
[2] The Comprehensive Cancer Center and The James Cancer Hospital and Solove
Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA [3] Division
of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, The Ohio State University,
Columbus, Ohio, USA [4] Department of Molecular Virology, Immunology and Medical 
Genetics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA.

The Sézary Syndrome (SS) is an aggressive CD4+ leukemic variant of cutaneous
T-cell lymphoma. Epigenetic modification of cancer cell genome is often linked to
the expression of important cancer-related genes. Here we addressed the
hypothesis that, in SS, DNA hypomethylation is involved in upregulation of PLS3, 
GATA6, and TWIST1, genes that are undetected in normal lymphocytes.
Pyrosequencing analysis of CpG rich regions, and CpG dinucleotides within the 5' 
regulatory regions, confirmed hypomethylation of all three genes in SS, compared 
with controls. We then studied how methylation regulates PLS3 transcription in
vitro using PLS3-negative (Jurkat) and PLS3-positive (HT-1080) cell lines.
Treatment with the hypomethylating agent 5-azacytidine induced PLS3 expression in
Jurkat cells and in vitro methylation of the cloned PLS3 promoter suppressed
luciferase expression in HT-1080 cells. In conclusion, we show that promoter
hypomethylation is associated with PLS3, GATA6, and TWIST1 overexpression in SS
CD4+ T cells and that methylation can regulate PLS3 expression in vitro. The
mechanisms of DNA hypomethylation in vivo and the functional role of PLS3,
TWIST1, and GATA6 in SS are being investigated.

PMID: 25806852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Stem Cells Dev. 2015 Jul 15;24(14):1680-90. doi: 10.1089/scd.2014.0512. Epub 2015
Apr 15.

Generation of Distal Airway Epithelium from Multipotent Human Foregut Stem Cells.

Hannan NR(1), Sampaziotis F(1), Segeritz CP(1), Hanley NA(2), Vallier L(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)1 Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Department of Surgery,
Wellcome Trust-Medical Research Council Stem Cell Institute, University of
Cambridge , Cambridge, United Kingdom . (2)2 Faculty of Medical and Human
Sciences, Centre for Endocrinology and Diabetes, Manchester Academic Health
Sciences Centre, Institute of Human Development, University of Manchester ,
Manchester, United Kingdom . (3)3 Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute , Hinxton,
United Kingdom .

Collectively, lung diseases are one of the largest causes of premature death
worldwide and represent a major focus in the field of regenerative medicine.
Despite significant progress, only few stem cell platforms are currently
available for cell-based therapy, disease modeling, and drug screening in the
context of pulmonary disorders. Human foregut stem cells (hFSCs) represent an
advantageous progenitor cell type that can be used to amplify large quantities of
cells for regenerative medicine applications and can be derived from any human
pluripotent stem cell line. Here, we further demonstrate the application of hFSCs
by generating a near homogeneous population of early pulmonary endoderm cells
coexpressing NKX2.1 and FOXP2. These progenitors are then able to form cells that
are representative of distal airway epithelium that express NKX2.1, GATA6, and
cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) and secrete SFTPC.
This culture system can be applied to hFSCs carrying the CFTR mutation <U+0394>f508,
enabling the development of an in vitro model for cystic fibrosis. This platform 
is compatible with drug screening and functional validations of small molecules, 
which can reverse the phenotype associated with CFTR mutation. This is the first 
demonstration that multipotent endoderm stem cells can differentiate not only
into both liver and pancreatic cells but also into lung endoderm. Furthermore,
our study establishes a new approach for the generation of functional lung cells 
that can be used for disease modeling as well as for drug screening and the study
of lung development.

PMCID: PMC4499787
PMID: 25758640  [PubMed - in process]


50. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Apr;167A(4):925-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36984. Epub 2015
Feb 23.

Neonatal diabetes mellitus due to a novel mutation in the GATA6 gene accompanying
renal dysfunction: a case report.

Tuhan H(1), Catli G, Anik A, Özmen D, Türkmen MA, Bober E, Abaci A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Dokuz Eylul University Faculty of
Medicine, Izmir, Turkey.

PMID: 25708516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 23;10(2):e0118449. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118449.
eCollection 2015.

Novel GATA6 mutations in patients with pancreatic agenesis and congenital heart
malformations.

Chao CS(1), McKnight KD(2), Cox KL(1), Chang AL(3), Kim SK(4), Feldman BJ(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, United States of America. (2)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States of America.
(3)Department of Dermatology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
CA, United States of America. (4)Department of Developmental Biology, Stanford
University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States of America; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA,
United States of America. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University School
of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States of America; Cardiovascular Institute,
Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, United States of America;
Program in Regenerative Medicine, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA, United States of America.

Patients with pancreatic agenesis are born without a pancreas, causing permanent 
neonatal diabetes and pancreatic enzyme insufficiency. These patients require
insulin and enzyme replacement therapy to survive, grow, and maintain normal
blood glucose levels. Pancreatic agenesis is an uncommon condition but
high-throughput sequencing methods provide a rare opportunity to identify
critical genes that are necessary for human pancreas development. Here we present
the clinical history, evaluation, and the genetic and molecular analysis from two
patients with pancreatic agenesis. Both patients were born with intrauterine
growth restriction, minor heart defects and neonatal diabetes. In both cases,
pancreatic agenesis was confirmed by imaging studies. The patients are clinically
stable with pancreatic enzymes and insulin therapy. In order identify the
etiology for their disease, we performed whole exome sequencing on both patients.
For each proband we identified a de novo heterozygous mutation in the GATA6 gene.
GATA6 is a homeobox containing transcription factor involved in both early
development of the pancreas and heart. In vitro functional analysis of one of the
variants revealed that the mutation creates a premature stop codon in the coding 
sequence resulting in the production of a truncated protein with loss of
activity. These results show how genetic mutations in GATA6 may lead to
functional inactivity and pancreatic agenesis in humans.

PMCID: PMC4338276
PMID: 25706805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Immunology. 2015 Apr;144(4):541-8. doi: 10.1111/imm.12451.

Tissue-resident macrophages: then and now.

Davies LC(1), Taylor PR.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Inflammation Program, National Cancer Institute at Frederick, NIH,
Frederick, MD, USA.

Macrophages have been at the heart of immune research for over a century and are 
an integral component of innate immunity. Macrophages are often viewed as
terminally differentiated monocytic phagocytes. They infiltrate tissues during
inflammation, and form polarized populations that perform pro-inflammatory or
anti-inflammatory functions. Tissue-resident macrophages were regarded as
differentiated monocytes, which seed the tissues to perform immune sentinel and
homeostatic functions. However, tissue-resident macrophages are not a homogeneous
population, but are in fact a grouping of cells with similar functions and
phenotypes. In the last decade, it has been revealed that many of these cells are
not terminally differentiated and, in most cases, are not derived from
haematopoiesis in the adult. Recent research has highlighted that tissue-resident
macrophages cannot be grouped into simple polarized categories, especially in
vivo, when they are exposed to complex signalling events. It has now been
demonstrated that the tissue environment itself is a major controller of
macrophage phenotype, and can influence the expression of many genes regardless
of origin. This is consistent with the concept that cells within different
tissues have diverse responses in inflammation. There is still a mountain to
climb in the field, as it evolves to encompass not only tissue-resident
macrophage diversity, but also categorization of specific tissue environments and
the plasticity of macrophages themselves. This knowledge provides a new
perspective on therapeutic strategies, as macrophage subsets can potentially be
manipulated to control the inflammatory environment in a tissue-specific manner.

© 2015 The Authors. Immunology Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4368161
PMID: 25684236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Endocrinology. 2015 May;156(5):1873-86. doi: 10.1210/en.2014-1907. Epub 2015 Feb 
10.

Combined loss of the GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors in male mice disrupts 
testicular development and confers adrenal-like function in the testes.

Padua MB(1), Jiang T, Morse DA, Fox SC, Hatch HM, Tevosian SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32610.

The roles of the GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors in testis development were
examined by simultaneously ablating Gata4 and Gata6 with Sf1Cre (Nr5a1Cre). The
deletion of both genes resulted in a striking testicular phenotype. Embryonic
Sf1Cre; Gata4(flox/flox) Gata6(flox/flox) (conditional double mutant) testes were
smaller than control organs and contained irregular testis cords and fewer
gonocytes. Gene expression analysis revealed significant down-regulation of Dmrt1
and Mvh. Surprisingly, Amh expression was strongly up-regulated and remained high
beyond postnatal day 7, when it is normally extinguished. Neither DMRT1 nor GATA1
was detected in the Sertoli cells of the mutant postnatal testes. Furthermore,
the expression of the steroidogenic genes Star, Cyp11a1, Hsd3b1, and Hsd17b3 was 
low throughout embryogenesis. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed a prominent
reduction in cytochrome P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme (CYP11A1)- and
3ß-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-positive (3ßHSD) cells, with few
17a-hydroxylase/17,20 lyase-positive (CYP17A1) cells present. In contrast, in
postnatal Sf1Cre; Gata4(flox/flox) Gata6(flox/flox) testes, the expression of the
steroidogenic markers Star, Cyp11a1, and Hsd3b6 was increased, but a dramatic
down-regulation of Hsd17b3, which is required for testosterone synthesis, was
observed. The genes encoding adrenal enzymes Cyp21a1, Cyp11b1, Cyp11b2, and Mcr2 
were strongly up-regulated, and clusters containing numerous CYP21A2-positive
cells were localized in the interstitium. These data suggest a lack of testis
functionality, with a loss of normal steroidogenic testis function, concomitant
with an expansion of the adrenal-like cell population in postnatal conditional
double mutant testes. Sf1Cre; Gata4(flox/flox) Gata6(flox/flox) animals of both
sexes lack adrenal glands; however, despite this deficiency, males are viable in 
contrast to the females of the same genotype, which die shortly after birth.

PMCID: PMC4398756 [Available on 2016-05-01]
PMID: 25668066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2015 Sep;141(9):1593-601. doi:
10.1007/s00432-015-1930-5. Epub 2015 Feb 4.

DNA methylation analysis of benign and atypical meningiomas: correlation between 
RUNX3 methylation and WHO grade.

Majchrzak-Celinska A(1), Paluszczak J, Szalata M, Barciszewska AM, Nowak S,
Baer-Dubowska W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, Poznan, Poland.

PURPOSE: Although meningiomas are common central nervous system tumors, the
biomarkers allowing early diagnosis and progression are still needed. The aim of 
this study was to evaluate the methylation status of 12 cancer-related genes,
namely ERCC1, hMLH1, ATM, CDKN2B (p15INK4B), p14ARF, CDKN2A (p16INK4A), RASSF1A, 
RUNX3, GATA6, NDRG2, PTEN, and RARß, in 44 meningioma samples of WHO grade I and 
II.
METHODS: All genes were analyzed using methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction, while pyrosequencing (PSQ) was used to study NDRG2 promoter
methylation.
RESULTS: The most frequently methylated genes in both types of meningiomas were
p14ARF, RASSF1A, and p15INK4B. RUNX3, GATA6, and p16INK4A were methylated to a
lesser extent, whereas ATM and RARß were found to be methylated in a marginal
number of patients. The ERCC1, hMLH1, NDRG2, and PTEN genes were unmethylated in 
all cases. Although tumors of the same grade according to WHO criteria had
different genes methylated, the number of methylated genes for each individual
patient was low. RUNX3 methylation significantly correlated with meningioma WHO
grade, therefore, can be considered as a potential indicator of tumor
aggressiveness. The sequence of NDRG2 chosen for PSQ analysis was found
methylated in the majority of meningiomas; however, the methylation level was
only slightly elevated as compared to non-cancerous brain.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, the results of this study confirm that DNA methylation
plays an important role in the pathogenesis of meningiomas. Further
investigations, particularly concerning RUNX3 methylation, are necessary in order
to assess the clinical usefulness of the methylation analysis of the studied
genes.

PMCID: PMC4534508
PMID: 25648363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 May;21(5):410-23. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav004. Epub 2015 Jan 
29.

Exogenous supplementation of Activin A enhances germ cell differentiation of
human embryonic stem cells.

Duggal G(1), Heindryckx B(2), Warrier S(1), Taelman J(1), Van der Jeught M(1),
Deforce D(3), Chuva de Sousa Lopes S(4), De Sutter P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department for Reproductive Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 
185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium. (2)Department for Reproductive Medicine, Ghent
University Hospital, De Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium
bjorn.heindryckx@ugent.be. (3)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Faculty
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ghent University, Harelbekestraat 72, 9000 Ghent,
Belgium. (4)Department for Reproductive Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, De
Pintelaan 185, 9000 Ghent, Belgium Department of Anatomy and Embryology, Leiden
University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC Leiden, The Netherlands.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) derived in the presence of Activin A (ActA)
demonstrate an increased differentiation propensity toward the germ cell lineage.
In addition, mouse epiblast stem cells and mouse epiblast-like cells are poised
toward germ cell differentiation and are derived in the presence of ActA. We
therefore investigated whether supplementation with ActA enhances in vitro hESC
differentiation toward germ cell lineage. ActA up-regulated early primordial germ
cell (PGC) genes STELLA/DPPA3 (developmental pluripotency associated 3) and
tyrosine kinase receptor cKIT in both ActA-derived and standard-derived hESCs
indicating its role in priming hESCs toward the PGC lineage. Indeed, ActA plus
bone morphogenic protein 4 (BMP4) strongly increased germ cell differentiation
potential of hESCs based on the high expression of late PGC markers DAZL (deleted
in azoospermia-like) and VASA/DDX4 (DEAD-box polypeptide 4) at mRNA and protein
level. Hence, the combination of ActA with BMP4 provides an additional boost for 
hESCs to develop into postmigratory germ cells. Together with increased VASA
expression in the presence of ActA and BMP4, we also observed up-regulation of
endoderm-specific genes GATA4 (GATA binding protein 4) and GATA6. Finally, we
were able to further mature these in vitro-derived PGC-like cells (PGCLCs) by
culturing them in in vitro maturation (IVM) medium, resulting in the formation of
germ cell-like clusters and induction of meiotic gene expression. In conclusion, 
we demonstrate for the first time a synergism between ActA and BMP4 in
facilitating germ cell-directed differentiation of hESCs, which is enhanced by
extended culture in IVM medium, as shown by cytoplasmic VASA-expressing PGCLCs.
We propose a novel relationship between the endoderm and germ cell lineage during
hESC differentiation.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25634576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Apr;8(2):284-93. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.113.000587. Epub 2015 Jan 22.

GATA-Binding Factor 6 Contributes to Atrioventricular Node Development and
Function.

Liu F(1), Lu MM(1), Patel NN(1), Schillinger KJ(1), Wang T(1), Patel VV(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Penn Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia (F.L., M.M.L., N.N.P., K.J.S., T.W.); and Department of Physiology, 
Section of Clinical Cardiac Electrophysiology & Cardiovascular Research Center,
Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA (V.V.P.). (2)From the Penn
Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia (F.L., M.M.L.,
N.N.P., K.J.S., T.W.); and Department of Physiology, Section of Clinical Cardiac 
Electrophysiology & Cardiovascular Research Center, Temple University School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA (V.V.P.). vickas.patel@temple.edu.

Comment in
    Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2015 Apr;8(2):247-9.

BACKGROUND: Several transcription factors regulate cardiac conduction system
(CCS) development and function but the role of each in specifying distinct CCS
components remains unclear. GATA-binding factor 6 (GATA6) is a zinc-finger
transcription factor that is critical for patterning the cardiovascular system.
However, the role of GATA6 in the embryonic heart and CCS has never been shown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report that Gata6 is expressed abundantly in the proximal
CCS during midgestation in mice. Myocardial-specific deletion of the carboxyl
zinc-finger of Gata6 induces loss of hyperpolarizing cyclic nucleotide-gated
channel, subtype 4 staining in the compact atrioventricular node with some
retention of hyperpolarizing cyclic nucleotide-gated channel, subtype 4 staining 
in the atrioventricular bundle, but has no significant effect on the
connexin-40-positive bundle branches. Furthermore, myocardial-specific deletion
of the carboxyl zinc-finger of Gata6 alters atrioventricular conduction in
postnatal life as assessed by surface and invasive electrophysiological
evaluation, as well as decreasing the number of ventricular myocytes and inducing
compensatory myocyte hypertrophy. Myocardial-specific deletion of the carboxyl
zinc-finger of Gata6 is also associated with downregulation of the
transcriptional repressor ID2 and the cardiac sodium-calcium exchanger NCX1 in
the proximal CCS, where GATA6 transactivates both of these factors. Finally,
carboxyl zinc-finger deletion of Gata6 reduces cell-cycle exit of TBX3+ myocytes 
in the developing atrioventricular bundle during the period of atrioventricular
node specification, which results in fewer TBX3+ cells in the proximal CCS of
mature mutant mice.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA6 contributes to the development and postnatal function of the
murine atrioventricular node by promoting cell-cycle exit of specified
cardiomyocytes toward a conduction system lineage.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4406809
PMID: 25613430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Jan 21;15:3. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0053-1.

Epigenetic regulation of histone modifications and Gata6 gene expression induced 
by maternal diet in mouse embryoid bodies in a model of developmental
programming.

Sun C, Denisenko O, Sheth B, Cox A, Lucas ES, Smyth NR, Fleming TP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Biological Sciences, University of Southampton, Mailpoint 840,
Level D Lab & Path Block, Southampton General Hospital, Tremona Road, Southampton
SO16 6YD, UK. tpf@soton.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Dietary interventions during pregnancy alter offspring fitness. We
have shown mouse maternal low protein diet fed exclusively for the
preimplantation period (Emb-LPD) before return to normal protein diet (NPD) for
the rest of gestation, is sufficient to cause adult offspring cardiovascular and 
metabolic disease. Moreover, Emb-LPD blastocysts sense altered nutrition within
the uterus and activate compensatory cellular responses including stimulated
endocytosis within extra-embryonic trophectoderm and primitive endoderm (PE)
lineages to protect fetal growth rate. However, these responses associate with
later disease. Here, we investigate epigenetic mechanisms underlying nutritional 
programming of PE that may contribute to its altered phenotype, stabilised during
subsequent development. We use embryonic stem (ES) cell lines established
previously from Emb-LPD and NPD blastocysts that were differentiated into
embryoid bodies (EBs) with outer PE-like layer.
RESULTS: Emb-LPD EBs grow to a larger size than NPD EBs and express reduced Gata6
transcription factor (regulator of PE differentiation) at mRNA and protein
levels, similar to Emb-LPD PE derivative visceral yolk sac tissue in vivo in
later gestation. We analysed histone modifications at the Gata6 promoter in
Emb-LPD EBs using chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. We found significant
reduction in histone H3 and H4 acetylation and RNA polymerase II binding compared
with NPD EBs, all markers of reduced transcription. Other histone modifications, 
H3K4Me2, H3K9Me3 and H3K27Me3, were unaltered. A similar but generally
non-significant histone modification pattern was found on the Gata4 promoter.
Consistent with these changes, histone deacetylase Hdac-1, but not Hdac-3, gene
expression was upregulated in Emb-LPD EBs.
CONCLUSIONS: First, these data demonstrate ES cells and EBs retain and propagate 
nutritional programming adaptations in vitro, suitable for molecular analysis of 
mechanisms, reducing animal use. Second, they reveal maternal diet induces
persistent changes in histone modifications to regulate Gata6 expression and PE
growth and differentiation that may affect lifetime health.

PMCID: PMC4305257
PMID: 25609498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Gut. 2016 Mar;65(3):476-86. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2014-308042. Epub 2015 Jan 16.

The acinar regulator Gata6 suppresses KrasG12V-driven pancreatic tumorigenesis in
mice.

Martinelli P(1), Madriles F(1), Cañamero M(2), Pau EC(1), Pozo ND(1), Guerra
C(3), Real FX(4).

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group, BBVA Foundation-Cancer Cell Biology
Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.
(2)Comparative Pathology Unit, Biotechnology Programme, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. (3)Experimental Oncology Group, Molecular 
Oncology Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid,
Spain. (4)Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group, BBVA Foundation-Cancer Cell Biology
Programme, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain
Departament de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Gata6 is required to complete and maintain acinar
differentiation in the mouse pancreas. Pancreas-specific Gata6 ablation during
development causes extensive and persistent acinar-ductal metaplasia, which is
considered an initial step of mutant KRas-driven carcinogenesis. Therefore, the
Gata6-null pancreas might represent a tumour-prone environment. We investigated
whether Gata6 plays a role during pancreatic tumorigenesis.
DESIGN: We analysed genetically engineered mouse models and human pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cell lines, using a combination of histopathological
studies, genome-wide expression and chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments to 
understand the role of Gata6 in the initiation and progression of
KRas(G12V)-driven tumours
RESULTS: We show that Gata6 maintains the acinar differentiation programme, both 
directly and indirectly, and it concomitantly suppresses ectopic programmes in
the pancreas. Gata6 ablation renders acinar cells more sensitive to KRas(G12V),
thereby accelerating tumour development. Gata6 expression is spontaneously lost
in a mouse model of KRas(G12V)-driven PDAC, in association with altered cell
differentiation. Using a combination of ChIP-Seq and RNA-Seq, we show that Gata6 
exerts its tumour-suppressive effect through the promotion of cell
differentiation, the suppression of inflammatory pathways, and the direct
repression of cancer-related pathways. Among them is the epidermal growth factor 
receptor (EGFR) pathway, the activity of which is upregulated in the normal and
preneoplastic Gata6-null pancreas. Accordingly, GATA6-silencing in human PDAC
cells leads to an upregulation of EGFR.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that, in the pancreas, Gata6 acts as a tumour suppressor 
by enforcing acinar cell differentiation, by directly and indirectly repressing
ectopic differentiation programmes, and by regulating crucial cancer-related gene
expression pathways.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://www.bmj.com/company/products-services/rights-and-licensing/

PMID: 25596178  [PubMed - in process]


59. Chin Med J (Engl). 2015 Jan 20;128(2):169-74. doi: 10.4103/0366-6999.149189.

Identification of differentially expressed microRNAs in the ovary of polycystic
ovary syndrome with hyperandrogenism and insulin resistance.

Lin L, Du T, Huang J, Huang LL, Yang DZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510120, China.

BACKGROUND: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is the commonest endocrinopathy in
women of reproductive age. The patients often develop insulin resistance (IR) or 
hyperinsulinemia despite manifesting anovulation and signs of hyperandrogenism.
The cause and effect relationship of hyperinsulinemia and hyperandrogenemia (HA) 
is still debated. Micro-ribonucleic acids (miRNAs) have recently been shown to
play a role in regulation of ovarian function. Our current study focused on the
altered expression of miRNAs with PCOS.
METHODS: Ovarian theca interna tissues were obtained from 10 PCOS patients and 8 
controls that were non-PCOS and had normal insulin sensitivity undergoing
laparoscopy and/or ovarian wedge resection. Total RNA of all samples was
extracted. We studied the repertoire of miRNAs in both PCOS and non-PCOS women by
microarray hybridization. Bioinformatic analysis was performed for predicting
targets of the differentially expressed miRNAs. Furthermore, selected miRNAs were
validated by quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR).
RESULTS: A total of 27 miRNAs were differentially expressed in PCOS patients with
respect to the controls in our discovery evaluationand two (miR-92a and miR-92b) 
of them were significantly downregulated in PCOS women in followed validation (P 
< 0.05). Targets prediction revealed that miR-92a targeted both GATA family of
zinc finger transcription factor GATA-binding factor 6 (GATA6) and insulin
receptor substrate proteins 2 (IRS-2).
CONCLUSIONS: MiRNAs are differentially expressed between PCOS patients and
controls. We identified and validated two miRNAs-miR-92a and miR-92b. They are
significantly downregulated and may be involved in the pathogenesis of PCOS.

PMID: 25591557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2015 Jan 2. [Epub ahead of print]

GATA6 mutation: a rare genetic cause of hepatobiliary disease.

Ferreira S(1), Devadason D, Denvir L, Seale A, Gupte G.

Author information: 
(1)*Liver Unit - Coimbra[Combining Acute Accent]s Paediatric Hospital (Portugal) 
†Department of Paediatric Gastroenterology - Nottingham University Hospitals (UK)
‡Queens Medical Centre - Nottingham University Hospitals (UK) §Department of
Cardiology - Birmingham[Combining Acute Accent]s Children Hospital (UK) ||Liver
Unit (and small bowel transplantation) - Birmingham[Combining Acute Accent]s
Children Hospital (UK).

PMID: 25564821  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


61. Tumour Biol. 2015 May;36(5):3831-41. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-3025-3. Epub 2015
Jan 8.

The methylation of a panel of genes differentiates low-grade from high-grade
gliomas.

Majchrzak-Celinska A(1), Paluszczak J, Szalata M, Barciszewska AM, Nowak S,
Kleszcz R, Sherba A, Baer-Dubowska W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Biochemistry, Poznan University of Medical
Sciences, ul. Swiecickiego 4, 60-781, Poznan, Poland.

Epigenetic changes play an important role in the pathogenesis of gliomas and have
the potential to become clinically useful biomarkers. The aim of this study was
the evaluation of the profile of promoter methylation of 13 genes selected based 
on their anticipated diagnostic and/or prognostic value. Methylation-specific PCR
(MSP) was used to assess the methylation status of MGMT, ERCC1, hMLH1, ATM,
CDKN2B (p15INK4B), p14ARF, CDKN2A (p16INK4A), RASSF1A, RUNX3, GATA6, NDRG2, PTEN,
and RARß in a subset of 95 gliomas of different grades. Additionally, the
methylation status of MGMT and NDRG2 was analyzed using pyrosequencing (PSQ). The
results revealed that the methylation index of individual glioma patients
correlates with World Health Organization (WHO) tumor grade and patient's age.
RASSF1A, RUNX3, GATA6, and MGMT were most frequently methylated, whereas the
INK4B-ARF-INK4A locus, PTEN, RARß, and ATM were methylated to a lesser extent.
ERCC1, hMLH1, and NDRG2 were unmethylated. RUNX3 methylation correlated with WHO 
tumor grade and patient's age. PSQ confirmed significantly higher methylation
levels of MGMT and NDRG2 as compared with normal, non-cancerous brain tissue. To 
conclude, DNA methylation of a whole panel of selected genes can serve as a tool 
for glioma aggressiveness prediction.

PMID: 25563195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2014 Dec 30;60(6):8-15.

Pluripotency properties of embryonic stem cells isolated from stage X blastoderm 
of Mazandaran native chicken.

Jahanpanah M(1), Pourasgari F(2), Mohammadi-Sangcheshmeh A(3), Ardeshirylajimi
A(4), Azarnia M(1), Sharifi SD(5), Soleimani M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Kharazmi University Department of Biology Karaj Iran. (2)Stem Cell Technology 
Research Center Department of Molecular Biology and Genetic Engineering Tehran
Iran farzaneh.pourasgari&commat;gmail.com. (3)University of Tehran, Pakdasht
Department of Animal and Poultry Science, College of Aburaihan Tehran Iran
amohammadis&commat;ut.ac.ir. (4)Razi Vaccine and Serum Research Institute
Department of Biotechnology Karaj Iran. (5)University of Tehran, Pakdasht
Department of Animal and Poultry Science, College of Aburaihan Tehran Iran.
(6)Stem Cell Technology Research Center Department of Molecular Biology and
Genetic Engineering Tehran Iran.

The aim of this study was to isolate Embryonic Stem Cells (ESCs) from native
chicken and to characterize their pluripotency properties through the cellular
and molecular markers. Samples obtained from fertilized eggs from Mazandaran
native hens. Cells were isolated from area of pellucida from stage X native hens'
blastoderm. Then the cells were cultured on inactivated mouse SNL feeder cells in
the presence of LIF, IGF-1, bFGF, CNTF, OSM, SCF, Il-6, and Il-11 growth factors.
The native chickens' ESCs colonies were picked up and subsequently passaged. To
characterize the cells, they were analyzed for their alkaline phosphatase
activity, and also for the expression of SSEA-4, and TRA-1-60 as
embryonic-specific markers at the protein level. Furthermore, the expression of
pluripotency (cPouV, Sox2, and Nanog) and cell lineage specific (Cvh, Brachyury, 
and Gata6) gene markers was evaluated at the level of mRNA using quantitative
RT-PCR. Isolated cells were passaged repeatedly and successfully up to ten
passages. The stemness of embryonic cells has been approved by the activity of
the alkaline phosphatase, presence of the SSEA-4, and TRA-1-60 protein, and
expression of the molecular marker (cPouV, Nanog, and Sox-2) genes. The
spontaneous differentiation of chicken ESCs confirmed the pluripotecy of the
cells in differentiation into specialized cell lineages. Our observation showed
that ESCs can be isolated successfully from stage X blastoderm of Mazandaran
native chickens and these cells maintain their stemness properties during
multi-passages in vitro.

PMID: 25553348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Toxicol In Vitro. 2015 Sep;29(6):1254-62. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2014.12.008. Epub
2014 Dec 23.

Evaluation of a new standardized enzymatic isolation protocol for human umbilical
cord-derived stem cells.

Buyl K(1), Vanhaecke T(2), Desmae T(2), Lagneaux L(3), Rogiers V(2), Najar M(3), 
De Kock J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of In Vitro Toxicology and Dermato-Cosmetology, Center for
Pharmaceutical Research (CePhaR), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 
103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: karobuyl@vub.ac.be.
(2)Department of In Vitro Toxicology and Dermato-Cosmetology, Center for
Pharmaceutical Research (CePhaR), Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 
103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. (3)Laboratory of Clinical Cell Therapy, Bordet
Institut, Université Libre de Bruxelles, 808 Route de Lennik, B-1070 Brussels,
Belgium.

The umbilical cord (UC) represents an important source of mesenchymal stem cells 
(MSC). These human UC-derived MSC (UC-MSC) have already been isolated using a
protocol based on the migratory and plastic adhesive properties of MSC
(UC-MSC-Mig). The UC-MSC-Mig isolation method, however, is difficult to
standardize. Therefore, we developed an enzymatic isolation protocol (UC-MSC-Enz)
to overcome the above mentioned disadvantages. First, we investigated the
UC-MSC-Enz for their MSC properties. We found that UC-MSC-Enz express the MSC
markers CD73, CD90 and CD105 and are able to differentiate into osteoblasts,
adipocytes and chondroblasts fulfilling the MSC criteria of the International
Society for Cellular Therapy. Previously we found that UC-MSC-Mig are unique
among MSCs due to their significant expression of several hepatic (progenitor)
markers. Therefore, we also investigated the expression of hepatic transcription 
factors and other hepatic markers in UC-MSC-Enz at both the mRNA and protein
level. We found that the expression of hepatic transcription factors (GATA4,
GATA6, SOX9 and SOX17) and hepatic markers (AFP, DPP4, CX43, DKK1, DSG2, KRT18
and KRT19) in UC-MSC-Enz was not significantly different from those of
UC-MSC-Mig. Consequently, this optimized enzyme-based method represents a fast,
robust and standardized way to isolate UC-MSC for a broad range of applications.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25541070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Cell Sci. 2015 Feb 15;128(4):695-705. doi: 10.1242/jcs.156588. Epub 2014 Dec
12.

FRNK negatively regulates IL-4-mediated inflammation.

Sharma R(1), Colarusso P(2), Zhang H(1), Stevens KM(2), Patel KD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary; Calgary, AB 
T2N 4N1, Canada. (2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of
Calgary; Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, Canada The Snyder Institute for Chronic Diseases,
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, Canada. (3)Department of Physiology
and Pharmacology, University of Calgary; Calgary, AB T2N 4N1, Canada The Snyder
Institute for Chronic Diseases, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N 4N1,
Canada Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Calgary, AB T2N
4N1, Canada kpatel@ucalgary.ca.

Focal adhesion kinase (FAK)-related nonkinase (PTK2 isoform 6 in humans,
hereafter referred to as FRNK) is a cytoskeletal regulatory protein that has
recently been shown to dampen lung fibrosis, yet its role in inflammation is
unknown. Here, we show for the first time that expression of FRNK negatively
regulates IL-4-mediated inflammation in a human model of eosinophil recruitment. 
Mechanistically, FRNK blocks eosinophil accumulation, firm adhesion and
transmigration by preventing transcription and protein expression of VCAM-1 and
CCL26. IL-4 activates STAT6 to induce VCAM-1 and CCL26 transcription. We now show
that IL-4 also increases GATA6 to induce VCAM-1 expression. FRNK blocks
IL-4-induced GATA6 transcription but has little effect on GATA6 protein
expression and no effect on STAT6 activation. FRNK can block FAK or Pyk2
signaling and we, thus, downregulated these proteins using siRNA to determine
whether signaling from either protein is involved in the regulation of VCAM-1 and
CCL26. Knockdown of FAK, Pyk2 or both had no effect on VCAM-1 or CCL26
expression, which suggests that FRNK acts independently of FAK and Pyk2
signaling. Finally, we found that IL-4 induces the late expression of endogenous 
FRNK. In summary, FRNK represents a novel mechanism to negatively regulate
IL-4-mediated inflammation.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25501808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Prog Biophys Mol Biol. 2015 Jan;117(1):69-77. doi:
10.1016/j.pbiomolbio.2014.11.006. Epub 2014 Dec 9.

Systems approaches in integrative cardiac biology: illustrations from cardiac
heterocellular signalling studies.

Nim HT(1), Boyd SE(2), Rosenthal NA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Level 1, Building 75, Monash
University, VIC 3800, Australia; Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute,
Level 1, Building 75, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia. Electronic address:
hieu.nim@monash.edu. (2)Systems Biology Institute (SBI) Australia, Level 1,
Building 75, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia; Australian Regenerative
Medicine Institute, Level 1, Building 75, Monash University, VIC 3800, Australia.
(3)Australian Regenerative Medicine Institute, Level 1, Building 75, Monash
University, VIC 3800, Australia.

Understanding the complexity of cardiac physiology requires system-level studies 
of multiple cardiac cell types. Frequently, however, the end result of published 
research lacks the detail of the collaborative and integrative experimental
design process, and the underlying conceptual framework. We review the recent
progress in systems modelling and omics analysis of the heterocellular heart
environment through complementary forward and inverse approaches, illustrating
these conceptual and experimental frameworks with case studies from our own
research program. The forward approach begins by collecting curated information
from the niche cardiac biology literature, and connecting the dots to form
mechanistic network models that generate testable system-level predictions. The
inverse approach starts from the vast pool of public omics data in recent cardiac
biological research, and applies bioinformatics analysis to produce novel
candidates for further investigation. We also discuss the possibility of
combining these two approaches into a hybrid framework, together with the
benefits and challenges. These interdisciplinary research frameworks illustrate
the interplay between computational models, omics analysis, and wet lab
experiments, which holds the key to making real progress in improving human
cardiac wellbeing.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25499442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jun 15;408:165-77. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.12.003. Epub
2014 Dec 8.

Toying with fate: Redirecting the differentiation of adrenocortical progenitor
cells into gonadal-like tissue.

Röhrig T(1), Pihlajoki M(2), Ziegler R(1), Cochran RS(3), Schrade A(2),
Schillebeeckx M(4), Mitra RD(4), Heikinheimo M(2), Wilson DB(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis 
Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Hochschule Mannheim - University
of Applied Sciences, Mannheim 68163, Germany. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St.
Louis, MO 63110, USA; Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki
University Central Hospital, Helsinki 00290, Finland. (3)Department of
Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's
Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. (4)Department of Genetics, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of 
Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis
Children's Hospital, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. Electronic address:
wilson_d@wustl.edu.

Cell fate decisions are integral to zonation and remodeling of the adrenal
cortex. Animal models exhibiting ectopic differentiation of gonadal-like cells in
the adrenal cortex can shed light on the molecular mechanisms regulating
steroidogenic cell fate. In one such model, prepubertal gonadectomy (GDX) of mice
triggers the formation of adrenocortical neoplasms that resemble luteinized
ovarian stroma. Transcriptomic analysis and genome-wide DNA methylation mapping
have identified genetic and epigenetic markers of GDX-induced adrenocortical
neoplasia. Members of the GATA transcription factor family have emerged as key
regulators of cell fate in this model. Expression of Gata4 is pivotal for the
accumulation of gonadal-like cells in the adrenal glands of gonadectomized mice, 
whereas expression of Gata6 limits the spontaneous and GDX-induced
differentiation of gonadal-like cells in the adrenal cortex. Additionally, Gata6 
is essential for proper development of the adrenal X-zone, a layer analogous to
the fetal zone of the human adrenal cortex. The relevance of these observations
to developmental signaling pathways in the adrenal cortex, to other animal models
of altered adrenocortical cell fate, and to human diseases is discussed.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4417465 [Available on 2016-06-15]
PMID: 25498963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. BMC Res Notes. 2014 Dec 11;7:902. doi: 10.1186/1756-0500-7-902.

Characterization of the developing small intestine in the absence of either GATA4
or GATA6.

Walker EM, Thompson CA, Kohlnhofer BM, Faber ML, Battle MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. mbattle@mcw.edu.

BACKGROUND: Studies of adult mice lacking either GATA4 or GATA6 in the small
intestine demonstrate roles for these factors in small intestinal biology.
Deletion of Gata4 in the adult mouse intestine revealed an essential role for
GATA4 in jejunal function. Deletion of Gata6 in the adult mouse ileum alters
epithelial cell types and ileal enterocyte gene expression. The effect of
deletion of Gata4 or Gata6 alone during embryonic small intestinal development,
however, has not been examined. We recently demonstrated that loss of both
factors in double conditional knockout embryos causes severe defects in jejunal
development. Therefore, the goal of this study is to provide phenotypic analysis 
of the small intestine of single Gata4 and Gata6 conditional knockout embryos.
RESULTS: Villin-Cre was used to delete Gata4 or Gata6 in the developing
intestinal epithelium. Elimination of either GATA4 or GATA6 in the jejunum, where
these factors are co-expressed, caused changes in enterocyte and enteroendocrine 
cell gene expression. Ectopic expression of markers of the ileal-specific bile
acid metabolism pathway was induced in GATA4-deficient jejunum but not in
GATA6-deficient jejunum. A subtle increase in goblet cells was also identified in
jejunum of both mutants. In GATA6-deficient embryonic ileum, villus length was
altered, and enterocyte gene expression was perturbed including ectopic
expression of the colon marker Car1. Goblet cells were increased, and
enteroendocrine cells were decreased.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, we show that aspects of the phenotypes observed in the
small intestine of adult Gata4 and Gata6 conditional knockout mice emerge during 
development. The effect of eliminating GATA6 from the developing ileum was
greater than that of eliminating either GATA4 or GATA6 from the developing
jejunum likely reflecting functional redundancy between these factors in the
jejunum. Although GATA4 and GATA6 functions overlap, our data also suggest unique
functions for GATA4 and GATA6 within the developing intestine. GATA4 likely
operates independently of GATA6 within the jejunum to regulate jejunal versus
ileal enterocyte identity and consequently jejunal physiology. GATA6 likely
regulates enteroendocrine cell differentiation cell autonomously whereas GATA4
affects this population indirectly.

PMCID: PMC4307969
PMID: 25495347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Dig Liver Dis. 2015 Jan;47(1):73-80. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2014.09.014. Epub 2014
Oct 16.

GATA6 expression in Barrett's oesophagus and oesophageal adenocarcinoma.

Pavlov K(1), Honing J(2), Meijer C(3), Boersma-van Ek W(1), Peters FT(1), van den
Berg A(4), Karrenbeld A(4), Plukker JT(2), Kruyt FA(3), Kleibeuker JH(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (2)Department of
Surgical Oncology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, University of
Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of Pathology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center
Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (5)Department of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: j.h.kleibeuker@umcg.nl.

BACKGROUND: Barrett's oesophagus can progress towards oesophageal adenocarcinoma 
through a metaplasia-dysplasia-carcinoma sequence, but the underlying mechanisms 
are poorly understood. The transcription factor GATA6 is known to be involved in 
columnar differentiation and proliferation, and GATA6 gene amplification was
recently linked with poor survival in oesophageal adenocarcinoma.
AIM: To study the expression of GATA6 during Barrett's oesophagus development and
malignant transformation. To determine the prognostic value of GATA6 in
oesophageal adenocarcinoma.
METHODS: Two retrospective cohorts were derived from the pathological archive of 
the University Medical Center Groningen. The first cohort contained 130 tissue
samples of normal squamous epithelium, metaplasia, dysplasia and oesophageal
adenocarcinoma. The second cohort consisted of a tissue microarray containing
tissue from 92 oesophageal adenocarcinoma patients. Immunohistochemistry was used
to examine GATA6 protein expression and to correlate GATA6 expression in
oesophageal adenocarcinoma with overall and disease-free survival.
RESULTS: The percentage of GATA6-positive cells was low in squamous epithelium
(10%) but increased progressively in Barrett's oesophagus (30%, P < 0.001) and
high-grade dysplasia (82%, P = 0.005). GATA6 expression was not associated with
overall or disease-free survival in oesophageal adenocarcinoma patients (P =
0.599 and P = 0.700 respectively).
CONCLUSION: GATA6 expression is progressively increased during Barrett's
oesophagus development and its malignant transformation. However, no prognostic
value of GATA6 expression could be found in oesophageal adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2014 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Gene. 2015 Jan 25;555(2):448-57. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.10.045. Epub 2014 Oct
28.

Dinitrophenol modulates gene expression levels of angiogenic, cell survival and
cardiomyogenic factors in bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Ali A(1), Akhter MA(1), Haneef K(1), Khan I(1), Naeem N(1), Habib R(1), Kabir
N(1), Salim A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug Research, International
Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences, University of Karachi,
Karachi-75270, Pakistan. (2)Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug
Research, International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences, University
of Karachi, Karachi-75270, Pakistan. Electronic address: asmat.salim@iccs.edu.

Various preconditioning strategies influence regeneration properties of stem
cells. Preconditioned stem cells generally show better cell survival, increased
differentiation, enhanced paracrine effects, and improved homing to the injury
site by regulating the expression of tissue-protective cytokines and growth
factors. In this study, we analyzed gene expression pattern of growth factors
through RT-PCR after treatment of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) with a metabolic 
inhibitor, 2,4 dinitrophenol (DNP) and subsequent re-oxygenation for periods of
2, 6, 12 and 24h. These growth factors play important roles in cardiomyogenesis, 
angiogenesis and cell survival. Mixed pattern of gene expression was observed
depending on the period of re-oxygenation. Of the 13 genes analyzed, ankyrin
repeat domain 1 (Ankrd1) and GATA6 were downregulated after DNP treatment and
subsequent re-oxygenations. Ankrd1 expression was, however, increased after 24h
of re-oxygenation. Placental growth factor (Pgf), endoglin (Eng), neuropilin
(Nrp1) and jagged 1 (Jag1) were up-regulated after DNP treatment. Gradual
increase was observed as re-oxygenation advances and by the end of the
re-oxygenation period the expression started to decrease and ultimately regained 
normal values. Epiregulin (Ereg) was not expressed in normal MSCs but its
expression increased gradually from 2 to 24h after re-oxygenation. No change was 
observed in the expression level of connective tissue growth factor (Ctgf) at any
time period after re-oxygenation. Kindlin3, kinase insert domain receptor (Kdr), 
myogenin (Myog), Tbx20 and endothelial tyrosine kinase (Tek) were not expressed
either in normal cells or cells treated with DNP. It can be concluded from the
present study that MSCs adjust their gene expression levels under the influence
of DNP induced metabolic stress. Their levels of expression vary with varying
re-oxygenation periods. Preconditioning of MSCs with DNP can be used for
enhancing the potential of these cells for better regeneration.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Clin Case Rep. 2013 Dec;1(2):86-90. doi: 10.1002/ccr3.33. Epub 2013 Nov 21.

A novel GATA6 mutation in a child with congenital heart malformation and neonatal
diabetes.

Eifes S(1), Chudasama KK(2), Molnes J(2), Wagner K(3), Hoang T(4), Schierloh
U(3), Rocour-Brumioul D(5), Johansson S(4), Njølstad PR(6), de Beaufort C(7).

Author information: 
(1)Luxembourg Centre for Systems Biomedicine (LCSB), University of Luxembourg,
Campus Belval Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg. (2)KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes
Research, Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen Bergen, Norway.
(3)Pediatric Clinic/Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
(4)KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical Science,
University of Bergen Bergen, Norway ; Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular
Medicine, Haukeland University Hospital Bergen, Norway. (5)Centre Regional
Hospitalier de Liege Liege, Belgium. (6)KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research,
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen Bergen, Norway ; Department 
of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital Bergen, Norway ; Broad Institute of 
Harvard and MIT Cambridge, Massachusetts. (7)Luxembourg Centre for Systems
Biomedicine (LCSB), University of Luxembourg, Campus Belval Esch-sur-Alzette,
Luxembourg ; Pediatric Clinic/Centre Hospitalier de Luxembourg Luxembourg,
Luxembourg.

KEY CLINICAL MESSAGE: Diabetes in neonates is a monogenetic disease and genetic
analysis is warranted to allow best treatment, prognosis, and genetic counseling.
Transcription factor mutations may have a variable expression and different
organs may be involved.

PMCID: PMC4184756
PMID: 25356219  [PubMed]


71. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2015 Feb;59(2):221-30. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201400279. Epub 2014 
Nov 17.

Sulforaphane suppresses cardiac hypertrophy by inhibiting GATA4/GATA6 expression 
and MAPK signaling pathways.

Kee HJ(1), Kim GR, Kim IK, Jeong MH.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Convergence Research Center, Chonnam National University
Hospital, Gwangju, South Korea.

SCOPE: Sulforaphane (SFN) is a naturally occurring isothiocynate compound found
in cruciferous vegetables. Here, we report the effect of SFN on cardiac
hypertrophy and propose an underlying mechanism.
METHODS AND RESULTS: SFN suppresses cardiomyocyte hypertrophy induced by
hypertrophic stimuli in vitro and in vivo. SFN suppresses the expression of fetal
genes, including atrial natriuretic peptide, brain natriuretic peptide, and beta 
myosin heavy chain. We used an siRNA technique and atrial natriuretic peptide
promoter with mutated GATA binding sites to demonstrate that SFN mediates cardiac
hypertrophy by modulating transcription factors GATA4/6.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that SFN has the potential to prevent cardiac
hypertrophy by downregulating GATA4/6 and mitogen-activated protein kinase
signaling pathways.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25332186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 16;9(10):e110683. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110683.
eCollection 2014.

Altered theca and cumulus oocyte complex gene expression, follicular arrest and
reduced fertility in cows with dominant follicle follicular fluid androgen
excess.

Summers AF(1), Pohlmeier WE(1), Sargent KM(1), Cole BD(1), Vinton RJ(1), Kurz
SG(1), McFee RM(1), Cushman RA(2), Cupp AS(1), Wood JR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln,
Nebraska, United States of America. (2)USDA-ARS Roman L. Hruska U.S. Meat Animal 
Research Center, Clay Center, Nebraska, United States of America.

Aspiration of bovine follicles 12-36 hours after induced corpus luteum lysis
serendipitously identified two populations of cows, one with High androstenedione
(A4; >40 ng/ml; mean = 102) and another with Low A4 (<20 ng/ml; mean = 9) in
follicular fluid. We hypothesized that the steroid excess in follicular fluid of 
dominant follicles in High A4 cows would result in reduced fertility through
altered follicle development and oocyte maternal RNA abundance. To test this
hypothesis, estrous cycles of cows were synchronized and ovariectomy was
performed 36 hours later. HPLC MS/MS analysis of follicular fluid showed
increased dehydroepiandrosterone (6-fold), A4 (158-fold) and testosterone
(31-fold) in the dominant follicle of High A4 cows. However, estrone (3-fold) and
estradiol (2-fold) concentrations were only slightly elevated, suggesting a
possible inefficiency in androgen to estrogen conversion in High A4 cows. Theca
cell mRNA expression of LHCGR, GATA6, CYP11A1, and CYP17A1 was greater in High A4
cows. Furthermore, abundance of ZAR1 was decreased 10-fold in cumulus oocyte
complexes from High A4 cows, whereas NLRP5 abundance tended to be 19.8-fold
greater (P = 0.07). There was a tendency for reduction in stage 4 follicles in
ovarian cortex samples from High A4 cows suggesting that progression to antral
stages were impaired. High A4 cows tended (P<0.07) to have a 17% reduction in
calving rate compared with Low A4 cows suggesting reduced fertility in the High
A4 population. These data suggest that the dominant follicle environment of High 
A4 cows including reduced estrogen conversion and androgen excess contributes to 
infertility in part through altered follicular and oocyte development.

PMCID: PMC4199720
PMID: 25330369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 16;9(10):e108853. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108853.
eCollection 2014.

Genome-wide expression analysis in fibroblast cell lines from probands with
Pallister Killian syndrome.

Kaur M(1), Izumi K(2), Wilkens AB(1), Chatfield KC(3), Spinner NB(4), Conlin
LK(4), Zhang Z(5), Krantz ID(6).

Author information: 
(1)The Division of Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (2)The Division of Human
Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America; Research Center for Epigenetic Disease, Institute of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Pediatric Cardiology, The Children's
Hospital of Colorado, Denver, Colorado, United States of America. (4)The
Department of Pathology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America; The Perelman School of Medicine at The
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(5)Center for Biomedical Informatics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (6)The Division of Human
Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America; The Perelman School of Medicine at The University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Pallister Killian syndrome (OMIM: # 601803) is a rare multisystem disorder
typically caused by tissue limited mosaic tetrasomy of chromosome 12p
(isochromosome 12p). The clinical manifestations of Pallister Killian syndrome
are variable with the most common findings including craniofacial dysmorphia,
hypotonia, cognitive impairment, hearing loss, skin pigmentary differences and
epilepsy. Isochromosome 12p is identified primarily in skin fibroblast cultures
and in chorionic villus and amniotic fluid cell samples and may be identified in 
blood lymphocytes during the neonatal and early childhood period. We performed
genomic expression profiling correlated with interphase fluorescent in situ
hybridization and single nucleotide polymorphism array quantification of degree
of mosaicism in fibroblasts from 17 Caucasian probands with Pallister Killian
syndrome and 9 healthy age, gender and ethnicity matched controls. We identified 
a characteristic profile of 354 (180 up- and 174 down-regulated) differentially
expressed genes in Pallister Killian syndrome probands and supportive evidence
for a Pallister Killian syndrome critical region on 12p13.31. The differentially 
expressed genes were enriched for developmentally important genes such as
homeobox genes. Among the differentially expressed genes, we identified several
genes whose misexpression may be associated with the clinical phenotype of
Pallister Killian syndrome such as downregulation of ZFPM2, GATA6 and SOX9, and
overexpression of IGFBP2.

PMCID: PMC4199614
PMID: 25329894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Development. 2014 Oct;141(20):3978-87. doi: 10.1242/dev.111906.

BMP-mediated induction of GATA4/5/6 blocks somitic responsiveness to SHH.

Daoud G(1), Kempf H(1), Kumar D(1), Kozhemyakina E(1), Holowacz T(1), Kim DW(1), 
Ionescu A(1), Lassar AB(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Bldg C-Room 303, 240 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (2)Department
of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Bldg 
C-Room 303, 240 Longwood Ave, Boston, MA 02115, USA
andrew_lassar@hms.harvard.edu.

The relative timing of SHH and BMP signals controls whether presomitic mesoderm
(PSM) cells will adopt either a chondrogenic or lateral plate mesoderm fate. Here
we document that SHH-mediated induction of Nkx3.2 maintains the competence of
somitic cells to initiate chondrogenesis in response to subsequent BMP signals by
repressing BMP-dependent induction of GATA genes. Conversely, administration of
BMP signals to PSM or forced expression of GATA family members in chick PSM
explants blocks induction of hedgehog-dependent gene expression. We demonstrate
that GATA factors can interact with Gli factors and can recruit the
transcriptional co-factor FOG1 (ZFPM1) to the regulatory region of the mouse Gli1
gene, repressing the induction of Gli1 by SHH by binding to both GATA and Gli
binding sites. Knockdown of FOG1 reverses the ability of GATA factors to repress 
Gli1 expression. Our findings uncover a novel role for GATA transcription factors
as repressors of hedgehog signaling, and document that NKX3.2 maintains the
ability of sclerotomal cells to express SHH transcriptional targets in the
presence of BMP signals by repressing the induction of Gata4/5/6.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197703
PMID: 25294942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Methods Mol Biol. 2015;1222:175-80. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1594-1_13.

Assessment of cell lineages and cell death in blastocysts by immunostaining.

Chauveau S(1), Chazaud C.

Author information: 
(1)GReD , INSERM 1103, UMR CNRS 6293, Clermont Université, BP 38, 28 Place
Henri-Dunant, Clermont-Ferrand, 63001, France, claire.chazaud@udamail.fr.

During the last decade it has been shown that most mammalian blastocysts
consisted of three cell lineages. Immunofluorescence with multiple antibodies
enables to identify each cell type allowing an easy detection of eventual
defects. It is complementary to RT-PCR experiments as this technique allows to
look at cell position and to analyze and count the proportions between the
different cell types. Thus after any kind of embryo manipulation such as nuclear 
transfer (NT), the analysis of the three cell lineages by immunofluorescence will
provide criteria for good or poor development.

PMID: 25287346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nat Commun. 2014 Oct 6;5:5042. doi: 10.1038/ncomms6042.

Dax1 and Nanog act in parallel to stabilize mouse embryonic stem cells and
induced pluripotency.

Zhang J(1), Liu G(1), Ruan Y(2), Wang J(3), Zhao K(4), Wan Y(5), Liu B(4), Zheng 
H(6), Peng T(7), Wu W(8), He P(8), Hu FQ(1), Jian R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400038, China. (2)Department of Pathogenic Biology, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, China. (3)Department of Physiology, Third Military 
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China. (4)Laboratory of Oncology,
Affiliated Hospital of Academy of Military Medical Sciences, Beijing 400038,
China. (5)1] Biomedical Analysis Center, Third Military Medical University,
Chongqing 100071, China [2] Department of Immunology, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, China. (6)Department of Endocrinology, Xinqiao
Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing 400037, China. (7)Research
Center of Laboratory Medicine, Chengdu Military General Hospital, Sichuan 610083,
China. (8)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China.

Nanog expression is heterogeneous and dynamic in embryonic stem cells (ESCs).
However, the mechanism for stabilizing pluripotency during the transitions
between Nanog(high) and Nanog(low) states is not well understood. Here we report 
that Dax1 acts in parallel with Nanog to regulate mouse ESC (mESCs) identity.
Dax1 stable knockdown mESCs are predisposed towards differentiation but do not
lose pluripotency, whereas Dax1 overexpression supports LIF-independent
self-renewal. Although partially complementary, Dax1 and Nanog function
independently and cannot replace one another. They are both required for full
reprogramming to induce pluripotency. Importantly, Dax1 is indispensable for
self-renewal of Nanog(low) mESCs. Moreover, we report that Dax1 prevents
extra-embryonic endoderm (ExEn) commitment by directly repressing Gata6
transcription. Dax1 may also mediate inhibition of trophectoderm differentiation 
independent or as a downstream effector of Oct4. These findings establish a basal
role of Dax1 in maintaining pluripotency during the state transition of mESCs and
somatic cell reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC4205889
PMID: 25284313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Gastroenterology. 2014 Nov;147(5):962-5. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.09.026. Epub 
2014 Sep 27.

Insights into the role of nicotine in pancreatic stem cell activation and acinar 
dedifferentiation.

Ponnusamy MP(1), Batra SK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Buffett Cancer Center,
Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, University of
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska. (2)Department of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Buffett Cancer Center, Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer
and Allied Diseases, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska.
Electronic address: sbatra@unmc.edu.

Comment on
    Gastroenterology. 2014 Nov;147(5):1119-33.e4.

PMID: 25265575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Oct 3;452(4):962-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.09.019. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Amino-terminal extension of 146 residues of L-type GATA-6 is required for
transcriptional activation but not for self-association.

Takada K(1), Obayashi K(1), Ohashi K(2), Ohashi-Kobayashi A(3), Nakanishi-Matsui 
M(4), Maeda M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(2)Department of Medical Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy, Iwate Medical
University, Nishitokuta 2-1-1, Shiwa, Iwate 028-3694, Japan. (3)Department of
Immunobiology, School of Pharmacy, Iwate Medical University, Nishitokuta 2-1-1,
Shiwa, Iwate 028-3694, Japan. (4)Department of Biochemistry, School of Pharmacy, 
Iwate Medical University, Nishitokuta 2-1-1, Shiwa, Iwate 028-3694, Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy, Iwate Medical University,
Nishitokuta 2-1-1, Shiwa, Iwate 028-3694, Japan. Electronic address:
mmaeda@iwate-med.ac.jp.

Transcription factor GATA-6 plays essential roles in developmental processes and 
tissue specific functions through regulation of gene expression. GATA-6 mRNA
utilizes two Met-codons in frame as translational initiation codons. Deletion of 
the nucleotide sequence encoding the PEST sequence (Glu(31)-Cys(46)) between the 
two initiation codons unusually reduced the protein molecular size on
SDS-polyacrylamide gel-electrophoresis, and re-introduction of this sequence
reversed this change. The long-type (L-type) GATA-6 containing this PEST sequence
self-associated similarly to the short-type (S-type) GATA-6, as determined on
co-immunoprecipitation of Myc-tagged GATA-6 with HA-tagged GATA-6. The L-type and
S-type GATA-6 also interacted mutually. The L-type GATA-6 without the PEST
sequence also self-associated and interacted with the S-type GATA-6. The
transcriptional activation potential of L-type GATA-6 is higher than that of
S-type GATA-6. When the PEST sequence (Glu(31)-Cys(46)) was inserted into the
L-type GATA-6 without Arg(13)-Gly(101), the resultant recombinant protein showed 
significantly higher transcriptional activity, while the construct with an
unrelated sequence exhibited lower activity. These results suggest that the
Glu(31)-Cys(46) segment plays an important role in the transcriptional
activation, although it does not participate in the self-association.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25234600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Development. 2014 Oct;141(19):3637-48. doi: 10.1242/dev.109678. Epub 2014 Sep 10.

Gata6, Nanog and Erk signaling control cell fate in the inner cell mass through a
tristable regulatory network.

Bessonnard S(1), De Mot L(2), Gonze D(2), Barriol M(1), Dennis C(1), Goldbeter
A(3), Dupont G(4), Chazaud C(5).

Author information: 
(1)Clermont Université, Université d'Auvergne, Laboratoire GReD, Clermont-Ferrand
F-63000, France Inserm, UMR1103, Clermont-Ferrand F-63001, France CNRS, UMR6293, 
Clermont-Ferrand F-63001, France. (2)Unité de Chronobiologie théorique, Faculté
des Sciences, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Campus Plaine, CP 231,
Brussels B-1050, Belgium. (3)Unité de Chronobiologie théorique, Faculté des
Sciences, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Campus Plaine, CP 231, Brussels
B-1050, Belgium Stellenbosch Institute for Advanced Study (STIAS), Wallenberg
Research Center at Stellenbosch University, Stellenbosch 7600, South Africa.
(4)Unité de Chronobiologie théorique, Faculté des Sciences, Université Libre de
Bruxelles (ULB), Campus Plaine, CP 231, Brussels B-1050, Belgium
genevieve.dupont@ulb.ac.be claire.chazaud@udamail.fr. (5)Clermont Université,
Université d'Auvergne, Laboratoire GReD, Clermont-Ferrand F-63000, France Inserm,
UMR1103, Clermont-Ferrand F-63001, France CNRS, UMR6293, Clermont-Ferrand
F-63001, France genevieve.dupont@ulb.ac.be claire.chazaud@udamail.fr.

During blastocyst formation, inner cell mass (ICM) cells differentiate into
either epiblast (Epi) or primitive endoderm (PrE) cells, labeled by Nanog and
Gata6, respectively, and organized in a salt-and-pepper pattern. Previous work in
the mouse has shown that, in absence of Nanog, all ICM cells adopt a PrE
identity. Moreover, the activation or the blockade of the Fgf/RTK pathway biases 
cell fate specification towards either PrE or Epi, respectively. We show that, in
absence of Gata6, all ICM cells adopt an Epi identity. Furthermore, the analysis 
of Gata6(+/-) embryos reveals a dose-sensitive phenotype, with fewer
PrE-specified cells. These results and previous findings have enabled the
development of a mathematical model for the dynamics of the regulatory network
that controls ICM differentiation into Epi or PrE cells. The model describes the 
temporal dynamics of Erk signaling and of the concentrations of Nanog, Gata6,
secreted Fgf4 and Fgf receptor 2. The model is able to recapitulate most of the
cell behaviors observed in different experimental conditions and provides a
unifying mechanism for the dynamics of these developmental transitions. The
mechanism relies on the co-existence between three stable steady states
(tristability), which correspond to ICM, Epi and PrE cells, respectively.
Altogether, modeling and experimental results uncover novel features of ICM cell 
fate specification such as the role of the initial induction of a subset of cells
into Epi in the initiation of the salt-and-pepper pattern, or the precocious Epi 
specification in Gata6(+/-) embryos.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25209243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Lin Chung Er Bi Yan Hou Tou Jing Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2014 May;28(9):643-6.

[The expression and significance of Dickkopf-1 and GATA-6 in laryngeal
carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Yue W, Zhao R, Yu T.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of Dickkopf-1 and GATA-6 in laryngeal
carcinoma and to discuss their relevance and the roles in carcinogenesis and
development of laryngeal carcinoma.
METHOD: Immunohistochemical technique was used to detect the expression of
Dickkopf-1 and GATA-6 protein in 48 tissues of larynge al carcinoma, 48
para-carcinoma tissues and 20 normal laryngeal mucosal tissues.
RESULT: (1) The expression of Dick kopf-1 protein in laryngeal cancer is
significantly lower than in para-carcinoma tissues and normal laryngeal mucosa
tissues (P < 0.05). (2) The expression of GATA-6 protein in laryngeal cancer is
significantly higher than in para-carcinoma tissues and normal laryngeal mucosa
tissues (P < 0.05). (3) The expression of Dickkopf-1 and GATA-6 protein in
laryngeal cancer is correlated with lymph node metastasis, clinical stage,
histological grade (P < 0.05). (4) The expression of Dickkopf-1 and GATA-6 are
negatively correlated in laryngeal cancer.
CONCLUSION: The expression of Dickkopf-1 and GATA-6 may contribute to the
carcinogenesis and development of laryngeal carcinoma.

PMID: 25195275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Gastroenterology. 2014 Nov;147(5):1119-33.e4. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.08.002. 
Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Nicotine promotes initiation and progression of KRAS-induced pancreatic cancer
via Gata6-dependent dedifferentiation of acinar cells in mice.

Hermann PC(1), Sancho P(1), Cañamero M(2), Martinelli P(3), Madriles F(3), Michl 
P(4), Gress T(4), de Pascual R(5), Gandia L(5), Guerra C(6), Barbacid M(6),
Wagner M(7), Vieira CR(1), Aicher A(1), Real FX(3), Sainz B Jr(8), Heeschen C(9).

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cells and Cancer Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO),
Madrid, Spain. (2)Comparative Pathology Core Unit, Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. (3)Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group,
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. (4)Department of
Gastroenterology, Endocrinology, Metabolism and Infectiology, University of
Marburg, Marburg, Germany. (5)Instituto Teófilo Hernando, Facultad de Medicina,
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain. (6)Experimental Oncology Group,
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. (7)Department of
Internal Medicine I, Ulm University, Ulm, Germany. (8)Stem Cells and Cancer
Group, Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain. Electronic 
address: bruno.sainz@uam.es. (9)Stem Cells and Cancer Group, Spanish National
Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain; Centre for Stem Cells in Cancer &
Ageing, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, UK. Electronic
address: c.heeschen@qmul.ac.uk.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2014 Nov;147(5):962-5.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Although smoking is a leading risk factor for pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), little is known about the mechanisms by which
smoking promotes initiation or progression of PDAC.
METHODS: We studied the effects of nicotine administration on pancreatic cancer
development in Kras(+/LSLG12Vgeo);Elas-tTA/tetO-Cre (Ela-KRAS) mice,
Kras(+/LSLG12D);Trp53+/LSLR172H;Pdx-1-Cre (KPC) mice (which express
constitutively active forms of KRAS), and C57/B6 mice. Mice were given nicotine
for up to 86 weeks to produce blood levels comparable with those of intermediate 
smokers. Pancreatic tissues were collected and analyzed by immunohistochemistry
and reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; cells were isolated and
assayed for colony and sphere formation and gene expression. The effects of
nicotine were also evaluated in primary pancreatic acinar cells isolated from
wild-type, nAChR7a(-/-), Trp53(-/-), and Gata6(-/-);Trp53(-/-) mice. We also
analyzed primary PDAC cells that overexpressed GATA6 from lentiviral expression
vectors.
RESULTS: Administration of nicotine accelerated transformation of pancreatic
cells and tumor formation in Ela-KRAS and KPC mice. Nicotine induced
dedifferentiation of acinar cells by activating AKT-ERK-MYC signaling; this led
to inhibition of Gata6 promoter activity, loss of GATA6 protein, and subsequent
loss of acinar differentiation and hyperactivation of oncogenic KRAS. Nicotine
also promoted aggressiveness of established tumors as well as the
epithelial-mesenchymal transition, increasing numbers of circulating cancer cells
and their dissemination to the liver, compared with mice not exposed to nicotine.
Nicotine induced pancreatic cells to acquire gene expression patterns and
functional characteristics of cancer stem cells. These effects were markedly
attenuated in K-Ras(+/LSL-G12D);Trp53(+/LSLR172H);Pdx-1-Cre mice given metformin.
Metformin prevented nicotine-induced pancreatic carcinogenesis and tumor growth
by up-regulating GATA6 and promoting differentiation toward an acinar cell
program.
CONCLUSIONS: In mice, nicotine promotes pancreatic carcinogenesis and tumor
development via down-regulation of Gata6 to induce acinar cell dedifferentiation.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25127677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Int J Mol Med. 2014 Nov;34(5):1315-22. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2014.1896. Epub 2014 Aug
13.

GATA6 loss-of-function mutations contribute to familial dilated cardiomyopathy.

Xu L(1), Zhao L(2), Yuan F(1), Jiang WF(1), Liu H(1), Li RG(1), Xu YJ(1), Zhang
M(1), Fang WY(1), Qu XK(1), Yang YQ(1), Qiu XB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 200030, P.R. China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Yantaishan 
Hospital, Yantai, Shandong 264001, P.R. China.

Dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM), the most prevalent form of primary heart muscle
disease, is the third most common cause of heart failure and the most frequent
reason for cardiac transplantation. Mounting evidence has demonstrated that
genetic risk factors are crucial in the pathogenesis of DCM. However, DCM is
genetically heterogeneous, and the genetic basis of DCM in a large majority of
cases remains unclear. In the current study, the coding exons and flanking
introns of the GATA6 gene, which encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor
essential for cardiogenesis, was sequenced in 140 unrelated patients with DCM,
and two novel heterozygous mutations, p.C447Y and p.H475R, were identified in
two index patients with DCM, respectively. Analysis of the pedigrees showed that 
in each family the mutation co-segregated with DCM transmitted in an
autosomal-dominant pattern, with complete penetrance. The missense mutations were
absent in 400 control chromosomes and predicted to be disease-causing by
MutationTaster or probably damaging by PolyPhen-2. The alignment of multiple
GATA6 proteins across species revealed that the altered amino acids were
completely conserved evolutionarily. The functional assays showed that the
mutated GATA6 proteins were associated with significantly reduced transcriptional
activation in comparison with their wild-type counterpart. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first study on the association of GATA6 loss-of-function
mutations with enhanced susceptibility to familial DCM, which provides novel
insight into the molecular mechanism of DCM and suggests potential implications
for the antenatal prophylaxis and allele-specific treatment of DCM.

PMID: 25119427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 28;9(7):e103097. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103097.
eCollection 2014.

miR-10a regulates proliferation of human cardiomyocyte progenitor cells by
targeting GATA6.

Liang D(1), Zhen L(2), Yuan T(1), Huang J(2), Deng F(2), Wuyahan(2), Zhang H(1), 
Pan L(2), Liu Y(1), The E(2), Yu Z(1), Zhu W(3), Zhang Y(1), Li L(3), Peng L(3), 
Li J(1), Chen YH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Arrhythmia of the Ministry of Education of China, East
Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Institute of
Medical Genetics, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. (2)Key Laboratory of
Arrhythmia of the Ministry of Education of China, East Hospital, Tongji
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China; Institute of Medical Genetics,
Tongji University, Shanghai, China; Department of Cardiology, East Hospital,
Tongji University, Shanghai, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Arrhythmia of the
Ministry of Education of China, East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China; Institute of Medical Genetics, Tongji University,
Shanghai, China; Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China. (4)Key Laboratory of Arrhythmia of the
Ministry of Education of China, East Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, China; Institute of Medical Genetics, Tongji University,
Shanghai, China; Department of Cardiology, East Hospital, Tongji University,
Shanghai, China; Department of Pathology and Pathophysiology, Tongji University
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

microRNAs (miRNAs) play essential roles in cardiogenesis. The altered expression 
of miRNAs can result in cardiac malformations by inducing abnormalities in the
behavior of cardiac cells. However, the role of miR-10a in the regulation of
cardiomyocyte progenitor cells (CMPCs) remains undetermined. In the present
study, we found that up- or down-regulation of miR-10a inhibited or promoted the 
proliferation of human CMPCs, respectively, without affecting their
differentiation toward cardiomyocytes. miR-10a bound to GATA6 directly and
reduced GATA6 expression. Over-expression of GATA6 greatly attenuated the
miR-10a-mediated inhibitory effect on the proliferation of human CMPCs. Thus, our
results indicate that miR-10a could effectively modulate the proliferation of
human CMPCs by targeting GATA6. The finding provides novel insights into the
potency of miR-10a during heart development.

PMCID: PMC4113387
PMID: 25068583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Gut. 2015 May;64(5):707-19. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-306596. Epub 2014 Jul 22.

Regulatory crosstalk between lineage-survival oncogenes KLF5, GATA4 and GATA6
cooperatively promotes gastric cancer development.

Chia NY(1), Deng N(2), Das K(3), Huang D(4), Hu L(5), Zhu Y(3), Lim KH(6), Lee
MH(7), Wu J(7), Sam XX(6), Tan GS(6), Wan WK(6), Yu W(4), Gan A(4), Tan AL(3),
Tay ST(3), Soo KC(8), Wong WK(9), Dominguez LT(9), Ng HH(10), Rozen S(1), Goh
LK(11), Teh BT(12), Tan P(13).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore A*STAR-Duke-NUS Neuroscience Partnership,
Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (2)Cancer and
Stem Cell Biology program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore,
Singapore NUS Graduate School for Integrative Sciences and Engineering, National 
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (3)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology
program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.
(4)Laboratory of Cancer Epigenome, National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore. 
(5)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National
University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (6)Department of Pathology,
Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. (7)Cellular and Molecular
Research, National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore. (8)Department of Surgical
Oncology, National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore. (9)Dept of General
Surgery, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore, Singapore. (10)Genome Institute
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. (11)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology program,
Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore, Singapore Saw Swee Hock
School of Public Health, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore. 
(12)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School
Singapore, Singapore, Singapore Laboratory of Cancer Epigenome, National Cancer
Centre, Singapore, Singapore. (13)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology program, Duke-NUS 
Graduate Medical School Singapore, Singapore, Singapore Cancer Science Institute 
of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore Cellular and
Molecular Research, National Cancer Centre, Singapore, Singapore Genome Institute
of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore.

OBJECTIVE: Gastric cancer (GC) is a deadly malignancy for which new therapeutic
strategies are needed. Three transcription factors, KLF5, GATA4 and GATA6, have
been previously reported to exhibit genomic amplification in GC. We sought to
validate these findings, investigate how these factors function to promote GC,
and identify potential treatment strategies for GCs harbouring these
amplifications.
DESIGN: KLF5, GATA4 and GATA6 copy number and gene expression was examined in
multiple GC cohorts. Chromatin immunoprecipitation with DNA sequencing was used
to identify KLF5/GATA4/GATA6 genomic binding sites in GC cell lines, and
integrated with transcriptomics to highlight direct target genes. Phenotypical
assays were conducted to assess the function of these factors in GC cell lines
and xenografts in nude mice.
RESULTS: KLF5, GATA4 and GATA6 amplifications were confirmed in independent GC
cohorts. Although factor amplifications occurred in distinct sets of GCs, they
exhibited significant mRNA coexpression in primary GCs, consistent with
KLF5/GATA4/GATA6 cross-regulation. Chromatin immunoprecipitation with DNA
sequencing revealed a large number of genomic sites co-occupied by KLF5 and
GATA4/GATA6, primarily located at gene promoters and exhibiting higher binding
strengths. KLF5 physically interacted with GATA factors, supporting
KLF5/GATA4/GATA6 cooperative regulation on co-occupied genes. Depletion and
overexpression of these factors, singly or in combination, reduced and promoted
cancer proliferation, respectively, in vitro and in vivo. Among the
KLF5/GATA4/GATA6 direct target genes relevant for cancer development, one target 
gene, HNF4a, was also required for GC proliferation and could be targeted by the 
antidiabetic drug metformin, revealing a therapeutic opportunity for
KLF5/GATA4/GATA6 amplified GCs.
CONCLUSIONS: KLF5/GATA4/GATA6 may promote GC development by engaging in mutual
crosstalk, collaborating to maintain a pro-oncogenic transcriptional regulatory
network in GC cells.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25053715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Int J Mol Sci. 2014 Jul 17;15(7):12677-87. doi: 10.3390/ijms150712677.

Novel and functional DNA sequence variants within the GATA6 gene promoter in
ventricular septal defects.

Li C(1), Li X(2), Pang S(3), Chen W(4), Qin X(5), Huang W(6), Zeng C(7), Yan
B(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Electrocardiogram, Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, 
Jining Medical University, Jining 272029, China. llichunyu@163.com. (2)Division
of Anesthesia, Jining First People's Hospital, Jining 272011, China.
13963722217@163.com. (3)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease
Diagnosis and Treatment, Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining
Medical University, Jining 272029, China. tonyp0720@126.com. (4)Laboratory of
Genome Variation and Precision Biomedicine, Beijing Institute of Genomics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. chenw@big.ac.cn. (5)Shandong 
Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment, Jining
Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining 272029,
China. qinxianyun@126.com. (6)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac
Disease Diagnosis and Treatment, Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital,
Jining Medical University, Jining 272029, China. huangwenhui1986@163.com.
(7)Laboratory of Genome Variation and Precision Biomedicine, Beijing Institute of
Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. czeng@big.ac.cn.
(8)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining 
272029, China. yanbmd@gmail.com.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common birth defect in humans. Genetic
causes and underlying molecular mechanisms for isolated CHD remain largely
unknown. Studies have demonstrated that GATA transcription factor 6 (GATA6) plays
an essential role in the heart development. Mutations in GATA6 gene have been
associated with diverse types of CHD. As GATA6 functions in a dosage-dependent
manner, we speculated that changed GATA6 levels, resulting from DNA sequence
variants (DSVs) within the gene regulatory regions, may mediate the CHD
development. In the present study, GATA6 gene promoter was genetically and
functionally analyzed in large groups of patients with ventricular septal defect 
(VSD) (n=359) and ethnic-matched healthy controls (n=365). In total, 11 DSVs,
including four SNPs, were identified in VSD patients and controls. Two novel and 
heterozygous DSVs, g.22169190A>T and g.22169311C>G, were identified in two VSD
patients, but in none of controls. In cultured cardiomyocytes, the activities of 
the GATA6 gene promoter were significantly reduced by the DSVs g.22169190A>T and 
g.22169311C>G. Therefore, our findings suggested that the DSVs within the GATA6
gene promoter identified in VSD patients may change GATA6 levels, contributing to
the VSD development as a risk factor.

PMCID: PMC4139867
PMID: 25036032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2014 Sep 15;307(6):C542-53. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00033.2014. Epub 2014 Jul 16.

Mechanical stretch upregulates proteins involved in Ca2+ sensitization in urinary
bladder smooth muscle hypertrophy.

Boopathi E(1), Gomes C(2), Zderic SA(3), Malkowicz B(1), Chakrabarti R(1), Patel 
DP(1), Wein AJ(1), Chacko S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; (2)Hospital das Clinicas, University of 
Sao Paulo School of Medicine, Sao Paulo, Brazil; (3)Department of Urology,
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. (4)Division of
Urology, Department of Surgery, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Department of Pathobiology, School of Veterinary
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
chackosk@vet.upenn.edu.

Partial bladder outlet obstruction (pBOO)-induced remodeling of bladder detrusor 
smooth muscle (DSM) is associated with the modulation of cell signals regulating 
contraction. We analyzed the DSM from obstructed murine urinary bladders for the 
temporal regulation of RhoA GTPase and Rho-activated kinase (ROCK), which are
linked to Ca(2+) sensitization. In addition, the effects of equibiaxial cell
stretch, a condition thought to be associated with pBOO-induced bladder wall
smooth muscle hypertrophy and voiding frequency, on the expression of RhoA, ROCK,
and C-kinase-activated protein phosphatase I inhibitor (CPI-17) were
investigated. DSM from 1-, 3-, 7-, and 14-day obstructed male mice bladders and
benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)-induced obstructed human bladders revealed
overexpression of RhoA and ROCK-ß at the mRNA and protein levels compared with
control. Primary human bladder myocytes seeded onto type I collagen-coated
elastic silicone membranes were subjected to cyclic equibiaxial stretch,
mimicking the cellular mechanical stretch in the bladder in vivo, and analyzed
for the expression of RhoA, ROCK-ß, and CPI-17. Stretch caused a significant
increase of RhoA, ROCKß, and CPI-17 expression. The stretch-induced increase in
CPI-17 expression occurs at the transcriptional level and is associated with
CPI-17 promoter binding by GATA-6 and NF-<U+03BA>B, the transcription factors
responsible for CPI-17 gene transcription. Cell stretch caused by bladder
overdistension in pBOO is the likely mechanism for initiating overexpression of
the signaling proteins regulating DSM tone.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4166735
PMID: 25031021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. EMBO J. 2014 Aug 18;33(16):1737-9. doi: 10.15252/embj.201489364. Epub 2014 Jul
14.

Integration of microenvironmental and stress signaling antagonizes colorectal
cancer progression.

Linde N(1), Sosa MS(1), Aguirre-Ghiso JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Department of Medicine, Department of
Otolaryngology, Tisch Cancer Institute, Black Family Stem Cell Institute, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;16(7):695-707.
    Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;16(7):685-94.

PMCID: PMC4195757
PMID: 25024435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Exp Med. 2014 Jul 28;211(8):1525-31. doi: 10.1084/jem.20140570. Epub 2014 Jul
14.

Gata6 regulates aspartoacylase expression in resident peritoneal macrophages and 
controls their survival.

Gautier EL(1), Ivanov S(1), Williams JW(1), Huang SC(1), Marcelin G(2), Fairfax
K(1), Wang PL(1), Francis JS(3), Leone P(3), Wilson DB(1), Artyomov MN(1), Pearce
EJ(1), Randolph GJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology and Department of Pediatrics,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110. (2)Department of
Medicine, Albert Einstein School of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461. (3)Department of
Cell Biology, Rowan University School of Osteopathic Medicine, Stratford, NJ
08084. (4)Department of Pathology and Immunology and Department of Pediatrics,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110
grandolph@path.wustl.edu.

The transcription factor Gata6 regulates proliferation and differentiation of
epithelial and endocrine cells and cancers. Among hematopoietic cells, Gata6 is
expressed selectively in resident peritoneal macrophages. We thus examined
whether the loss of Gata6 in the macrophage compartment affected peritoneal
macrophages, using Lyz2-Cre x Gata6(flox/flox) mice to tackle this issue. In
Lyz2-Cre x Gata6(flox/flox) mice, the resident peritoneal macrophage compartment,
but not macrophages in other organs, was contracted, with only a third the normal
number of macrophages remaining. Heightened rates of death explained the marked
decrease in peritoneal macrophage observed. The metabolism of the remaining
macrophages was skewed to favor oxidative phosphorylation and alternative
activation markers were spontaneously and selectively induced in Gata6-deficient 
macrophages. Gene expression profiling revealed perturbed metabolic regulators,
including aspartoacylase (Aspa), which facilitates generation of acetyl CoA.
Mutant mice lacking functional Aspa phenocopied the higher propensity to death
and led to a contraction of resident peritoneal macrophages. Thus, Gata6
regulates differentiation, metabolism, and survival of resident peritoneal
macrophages.

© 2014 Gautier et al.

PMCID: PMC4113942
PMID: 25024137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Circ Res. 2014 Aug 15;115(5):493-503. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.115.304388. Epub
2014 Jul 11.

Small heterodimer partner blocks cardiac hypertrophy by interfering with GATA6
signaling.

Nam YS(1), Kim Y(1), Joung H(1), Kwon DH(1), Choe N(1), Min HK(1), Kim YS(1), Kim
HS(1), Kim DK(1), Cho YK(1), Kim YH(1), Nam KI(1), Choi HC(1), Park DH(1), Suk
K(1), Lee IK(1), Ahn Y(1), Lee CH(1), Choi HS(1), Eom GH(1), Kook H(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and Medical Research Center for Gene
Regulation (Y.S.N., Y.K., H.J., D.-H.K., N.C., H.-K.M., G.H.E., H.K.), Forensic
Medicine (H.-S.K.), and Anatomy (K.-I.N.), Chonnam National University Medical
School, Gwangju, Korea; Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Yeungnam
University, Gyeongsan, Korea (H.C.C.); Departments of Internal Medicine
(I.-K.L.), Pharmacology, Brain Science and Engineering Institute (K.S.), and
Ophthalmology (D.H.P.), Kyungpook National University School of Medicine, Daegu, 
Korea; Departments of Cardiology (Y.S.K., Y.A.) and Pediatrics (Y.K.C.), Chonnam 
National University Hospital, Gwangju, Korea; National Creative Research
Initiatives Center for Nuclear Receptor Signals and Hormone Research Center,
School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam National University,
Gwangju, Korea (D.-K.K., H.-S.C.); and Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea (Y.-H.K., C.-H.L.). (2)From the Department of
Pharmacology and Medical Research Center for Gene Regulation (Y.S.N., Y.K., H.J.,
D.-H.K., N.C., H.-K.M., G.H.E., H.K.), Forensic Medicine (H.-S.K.), and Anatomy
(K.-I.N.), Chonnam National University Medical School, Gwangju, Korea; Department
of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Yeungnam University, Gyeongsan, Korea
(H.C.C.); Departments of Internal Medicine (I.-K.L.), Pharmacology, Brain Science
and Engineering Institute (K.S.), and Ophthalmology (D.H.P.), Kyungpook National 
University School of Medicine, Daegu, Korea; Departments of Cardiology (Y.S.K.,
Y.A.) and Pediatrics (Y.K.C.), Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwangju,
Korea; National Creative Research Initiatives Center for Nuclear Receptor Signals
and Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology,
Chonnam National University, Gwangju, Korea (D.-K.K., H.-S.C.); and Korea
Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Korea (Y.-H.K.,
C.-H.L.). kookhyun@chonnam.ac.kr innuendo@chonnam.ac.kr.

RATIONALE: Small heterodimer partner (SHP; NR0B2) is an atypical orphan nuclear
receptor that lacks a conventional DNA-binding domain. Through interactions with 
other transcription factors, SHP regulates diverse biological events, including
glucose metabolism in liver. However, the role of SHP in adult heart diseases has
not yet been demonstrated.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to investigate the role of SHP in adult heart in association 
with cardiac hypertrophy.
METHODS AND RESULTS: The roles of SHP in cardiac hypertrophy were tested in
primary cultured cardiomyocytes and in animal models. SHP-null mice showed a
hypertrophic phenotype. Hypertrophic stresses repressed the expression of SHP,
whereas forced expression of SHP blocked the development of hypertrophy in
cardiomyocytes. SHP reduced the protein amount of Gata6 and, by direct physical
interaction with Gata6, interfered with the binding of Gata6 to GATA-binding
elements in the promoter regions of natriuretic peptide precursor type A.
Metformin, an antidiabetic agent, induced SHP and suppressed cardiac hypertrophy.
The metformin-induced antihypertrophic effect was attenuated either by SHP small 
interfering RNA in cardiomyocytes or in SHP-null mice.
CONCLUSIONS: These results establish SHP as a novel antihypertrophic regulator
that acts by interfering with GATA6 signaling. SHP may participate in the
metformin-induced antihypertrophic response.

© 2014 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 25015078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Respir Res. 2014 Jun 26;15:70. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-15-70.

Developmental lung expression and transcriptional regulation of claudin-6 by
TTF-1, Gata-6, and FoxA2.

Jimenez FR, Lewis JB, Belgique ST, Wood TT, Reynolds PR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Brigham Young University, 
3054 Life Sciences Building, Provo, UT 84602, USA. paul_reynolds@byu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Claudins are transmembrane proteins expressed in tight junctions that
prevent paracellular transport of extracellular fluid and a variety of other
substances. However, the expression profile of Claudin-6 (Cldn6) in the
developing lung has not been characterized.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Cldn6 expression was determined during important periods of 
lung organogenesis by microarray analysis, qPCR and immunofluorescence.
Expression patterns were confirmed to peak at E12.5 and diminish as lung
development progressed. Immunofluorescence revealed that Cldn6 was detected in
cells that also express TTF-1 and FoxA2, two critical transcriptional regulators 
of pulmonary branching morphogenesis. Cldn6 was also observed in cells that
express Sox2 and Sox9, factors that influence cell differentiation in the
proximal and distal lung, respectively. In order to assess transcriptional
control of Cldn6, 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0-kb of the proximal murine Cldn6 promoter was 
ligated into a luciferase reporter and co-transfected with expression vectors for
TTF-1 or two of its important transcriptional co-regulators, FoxA2 and Gata-6. In
almost every instance, TTF-1, FoxA2, and Gata-6 activated gene transcription in
cell lines characteristic of proximal airway epithelium (Beas2B) and distal
alveolar epithelium (A-549).
CONCLUSIONS: These data revealed for the first time that Cldn6 might be an
important tight junctional component expressed by pulmonary epithelium during
lung organogenesis. Furthermore, Cldn6-mediated aspects of cell differentiation
may describe mechanisms of lung perturbation coincident with impaired cell
junctions and abnormal membrane permeability.

PMCID: PMC4082679
PMID: 24970044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Nat Cell Biol. 2014 Jul;16(7):695-707. doi: 10.1038/ncb2992. Epub 2014 Jun 22.

The transcription factor GATA6 enables self-renewal of colon adenoma stem cells
by repressing BMP gene expression.

Whissell G(1), Montagni E(2), Martinelli P(3), Hernando-Momblona X(1), Sevillano 
M(1), Jung P(1), Cortina C(1), Calon A(1), Abuli A(4), Castells A(5),
Castellvi-Bel S(5), Nacht AS(6), Sancho E(1), Stephan-Otto Attolini C(1), Vicent 
GP(6), Real FX(7), Batlle E(8).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), 08028 Barcelona, Spain.
(2)1] Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), 08028 Barcelona,
Spain [2]. (3)1] Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO), 28029 Madrid,
Spain [2]. (4)1] Department of Gastroenterology, Hospital Clínic, Centro de
Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD),
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of
Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain [2] Department of Gastroenterology, 
Hospital del Mar-IMIM (Hospital del Mar Medical Research Centre), Pompeu Fabra
University, 08003 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain. (5)Department of Gastroenterology,
Hospital Clínic, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades
Hepáticas y Digestivas (CIBEREHD), Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August
Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Catalonia,
Spain. (6)Centre de Regulació Genòmica (CRG), Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF),
E-08003 Barcelona, Spain. (7)1] Spanish National Cancer Research Centre (CNIO),
28029 Madrid, Spain [2] Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. (8)1]
Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona), 08028 Barcelona, Spain [2]
Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), 08010 Barcelona,
Spain.

Comment in
    EMBO J. 2014 Aug 18;33(16):1737-9.

Aberrant activation of WNT signalling and loss of BMP signals represent the two
main alterations leading to the initiation of colorectal cancer (CRC). Here we
screen for genes required for maintaining the tumour stem cell phenotype and
identify the zinc-finger transcription factor GATA6 as a key regulator of the WNT
and BMP pathways in CRC. GATA6 directly drives the expression of LGR5 in adenoma 
stem cells whereas it restricts BMP signalling to differentiated tumour cells.
Genetic deletion of Gata6 from mouse colon adenomas increases the levels of BMP
factors, which signal to block self-renewal of tumour stem cells. In human
tumours, GATA6 competes with ß-catenin/TCF4 for binding to a distal regulatory
region of the BMP4 locus that has been linked to increased susceptibility to
development of CRC. Hence, GATA6 creates an environment permissive for CRC
initiation by lowering the threshold of BMP signalling required for tumour stem
cell expansion.

PMID: 24952462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Gene. 2014 Aug 15;547(1):86-90. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2014.06.030. Epub 2014 Jun
18.

Two functional sequence variants of the GATA6 gene promoter in patients with
indirect inguinal hernia.

Qiao Y(1), Zhang Z(2), Huang W(3), Pang S(3), Xing Q(4), Yan B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Interventional Therapy, Jining Medical University Affiliated
Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China. (2)Division 
of Oncology, Jining First People's Hospital, Jining, Shandong 272011, China.
(3)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis and Treatment,
Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining,
Shandong 272029, China. (4)Division of Pediatric Surgery, Jining Medical
University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong
272029, China. (5)Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Cardiac Disease Diagnosis
and Treatment, Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital, Jining Medical
University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China; Shandong Sino-US Cooperation Research
Center for Translational Medicine, Jining Medical University Affiliated Hospital,
Jining Medical University, Jining, Shandong 272029, China. Electronic address:
yanbo@mail.jnmc.edu.cn.

Inguinal hernia is a common surgical disease, majority of which are indirect
inguinal hernia (IIH). A positive family history has indicated that genetic
factors play important roles in the IIH development. To date, genetic causes and 
underlying mechanisms for inguinal hernia remain largely unknown. During the
embryonic development, GATA transcription factor 6 (GATA6) plays an essential
role. Mutations in GATA6 gene and changed GATA6 levels have been associated with 
human diseases. As GATA6 acts in a dosage-dependent manner, we speculated that
changed GATA6 levels, resulting from DNA sequence variants (DSVs) within the gene
regulatory regions, may mediate the IIH development. In this study, the GATA6
gene promoter was genetically and functionally analyzed in IIH patients and
ethnic-matched controls. Eleven DNA sequence variants (DSVs), including four SNPs
and seven new variants, within the GATA6 gene promoter were identified. Two
heterozygous DSVs, g.22168361C>A and g.22169106C>T, were identified in two IIH
patients, but in none of controls. In cultured human fibroblast, these DSVs
significantly reduced the GATA6 gene promoter activities. In addition, three
heterozygous DSVs were only found in three controls. Five DSVs, including four
SNPs and one new variant, were found in both IIH patients and controls with
similar frequencies. Therefore, the DSVs within the GATA6 gene promoter may
contribute to the IIH development as a risk factor by changing the GATA6 levels.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24949533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Genes Dev. 2014 Jun 15;28(12):1363-79. doi: 10.1101/gad.238782.114.

Long noncoding RNAs are spatially correlated with transcription factors and
regulate lung development.

Herriges MJ(1), Swarr DT(2), Morley MP(3), Rathi KS(3), Peng T(3), Stewart KM(3),
Morrisey EE(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (2)Division of Neonatology, Division of
Human Genetics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA; (3)Department of Medicine. (4)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA; Department of Medicine, Institute for Regenerative Medicine,
Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19104, USA.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are thought to play important roles in regulating
gene transcription, but few have well-defined expression patterns or known
biological functions during mammalian development. Using a conservative pipeline 
to identify lncRNAs that have important biological functions, we identified 363
lncRNAs in the lung and foregut endoderm. Importantly, we show that these lncRNAs
are spatially correlated with transcription factors across the genome. In-depth
expression analyses of lncRNAs with genomic loci adjacent to the critical
transcription factors Nkx2.1, Gata6, Foxa2 (forkhead box a2), and Foxf1 mimic the
expression patterns of their protein-coding neighbor. Loss-of-function analysis
demonstrates that two lncRNAs, LL18/NANCI (Nkx2.1-associated noncoding intergenic
RNA) and LL34, play distinct roles in endoderm development by controlling
expression of critical developmental transcription factors and pathways,
including retinoic acid signaling. In particular, we show that LL18/NANCI acts
upstream of Nkx2.1 and downstream from Wnt signaling to regulate lung endoderm
gene expression. These studies reveal that lncRNAs play an important role in
foregut and lung endoderm development by regulating multiple aspects of gene
transcription, often through regulation of transcription factor expression.

© 2014 Herriges et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press.

PMCID: PMC4066405
PMID: 24939938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Dev Biol. 2014 Aug 15;392(2):283-94. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.05.017. Epub 2014 
Jun 12.

GATA4 and GATA6 regulate intestinal epithelial cytodifferentiation during
development.

Walker EM(1), Thompson CA(1), Battle MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI, USA. (2)Department of Cell
Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown
Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI, USA. Electronic address: mbattle@mcw.edu.

The intestinal epithelium performs vital roles in organ function by absorbing
nutrients and providing a protective barrier. The zinc-finger containing
transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 regulate enterocyte gene expression and
control regional epithelial cell identity in the adult intestinal epithelium.
Although GATA4 and GATA6 are expressed in the developing intestine, loss of
either factor alone during the period of epithelial morphogenesis and
cytodifferentiation fails to disrupt these processes. Therefore, we tested the
hypothesis that GATA4 and GATA6 function redundantly to control these aspects of 
intestinal development. We used Villin-Cre, which deletes specifically in the
intestinal epithelium during the period of villus development and epithelial
cytodifferentiation, to generate Gata4Gata6 double conditional knockout embryos. 
Mice lacking GATA4 and GATA6 in the intestinal epithelium died within 24h of
birth. At E18.5, intestinal villus architecture and epithelial cell populations
were altered. Enterocytes were lost, and goblet cells were increased.
Proliferation was also increased in GATA4-GATA6 deficient intestinal epithelium. 
Although villus morphology appeared normal at E16.5, the first time at which both
Gata4 and Gata6 were efficiently reduced, changes in expression of markers of
enterocytes, goblet cells, and proliferative cells were detected. Moreover,
goblet cell number was increased at E16.5. Expression of the Notch ligand Dll1
and the Notch target Olfm4 were reduced in mutant tissue indicating decreased
Notch signaling. Finally, we found that GATA4 occupies chromatin near the Dll1
transcription start site suggesting direct regulation of Dll1 by GATA4. We
demonstrate that GATA4 and GATA6 play an essential role in maintaining proper
intestinal epithelial structure and in regulating intestinal epithelial
cytodifferentiation. Our data highlight a novel role for GATA factors in fine
tuning Notch signaling during intestinal epithelial development to repress goblet
cell differentiation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4149467
PMID: 24929016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biol Reprod. 2014 Jul;91(1):24. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.117002. Epub 2014 Jun
4.

Simultaneous gene deletion of gata4 and gata6 leads to early disruption of
follicular development and germ cell loss in the murine ovary.

Padua MB(1), Fox SC(1), Jiang T(1), Morse DA(1), Tevosian SG(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine,
University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida. (2)Department of Physiological
Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida, Gainesville,
Florida stevosian@ufl.edu.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2014 Aug;91(2):38.

Granulosa cell formation and subsequent follicular assembly are important for
ovarian development and function. Two members of the GATA family of transcription
factors, GATA4 and GATA6, are expressed in ovarian somatic cells early in
development, and their importance in adult ovarian function has been recently
highlighted. In this study, we demonstrated that the embryonic loss of Gata4 and 
Gata6 expression within the ovary results in a strong down-regulation of genes
involved in the ovarian developmental pathway (Fst and Irx3) as well as
diminished expression of the pregranulosa and granulosa cell markers SPRR2 and
FOXL2, respectively. Postnatal ovaries deficient in both Gata genes show impaired
somatic cell proliferation and arrested follicular development at the primordial 
stage, where oocytes are either enclosed by one layer of squamous granulosa cells
or remain in germ cell nests/clusters. Furthermore, germ cell nests and
primordial follicles are predominantly localized to the central region of the
Sf1Cre; Gata4(flox/flox) Gata6(flox/flox) ovaries, where the boundary between the
medulla and cortex is almost nonexistent. Lastly, most of the oocytes are lost
early in development in conditional double mutant ovaries, which confirms the
importance of normally differentiated granulosa cells as supporting cells for
oocyte survival. Thus, both GATA4 and GATA6 proteins are fundamental regulators
of granulosa cell differentiation and proliferation, and consequently of proper
follicular assembly during normal ovarian development and function.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4434962
PMID: 24899573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2014 Aug;555-556:28-32. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2014.05.021.
Epub 2014 Jun 2.

Activated protease receptor-2 induces GATA6 expression to promote survival in
irradiated colon cancer cells.

Cai WS(1), Shen F(1), Li JL(1), Feng Z(1), Wang YC(1), Xiao HQ(1), Xu B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of General Surgery, Guangzhou
First People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, China.
Electronic address: BoXu44@163.com.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The resistance to irradiation is common and a great drawback
in the treatment of cancer with radiotherapy; the underlying mechanism is
unclear. GATA binding protein 6 (GATA6) is associated with the pathogenesis of
cancer. This study aims to investigate the role of GATA6 on compromising
irradiation effect on HT55 and HT29 cells, 2 colorectal cancer cell lines.
METHODS: Human colon cancer cell lines, HT55 and HT29 cells, were treated with
irradiation in the culture. Apoptosis of HT55 and HT29 cells was determined by
flow cytometry. The expression of PAR2 and GATA6 in HT55 and HT29 cells was
analyzed by real time RT-PCR and Western blotting. The gene silence and gene over
expression were employed to observe the effect of GATA6 on p53 expression in HT55
and HT29 cells.
RESULTS: The results showed that HT55 and HT29 cells expressed protease-activated
receptor-2 (PAR2). Irradiation induced 38.6% HT55 cell and 33.8% HT29 cell
apoptosis, which reduced to 4.2% and 5.6%, respectively after activation of PAR2.
Exposure to irradiation increased the expression of GATA6; the latter played a
critical role in suppression of p53 expression in HT55 and HT29 cells. Inhibition
of GATA6 significantly increased the effect of irradiation on HT55 and HT29
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Activation of PAR2 compromises the effect of irradiation on inducing
colorectal cancer cell apoptosis, which can be prevented by inhibition of GATA6
expression.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24887481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Jun;14(6):360. doi: 10.1038/nri3695.

Macrophages: Peritoneal population depends on GATA6.

Leavy O.

Comment on
    Science. 2014 May 9;344(6184):645-8.
    Cell. 2014 May 8;157(4):832-44.

PMID: 24854587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Med Rep. 2014 Aug;10(2):743-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2247. Epub 2014 May 16.

Identification of two novel GATA6 mutations in patients with nonsyndromic
conotruncal heart defects.

Wang X(1), Ji W(2), Wang J(2), Zhao P(2), Guo Y(2), Xu R(1), Chen S(1), Sun K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Children's Heart Center, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai 200092, P.R. China. (2)Department of Cardiology, Shanghai
Children's Medical Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200127, P.R. China.

GATA binding protein 6 (GATA6) encodes a zinc-<U+FB01>nger transcription factor that is 
essential for normal heart development. Mutations in this gene lead to
conotruncal heart defects associated with cyanotic congenital heart disease;
however, it remains unclear whether the mutations in GATA6 are also responsible
for the development of the nonsyndromic conotruncal heart defects. The coding
region exons and <U+FB02>anking intron sequences of GATA6 were screened in 157 patients 
with nonsyndromic conotruncal heart defects and 300 control subjects. Three
heterozygous missense mutations, c.151G>A (E51K), c.551G>A (S184N) and c.733G>C
(G245R), were identified in patients with tetralogy of Fallot or persistent
truncus arteriosus. The two novel mutations (E51K and G245R) identified in the
current study are located in evolutionarily conserved residues of the GATA6
protein. It was demonstrated that these two mutations lead to a significant
reduction in the transactivation capacity of downstream genes. The current study 
presents two novel GATA6 mutations in patients with nonsyndromic conotruncal
heart defects and provides novel insights into the pathogenesis of this disease.

PMID: 24841381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Cell. 2014 May 27;29(4):454-67. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.04.011. Epub 2014 
May 15.

GATA6 levels modulate primitive endoderm cell fate choice and timing in the mouse
blastocyst.

Schrode N(1), Saiz N(1), Di Talia S(2), Hadjantonakis AK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (2)Department of Cell Biology, 
Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. (3)Developmental Biology
Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, NY 10065, USA. Electronic address: hadj@mskcc.org.

Cells of the inner cell mass (ICM) of the mouse blastocyst differentiate into the
pluripotent epiblast or the primitive endoderm (PrE), marked by the transcription
factors NANOG and GATA6, respectively. To investigate the mechanistic regulation 
of this process, we applied an unbiased, quantitative, single-cell-resolution
image analysis pipeline to analyze embryos lacking or exhibiting reduced levels
of GATA6. We find that Gata6 mutants exhibit a complete absence of PrE and
demonstrate that GATA6 levels regulate the timing and speed of lineage commitment
within the ICM. Furthermore, we show that GATA6 is necessary for PrE
specification by FGF signaling and propose a model where interactions between
NANOG, GATA6, and the FGF/ERK pathway determine ICM cell fate. This study
provides a framework for quantitative analyses of mammalian embryos and
establishes GATA6 as a nodal point in the gene regulatory network driving ICM
lineage specification.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4103658
PMID: 24835466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Dev Cell. 2014 May 12;29(3):350-9. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2014.04.003.

A Pak1/Erk signaling module acts through Gata6 to regulate cardiovascular
development in zebrafish.

Kelly ML(1), Astsaturov A(2), Rhodes J(2), Chernoff J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA; 
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University,
Philadelphia, PA 19102, USA. (2)Cancer Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. (3)Cancer Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. Electronic address: jonathan.chernoff@fccc.edu.

Proper neural crest development and migration is critical during embryonic
development, but the molecular mechanisms regulating this process remain
incompletely understood. Here, we show that the protein kinase Erk, which plays a
central role in a number of key developmental processes in vertebrates, is
regulated in the developing neural crest by p21-activated protein kinase 1
(Pak1). Furthermore, we show that activated Erk signals by phosphorylating the
transcription factor Gata6 on a conserved serine residue to promote neural crest 
migration and proper formation of craniofacial structures, pigment cells, and the
outflow tract of the heart. Our data suggest an essential role for Pak1 as an Erk
activator, and Gata6 as an Erk target, during neural crest development.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4073496
PMID: 24823378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Cell. 2014 May 8;157(4):832-44. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2014.04.016. Epub 2014 May 1.

Tissue-specific signals control reversible program of localization and functional
polarization of macrophages.

Okabe Y(1), Medzhitov R(2).

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Immunobiology, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA. (2)Howard Hughes Medical
Institute and Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA. Electronic address: ruslan.medzhitov@yale.edu.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Jun;14(6):360.

Tissue-resident macrophages are highly heterogeneous in terms of their functions 
and phenotypes as a consequence of adaptation to different tissue environments.
Local tissue-derived signals are thought to control functional polarization of
resident macrophages; however, the identity of these signals remains largely
unknown. It is also unknown whether functional heterogeneity is a result of
irreversible lineage-specific differentiation or a consequence of continuous but 
reversible induction of diverse functional programs. Here, we identified retinoic
acid as a signal that induces tissue-specific localization and functional
polarization of peritoneal macrophages through the reversible induction of
transcription factor GATA6. We further found that GATA6 in macrophages regulates 
gut IgA production through peritoneal B-1 cells. These results provide insight
into the regulation of tissue-resident macrophage functional specialization by
tissue-derived signals.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4137874
PMID: 24792964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Science. 2014 May 9;344(6184):645-8. doi: 10.1126/science.1251414. Epub 2014 Apr 
24.

The transcription factor Gata6 links tissue macrophage phenotype and
proliferative renewal.

Rosas M(1), Davies LC, Giles PJ, Liao CT, Kharfan B, Stone TC, O'Donnell VB,
Fraser DJ, Jones SA, Taylor PR.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiff Institute of Infection and Immunity, Cardiff University School of
Medicine, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Immunol. 2014 Jun;14(6):360.

Tissue-resident macrophages are heterogeneous as a consequence of anatomical
niche-specific functions. Many populations self-renew independently of bone
marrow in the adult, but the molecular mechanisms of this are poorly understood. 
We determined a transcriptional profile for the major self-renewing population of
peritoneal macrophages in mice. These cells specifically expressed the
transcription factor Gata6. Selective deficiency of Gata6 in myeloid cells caused
substantial alterations in the transcriptome of peritoneal macrophages. Gata6
deficiency also resulted in dysregulated peritoneal macrophage proliferative
renewal during homeostasis and in response to inflammation, which was associated 
with delays in the resolution of inflammation. Our investigations reveal that the
tissue macrophage phenotype is under discrete tissue-selective transcriptional
control and that this is fundamentally linked to the regulation of their
proliferation renewal.

PMCID: PMC4185421
PMID: 24762537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jun;124(6):2696-708. doi: 10.1172/JCI72171. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

ZEB1 sensitizes lung adenocarcinoma to metastasis suppression by PI3K antagonism.

Yang Y, Ahn YH, Chen Y, Tan X, Guo L, Gibbons DL, Ungewiss C, Peng DH, Liu X, Lin
SH, Thilaganathan N, Wistuba II, Rodriguez-Canales J, McLendon G, Creighton CJ,
Kurie JM.

Epithelial tumor cells that have undergone epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) are typically prone to metastasis and drug resistance and contribute to a
poor clinical outcome. The transcription factor ZEB1 is a known driver of EMT,
and mediators of ZEB1 represent potential therapeutic targets for metastasis
suppression. Here, we have shown that phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-targeted
(PI3K-targeted) therapy suppresses metastasis in a mouse model of
Kras/Tp53-mutant lung adenocarcinoma that develops metastatic disease due to high
expression of ZEB1. In lung adenocarcinoma cells from Kras/Tp53-mutant animals
and human lung cancer cell lines, ZEB1 activated PI3K by derepressing miR-200
targets, including amphiregulin (AREG), betacellulin (BTC), and the transcription
factor GATA6, which stimulated an EGFR/ERBB2 autocrine loop. Additionally,
ZEB1-dependent derepression of the miR-200 and miR-183 target friend of GATA 2
(FOG2) enhanced GATA3-induced expression of the p110a catalytic subunit of PI3K. 
Knockdown of FOG2, p110a, and RHEB ameliorated invasive and metastatic
propensities of tumor cells. Surprisingly, FOG2 was not required for mesenchymal 
differentiation, suggesting that mesenchymal differentiation and invasion are
distinct and separable processes. Together, these results indicate that ZEB1
sensitizes lung adenocarcinoma cells to metastasis suppression by PI3K-targeted
therapy and suggest that treatments to selectively modify the metastatic behavior
of mesenchymal tumor cells are feasible and may be of clinical value.

PMCID: PMC4038569
PMID: 24762440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Diabetes. 2014 Aug;63(8):2888-94. doi: 10.2337/db14-0061. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

GATA4 mutations are a cause of neonatal and childhood-onset diabetes.

Shaw-Smith C(1), De Franco E(1), Lango Allen H(1), Batlle M(2), Flanagan SE(1),
Borowiec M(3), Taplin CE(4), van Alfen-van der Velden J(5), Cruz-Rojo J(6), Perez
de Nanclares G(7), Miedzybrodzka Z(8), Deja G(9), Wlodarska I(10), Mlynarski
W(3), Ferrer J(11), Hattersley AT(1), Ellard S(12).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical
School, Exeter, U.K. (2)Genomic Programming of Beta-Cells Laboratory, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, SpainCIBER de
Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas, Barcelona, Spain. (3)Department of
Paediatrics, Oncology, Haematology and Diabetology, Medical University of Lodz,
Lodz, Poland. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Seattle Children's Hospital,
University of Washington, Seattle, WA. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Radboud
University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. (6)Unidad de
Endocrinología Pediátrica Hospital, Universitario Doce de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.
(7)Molecular (Epi)Genetics Laboratory, Hospital Universitario Araba-Txagorritxu, 
BioAraba, Vitoria-Gasteiz, Spain. (8)Division of Applied Medicine, University of 
Aberdeen, Aberdeen, U.K. (9)Department of Paediatrics, Paediatric Endocrinology
and Diabetes, Silesian Medical University, Katowice, Poland. (10)Center for Human
Genetics, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (11)Genomic Programming of Beta-Cells
Laboratory, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, 
SpainCIBER de Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas, Barcelona,
SpainDepartment of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, U.K. (12)Institute 
of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, 
U.K. sian.ellard@nhs.net.

The GATA family zinc finger transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 are known to
play important roles in the development of the pancreas. In mice, both Gata4 and 
Gata6 are required for pancreatic development. In humans, GATA6
haploinsufficiency can cause pancreatic agenesis and heart defects. Congenital
heart defects also are common in patients with GATA4 mutations and deletions, but
the role of GATA4 in the developing human pancreas is unproven. We report five
patients with deletions (n = 4) or mutations of the GATA4 gene who have diabetes 
and a variable exocrine phenotype. In four cases, diabetes presented in the
neonatal period (age at diagnosis 1-7 days). A de novo GATA4 missense mutation
(p.N273K) was identified in a patient with complete absence of the pancreas
confirmed at postmortem. This mutation affects a highly conserved residue located
in the second zinc finger domain of the GATA4 protein. In vitro studies showed
reduced DNA binding and transactivational activity of the mutant protein. We show
that GATA4 mutations/deletions are a cause of neonatal or childhood-onset
diabetes with or without exocrine insufficiency. These results confirm a role for
GATA4 in normal development of the human pancreas.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 24696446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2014 Aug;51(2):311-22. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2013-0419OC.

Sox2 regulates the emergence of lung basal cells by directly activating the
transcription of Trp63.

Ochieng JK(1), Schilders K, Kool H, Boerema-De Munck A, Buscop-Van Kempen M,
Gontan C, Smits R, Grosveld FG, Wijnen RM, Tibboel D, Rottier RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of 1 Pediatric Surgery of the Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's
Hospital.

Lung development is determined by the coordinated expression of several key
genes. Previously, we and others have shown the importance of the sex determining
region Y-box 2 (Sox2) gene in lung development. Transgenic expression of Sox2
during lung development resulted in cystic airways, and here we show that
modulating the timing of ectopic Sox2 expression in the branching regions of the 
developing lung results in variable cystic lesions resembling the spectrum of the
human congenital disorder congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation (CCAM). Sox2
dominantly differentiated naive epithelial cells into the proximal lineage
irrespective of the presence of Fgf10. Sox2 directly induced the expression of
Trp63, the master switch toward the basal cell lineage and induced the expression
of Gata6, a factor involved in the emergence of bronchoalveolar stem cells. We
showed that SOX2 and TRP63 are coexpressed in the lungs of human patients with
type II CCAM. The combination of premature differentiation toward the proximal
cell lineage and the induction of proliferation resulted in the cyst-like
structures. Thus, we show that Sox2 is directly responsible for the emergence of 
two lung progenitor cells: basal cells by regulating the master gene Trp63 and
bronchoalveolar stem cells by regulating Gata6.

PMID: 24669837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. FEBS Lett. 2014 May 2;588(9):1529-36. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2014.03.027. Epub
2014 Mar 21.

Piceatannol attenuates cardiac hypertrophy in an animal model through regulation 
of the expression and binding of the transcription factor GATA binding factor 6.

Kee HJ(1), Park S(2), Kang W(2), Lim KS(2), Kim JH(2), Ahn Y(2), Jeong MH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Heart Research Center of Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwangju
501-757, South Korea. Electronic address: sshjkee@hanmail.net. (2)Heart Research 
Center of Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwangju 501-757, South Korea.
(3)Heart Research Center of Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwangju
501-757, South Korea. Electronic address: myungho@chollian.net.

Piceatannol is found in grapes, passion fruit, and Japanese knotweed. Piceatannol
pretreatment suppresses cardiac hypertrophy induced by isoproterenol as assessed 
by heart weight/body weight ratio, cross-sectional area, and expression of
hypertrophic markers. The anti-hypertrophic effect of piceatannol in rat neonatal
cardiomyocytes is the same as that in vivo. Piceatannol inhibits
lentiviral-GATA6-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Furthermore, piceatannol
reduces the interaction between GATA4 and GATA6 as well as the DNA-binding
activity of endogenous GATA6 in the ANP promoter. Our results suggest that
piceatannol may be a novel therapeutic agent for the prevention of cardiac
hypertrophy.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24662306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. BMC Biol. 2014 Mar 24;12:21. doi: 10.1186/1741-7007-12-21.

Hmga2 is required for canonical WNT signaling during lung development.

Singh I, Mehta A, Contreras A, Boettger T, Carraro G, Wheeler M, Cabrera-Fuentes 
HA, Bellusci S, Seeger W, Braun T, Barreto G(1).

Author information: 
(1)LOEWE Research Group Lung Cancer Epigenetic, Max-Planck-Institute for Heart
and Lung Research, Parkstraße 1, 61231 Bad Nauheim Germany.
guillermo.barreto@mpi-bn.mpg.de.

BACKGROUND: The high-mobility-group (HMG) proteins are the most abundant
non-histone chromatin-associated proteins. HMG proteins are present at high
levels in various undifferentiated tissues during embryonic development and their
levels are strongly reduced in the corresponding adult tissues, where they have
been implicated in maintaining and activating stem/progenitor cells. Here we
deciphered the role of the high-mobility-group AT-hook protein 2 (HMGA2) during
lung development by analyzing the lung of Hmga2-deficient mice (Hmga2(-/-)).
RESULTS: We found that Hmga2 is expressed in the mouse embryonic lung at the
distal airways. Analysis of Hmga2(-/-) mice showed that Hmga2 is required for
proper cell proliferation and distal epithelium differentiation during embryonic 
lung development. Hmga2 knockout led to enhanced canonical WNT signaling due to
an increased expression of secreted WNT glycoproteins Wnt2b, Wnt7b and Wnt11 as
well as a reduction of the WNT signaling antagonizing proteins GATA-binding
protein 6 and frizzled homolog 2. Analysis of siRNA-mediated loss-of-function
experiments in embryonic lung explant culture confirmed the role of Hmga2 as a
key regulator of distal lung epithelium differentiation and supported the causal 
involvement of enhanced canonical WNT signaling in mediating the effect of
Hmga2-loss-of-fuction. Finally, we found that HMGA2 directly regulates Gata6 and 
thereby modulates Fzd2 expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support that Hmga2 regulates canonical WNT signaling at 
different points of the pathway. Increased expression of the secreted WNT
glycoproteins might explain a paracrine effect by which Hmga2-knockout enhanced
cell proliferation in the mesenchyme of the developing lung. In addition,
HMGA2-mediated direct regulation of Gata6 is crucial for fine-tuning the activity
of WNT signaling in the airway epithelium. Our results are the starting point for
future studies investigating the relevance of Hmga2-mediated regulation of WNT
signaling in the adult lung within the context of proper balance between
differentiation and self-renewal of lung stem/progenitor cells during lung
regeneration in both homeostatic turnover and repair after injury.

PMCID: PMC4064517
PMID: 24661562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. BMC Pharmacol Toxicol. 2014 Mar 10;15:15. doi: 10.1186/2050-6511-15-15.

Whole adult organism transcriptional profiling of acute metal exposures in male
zebrafish.

Hussainzada N, Lewis JA, Baer CE, Ippolito DL, Jackson DA, Stallings JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Biomarkers Program, US Army Center for Environmental Health Research, Fort
Detrick, Frederick, Maryland 21702-5010, USA. jonathan.d.stallings.mil@mail.mil.

BACKGROUND: A convergence of technological breakthroughs in the past decade has
facilitated the development of rapid screening tools for biomarkers of toxicant
exposure and effect. Platforms using the whole adult organism to evaluate the
genome-wide response to toxicants are especially attractive. Recent work
demonstrates the feasibility of this approach in vertebrates using the
experimentally robust zebrafish model. In the present study, we evaluated gene
expression changes in whole adult male zebrafish following an acute 24 hr high
dose exposure to three metals with known human health risks. Male adult zebrafish
were exposed to nickel chloride, cobalt chloride or sodium dichromate
concentrations corresponding to their respective 96 hr LC20, LC40 and LC60.
Histopathology was performed on a subset of metal-exposed zebrafish to
phenotypically anchor transcriptional changes associated with each metal.
RESULTS: Comparative analysis identified subsets of differentially expressed
transcripts both overlapping and unique to each metal. Application of gene
ontology (GO) and transcription factor (TF) enrichment algorithms revealed a
number of key biological processes perturbed by metal poisonings and the master
transcriptional regulators mediating gene expression changes. Metal poisoning
differentially activated biological processes associated with ribosome
biogenesis, proteosomal degradation, and p53 signaling cascades, while repressing
oxygen-generating pathways associated with amino acid and lipid metabolism.
Despite appreciable effects on gene regulation, nickel poisoning did not induce
any morphological alterations in male zebrafish organs and tissues.
Histopathological effects of cobalt remained confined to the olfactory system,
while chromium targeted the gills, pharynx, and intestinal mucosa. A number of
enriched transcription factors mediated the observed gene response to metal
poisoning, including known targets such as p53, HIF1a, and the myc oncogene, and 
novel regulatory factors such as XBP1, GATA6 and HNF3ß.
CONCLUSIONS: This work uses an experimentally innovative approach to capture
global responses to metal poisoning and provides mechanistic insights into metal 
toxicity.

PMCID: PMC4007779
PMID: 24612858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. PLoS Genet. 2014 Mar 6;10(3):e1004158. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004158.
eCollection 2014.

Genome-wide DNA methylation analysis predicts an epigenetic switch for GATA
factor expression in endometriosis.

Dyson MT(1), Roqueiro D(2), Monsivais D(1), Ercan CM(1), Pavone ME(1), Brooks
DC(1), Kakinuma T(1), Ono M(1), Jafari N(1), Dai Y(2), Bulun SE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Dept. Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America. (2)Laboratory of Computational Functional Genomics, Dept.
Bioengineering, University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United
States of America.

Endometriosis is a gynecological disease defined by the extrauterine growth of
endometrial-like cells that cause chronic pain and infertility. The disease is
limited to primates that exhibit spontaneous decidualization, and diseased cells 
are characterized by significant defects in the steroid-dependent genetic
pathways that typify this process. Altered DNA methylation may underlie these
defects, but few regions with differential methylation have been implicated in
the disease. We mapped genome-wide differences in DNA methylation between healthy
human endometrial and endometriotic stromal cells and correlated this with gene
expression using an interaction analysis strategy. We identified 42,248
differentially methylated CpGs in endometriosis compared to healthy cells. These 
extensive differences were not unidirectional, but were focused intragenically
and at sites distal to classic CpG islands where methylation status was typically
negatively correlated with gene expression. Significant differences in
methylation were mapped to 403 genes, which included a disproportionally large
number of transcription factors. Furthermore, many of these genes are implicated 
in the pathology of endometriosis and decidualization. Our results tremendously
improve the scope and resolution of differential methylation affecting the HOX
gene clusters, nuclear receptor genes, and intriguingly the GATA family of
transcription factors. Functional analysis of the GATA family revealed that GATA2
regulates key genes necessary for the hormone-driven differentiation of healthy
stromal cells, but is hypermethylated and repressed in endometriotic cells.
GATA6, which is hypomethylated and abundant in endometriotic cells, potently
blocked hormone sensitivity, repressed GATA2, and induced markers of
endometriosis when expressed in healthy endometrial cells. The unique epigenetic 
fingerprint in endometriosis suggests DNA methylation is an integral component of
the disease, and identifies a novel role for the GATA family as key regulators of
uterine physiology-aberrant DNA methylation in endometriotic cells correlates
with a shift in GATA isoform expression that facilitates progesterone resistance 
and disease progression.

PMCID: PMC3945170
PMID: 24603652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2014 Apr;239(4):430-5. doi: 10.1177/1535370213517616.
Epub 2014 Mar 4.

STARD6 is expressed in steroidogenic cells of the ovary and can enhance de novo
steroidogenesis.

LaVoie HA(1), Whitfield NE, Shi B, King SR, Bose HS, Hui YY.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 
29208, USA.

STARD6 is a member of the StAR-related lipid transfer (START) domain family of
proteins whose function thus far remains obscure. While it recently was shown to 
facilitate steroidogenesis in a cell-free setting, it has not been localized to
steroidogenic cells of normal reproductive tissues. In a recent microarray study,
we detected STARD6 mRNA in cultured porcine ovarian granulosa cells which are
steroidogenic. In the present study, we examined regulation of STARD6 mRNA in
porcine granulosa cultures, and found that it was not regulated by cyclic AMP,
but it was reduced by combined knockdown of the transcription factors GATA4 and
GATA6. We detected both STARD6 mRNA and protein in fresh granulosa cells and
whole antral follicles and different stage corpora lutea of pig. The highest
levels were discovered in the mid-luteal phase corpus luteum. Immunolocalization 
within ovarian tissues indicated robust STARD6 immunoreactivity in steroidogenic 
cells of the corpus luteum. Relatively lesser amounts of STARD6 signal were found
in granulosa cells, theca cells, and oocytes. To test the ability of STARD6 to
facilitate de novo steroidogenesis, non-steroidogenic COS-1 cells were
co-transfected with components of the P450 cholesterol side-chain cleavage
system, enabling them to make pregnenolone, and STARD6. STARD6 increased
pregnenolone production by two- to three-fold over the empty vector control. In
summary, STARD6 is found in the pig ovary, exhibits the strongest expression in
highly steroidogenic luteal cells, and significantly enhances pregnenolone
production in transfected COS cells independent of cyclic AMP treatment.
Collectively, these findings indicate that STARD6 may contribute to
steroidogenesis in ovarian cells, but also suggests other cellular functions that
require cholesterol trafficking.

PMCID: PMC4220442
PMID: 24595982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014 Dec;28(12):1782-91. doi: 10.1111/jdv.12420.
Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Gene expression profile of dermal mesenchymal stem cells from patients with
psoriasis.

Hou R(1), Yan H, Niu X, Chang W, An P, Wang C, Yang Y, Yan X, Li J, Liu R, Li X, 
Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Dermatology, Taiyuan City Central Hospital, Taiyuan, Shanxi,
China.

BACKGROUND: Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are likely involved in pathological
processes of immune-related diseases, including psoriasis because of their
immunoregulatory and pro-angiogenic effects, and the vascular proliferation,
angiectasis and perivascular lymphocyte infiltration are known to be
predominantly responsible for the pathological alterations in psoriasis.
OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the gene expression profile of dermal 
MSCs from patients with psoriasis.
METHODS: We isolated and expanded dermal MSCs from psoriatic patients and normal 
controls by using the attachment assay and conducted mRNA expression profile and 
gene ontology analyses using microarray.
RESULTS: The gene expression profile of MSCs from psoriatic derma was markedly
different from the normal derma-derived MSCs; the angiogenesis-related genes such
as vascular endothelial growth factor A, insulin-like growth factor-binding
protein-5, and GATA6 showed significant differential expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that MSCs from the derma of psoriasis
patients might be involved in the early development of psoriasis because of their
pro-angiogenic potential as well as the immunoregulatory effect.

© 2014 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

PMID: 24593802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Toxicol Mech Methods. 2014 Jun;24(5):323-31. doi: 10.3109/15376516.2014.894165.
Epub 2014 Mar 4.

Detecting the developmental toxicity of bFGF in the embryonic stem cell test
using differential gene expression of differentiation-related genes.

Deng SQ(1), Xu H, He Q, Jiang HX, Su BJ, Zhang QH.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacy College, Jinan University , Guangzhou , China .

Basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) is a mitogenic cytokine that can stimulate 
mesoderm-and neuroectoderm-originated cell proliferation. This study was
performed to investigate the effects of bFGF on cell differentiation and the
expression of specific markers at different embryonic developmental stages. We
firstly evaluated the embryotoxic potential of bFGF in vitro using a modified EST
protocol. Sequentially, we further investigated how bFGF impact the different
tissue-special genes and proteins expressions during the differentiation of
murine ES cells in vitro and attempt to reveal the effects of bFGF on
differentiation processes. This analysis was focused on key tissue- and
stage-specific genes involved in ectodermal, mesodermal, and endodermal
differentiation, including ectodermal-specific gene Nestin, Oligo2 and Syn,
mesodermal-specific gene MHC and MyoD, and endodermal-specific gene GATA6, TTR
and ALB, as well as undifferentiated gene Sox-2 and Oct-4. The results
demonstrate that bFGF could promote expression of ectodermal-specific genes and
protein, but suppress the expressions of endoderm-specific and some
mesoderm-specific gene and protein. A conclusion can be drawn that bFGF exhibits 
weak embryotoxicity and mainly promotes ES cell differentiation towards the
ectodermal lineages but suppress differentiation into endoderm lineages. These
opposing effects of bFGF on the embryonic development of the three germ layers
may be related to its weak embryotoxic potential. More specifically, inhibition
of expression of the endodermal-specific markers transthyretin (TTR), and albumin
(ALB) by bFGF may be of more value in detecting the embryotoxic potential of
bFGF.

PMID: 24559483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Endocr J. 2014;61(4):393-401. Epub 2014 Feb 15.

GATA6, SF1, NGFIB and DAX1 in the remodeled subcapsular zones in primary
aldosteronism.

Nakamura Y(1), Kurotaki Y, Ise K, Felizola SJ, McNamara KM, Sasano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, Sendai
980- 8575, Japan.

The majority of the cases diagnosed as primary aldosteronism (PA) are caused by
aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA) or idiopathic hyperaldosteronism (IHA).
Histopathologically, both IHA and adjacent adrenal glands of APA demonstrate
remodeled subcapsular zone (RSZ) but these zones in two disorders are markedly
different in terms of steroidogenesis. 3ß-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase/<U+0394>5-<U+0394>4
isomerase (3ß-HSD) expression has been known to be activated synergistically by
GATA6 and SF1, and repressed by DAX1 through abolishing the activation. Nerve
growth factor-induced clone B (NGFIB) is also known as one of the transcription
factors to bind to and activate 3ß-HSD promoter. The results of our
immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated the expression levels of 3ß-HSD in RSZ 
of IHA were higher than in RSZ of adjacent adrenals of APA, while those in the
zona glomerulosa (ZG) of normal adrenal gland (NA) were in between these two
RSZs. The expression levels of GATA6, SF1 and DAX1 did not prominently differ
among these three types of adrenals, especially between in RSZs of IHA and APA
cases, indicating the marked difference of 3ß-HSD expression was unlikely to be
explained by the levels of these three factors. However, the levels of NGFIB
expression were significantly higher in RSZ of IHA than in RSZ of adjacent
adrenals of APA and the ZG of NA (P<0.05), which may partly account for the
expression levels of 3ß-HSD among the three groups of adrenals. These results may
imply NGFIB plays important roles in the marked differences in steroidogenic
functions in the two distinct types of RSZ of PA cases.

PMID: 24531914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Reprod Dev. 2014 Apr 24;60(2):83-91. Epub 2014 Feb 17.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6: molecular characterization, expression
patterns and possible functions during goose (Anser cygnoides) follicle
development.

Yuan X(1), Xia L, Dong X, Hu S, Zhang Y, Ding F, Liu H, Li L, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Genetics and Breeding, College of Animal Science and
Technology, Sichuan Agricultural University, Sichuan 625014, P.R. China.

The transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6, members of the GATA family, play an 
important role in ovarian cell proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. In
this study, the full-length coding sequences of goose GATA-4 and GATA-6 were
cloned and characterized. GATA-4 and GATA-6 consist of 1236 and 1104 nucleotides 
encoding proteins with 411 and 367 amino acids, respectively. The deduced amino
acid sequences of both proteins include two adjacent zinc finger domains with the
distinctive form (CVNC-X17-CNAC)-X29-(CANC-X17-CNAC) and share 84.76% identity
within this domain. In silico prediction together with matching of the high
affinity RRXS(T)Y motif revealed that the GATA-4 protein might be phosphorylated 
predominantly at S(233), but no phosphorylation site was found in the GATA-6
protein. Real-time quantitative PCR analysis showed that GATA-4 and GATA-6 mRNAs 
were co-expressed in goose follicles, moderately expressed in granulosa cells and
weakly expressed in theca cells. The expression level of GATA-4 mRNA in healthy
follicles was significantly higher than in atretic follicles or postovulatory
follicles (P<0.01), and the expression level of GATA-6 mRNA in healthy follicles 
was significantly lower than in atretic follicles or postovulatory follicles
(P<0.01). The expression level of GATA-4 mRNA in granulosa cells was
downregulated during follicle development; the peak of expression occurred in the
8-10 mm follicles, and the lowest expression was in the F1 follicles. GATA-6 was 
upregulated and reached its peak expression in the F1 follicles. These results
indicate that the molecular structural differences in goose GATA-4 and GATA-6 may
be related to their different roles during follicle development.

PMCID: PMC3999398
PMID: 24531706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. BMC Mol Biol. 2014 Jan 28;15:3. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-15-3.

Spdef deletion rescues the crypt cell proliferation defect in conditional Gata6
null mouse small intestine.

Aronson BE, Stapleton KA, Vissers LA, Stokhuijzen E, Bruijnzeel H, Krasinski
SD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Children's
Hospital Boston, and Harvard Medical School, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA
02115, USA. stephen.krasinski@childrens.harvard.edu.

BACKGROUND: GATA transcription factors are essential for self-renewal of the
small intestinal epithelium. Gata4 is expressed in the proximal 85% of small
intestine while Gata6 is expressed throughout the length of small intestine.
Deletion of intestinal Gata4 and Gata6 results in an altered
proliferation/differentiation phenotype, and an up-regulation of SAM pointed
domain containing ETS transcription factor (Spdef), a transcription factor
recently shown to act as a tumor suppressor. The goal of this study is to
determine to what extent SPDEF mediates the downstream functions of GATA4/GATA6
in the small intestine. The hypothesis to be tested is that intestinal
GATA4/GATA6 functions through SPDEF by repressing Spdef gene expression. To test 
this hypothesis, we defined the functions most likely regulated by the
overlapping GATA6/SPDEF target gene set in mouse intestine, delineated the
relationship between GATA6 chromatin occupancy and Spdef gene regulation in
Caco-2 cells, and determined the extent to which prevention of Spdef
up-regulation by Spdef knockout rescues the GATA6 phenotype in conditional Gata6 
knockout mouse ileum.
RESULTS: Using publicly available profiling data, we found that 83% of
GATA6-regulated genes are also regulated by SPDEF, and that proliferation/cancer 
is the function most likely to be modulated by this overlapping gene set. In
human Caco-2 cells, GATA6 knockdown results in an up-regulation of Spdef gene
expression, modeling our mouse Gata6 knockout data. GATA6 occupies a genetic
locus located 40 kb upstream of the Spdef transcription start site, consistent
with direct regulation of Spdef gene expression by GATA6. Prevention of Spdef
up-regulation in conditional Gata6 knockout mouse ileum by the additional
deletion of Spdef rescued the crypt cell proliferation defect, but had little
effect on altered lineage differentiation or absorptive enterocytes gene
expression.
CONCLUSION: SPDEF is a key, immediate downstream effecter of the crypt cell
proliferation function of GATA4/GATA6 in the small intestine.

PMCID: PMC3917371
PMID: 24472151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Nat Commun. 2014;5:3150. doi: 10.1038/ncomms4150.

The miR-363-GATA6-Lgr5 pathway is critical for colorectal tumourigenesis.

Tsuji S(1), Kawasaki Y(1), Furukawa S(2), Taniue K(2), Hayashi T(2), Okuno M(2), 
Hiyoshi M(3), Kitayama J(3), Akiyama T(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0032, Japan [2]. (2)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information,
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1, 
Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan. (3)Department of Surgical Oncology,
Graduate school of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1, Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

Erratum in
    Nat Commun. 2014;5:4025.

Aberrant activation of Wnt signalling results in colorectal tumours. Lgr5 is
specifically expressed in stem cells of the intestine and has an essential role
in maintaining tissue homeostasis. Lgr5-positive stem cells are responsible for
the intestinal adenoma initiated by mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli.
Furthermore, Lgr5 interacts with R-spondins and thereby activates Wnt signalling.
However, the function of Lgr5 in colorectal tumourigenesis is unclear. Here we
show that LGR5 is required for the tumourigenicity of colorectal cancer cells. We
show that the transcription factor GATA6 directly enhances the expression of
LGR5. We further demonstrate that GATA6 is upregulated in colorectal cancer cells
due to the downregulation of miR-363, which directly targets GATA6. Moreover, we 
show that overexpression of miR-363 suppresses the tumourigenicity of colorectal 
cancer cells. These results suggest that the miR-363-GATA6-LGR5 pathway is
critical for colorectal tumourigenesis and would be a promising target for the
treatment of colorectal cancer.

PMID: 24452072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2014 Mar;306(6):G474-90. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00119.2013. Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Role of GATA factors in development, differentiation, and homeostasis of the
small intestinal epithelium.

Aronson BE(1), Stapleton KA, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Children's
Hospital Boston, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts;

The small intestinal epithelium develops from embryonic endoderm into a highly
specialized layer of cells perfectly suited for the digestion and absorption of
nutrients. The development, differentiation, and regeneration of the small
intestinal epithelium require complex gene regulatory networks involving multiple
context-specific transcription factors. The evolutionarily conserved GATA family 
of transcription factors, well known for its role in hematopoiesis, is essential 
for the development of endoderm during embryogenesis and the renewal of the
differentiated epithelium in the mature gut. We review the role of GATA factors
in the evolution and development of endoderm and summarize our current
understanding of the function of GATA factors in the mature small intestine. We
offer perspective on the application of epigenetics approaches to define the
mechanisms underlying context-specific GATA gene regulation during intestinal
development.

PMCID: PMC3949026
PMID: 24436352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Pediatr Diabetes. 2015 Feb;16(1):67-70. doi: 10.1111/pedi.12111. Epub 2014 Jan
17.

A novel mutation in GATA6 causes pancreatic agenesis.

Stanescu DE(1), Hughes N, Patel P, De León DD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Heterozygous mutations in GATA6 have been linked to pancreatic agenesis and
cardiac malformations. The aim of this study was to describe a new mutation in
GATA6 in an infant with pancreatic agenesis, associated with truncus arteriosus
and absent gallbladder. Clinical data were obtained from chart review. Gene
sequencing was performed on genomic DNA. The patient was a female infant
diagnosed shortly after birth with a severe cardiac malformation, absent
gallbladder, anomalous hepatic blood flow, unilateral hydronephrosis and
hydroureter, neonatal diabetes, and pancreatic exocrine insufficiency. Despite
prolonged intensive management care, she died at 3 months of age because of
cardiac complications. Analysis of her genomic DNA revealed a novel missense
mutation of GATA6. The novel mutation described in this case extends the list of 
GATA6 mutations causing pancreatic agenesis and cardiac malformations.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4102676
PMID: 24433315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. PLoS Genet. 2014 Jan;10(1):e1004072. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004072. Epub 2014
Jan 9.

GATA6 is a crucial regulator of Shh in the limb bud.

Kozhemyakina E(1), Ionescu A(1), Lassar AB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.

In the limb bud, patterning along the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis is controlled
by Sonic Hedgehog (Shh), a signaling molecule secreted by the "Zone of Polarizing
Activity", an organizer tissue located in the posterior margin of the limb bud.
We have found that the transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6, which are key
regulators of cell identity, are expressed in an anterior to posterior gradient
in the early limb bud, raising the possibility that GATA transcription factors
may play an additional role in patterning this tissue. While both GATA4 and GATA6
are expressed in an A-P gradient in the forelimb buds, the hindlimb buds
principally express GATA6 in an A-P gradient. Thus, to specifically examine the
role of GATA6 in limb patterning we generated Prx1-Cre; GATA6(fl/fl) mice, which 
conditionally delete GATA6 from their developing limb buds. We found that these
animals display ectopic expression of both Shh and its transcriptional targets
specifically in the anterior mesenchyme of the hindlimb buds. Loss of GATA6 in
the developing limbs results in the formation of preaxial polydactyly in the
hindlimbs. Conversely, forced expression of GATA6 throughout the limb bud
represses expression of Shh and results in hypomorphic limbs. We have found that 
GATA6 can bind to chromatin (isolated from limb buds) encoding either Shh or Gli1
regulatory elements that drive expression of these genes in this tissue, and
demonstrated that GATA6 works synergistically with FOG co-factors to repress
expression of luciferase reporters driven by these sequences. Most significantly,
we have found that conditional loss of Shh in limb buds lacking GATA6 prevents
development of hindlimb polydactyly in these compound mutant embryos, indicating 
that GATA6 expression in the anterior region of the limb bud blocks hindlimb
polydactyly by repressing ectopic expression of Shh.

PMCID: PMC3886911
PMID: 24415953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 31;8(12):e84591. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084591.
eCollection 2013.

Parsing the roles of the transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in the adult
cardiac hypertrophic response.

van Berlo JH(1), Aronow BJ(1), Molkentin JD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
University of Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America. (2)Department of
Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of
Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America ; Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of
America.

The transcriptional code that programs cardiac hypertrophy involves the zinc
finger-containing DNA binding factors GATA-4 and GATA-6, both of which are
required to mount a hypertrophic response of the adult heart. Here we performed
conditional gene deletion of Gata4 or Gata6 in the mouse heart in conjunction
with reciprocal gene replacement using a transgene encoding either GATA-4 or
GATA-6 in the heart as a means of parsing dosage effects of GATA-4 and GATA-6
versus unique functional roles. We determined that GATA-4 and GATA-6 play a
redundant and dosage-sensitive role in programming the hypertrophic growth
response of the heart following pressure overload stimulation. However,
non-redundant functions were identified in allowing the heart to compensate and
resist heart failure after pressure overload stimulation, as neither Gata4 nor
Gata6 deletion was fully rescued by expression of the reciprocal transgene. For
example, only Gata4 heart-specific deletion blocked the neoangiogenic response to
pressure overload stimulation. Gene expression profiling from hearts of these
gene-deleted mice showed both overlapping and unique transcriptional codes, which
is presented. These results indicate that GATA-4 and GATA-6 play a
dosage-dependent and redundant role in programming cardiac hypertrophy, but that 
each has a more complex role in maintaining cardiac homeostasis and resistance to
heart failure following injury that cannot be compensated by the other.

PMCID: PMC3877334
PMID: 24391969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Med Genet. 2014 Mar;51(3):197-202. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-101989. Epub
2014 Jan 2.

Whole exome sequencing identifies de novo mutations in GATA6 associated with
congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

Yu L(1), Bennett JT, Wynn J, Carvill GL, Cheung YH, Shen Y, Mychaliska GB, Azarow
KS, Crombleholme TM, Chung DH, Potoka D, Warner BW, Bucher B, Lim FY, Pietsch J, 
Stolar C, Aspelund G, Arkovitz MS; University of Washington Center for Mendelian 
Genomics, Mefford H, Chung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Columbia University 
Medical Center, New York, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is a common birth defect
affecting 1 in 3000 births. It is characterised by herniation of abdominal
viscera through an incompletely formed diaphragm. Although chromosomal anomalies 
and mutations in several genes have been implicated, the cause for most patients 
is unknown.
METHODS: We used whole exome sequencing in two families with CDH and congenital
heart disease, and identified mutations in GATA6 in both.
RESULTS: In the first family, we identified a de novo missense mutation
(c.1366C>T, p.R456C) in a sporadic CDH patient with tetralogy of Fallot. In the
second, a nonsense mutation (c.712G>T, p.G238*) was identified in two siblings
with CDH and a large ventricular septal defect. The G238* mutation was inherited 
from their mother, who was clinically affected with congenital absence of the
pericardium, patent ductus arteriosus and intestinal malrotation. Deep sequencing
of blood and saliva-derived DNA from the mother suggested somatic mosaicism as an
explanation for her milder phenotype, with only approximately 15% mutant alleles.
To determine the frequency of GATA6 mutations in CDH, we sequenced the gene in
378 patients with CDH. We identified one additional de novo mutation (c.1071delG,
p.V358Cfs34*).
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in GATA6 have been previously associated with pancreatic
agenesis and congenital heart disease. We conclude that, in addition to the heart
and the pancreas, GATA6 is involved in development of two additional organs, the 
diaphragm and the pericardium. In addition, we have shown that de novo mutations 
can contribute to the development of CDH, a common birth defect.

PMCID: PMC3955383
PMID: 24385578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Dev Biol. 2014 Feb 1;386(1):204-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.12.033. Epub 2013
Dec 28.

Epicardial GATA factors regulate early coronary vascular plexus formation.

Kolander KD(1), Holtz ML(1), Cossette SM(1), Duncan SA(2), Misra RP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank
Rd., Milwaukee, WI 53226, United States. (2)Department of Cell Biology,
Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank
Rd., Milwaukee, WI 53226, United States. (3)Department of Biochemistry, Medical
College of Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd., Milwaukee, WI 53226, United
States. Electronic address: rmisra@mcw.edu.

During early development, GATA factors have been shown to be important for key
events of coronary vasculogenesis, including formation of the epicardium.
Myocardial GATA factors are required for coronary vascular (CV) formation;
however, the role of epicardial localized GATAs in this process has not been
addressed. The current study was conducted to investigate the molecular
mechanisms by which the epicardium controls coronary vasculogenesis, focusing on 
the role of epicardial GATAs in establishing the endothelial plexus during early 
coronary vasculogenesis. To address the role of epicardial GATAs, we ablated
GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors specifically from the mouse epicardium and 
found that the number of endothelial cells in the sub-epicardium was drastically 
reduced, and concomitant coronary vascular plexus formation was significantly
compromised. Here we present evidence for a novel role for epicardial GATA
factors in controlling plexus formation by recruiting endothelial cells to the
sub-epicardium.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3962664
PMID: 24380800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Diabetes. 2014 Jun;63(6):1978-93. doi: 10.2337/db13-1383. Epub 2013 Dec 30.

RNA sequencing identifies dysregulation of the human pancreatic islet
transcriptome by the saturated fatty acid palmitate.

Cnop M(1), Abdulkarim B(2), Bottu G(2), Cunha DA(2), Igoillo-Esteve M(2), Masini 
M(3), Turatsinze JV(2), Griebel T(4), Villate O(2), Santin I(2), Bugliani M(3),
Ladriere L(2), Marselli L(3), McCarthy MI(5), Marchetti P(3), Sammeth M(6),
Eizirik DL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, ULB Center for Diabetes Research,
Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, BelgiumDivision of Endocrinology,
Erasmus Hospital, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium
mcnop@ulb.ac.be. (2)Laboratory of Experimental Medicine, ULB Center for Diabetes 
Research, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. (3)Department of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. (4)Functional
Bioinformatics, Centre Nacional d'Anàlisi Genòmica, Barcelona, Spain. (5)Oxford
Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Churchill Hospital, Oxford,
U.K.Oxford National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre,
Churchill Hospital, Oxford, U.K.Wellcome Trust Centre for Human Genetics,
University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K. (6)Functional Bioinformatics, Centre Nacional 
d'Anàlisi Genòmica, Barcelona, SpainLaboratório Nacional de Computação
Cientifica, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2014 Jun;63(6):1823-5.

Pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction and death are central in the pathogenesis of type 2
diabetes (T2D). Saturated fatty acids cause ß-cell failure and contribute to
diabetes development in genetically predisposed individuals. Here we used RNA
sequencing to map transcripts expressed in five palmitate-treated human islet
preparations, observing 1,325 modified genes. Palmitate induced fatty acid
metabolism and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Functional studies identified
novel mediators of adaptive ER stress signaling. Palmitate modified genes
regulating ubiquitin and proteasome function, autophagy, and apoptosis.
Inhibition of autophagic flux and lysosome function contributed to lipotoxicity. 
Palmitate inhibited transcription factors controlling ß-cell phenotype, including
PAX4 and GATA6. Fifty-nine T2D candidate genes were expressed in human islets,
and 11 were modified by palmitate. Palmitate modified expression of 17 splicing
factors and shifted alternative splicing of 3,525 transcripts. Ingenuity Pathway 
Analysis of modified transcripts and genes confirmed that top changed functions
related to cell death. Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated
Discovery (DAVID) analysis of transcription factor binding sites in
palmitate-modified transcripts revealed a role for PAX4, GATA, and the ER stress 
response regulators XBP1 and ATF6. This human islet transcriptome study
identified novel mechanisms of palmitate-induced ß-cell dysfunction and death.
The data point to cross talk between metabolic stress and candidate genes at the 
ß-cell level.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association.

PMID: 24379348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 18;8(12):e83723. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083723.
eCollection 2013.

Function of GATA factors in the adult mouse liver.

Zheng R(1), Rebolledo-Jaramillo B(2), Zong Y(3), Wang L(4), Russo P(5), Hancock
W(4), Stanger BZ(6), Hardison RC(7), Blobel GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America ; Division of Hematology, The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(2)Huck Institutes of the Life Sciences, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (3)Abramson Family
Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (4)Division
of Transplant Immunology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and
Biesecker Center for Pediatric Liver Disease, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (5)Pathology 
and Laboratory Medicine, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States of America. (6)Division of Gastroenterology,
Department of Medicine, Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Abramson
Family Cancer Research Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America. (7)Department
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University 
Park, Pennsylvania, United States of America.

GATA transcription factors and their Friend of Gata (FOG) cofactors control the
development of diverse tissues. GATA4 and GATA6 are essential for the expansion
of the embryonic liver bud, but their expression patterns and functions in the
adult liver are unclear. We characterized the expression of GATA and FOG factors 
in whole mouse liver and purified hepatocytes. GATA4, GATA6, and FOG1 are the
most prominently expressed family members in whole liver and hepatocytes. GATA4
chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high throughput sequencing (ChIP-seq)
identified 4409 occupied sites, associated with genes enriched in ontologies
related to liver function, including lipid and glucose metabolism. However,
hepatocyte-specific excision of Gata4 had little impact on gross liver
architecture and function, even under conditions of regenerative stress, and,
despite the large number of GATA4 occupied genes, resulted in relatively few
changes in gene expression. To address possible redundancy between GATA4 and
GATA6, both factors were conditionally excised. Surprisingly, combined Gata4,6
loss did not exacerbate the phenotype resulting from Gata4 loss alone. This
points to the presence of an unusually robust transcriptional network in adult
hepatocytes that ensures the maintenance of liver function.

PMCID: PMC3867416
PMID: 24367609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 May 30;448(2):121-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.12.044. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Analysis of the stem cell characteristics of adult stem cells from Arbas white
Cashmere goat.

Ren Y(1), Wu H(1), Wang X(1), Xue N(1), Liang H(1), Liu D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and Biotechnology Ministry of
Education, Inner Mongolia University, Inner Mongolia, Hohhot 010021, China.
(2)Key Laboratory of Mammalian Reproductive Biology and Biotechnology Ministry of
Education, Inner Mongolia University, Inner Mongolia, Hohhot 010021, China.
Electronic address: nmliudongjun@sina.com.

Studies have shown that multipotent adult stem cells possess differentiation
characteristics similar to embryonic stem cells and pluripotent stem cells. We
aimed to explore these similarities further by examining the expression of the
pluripotency and stemness biomarkers, AKP, IL-6, Nanog, Oct-4, Rex-1, Sox-2 and
TERT, as well as the triploblastic biomarkers, Sox-1, Myod1 and Gata-6 in
adipose-derived stem cells (ADSCs), bone marrow stem cells (BMSCs) and
muscle-derived satellite cells (MDSCs). These were isolated from adult Arbas
white Cashmere goats and cultured in vitro. Immunocytochemistry, reverse
transcription quantitative PCR and Western blotting were used to analyze the
protein and mRNA expression of the markers. To investigate the ability of ADSCs, 
BMSCs and MDSCs to differentiate and cause tumors in vivo they were injected into
immunodeficient mice (NOD-SCID). All results were compared to those for mouse
embryonic stem cells (mESCs). Immunocytochemistry showed that AKP, IL-6, Nanog,
Oct-4, Rex-1 and TERT were expressed in ADSCs, BMSCs and MDSCs, whereas Sox-2 was
not. In ADSCs, the expression of IL-6 mRNA was relatively high, followed by Nanog
and Oct-4, while Rex-1 and TERT expression were the lowest (P<0.01). In BMSCs,
the expression of Rex-1 was relatively high, followed by IL-6, while Oct-4, Nanog
and TERT were comparatively low (P<0.01). In MDSCs, the expression of IL-6, Nanog
and Oct-4 were relatively high, while TERT was comparatively low (P<0.01).
However, no expression of Sox-2 mRNA was detected in any of the three cell lines.
The expression of Sox-1, Myod1 and Gata-6 was observed to different degrees in
all three cell lines (P<0.01); the expression pattern in MDSCs was different from
that in ADSCs and BMSCs. Western blotting indicated that no expression of Sox-2
and Rex-1 protein occurred in ADSCs, BMSCs and MDSCs, while the other five
proteins were all expressed to different degrees (P<0.01); the expression pattern
was consistent with the mRNA results. In contrast to the mESCs, no teratoma
tissue or triploblastic differentiation appendages were formed in the
immunodeficient mice after injection of ADSCs, BMSCs and MDSCs. Our results
suggest that the three adult goat stem cell types are non-oncogenic and have
stemness characteristics similar to embryonic stem cells. Of these, MDSCs were
found to exhibit the most ESC-like properties and would make the best candidates 
for clinical application.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24333446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Anim Sci J. 2014 Apr;85(4):388-94. doi: 10.1111/asj.12156. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Expression and in situ localization of GATA4, 5 and 6 mRNAs in ovine conceptuses 
and uterine endometria during the peri-implantation period.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Godkin JD, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Graduate School of Agricultural and Life
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

In vertebrates, six GATA transcription factors, GATA1 through GATA6, have been
identified and GATA1-3 is known to be involved in hematopoietic developments,
while GATA4-6 play roles in cardiac and endoderm developments. Recently, we and
others have found that GATA2 and GATA3 found in the trophectoderm plays a role in
gene expression specific to this cell type, but GATA4-6 have not been well
characterized in early embryonic developments. Using quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (qPCR) and in situ hybridization, we examined the expression of
GATA4, 5 and 6 messenger RNAs (mRNAs) in ovine conceptuses and uteri during the
peri-implantation period. In ovine conceptuses, GATA4, 5 and 6 transcripts were
present on days 15, 17 and 21 (day 0<U+2009>=<U+2009>day of mating), and high GATA5 and 6 mRNAs
were found on day 21, most of which were localized in the trophectoderm and
endoderm. Moreover, minute and substantial GATA4 and 5 mRNAs were found in days
15 and 21 uterine endometria, respectively. Increase in GATA4-6 transcripts in
day 21 uteri indicates that in addition to GATA1-3, GATA4-6 may also play a
potentially novel role in the development of ovine trophectoderm, endoderm and/or
uterine endometria following conceptus attachment to the uterine epithelium.

© 2013 Japanese Society of Animal Science.

PMID: 24329758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Oncogene. 2014 Dec 4;33(49):5637-48. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.517. Epub 2013 Dec 9.

An integrative analysis reveals functional targets of GATA6 transcriptional
regulation in gastric cancer.

Sulahian R(1), Casey F(2), Shen J(2), Qian ZR(3), Shin H(4), Ogino S(3), Weir
BA(5), Vazquez F(5), Liu XS(4), Hahn WC(6), Bass AJ(6), Chan V(2), Shivdasani
RA(6).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA,
USA [2] Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research, Emeryville, CA, USA. (3)1]
Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA [2]
Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School and Brigham & Women's Hospital,
Boston, MA, USA. (4)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Department of Medical Oncology,
Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (6)1] Department of Medical
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA, USA [2] Department of
Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA [3] Department of Medicine,
Brigham & Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Lineage-restricted transcription factors (TFs) are frequently mutated or
overexpressed in cancer and contribute toward malignant behaviors; however, the
molecular bases of their oncogenic properties are largely unknown. As TF
activities are difficult to inhibit directly with small molecules, the genes and 
pathways they regulate might represent more tractable targets for drug therapy.
We studied GATA6, a TF gene that is frequently amplified or overexpressed in
gastric, esophageal and pancreatic adenocarcinomas. GATA6-overexpressing gastric 
cancer cell lines cluster in gene expression space, separate from
non-overexpressing lines. This expression clustering signifies a shared
pathogenic group of genes that GATA6 may regulate through direct cis-element
binding. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation and sequencing (ChIP-seq) to
identify GATA6-bound genes and considered TF occupancy in relation to genes that 
respond to GATA6 depletion in cell lines and track with GATA6 mRNA (synexpression
groups) in primary gastric cancers. Among other cellular functions,
GATA6-occupied genes control apoptosis and govern the M-phase of the cell cycle. 
Depletion of GATA6 reduced the levels of the latter transcripts and arrested
cells in G2 and M phases of the cell cycle. Synexpression in human tumor samples 
identified likely direct transcriptional targets substantially better than
consideration only of transcripts that respond to GATA6 loss in cultured cells.
Candidate target genes responded to the loss of GATA6 or its homolog GATA4 and
even more to the depletion of both proteins. Many GATA6-dependent genes lacked
nearby binding sites but several strongly dependent, synexpressed and GATA6-bound
genes encode TFs such as MYC, HES1, RARB and CDX2. Thus, many downstream effects 
occur indirectly through other TFs and GATA6 activity in gastric cancer is
partially redundant with GATA4. This integrative analysis of locus occupancy,
gene dependency and synexpression provides a functional signature of
GATA6-overexpressing gastric cancers, revealing both limits and new therapeutic
directions for a challenging and frequently fatal disease.

PMCID: PMC4050037
PMID: 24317510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Dec 5;13(6):663-75. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.11.015.

Induction of a human pluripotent state with distinct regulatory circuitry that
resembles preimplantation epiblast.

Chan YS(1), Göke J, Ng JH, Lu X, Gonzales KA, Tan CP, Tng WQ, Hong ZZ, Lim YS, Ng
HH.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Regulation Laboratory, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore 138672,
Singapore. Electronic address: chanysw@gis.a-star.edu.sg.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are derived from the inner cell mass of the
blastocyst. Despite sharing the common property of pluripotency, hESCs are
notably distinct from epiblast cells of the preimplantation blastocyst. Here we
use a combination of three small-molecule inhibitors to sustain hESCs in a LIF
signaling-dependent hESC state (3iL hESCs) with elevated expression of NANOG and 
epiblast-enriched genes such as KLF4, DPPA3, and TBX3. Genome-wide transcriptome 
analysis confirms that the expression signature of 3iL hESCs shares similarities 
with native preimplantation epiblast cells. We also show that 3iL hESCs have a
distinct epigenetic landscape, characterized by derepression of preimplantation
epiblast genes. Using genome-wide binding profiles of NANOG and OCT4, we identify
enhancers that contribute to rewiring of the regulatory circuitry. In summary,
our study identifies a distinct hESC state with defined regulatory circuitry that
will facilitate future analysis of human preimplantation embryogenesis and
pluripotency.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24315441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Am J Med Genet A. 2014 Feb;164A(2):476-9. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36275. Epub 2013
Dec 5.

A case of pancreatic agenesis and congenital heart defects with a novel GATA6
nonsense mutation: evidence of haploinsufficiency due to nonsense-mediated mRNA
decay.

Suzuki S(1), Nakao A, Sarhat AR, Furuya A, Matsuo K, Tanahashi Y, Kajino H, Azuma
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Asahikawa Medical University, Asahikawa, Japan.

Recently, GATA6 heterozygous loss-of-function mutations were reported to cause
pancreatic agenesis and congenital heart defects (PACHD [OMIM:600001]). However, 
the molecular mechanisms resulting from premature termination codons have not
been examined in this disorder. The objective of this study was to perform a
genetic analysis of a patient with PACHD. A female patient presented with
ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus, and congenital diaphragmatic
hernia at birth. Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus and pancreatic exocrine
deficiency due to pancreatic agenesis was diagnosed at 1 month of age. PCR-direct
sequencing of GATA6 revealed that the patient is heterozygous for a novel de novo
nonsense mutation of c.1477C>T, p. Arg493X in exon 5. RT-PCR direct sequencing of
the RT-PCR products of total RNA from peripheral blood of the patient for the
region encompassing exons 4-6 revealed only the wild-type allele. This finding
provides the evidence for the occurrence of nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) in
the p.Arg493X mutation. Quantitative RT-PCR analysis revealed that the expression
of GATA6 transcript in the patient was less than half compared with normal
control samples. This is the first evidence that GATA6 haploinsufficiency is
caused by NMD in vivo, and we conclude that GATA6 haploinsufficiency causes not
only PACHD but may affect other organs derived from the endoderm. Further
screenings of GATA6 mutations in patients with various forms of diabetes and/or
congenital heart disease with other visceral malformation may reveal the impact
of GATA6 mutations on diabetes and congenital malformation.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24310933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Endocrinol. 2014 Jan;28(1):28-39. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1265. Epub 2013 Jan 1.

GATA factors promote ER integrity and ß-cell survival and contribute to type 1
diabetes risk.

Sartori DJ(1), Wilbur CJ, Long SY, Rankin MM, Li C, Bradfield JP, Hakonarson H,
Grant SF, Pu WT, Kushner JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes (D.J.S., C.J.W., S.Y.L., M.M.R., C.L.),
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department of Pediatrics (H.H., S.F.A.G.),
Perelman School of Medicine, and Center for Applied Genomics (J.P.B., H.H.,
S.F.A.G.), Abramson Research Center, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104; Department of Cardiology (W.T.P.), Children's
Hospital, Boston, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115; Section of
Pediatric Diabetes and Endocrinology (J.A.K.), Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030; and Diabetes and Endocrinology Service (J.A.K.), Texas
Children's Hospital, Houston, Texas 77030.

Pancreatic ß-cell survival remains poorly understood despite decades of research.
GATA transcription factors broadly regulate embryogenesis and influence survival 
of several cell types, but their role in adult ß-cells remains undefined. To
investigate the role of GATA factors in adult ß-cells, we derived
ß-cell-inducible Gata4- and Gata6-knockout mice, along with whole-body inducible 
Gata4 knockouts. ß-Cell Gata4 deletion modestly increased the proportion of dying
ß-cells in situ with ultrastructural abnormalities suggesting endoplasmic
reticulum (ER) stress. Notably, glucose homeostasis was not grossly altered in
Gata4- and Gata6-knockout mice, suggesting that GATA factors do not have
essential roles in ß-cells. Several ER stress signals were up-regulated in Gata4 
and Gata6 knockouts, most notably CHOP, a known regulator of ER stress-induced
apoptosis. However, ER stress signals were not elevated to levels observed after 
acute thapsigargin administration, suggesting that GATA deficiency only caused
mild ER stress. Simultaneous deletion of Gata4 and CHOP partially restored ß-cell
survival. In contrast, whole-body inducible Gata4 knockouts displayed no evidence
of ER stress in other GATA4-enriched tissues, such as heart. Indeed, distinct
GATA transcriptional targets were differentially expressed in islets compared
with heart. Such ß-cell-specific findings prompted study of a large meta-analysis
dataset to investigate single nucleotide polymorphisms harbored within the human 
GATA4 locus, revealing several variants significantly associated with type 1
diabetes mellitus. We conclude that GATA factors have important but nonessential 
roles to promote ER integrity and ß-cell survival in a tissue-specific manner and
that GATA factors likely contribute to type 1 diabetes mellitus pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3874454
PMID: 24284823  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Hum Reprod. 2014 Jan;29(1):41-8. doi: 10.1093/humrep/det400. Epub 2013 Nov 19.

Treatment of human embryos with the TGFß inhibitor SB431542 increases epiblast
proliferation and permits successful human embryonic stem cell derivation.

Van der Jeught M(1), Heindryckx B, O'Leary T, Duggal G, Ghimire S, Lierman S, Van
Roy N, Chuva de Sousa Lopes SM, Deroo T, Deforce D, De Sutter P.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Reproductive Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 
185, Ghent 9000, Belgium.

STUDY QUESTION: Is there an effect of the TGFß inhibitor SB431542 (SB) on the
epiblast compartment of human blastocysts, and does it affect subsequent human
embryonic stem cell (hESC) derivation?
SUMMARY ANSWER: SB increases the mean number of NANOG-positive cells in the inner
cell mass (ICM), and allows for subsequent hESC derivation.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: It is known that inhibition of TGFß by SB has a positive
effect on mouse ESC self-renewal, while active TGFß signalling is needed for
self-renewal of primed ESC.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: From December 2011 until March 2012, 263 donated
spare embryos were used from patients who had undergone IVF/ICSI in our centre.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Donated human embryos were cultured in 
the presence of SB or Activin A, and immunocytochemistry was performed on Day 6
blastocysts for NANOG and GATA6. Moreover, blastocysts were used for the
derivation of hESC, with or without exposure to SB.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Immunocytochemistry revealed a significantly
higher number of NANOG-positive ICM cells in the SB group compared with the
control (12.0 ± 5.9 versus 6.1 ± 4.7), while no difference was observed in the
Activin A group compared with other groups (6.7 ± 3.7). The number of
GATA6-positive ICM cells did not differ between the SB, Activin A and control
group (8.8 ± 4.3, 8.0 ± 4.6 and 7.2 ± 4.0, respectively). Blocking TGFß
signalling did not prevent subsequent hESC line derivation.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The number of human blastocysts available for
this study was too low to reveal if the observed increase in NANOG-positive
epiblast cells after exposure to SB affected the efficiency of hESC derivation
(12.5% compared with 16.7%).
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: This work can contribute to the derivation of
naive hESC lines in the future.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): M.V.d.J. is holder of a Ph.D. grant of the
Agency for Innovation by Science and Technology (IWT, grant number SB093128),
Belgium. G.D. and this research are supported by the Research Foundation Flanders
(FWO), grant number FWO-3G062910) and a Concerted Research Actions funding from
BOF (Bijzonder Onderzoeksfonds University Ghent, grant number BOF GOA 01G01112). 
S.M.C.d. S.L. is supported by the Netherlands Organization of Scientific Research
(NWO) (ASPASIA 015.007.037) and the Interuniversity Attraction Poles (PAI) (no.
P7/07). P.D.S. is holder of a fundamental clinical research mandate by the FWO.
We would like to thank Ferring Company (Aalst, Belgium) for financial support of 
this study. The authors do not have any competing interests to declare.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: Not applicable.

PMID: 24256991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Zygote. 2015 Apr;23(2):266-76. doi: 10.1017/S0967199413000531. Epub 2013 Nov 15.

Morphological changes and germ layer formation in the porcine embryos from days
7-13 of development.

Sun R(1), Lei L(1), Liu S(2), Xue B(2), Wang J(2), Wang J(2), Shen J(1), Duan
L(1), Shen X(1), Cong Y(2), Gu Y(1), Hu K(2), Jin L(3), Liu ZH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology,Harbin Medical University,194 Xuefu
Road,Nangang District,Harbin,Heilongjiang Province,150081,China. (2)College of
Life Sciences,Northeast Agricultural University,Xiangfang District,Harbin
150030,Heilongjiang Province,China. (3)Department of Histology and
Embryology,Harbin Medical University,194 Xuefu Road,Nangang
District,Harbin,Heilongjiang Province,150081,ChinaorCollege of Life
Sciences,Northeast Agricultural University,Xiangfang District,Harbin
150030,Heilongjiang Province,China.

Morphogenesis and identification of embryonic differentiation in porcine embryos 
are crucial issues for developmental biology and laboratory animal science. The
current paper presents a study on the asynchronous development of hatched porcine
embryos from days 7 to 13 post-insemination. Examination of semi-thin sections of
the hypoblast showed that it had characteristics similar to those of the mouse
anterior visceral endoderm during embryonic disc formation. Also, a cavity
appeared in the epiblast, which was similar to a mouse proamniotic cavity. With
the gradual disappearance of Rauber's layer, the cavity opened and contacted the 
external environment directly, all of which formed the embryonic disc. To confirm
the differentiation characteristics, we performed immunohistochemical analyses
and showed that GATA6 was detected clearly in parietal endoderm cells during
embryonic disc establishment. OCT4 was expressed in the inner cell mass (ICM) and
trophoblast of hatched blastocysts and in the epiblast during formation of the
embryonic disc. However, OCT4 showed comparatively decreased expression in the
posterior embryonic disc, primitive streak and migrating cells. SOX2 was present 
in the ICM and epiblast. Therefore, both SOX2 and OCT4 can be used as markers of 
pluripotent cells in the porcine embryonic disc. At the start of gastrulation,
staining revealed VIMENTIN in the posterior of the embryonic disc, primitive
streak and in migrating cells that underlay the embryonic disc and was also
expressed in epiblast cells located in the anterior primitive streak. Together
with serial sections of embryos stained by whole mount immunohistochemistry, the 
mesoderm differentiation pattern was shown as an ingression movement that took
place at the posterior of the embryonic disc and with bilateral migration along
the embryonic disc borders.

PMID: 24229742  [PubMed - in process]


133. Biometals. 2013 Dec;26(6):1051-65. doi: 10.1007/s10534-013-9683-6. Epub 2013 Nov 
1.

Friend of GATA and GATA-6 modulate the transcriptional up-regulation of hepcidin 
in hepatocytes during inflammation.

Bagu ET(1), Layoun A, Calvé A, Santos MM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche du Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal
(CRCHUM), Institut du Cancer de Montréal, (ICM), University of Montreal, Pavillon
De Sève Porte Y-5625, 2099 rue Alexandre De Sève, Montreal, QC, H2L 4M1, Canada, 
ebagu@yahoo.com.

Hepcidin is an antimicrobial peptide hormone that plays a central role in the
metabolism of iron and its expression in the liver can be induced through two
major pathways: the inflammatory pathway, mainly via IL-6; and the iron-sensing
pathway, mediated by BMP-6. GATA-proteins are group of evolutionary conserved
transcriptional regulators that bind to the consensus motif-WGATAR-in the
promoter region. In hepatoma cells, GATA-proteins 4 and 6 in conjunction with the
co-factor friend of GATA (FOG) were shown to modulate the transcription of HAMP. 
However, it is unclear as to which of the GATA-proteins drive the expression of
HAMP in vivo. In this study, using in vitro and in vivo approaches, we
investigated the relevance of GATA and FOG proteins in the expression of hepcidin
following treatment with IL-6 and BMP-6. We found that treatment of Huh7 cells
with either IL-6 or BMP-6 increased the HAMP promoter activity. The HAMP promoter
activity following treatment with IL-6 or BMP-6 was further increased by
co-transfection of the promoter with GATA proteins 4 and 6. However,
co-transfection of the HAMP promoter with FOG proteins 1 or 2 repressed the
promoter response to treatments with either IL-6 or BMP-6. The effects of both
GATA and FOG proteins on the promoter activity in response to IL-6 or BMP-6
treatment were abrogated by mutation of the GATA response element-TTATCT-in the
HAMP promoter region -103/-98. In vivo, treatment of mice with lipopolysaccharide
led to a transient increase of Gata-6 expression in the liver that was positively
correlated with the expression of hepcidin. Our results indicate that during
inflammation GATA-6 is up-regulated in concert with hepcidin while GATA-4 and FOG
(1 and 2) are repressed.

PMID: 24179092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2014 Oct;26(8):1166-75. doi: 10.1071/RD13169.

EZH2 is essential for development of mouse preimplantation embryos.

Huang XJ(1), Wang X(1), Ma X(1), Sun SC(1), Zhou X(1), Zhu C(1), Liu H(2).

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University,
Weigang No.1, Nanjing 210095, China. (2)Corresponding author. Email:

Enhancer of zeste homologue 2 (Ezh2) is essential for the development of the
early mouse preimplantation embryo. Loss of Ezh2 results in embryonic lethality
in mice. Ezh2-deficient embryos display impaired outgrowth potential, defective
establishment of Ezh2-null embryonic stem (ES) cells and adherence and
differentiation of the trophoblast layer into giant cells. We investigated if
Ezh2 controls the fate of embryos at an earlier stage by treating with
cycloheximide (CHX) or microinjecting short interfering RNA (siRNA) to restrict
embryonic Ezh2 expression during preimplantation. CHX inhibited de novo EZH2
protein synthesis in zygotes, suggesting that EZH2 requires de novo synthesis
during post-fertilisation stages. We found that loss of Ezh2 at the pronuclear
stage caused severe growth retardation and reduced blastocyst formation.
Expression of the pluripotency-associated markers Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog were
significantly decreased in embryos that had been injected with Ezh2 siRNA. In
addition, Ezh2 loss induced upregulated expression of genes related to the
differentiation of germ layers, including Gata6, Hoxb1 and Hand1. Finally,
apoptosis was increased in the blastocyst embryos with Ezh2 knockdown.
Modification of histone H3-Lysine 27 de-methylation and tri-methylation
(H3K27me2/3) was strongly reduced in Ezh2 siRNA embryos. We conclude that Ezh2 is
essential for early preimplantation embryo development through the regulation of 
epigenetic modification and apoptosis.

PMID: 24153105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 15;288(46):33049-59. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.501601. Epub
2013 Oct 2.

Nicotine induces the up-regulation of the a7-nicotinic receptor (a7-nAChR) in
human squamous cell lung cancer cells via the Sp1/GATA protein pathway.

Brown KC(1), Perry HE, Lau JK, Jones DV, Pulliam JF, Thornhill BA, Crabtree CM,
Luo H, Chen YC, Dasgupta P.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology, Physiology, and Toxicology, Joan C.
Edwards School of Medicine, Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia 25755.

Nicotine, the addictive component of cigarettes, promotes lung cancer
proliferation via the a7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (a7-nAChR) subtype. The
present manuscript explores the effect of nicotine exposure on a7-nAChR levels in
squamous cell carcinoma of the lung (SCC-L) in vitro and in vivo. Nicotine (at
concentrations present in the plasma of average smokers) increased a7-nAChR
levels in human SCC-L cell lines. Nicotine-induced up-regulation of a7-nAChR was 
confirmed in vivo by chicken chorioallantoic membrane models. We also observed
that the levels of a7-nAChR in human SCC-L tumors (isolated from patients who are
active smokers) correlated with their smoking history. Nicotine increased the
levels of a7-nAChR mRNA and a7-nAChR transcription in human SCC-L cell lines and 
SCC-L tumors. Nicotine-induced up-regulation of a7-nAChR required GATA4 and
GATA6. ChIP assays showed that nicotine induced the binding of GATA4 or GATA6 to 
Sp1 on the a7-nAChR promoter, thereby inducing its transcription and increasing
its levels in human SCC-L. Our data are clinically relevant because SCC-L
patients smoked for decades before being diagnosed with cancer. It may be
envisaged that continuous exposure to nicotine (in such SCC-L patients) causes
up-regulation of a7-nAChRs, which facilitates tumor growth and progression. Our
results will also be relevant to many SCC-L patients exposed to nicotine via
second-hand smoke, electronic cigarettes, and patches or gums to quit smoking.

PMCID: PMC3829154
PMID: 24089524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Endocrinology. 2013 Dec;154(12):4845-58. doi: 10.1210/en.2013-1410. Epub 2013 Sep
24.

GATA4 and GATA6 silencing in ovarian granulosa cells affects levels of mRNAs
involved in steroidogenesis, extracellular structure organization, IGF-I
activity, and apoptosis.

Bennett J(1), Baumgarten SC, Stocco C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 606012. costocco@uic.edu.

Knockdown of the transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 in granulosa cells (GCs)
impairs folliculogenesis and induces infertility. To investigate the pathways and
genes regulated by these factors, we performed microarray analyses on wild-type
GCs or GCs lacking GATA4, GATA6, or GATA4/6 (G4(gcko), G6(gcko), and G4/6(gcko)) 
after in vivo treatment with equine chorionic gonadotropin. GATA4 deletion
affected a greater number of genes than GATA6, which correlates with the
subfertility observed in G4(gcko) mice and the normal reproductive function found
in G6(gcko) animals. An even greater number of genes were affected by the
deletion of both factors. Moreover, the expression of FSH receptor, LH receptor, 
inhibin a and ß, versican, pregnancy-associated plasma protein A, and the
regulatory unit 2b of protein kinase A, which are known to be crucial for ovarian
function, was greatly affected in double GATA4 and GATA6 knockouts when compared 
with single GATA-deficient animals. This suggests that GATA4 and GATA6
functionally compensate for each other in the regulation of key ovarian genes.
Functional enrichment revealed that ovulation, growth, intracellular signaling,
extracellular structure organization, gonadotropin and growth factor actions, and
steroidogenesis were significantly regulated in G4/6(gcko) mice. The results of
this analysis were confirmed using quantitative polymerase chain reaction,
immunohistochemical, and biological assays. Treatment of GCs with cAMP/IGF-I, to 
bypass FSH and IGF-I signaling defects, revealed that most of the affected genes 
are direct targets of GATA4/6. The diversity of pathways affected by the
knockdown of GATA underscores the important role of these factors in the
regulation of GC function.

PMCID: PMC3836082
PMID: 24064357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Cells Tissues Organs. 2013;198(2):111-26. doi: 10.1159/000353942. Epub 2013 Sep
21.

Culture of mouse amniotic fluid-derived cells on irradiated STO feeders results
in the generation of primitive endoderm cell lines capable of self-renewal in
vitro.

Babic AM(1), Jang S, Nicolov E, Voicu H, Luckey CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Genomic Medicine, The Methodist Hospital, Houston,
Tex., USA.

The cells present in amniotic fluid (AF) are currently used for prenatal
diagnosis of fetal anomalies but are also a potential source of cells for cell
therapy. To better characterize putative progenitor cell populations present in
AF, we used culture conditions that support self-renewal to determine if these
promoted the generation of stable cell lines from AF-derived cells (AFC). Cells
isolated from E11.5 mouse were cultured on irradiated STO fibroblast feeder
layers in human embryonic germ cell derivation conditions. The cultures grew
multicellular epithelial colonies that could be repropagated from single cells.
Reverse transcription semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction of established
cell lines revealed that they belonged to the extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn)
expressing high levels of Gata6, Gata4, Sox17, Foxa2 and Sox7 mRNA. Hierarchical 
clustering based on the whole transcriptome expression profile of the AFC lines
(AFCL) shows significant correlation between transcription profiles of AFCL and
blastocyst-derived XEN, an ExEn cell line. In vitro differentiation of AFCL
results in the generation of cells expressing albumin and a-fetoprotein (AFP),
while intramuscular injection of AFCL into immunodeficient mice produced
AFP-positive tumors with primitive endodermal appearance. Hence, E11.5 mouse AF
contains cells that efficiently produce XEN lines. These AF-derived XEN lines do 
not spontaneously differentiate into embryonic-type cells but are phenotypically 
stable and have the capacity for extensive expansion. The lack of requirement for
reprogramming factors to turn AF-derived progenitor cells into stable cell lines 
capable of massive expansion together with the known ability of ExEn to
contribute to embryonic tissue suggests that this cell type may be a candidate
for banking for cell therapies.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMCID: PMC3914766
PMID: 24060676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Reproduction. 2013 Oct 23;146(6):569-79. doi: 10.1530/REP-13-0212. Print 2013
Dec.

Effects of TET1 knockdown on gene expression and DNA methylation in porcine
induced pluripotent stem cells.

Fan A(1), Ma K, An X, Ding Y, An P, Song G, Tang L, Zhang S, Zhang P, Tan W, Tang
B, Zhang X, Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Animal Embryo Engineering, The Center for
Animal Embryo Engineering of Jilin Province, College of Veterinary Medicine.

TET1 is implicated in maintaining the pluripotency of embryonic stem cells.
However, its precise effects on induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs), and
particularly on porcine iPSCs (piPSCs), are not well defined. To investigate the 
role of TET1 in the pluripotency and differentiation of piPSCs, piPSCs were
induced from porcine embryonic fibroblasts by overexpression of POU5F1 (OCT4),
SOX2, KLF4, and MYC (C-MYC). siRNAs targeting to TET1 were used to transiently
knockdown the expression of TET1 in piPSCs. Morphological abnormalities and loss 
of the undifferentiated state of piPSCs were observed in the piPSCs after the
downregulation of TET1. The effects of TET1 knockdown on the expression of key
stem cell factors and differentiation markers were analyzed to gain insights into
the molecular mechanisms underlying the phenomenon. The results revealed that
knockdown of TET1 resulted in the downregulated expression of
pluripotency-related genes, such as LEFTY2, KLF2, and SOX2, and the upregulated
expression of differentiation-related genes including PITX2, HAND1, GATA6, and
LEF1. However, POU5F1, MYC, KLF4, and NANOG were actually not downregulated.
Further analysis showed that the methylation levels of the promoters for POU5F1
and MYC increased significantly after TET1 downregulation, whereas there were no 
obvious changes in the promoters of SOX2, KLF4, and NANOG. The methylation of the
whole genome increased, while hydroxymethylation slightly declined. Taken
together, these results suggest that TET1 may play important roles in the
self-renewal of piPSCs and the maintenance of their characteristics by regulating
the expression of genes and the DNA methylation.

PMID: 24051058  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Development. 2013 Oct;140(19):4110-5. doi: 10.1242/dev.094615.

Genome-wide shRNA screening to identify factors mediating Gata6 repression in
mouse embryonic stem cells.

Cooper S(1), Brockdorff N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford,
OX1 3QU, UK.

The use of whole-genome pooled shRNA libraries in loss-of-function screening in
tissue culture models provides an effective means to identify novel factors
acting in pathways of interest. Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) offer a unique
opportunity to study processes involved in stem cell pluripotency and
differentiation. Here, we report a genome-wide shRNA screen in ESCs to identify
novel components involved in repression of the Gata6 locus, using a cell
viability-based screen, which offers the benefits of stable shRNA integration and
a robust and simple protocol for hit identification. Candidate factors identified
were enriched for transcription factors and included known Polycomb proteins and 
other chromatin-modifying factors. We identified the protein Bcor, which is known
to associate in complexes with the Polycomb protein Ring1B, and verified its
importance in Gata6 repression in ESCs. Potential further applications of such a 
screening strategy could allow the identification of factors important for
regulation of gene expression and pluripotency.

PMCID: PMC3775421
PMID: 24046324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Dev Biol. 2014 Jan 1;385(1):136-48. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.09.008. Epub 2013
Sep 13.

Allocation of inner cells to epiblast vs primitive endoderm in the mouse embryo
is biased but not determined by the round of asymmetric divisions (8<U+2192>16- and
16<U+2192>32-cells).

Krupa M(1), Mazur E, Szczepanska K, Filimonow K, Maleszewski M, Suwinska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Embryology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw,
Miecznikowa 1, 02-096 Warsaw, Poland.

The epiblast (EPI) and the primitive endoderm (PE), which constitute foundations 
for the future embryo body and yolk sac, build respectively deep and surface
layers of the inner cell mass (ICM) of the blastocyst. Before reaching their
target localization within the ICM, the PE and EPI precursor cells, which display
distinct lineage-specific markers, are intermingled randomly. Since the ICM cells
are produced in two successive rounds of asymmetric divisions at the 8<U+2192>16
(primary inner cells) and 16<U+2192>32 cell stage (secondary inner cells) it has been
suggested that the fate of inner cells (decision to become EPI or PE) may depend 
on the time of their origin. Our method of dual labeling of embryos allowed us to
distinguish between primary and secondary inner cells contributing ultimately to 
ICM. Our results show that the presence of two generations of inner cells in the 
32-cell stage embryo is the source of heterogeneity within the ICM. We found some
bias concerning the level of Fgf4 and Fgfr2 expression between primary and
secondary inner cells, resulting from the distinct number of cells expressing
these genes. Analysis of experimental aggregates constructed using different
ratios of inner cells surrounded by outer cells revealed that the fate of cells
does not depend exclusively on the timing of their generation, but also on the
number of cells generated in each wave of asymmetric division. Taking together,
the observed regulatory mechanism adjusting the proportion of outer to inner
cells within the embryo may be mediated by FGF signaling.

© 2013 Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24041854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Dev Biol. 2013 Nov 1;383(1):15-27. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2013.09.005. Epub 2013
Sep 11.

CTR9/PAF1c regulates molecular lineage identity, histone H3K36 trimethylation and
genomic imprinting during preimplantation development.

Zhang K(1), Haversat JM, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Genome-wide epigenetic reprogramming is required for successful preimplantation
development. Inappropriate or deficient chromatin regulation can result in
defective lineage specification and loss of genomic imprinting, compromising
normal development. Here we report that two members of the RNA polymerase II
associated factor, homolog (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) complex (PAF1 complex)
components, Ctr9 and Rtf1, are required during mammalian preimplantation
development. We demonstrate that Ctr9-deficient embryos fail to correctly specify
lineages at the blastocyst stage. Expression of some lineage specific factors is 
markedly reduced in Ctr9 knockdown embryos, including Eomes, Elf5 and Sox2, while
others are inappropriately expressed (Oct4, Nanog, Gata6, Fgf4 and Sox17). We
also show that several imprinted genes (Mest, Peg3, Snrpn and Meg3) are
aberrantly expressed although allele specific DNA methylation is not altered. We 
document a loss of histone H3 lysine 36 trimethylation (H3K36me3) in
Ctr9-deficient embryos and confirm that knockdown of either Setd2 or Rtf1 results
in similar phenotypes. These findings show that the PAF1 complex is required for 
mammalian development, likely through regulation of H3K36me3, and indicate
functional conservation of the PAF1 complex from yeast to mammals in vivo.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24036311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Dev Growth Differ. 2013 Sep;55(7):676-86. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12075. Epub 2013 Sep
11.

Insulin induces proliferation and cardiac differentiation of P19CL6 cells in a
dose-dependent manner.

Li WY(1), Song YL, Xiong CJ, Lu PQ, Xue LX, Yao CX, Wang WP, Zhang SF, Zhang SF, 
Wei QX, Zhang YY, Zhao JM, Zang MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, Henan, 450001, China.

Insulin is a peptide hormone produced by beta cells of the pancreas. The roles of
insulin in energy metabolism have been well studied, with most of the attention
focused on glucose utilization, but the roles of insulin in cell proliferation
and differentiation remain unclear. In this study, we observed for the first time
that 10 nmol/L insulin treatment induces cell proliferation and cardiac
differentiation of P19CL6 cells, whereas 50 and 100 nmol/L insulin treatment
induces P19CL6 cell apoptosis and blocks cardiac differentiation of P19CL6 cells.
By using real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and Western blotting analysis,
we found that the mRNA levels of cyclin D1 and a myosin heavy chain (a-MHC) are
induced upon 10 nmol/L insulin stimulation and inhibited upon 50/100 nmol/L
insulin treatment, whereas the mRNA levels of BCL-2-antagonist of cell death
(BAD) exists a reverse trend. The similar results were observed in P19CL6 cells
expressing GATA-6 or peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a (PPARa). Our
results identified the downstream targets of insulin, cyclin D1, BAD, a-MHC, and 
GATA-4, elucidate a novel molecular mechanism of insulin in promoting cell
proliferation and differentiation.

© 2013 The Authors Development, Growth & Differentiation © 2013 Japanese Society 
of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 24020834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. BMC Dev Biol. 2013 Aug 13;13:32. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-13-32.

Changes in sub-cellular localisation of trophoblast and inner cell mass specific 
transcription factors during bovine preimplantation development.

Madeja ZE(1), Sosnowski J, Hryniewicz K, Warzych E, Pawlak P, Rozwadowska N,
Plusa B, Lechniak D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Poznan University of Life
Sciences, Wolynska 33, Poznan 60-673, Poland. zofia.madeja@jay.up.poznan.pl

BACKGROUND: Preimplantation bovine development is emerging as an attractive
experimental model, yet little is known about the mechanisms underlying
trophoblast (TE)/inner cell mass (ICM) segregation in cattle. To gain an insight 
into these processes we have studied protein and mRNA distribution during the
crucial stages of bovine development. Protein distribution of lineage specific
markers OCT4, NANOG, CDX2 were analysed in 5-cell, 8-16 cell, morula and
blastocyst stage embryos. ICM/TE mRNA levels were compared in hatched blastocysts
and included: OCT4, NANOG, FN-1, KLF4, c-MYC, REX1, CDX2, KRT-18 and GATA6.
RESULTS: At the mRNA level the observed distribution patterns agree with the
mouse model. CDX2 and OCT4 proteins were first detected in 5-cell stage embryos. 
NANOG appeared at the morula stage and was located in the cytoplasm forming
characteristic rings around the nuclei. Changes in sub-cellular localisation of
OCT4, NANOG and CDX2 were noted from the 8-16 cell onwards. CDX2 initially
co-localised with OCT4, but at the blastocyst stage a clear lineage segregation
could be observed. Interestingly, we have observed in a small proportion of
embryos (2%) that CDX2 immunolabelling overlapped with mitotic chromosomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Cell fate specification in cattle become evident earlier than
presently anticipated - around the time of bovine embryonic genome activation.
There is an intriguing possibility that for proper lineage determination certain 
transcription factors (such as CDX2) may need to occupy specific regions of
chromatin prior to its activation in the interphase nucleus. Our observation
suggests a possible role of CDX2 in the process of epigenetic regulation of
embryonic cell fate.

PMCID: PMC3751447
PMID: 23941255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Development. 2013 Sep;140(18):3787-98. doi: 10.1242/dev.093567. Epub 2013 Jul 31.

Tmem88a mediates GATA-dependent specification of cardiomyocyte progenitors by
restricting WNT signaling.

Novikov N(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, Cornell University, 1300
York Ave., LC-708, New York, NY, USA.

Biphasic control of WNT signaling is essential during cardiogenesis, but how the 
pathway switches from promoting cardiac mesoderm to restricting cardiomyocyte
progenitor fate is unknown. We identified genes expressed in lateral mesoderm
that are dysregulated in zebrafish when both gata5 and gata6 are depleted,
causing a block to cardiomyocyte specification. This screen identified tmem88a,
which is expressed in the early cardiac progenitor field and was previously
implicated in WNT modulation by overexpression studies. Depletion of tmem88a
results in a profound cardiomyopathy, secondary to impaired cardiomyocyte
specification. In tmem88a morphants, activation of the WNT pathway exacerbates
the cardiomyocyte deficiency, whereas WNT inhibition rescues progenitor cells and
cardiogenesis. We conclude that specification of cardiac fate downstream of
gata5/6 involves activation of the tmem88a gene to constrain WNT signaling and
expand the number of cardiac progenitors. Tmem88a is a novel component of the
regulatory mechanism controlling the second phase of biphasic WNT activity
essential for embryonic cardiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3754477
PMID: 23903195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Nov;383(1-2):161-71. doi: 10.1007/s11010-013-1764-x. Epub 
2013 Jul 23.

Genetic isolation of stem cell-derived pacemaker-nodal cardiac myocytes.

Hashem SI(1), Claycomb WC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center, 1901 Perdido Street, New Orleans, LA, 70112, USA.

Dysfunction of the cardiac pacemaker tissues due to genetic defects, acquired
diseases, or aging results in arrhythmias. When arrhythmias occur, artificial
pacemaker implants are used for treatment. However, the numerous limitations of
electronic implants have prompted studies of biological pacemakers that can
integrate into the myocardium providing a permanent cure. Embryonic stem (ES)
cells cultured as three-dimensional (3D) spheroid aggregates termed embryoid
bodies possess the ability to generate all cardiac myocyte subtypes. Here, we
report the use of a SHOX2 promoter and a Cx30.2 enhancer to genetically identify 
and isolate ES cell-derived sinoatrial node (SAN) and atrioventricular node (AVN)
cells, respectively. The ES cell-derived Shox2 and Cx30.2 cardiac myocytes
exhibit a spider cell morphology and high intracellular calcium loading
characteristic of pacemaker-nodal myocytes. These cells express abundant levels
of pacemaker genes such as endogenous HCN4, Cx45, Cx30.2, Tbx2, and Tbx3. These
cells were passaged, frozen, and thawed multiple times while maintaining their
pacemaker-nodal phenotype. When cultured as 3D aggregates in an attempt to create
a critical mass that simulates in vivo architecture, these cell lines exhibited
an increase in the expression level of key regulators of cardiovascular
development, such as GATA4 and GATA6 transcription factors. In addition, the
aggregate culture system resulted in an increase in the expression level of
several ion channels that play a major role in the spontaneous diastolic
depolarization characteristic of pacemaker cells. We have isolated pure
populations of SAN and AVN cells that will be useful tools for generating
biological pacemakers.

PMID: 23877224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2013;37(4-5):229-39. doi: 10.1159/000350148. Epub 2013
Jul 8.

HDAC inhibition suppresses cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis in DOCA-salt
hypertensive rats via regulation of HDAC6/HDAC8 enzyme activity.

Kee HJ(1), Bae EH, Park S, Lee KE, Suh SH, Kim SW, Jeong MH.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Research Center of Chonnam National University Hospital, Gwangju
501-757, Republic of Korea.

Background : Inhibition of histone deacetylase (HDAC) was reported to suppress
cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis in various hypertrophic animal models. However, 
the HDAC expression profile and HDAC enzyme activity have not yet been
investigated in DOCA-salt hypertensive rats. Methods : Unilaterally
nephrectomized rats were implanted with DOCA strips. DOCA-salt rats then received
a control diet with vehicle or valproate. We measured the expression of cardiac
hypertrophic markers, class I HDACs, class II HDACs, fibrosis, and HDAC enzyme
activity. Results : Here we report that sodium valproate inhibits the cardiac
hypertrophy accompanied by fibrosis in the heart of chronic hypertensive rats. We
show that expression of GATA6 and HDAC6 is upregulated in DOCA-salt hypertension.
In addition, HDAC6 and HDAC8 enzyme activity is attenuated by sodium valproate.
Conclusion : These results suggest that a novel HDAC6- and HDAC8-selective
inhibitor is needed to treat or prevent pathological cardiac hypertrophy. © 2013 
S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23868068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Pathol Res Pract. 2013 Aug;209(8):503-9. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2013.06.002. Epub
2013 Jun 21.

Expression of Wnt and TGF-ß pathway components and key adrenal transcription
factors in adrenocortical tumors: association to carcinoma aggressiveness.

Parviainen H(1), Schrade A, Kiiveri S, Prunskaite-Hyyryläinen R, Haglund C,
Vainio S, Wilson DB, Arola J, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Finland.

Factors controlling benign and malignant adrenocortical tumorigenesis are largely
unknown, but several mouse models suggest an important role for inhibin-alpha
(INHA). To show that findings in the mouse are relevant to human tumors and
clinical outcome, we investigated the expression of signaling proteins and
transcription factors involved in the regulation of INHA in human tumor samples· 
Thirty-one adrenocortical tumor samples, including 13 adrenocortical carcinomas
(ACCs), were categorized according to Weiss score, hormonal profile, and patient 
survival data and analyzed using immunohistochemistry and RT-PCR. Expression of
the TGF-ß signaling mediator SMAD3 varied inversely with Weiss score, so that
SMAD3 expression was lowest in the most malignant tumors. By contrast, SMAD2
expression was upregulated in most malignant tumors. Wnt pathway co-receptors
LRP5 and LRP6 were predominantly expressed in benign adrenocortical tumors. In
ACCs, expression of transcription factors GATA-6 and SF-1 correlated with that of
their target gene INHA. Moreover, the diminished expression of GATA-6 and SF-1 in
ACCs correlated with poor outcome. We conclude that the factors driving INHA
expression are reduced in ACCs with poor outcome, implicating a role for INHA as 
a tumor suppressor in humans.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3777642
PMID: 23866946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Sep;41(16):e157. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt601. Epub 2013 Jul
16.

Genome-wide hydroxymethylation tested using the HELP-GT assay shows
redistribution in cancer.

Bhattacharyya S(1), Yu Y, Suzuki M, Campbell N, Mazdo J, Vasanthakumar A, Bhagat 
TD, Nischal S, Christopeit M, Parekh S, Steidl U, Godley L, Maitra A, Greally JM,
Verma A.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue,
Bronx, NY 10461, USA, Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Bronx, NY 10461, USA, Department of Pathology,
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 1550 Orleans Street, Baltimore MD 21231, USA,
Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, 5841 S. Maryland Avenue, Chicago, 
IL 60637, USA and Department of Medicine, Hematology and Medical Oncology, Mount 
Sinai School of Medicine, 1470 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10029, USA.

5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5-hmC) is a recently discovered epigenetic modification 
that is altered in cancers. Genome-wide assays for 5-hmC determination are needed
as many of the techniques for 5-methylcytosine (5-mC) determination, including
methyl-sensitive restriction digestion and bisulfite sequencing cannot
distinguish between 5-mC and 5-hmC. Glycosylation of 5-hmC residues by
beta-glucosyl transferase (ß-GT) can make CCGG residues insensitive to digestion 
by MspI. Restriction digestion by HpaII, MspI or MspI after ß-GT conversion,
followed by adapter ligation, massive parallel sequencing and custom
bioinformatic analysis allowed us determine distribution of 5-mC and 5-hmC at
single base pair resolution at MspI restriction sites. The resulting HpaII tiny
fragment Enrichment by Ligation-mediated PCR with ß-GT (HELP-GT) assay identified
5-hmC loci that were validated at global level by liquid chromatography-mass
spectrometry (LC-MS) and the locus-specific level by quantitative reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction of 5-hmC pull-down DNA.
Hydroxymethylation at both promoter and intragenic locations correlated
positively with gene expression. Analysis of pancreatic cancer samples revealed
striking redistribution of 5-hmC sites in cancer cells and demonstrated
enrichment of this modification at many oncogenic promoters such as GATA6. The
HELP-GT assay allowed global determination of 5-hmC and 5-mC from low amounts of 
DNA and with the use of modest sequencing resources. Redistribution of 5-hmC seen
in cancer highlights the importance of determination of this modification in
conjugation with conventional methylome analysis.

PMCID: PMC3763560
PMID: 23861445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Dig Dis Sci. 2013 Sep;58(9):2518-27. doi: 10.1007/s10620-013-2752-4. Epub 2013
Jul 6.

Silencing of GATA6 suppresses SW1990 pancreatic cancer cell growth in vitro and
up-regulates reactive oxygen species.

Chen WB(1), Huang FT, Zhuang YY, Tang J, Zhuang XH, Cheng WJ, Gu ZQ, Zhang SN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Sun Yat-sen Memorial Hospital, Sun Yat-sen
University, No. 107 Yanjiang West Road, Guangzhou, 510120, Guangdong, People's
Republic of China. wenbochen2012@163.com

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Pancreatic cancer has the worst prognosis of any
gastrointestinal cancer with a mortality rate approaching its incidence. Previous
studies have indicated that GATA6 plays a key role in organ development and
function, and that abnormal expression of GATA6 may induce tumorigenesis.
Meanwhile, it has been reported that generation of reactive oxygen species
contributes to carcinogenesis. In this study, we set out to study the role of
GATA6 expression on proliferation and apoptosis of pancreatic cancer cells and
the role of reactive oxygen species.
METHODS: Four target miRNA sequences against GATA6 mRNA were synthesized and used
to transfect SW1990 cells. Then, GATA6 expression in SW1990 cells was examined by
western blot and quantative real-time polymerase chain reaction. Cell
proliferation was examined by WST-8 and colony formation assay. Cell cycle
progression and apoptosis were measured by flow cytometry. We also measured the
generation of reactive oxygen species by immunofluorescence and flow cytometry.
RESULTS: RNA interference against GATA6 successfully inhibited mRNA and protein
expression of GATA6 in the SW1990 pancreatic cancer cell line. Silencing of GATA6
by RNA interference inhibited cell proliferation and increased apoptosis of
SW1990, and enhanced the expression of reactive oxygen species.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the RNA interference approach against
GATA6 may be an effective therapeutic approach for treatment of pancreatic
cancer.

PMID: 23832791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2013 Sep 15;305(6):H829-42. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00761.2012. Epub 2013 Jul 5.

Nox2 and Nox4 influence neonatal c-kit(+) cardiac precursor cell status and
differentiation.

Nadworny AS(1), Guruju MR, Poor D, Doran RM, Sharma RV, Kotlikoff MI, Davisson
RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Weill Cornell Medical College,
New York, New York; and.

Redox status has emerged as critical in modulating stemness and lineage
commitment in several precursor cell types. However, a role for redox genes,
specifically NADPH oxidases (Nox), in cardiac precursor cells (CPCs) has not been
established. We tested whether CPCs marked by type III receptor tyrosine kinase
c-kit (c-kit(+)) exhibit a unique NADPH oxidase signature that confers precursor 
status and whether alterations in this profile are functionally linked to changes
in lineage specification. Dihydroethidium (DHE) microfluorography indicated
reduced basal reactive oxygen species (ROS) formation within early postnatal
c-kit(+) CPCs. Real-time quantitative PCR revealed downregulation of ROS
generator Nox2 and its subunit p67(phox) in c-kit(+) CPCs under basal conditions 
but upregulation of Nox2 and Nox4 over the course of differentiation. Adenoviral 
silencing of Nox2 and Nox4 increased expression of CPC markers c-kit and Flk-1
and blunted smooth and cardiac muscle differentiation, respectively, while
overexpression of Nox2 and Nox4 significantly reduced c-kit expression. These
changes were accompanied by altered expression of transcription factors
regulating cardiac lineage commitment, Gata6 and Gata4, and cytokine transforming
growth factor (TGF)-ß1. Similar to other precursor cell types, RT(2)Profiler PCR 
Arrays revealed that c-kit(+) CPCs also exhibit enhanced antioxidant capacity at 
the mRNA level. In conclusion, we report that c-kit(+) CPCs demonstrate reduced
Nox2 expression and ROS levels and that increases in Nox2 and Nox4 influence
their differentiation into mature cells. We speculate that ROS generators Nox2
and Nox4, along with the antioxidant genes identified by PCR Arrays, may be novel
targets in CPCs that could prove useful in cell-based therapy of the heart.

PMCID: PMC3761344
PMID: 23832701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Dec 1;22(23):3141-55. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0024. Epub 2013 
Aug 14.

Influence of activin A supplementation during human embryonic stem cell
derivation on germ cell differentiation potential.

Duggal G(1), Heindryckx B, Warrier S, O'Leary T, Van der Jeught M, Lierman S,
Vossaert L, Deroo T, Deforce D, Chuva de Sousa Lopes SM, De Sutter P.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department for Reproductive Medicine, Ghent University Hospital , Ghent,
Belgium .

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) are more similar to "primed" mouse epiblast
stem cells (mEpiSCs). mEpiSCs, which are derived in Activin A, show an increased 
propensity to form primordial germ cell (PGC)-like cells in response to bone
morphogenic protein 4 (BMP4). Hence, we hypothesized that hESCs derived in the
presence of Activin A may be more competent in differentiating towards PGC-like
cells after supplementation with BMP4 compared to standard hESC lines. We were
able to successfully derive two hESC lines in the presence of Activin A, which
were pluripotent and showed higher base levels of STELLA and cKIT compared to
standard hESC lines derived without Activin A addition. Furthermore, upon
differentiation as embryoid bodies in the presence of BMP4, we observed
upregulation of VASA at day 7, both at the transcript and protein level compared 
to standard hESC lines, which appeared to take longer time for PGC specification.
Unlike other hESC lines, nuclear pSMAD2/3 presence confirmed that Activin
signalling was switched on in Activin A-derived hESC lines. They were also
responsive to BMP4 based on nuclear detection of pSMAD1/5/8 and showed endodermal
differentiation as a result of GATA-6 expression. Hence, our results provide
novel insights into the impact of hESC derivation in the presence of Activin A
and its subsequent influence on germ cell differentiation potential in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3856713
PMID: 23829223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Toxicol In Vitro. 2014 Feb;28(1):113-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2013.06.014. Epub 2013
Jun 29.

Characterization of hepatic markers in human Wharton's Jelly-derived mesenchymal 
stem cells.

Buyl K(1), De Kock J, Najar M, Lagneaux L, Branson S, Rogiers V, Vanhaecke T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Center for Pharmaceutical Research (CePhaR), Vrije
Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic 
address: karobuyl@vub.ac.be.

Stem cell technology could offer a unique tool to develop human-based in vitro
liver models that are applicable for testing of potential liver toxicity early
during drug development. In this context, recent research has indicated that
human Wharton's Jelly-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hWJs) represent an
interesting stem cell population to develop human hepatocyte-like cells. Here, an
in-depth analysis of the expression of liver-specific transcription factors and
other key hepatic markers in hWJs is evaluated at both the mRNA and protein
level. Our results reveal that transcription factors that are mandatory to
acquire and maintain an adult hepatic phenotype (HNF4A and HNF1A), as well as
adult hepatic markers (ALB, CX32, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2B6 and CYP3A4) are not
expressed in hWJs with the exception of K18. On the contrary, transcription
factors involved in liver development (GATA4, GATA6, SOX9 and SOX17) and liver
progenitor markers (DKK1, DPP4, DSG2, CX43 and K19) were found to be highly
expressed in hWJs. These findings provide additional indication that hWJs could
be a promising stem cell source to generate hepatocyte-like cells necessary for
the development of a functional human-based in vitro liver model.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23820183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Chin Med Sci J. 2013 Jun;28(2):65-71.

Up-regulation of Fas ligand expression by sirtuin 1 in both flow-restricted
vessels and serum-stimulated vascular smooth muscle cells.

Li L(1), Gao P, Chen HZ, Zhang ZQ, Xu TT, Jia YY, Zhang HN, Du GH, Liu DP.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Key Laboratory of Drug Target and Screening Research, Institute of
Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing 100050, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the role of sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) in Fas ligand (FasL) expression
regulation during vascular lesion formation and to elucidate the potential
mechanisms.
METHODS: SIRT1 and FasL protein levels were detected by Western blotting in
either mouse arteries extract or the whole rat aortic vascular smooth muscle cell
(VSMC) lysate. Smooth muscle cell (SMC)-specific human SIRT1 transgenic (Tg)
C57BL/6 mice and their littermate wild-type (WT) controls underwent complete
carotid artery ligation (ligation groups) or the ligation-excluded operation
(sham groups). The carotid arteries were collected 1 day after operation. Reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction was performed to detect the mRNA levels
of SIRT1 and FasL. Luciferase reporter assays were performed to detect the effect
of WT-SIRT1, a dominant-negative form of SIRT1 (SIRT1H363Y), and GATA-6 on the
promoter activity of FasL. Flow cytometry assay was applied to measure the
hypodiploid DNA content of VSMC so as to monitor cellular apoptosis.
RESULTS: SIRT1 was expressed in both rat aortic VSMCs and mouse arteries. Forced 
SIRT1 expression increased FasL expression both in injured mouse carotid arteries
1 day after ligation (P<0.001) and VSMCs treated with serum (P<0.05 at the
transcriptional level, P<0.001 at the protein level). No notable apoptosis was
observed. Furthermore, transcription factor GATA-6 increased the promoter
activity of FasL (P<0.001). The induction of FasL promoter activity by GATA-6 was
enhanced by WT-SIRT1 (P<0.001), while SIRT1H363Y significantly relieved the
enhancing effect of WT-SIRT1 on GATA-6 (P<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Overexpression of SIRT1 up-regulates FasL expression in both
flow-restricted mouse carotid arteries and serum-stimulated VSMCs. The
transcription factor GATA-6 participates in the transcriptional regulation of
FasL expression by SIRT1.

PMID: 23806367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Dec;114(12):2708-17. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24619.

Insulin induces C2C12 cell proliferation and apoptosis through regulation of
cyclin D1 and BAD expression.

Xiong CJ(1), Li PF, Song YL, Xue LX, Jia ZQ, Yao CX, Wei QX, Zhang SF, Zhang SF, 
Zhang YY, Zhao JM, Wang TQ, Guo MF, Zang MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou City, Henan, 450001, China.

Insulin is a secreted peptide hormone identified in human pancreas to promote
glucose utilization. Insulin has been observed to induce cell proliferation and
myogenesis in C2C12 cells. The precise mechanisms underlying the proliferation of
C2C12 cells induced by insulin remain unclear. In this study, we observed for the
first time that 10 nM insulin treatment promotes C2C12 cell proliferation.
Additionally, 50 and 100 nM insulin treatment induces C2C12 cell apoptosis. By
utilizing real-time PCR and Western blotting analysis, we found that the mRNA
levels of cyclinD1 and BAD are induced upon 10 and 50 nM/100 nM insulin
treatment, respectively. The similar results were observed in C2C12 cells
expressing GATA-6 or PPARa. Our results identify for the first time the
downstream targets of insulin, cyclin D1, and BAD, elucidate a new molecular
mechanism of insulin in promoting cell proliferation and apoptosis.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23794242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Oncol Rep. 2013 Sep;30(3):1355-61. doi: 10.3892/or.2013.2544. Epub 2013 Jun 19.

GATA6 predicts prognosis and hepatic metastasis of colorectal cancer.

Shen F(1), Li J, Cai W, Zhu G, Gu W, Jia L, Xu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou
Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510180, P.R. China.

Liver metastasis is a major cause of mortality for colorectal cancer (CRC).
However, the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. GATA binding protein 6
(GATA6), a zinc-finger transcription factor, is expressed in the colorectal
epithelium. We investigated the clinical significance of GATA6 and its role in
invasion and metastasis in CRC. Expression of GATA6 in 89 cancerous, 35 adjacent 
normal and 39 liver metastatic samples from 89 CRC patients undergoing surgical
resection was detected by immunohistochemical (IHC) methods. The effect of GATA6 
on invasion and metastasis was assessed in CRC cells by shRNA lentivirus or
expressed-plasmid transfection. We found that GATA6 expression was significantly 
higher in liver metastatic tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues.
Aberrant GATA6 expression in CRC was associated with liver metastasis.
Kaplan-Meier analysis showed GATA6 expression correlated with poor overall
survival (OS) in CRC. The cell invasion and migration of established CRC cell
lines were decreased by GATA6 knockdown and enhanced by GATA6 overexpression in
vitro. Thus, aberrant expression of GATA6 correlates with poor prognosis and
liver metastasis in CRC.

PMID: 23784465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Nov 1;22(21):2915-26. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0123. Epub 2013 
Jul 26.

Shox2 regulates the pacemaker gene program in embryoid bodies.

Hashem SI(1), Lam ML, Mihardja SS, White SM, Lee RJ, Claycomb WC.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Louisiana State University
Health Sciences Center , New Orleans, Louisiana.

The pacemaker tissues of the heart are a complex set of specialized cells that
initiate the rhythmic heartbeat. The sinoatrial node (SAN) serves as the primary 
pacemaker, whereas the atrioventricular node can serve as a subsidiary pacemaker 
in cases of SAN failure or block. The elucidation of genetic networks regulating 
the development of these tissues is crucial for understanding the mechanisms
underlying arrhythmias and for the design of targeted therapies. Here we report
temporal and spatial self-organized formation of the pacemaker and contracting
tissues in three-dimensional aggregate cultures of mouse embryonic stem cells
termed embryoid bodies (EBs). Using genetic marker expression and
electrophysiological analyses we demonstrate that in EBs the pacemaker potential 
originates from a localized population of cells and propagates into the adjacent 
contracting region forming a functional syncytium. When Shox2, a major
determinant of the SAN genetic pathway, was ablated we observed substantial
slowing of spontaneous contraction rates and an altered gene expression pattern
including downregulation of HCN4, Cx45, Tbx2, Tbx3, and bone morphogenetic
protein 4 (BMP4); and upregulation of Cx40, Cx43, Nkx2.5, and Tbx5. This
phenotype could be rescued by adding BMP4 to Shox2 knockout EBs in culture from
days 6 to 16 of differentiation. When wild-type EBs were treated with Noggin, a
potent BMP4 inhibitor, we observed a phenotype consistent with the Shox2 knockout
EB. Altogether, we have generated a reproducible in vitro model that will be an
invaluable tool for studying the molecular pathways regulating the development of
cardiac pacemaker tissues.

PMID: 23767866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):707-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.05.013.

Hopping between differentiation states in lung adenocarcinoma.

Watanabe H(1), Meyerson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline
Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA. hideo_watanabe@dfci.harvard.edu

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):725-38.

The work by Cheung and colleagues, in this issue of Cancer Cell, demonstrates
another example of how lineage-specific transcriptional regulators of
differentiation, GATA6 and HOPX, can control the fate of lung adenocarcinoma
progression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3748274
PMID: 23763994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Dev Cell. 2013 Jun 24;25(6):610-22. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2013.05.004. Epub 2013 
Jun 6.

Oct4 cell-autonomously promotes primitive endoderm development in the mouse
blastocyst.

Frum T(1), Halbisen MA, Wang C, Amiri H, Robson P, Ralston A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell, and Developmental Biology, University of
California, Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2013 Jun 24;25(6):547-8.

In embryonic stem (ES) cells and in early mouse embryos, the transcription factor
Oct4 is an essential regulator of pluripotency. Oct4 transcriptional targets have
been described in ES cell lines; however, the molecular mechanisms by which Oct4 
regulates establishment of pluripotency in the epiblast (EPI) have not been fully
elucidated. Here, we show that neither maternal nor zygotic Oct4 is required for 
the formation of EPI cells in the blastocyst. Rather, Oct4 is first required for 
development of the primitive endoderm (PE), an extraembryonic lineage. EPI cells 
promote PE fate in neighboring cells by secreting Fgf4, and Oct4 is required for 
expression of Fgf4, but we show that Oct4 promotes PE development
cell-autonomously, downstream of Fgf4 and Mapk. Finally, we show that Oct4 is
required for the expression of multiple EPI and PE genes as well as multiple
metabolic pathways essential for the continued growth of the preimplantation
embryo.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4076445
PMID: 23747191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Oct 15;22(20):2706-13. doi: 10.1089/scd.2013.0083. Epub 2013
Jul 24.

Spontaneously differentiated GATA6-positive human embryonic stem cells represent 
an important cellular step in human embryonic development; they are not just an
artifact of in vitro culture.

Lee JH(1), Hong KS, Mantel C, Broxmeyer HE, Lee MR, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School of Biomedical Science and 
Engineering, Hanyang University , Seoul, Korea.

In this study, we isolated and characterized spontaneously differentiated human
embryonic stem cells (SD-hESCs) found in hESC colonies in comparison to the
morphologically premature ESCs in the colonies to investigate the potential role 
of SD-hESCs in embryogenesis. SD-hESCs were distinguished from undifferentiated
hESCs by their higher expression of GATA6, a marker for primitive endoderm and
transthyretin, a marker visceral endoderm in embryoid bodies (EBs). SD-hESCs
expressed OCT4 and NANOG, markers for pluripotent stem cells, at significantly
lower levels than undifferentiated hESCs. EBs derived from isolated SD-hESCs were
morphologically distinct from cells directly derived from the undifferentiated
hESCs; they contained higher number of cysts compared to EBs from
undifferentiated hESC-derived EBs (42% vs. 20%). Furthermore, the extracellular
signal molecule, BMP2/4, induced a higher GATA4/6 expression and cystic EB
formation than control and noggin-treated EBs. Since cystic formation in EBs play
a role in primitive endoderm formation during embryogenesis, the SD-hESC may be a
relevant cell type equipped to differentiate into primitive endoderm. Our results
suggest that SD-ESCs generated during routine hESC culture are not just an
artifact of in vitro culture and these cells could serve as a useful model to
study the process of embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3787399
PMID: 23746070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Physiol Genomics. 2013 Aug 15;45(16):697-709. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00042.2013. Epub 2013 Jun 4.

Human coronary artery perivascular adipocytes overexpress genes responsible for
regulating vascular morphology, inflammation, and hemostasis.

Chatterjee TK(1), Aronow BJ, Tong WS, Manka D, Tang Y, Bogdanov VY, Unruh D,
Blomkalns AL, Piegore MG Jr, Weintraub DS, Rudich SM, Kuhel DG, Hui DY, Weintraub
NL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA.
tapan.chatterjee@uc.edu

Inflammatory cross talk between perivascular adipose tissue and the blood vessel 
wall has been proposed to contribute to the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis. We
previously reported that human perivascular (PV) adipocytes exhibit a
proinflammatory phenotype and less adipogenic differentiation than do
subcutaneous (SQ) adipocytes. To gain a global view of the genomic basis of
biologic differences between PV and SQ adipocytes, we performed genome-wide
expression analyses to identify differentially expressed genes between adipocytes
derived from human SQ vs. PV adipose tissues. Although >90% of well-expressed
genes were similarly regulated, we identified a signature of 307 differentially
expressed genes that were highly enriched for functions associated with the
regulation of angiogenesis, vascular morphology, inflammation, and blood
clotting. Of the 156 PV upregulated genes, 59 associate with angiogenesis,
vascular biology, or inflammation, noteworthy of which include TNFRSF11B
(osteoprotegerin), PLAT, TGFB1, THBS2, HIF1A, GATA6, and SERPINE1. Of 166 PV
downregulated genes, 21 associated with vascular biology and inflammation,
including ANGPT1, ANGPTL1, and VEGFC. Consistent with the emergent hypothesis
that PV adipocytes differentially regulate angiogenesis and inflammation, cell
culture-derived adipocyte-conditioned media from PV adipocytes strongly enhanced 
endothelial cell tubulogenesis and monocyte migration compared with media from SQ
adipocytes. These findings demonstrate that PV adipocytes have the potential to
significantly modulate vascular inflammatory crosstalk in the setting of
atherosclerosis by their ability to signal to both endothelial and inflammatory
cells.

PMCID: PMC3742916
PMID: 23737535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Dev Dyn. 2013 Sep;242(9):1110-20. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23991. Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Morphogenetic analysis of peri-implantation development.

Wallingford MC(1), Angelo JR, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
USA.

BACKGROUND: Although successful implantation is required for development in
placental mammals, the molecular and morphogenetic events that define
peri-implantation remain largely unexplored.
RESULTS: Here we present detailed morphological and immunohistochemical analysis 
of mouse embryos between embryonic day 3.75 and 5.25 of gestation, during the
implantation process in vivo. We examined expression patterns of key
transcription factors (Sox2, Oct4, Nanog, Cdx2, Gata6, Sox17, and Yy1) during
pre- and postimplantation development. Additionally, we examined morphogenetic
changes through analysis of ZO-1, Laminin, and E-Cadherin localization. The
results presented reveal novel changes in gene expression and morphogenetic
events during peri-implantation in utero. Here we show: (1) molecular and
morphological changes in primitive endoderm cells as they transition from a salt 
and pepper distribution to a sheet covering the inner cell mass; (2)
tissue-specific GATA6 levels; and (3) a striking pattern of SOX17 that is
suggestive of a functional role either directing or permitting implantation at
specific sites in the uterine epithelium.
CONCLUSIONS: A growing number of knockout mice display peri-implantation
lethality, and the data presented herein identify key morphogenetic landmarks
that can be used to characterize mutant phenotypes, as well as further our basic 
understanding of peri-implantation development.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23728800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Indian J Hum Genet. 2012 Sep;18(3):369-72. doi: 10.4103/0971-6866.108050.

A novel 11;18 translocation in a case of acute myeloid leukemia with maturation.

Sandhya DG(1), Ahmed F, Khadke K, Murthy SS, Rajappa SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Basavatarakam Indo American Cancer Hospital
and Research Institute, Hyderabad, India.

Acute myeloid leukemia with maturation (AML-M2) is associated with the 8;21
translocation. For the first time in an adult patient with AML-M2, a novel
unbalanced translocation involving the short arm of chromosome 11 and long arm of
chromosome18 with new breakpoints is presented. CD82 on band 11p11.2 and GATA 6
on 18q11.2 may play a role in the pathogenesis of de novo AML M2. The report with
translocation (11;18)(p11.2;q11.2), as the sole cytogenetic abnormality provides 
more data on the leukemogenesis of de novo AML M2.

PMCID: PMC3656533
PMID: 23716952  [PubMed]


163. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):725-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.009. Epub 2013 
May 23.

Control of alveolar differentiation by the lineage transcription factors GATA6
and HOPX inhibits lung adenocarcinoma metastasis.

Cheung WK(1), Zhao M, Liu Z, Stevens LE, Cao PD, Fang JE, Westbrook TF, Nguyen
DX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):707-9.

Molecular programs that mediate normal cell differentiation are required for
oncogenesis and tumor cell survival in certain cancers. How
cell-lineage-restricted genes specifically influence metastasis is poorly
defined. In lung cancers, we uncovered a transcriptional program that is
preferentially associated with distal airway epithelial differentiation and lung 
adenocarcinoma (ADC) progression. This program is regulated in part by the
lineage transcription factors GATA6 and HOPX. These factors can cooperatively
limit the metastatic competence of ADC cells, by modulating overlapping alveolar 
differentiation and invasogenic target genes. Thus, GATA6 and HOPX are critical
nodes in a lineage-selective pathway that directly links effectors of airway
epithelial specification to the inhibition of metastasis in the lung ADC subtype.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3697763
PMID: 23707782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Am J Med Genet A. 2013 Jul;161A(7):1773-8. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.35974. Epub 2013
May 21.

First report of a de novo 18q11.2 microdeletion including GATA6 associated with
complex congenital heart disease and renal abnormalities.

Bui PH(1), Dorrani N, Wong D, Perens G, Dipple KM, Quintero-Rivera F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Laboratory Medicine, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California at Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Deletions of the long arm of chromosome 18 have been previously reported in many 
patients. Most cases involve the more distal regions of the long arm
(18q21.1->qter). However, proximal interstitial deletions involving 18q11.2 are
extremely rare. Here we report on a 14-month-old female with a 4.7 Mb
(19,667,062-24,401,876 hg19) de novo interstitial deletion within chromosomal
band 18q11.2, which includes GATA6 and 24 other RefSeq genes. The clinical
features of our patient include complex congenital heart defects, a double outlet
right ventricle, a subaortic ventricular septal defect, D-malposed great
arteries, an atrial septal defect, a dysplastic aortic valve and patent ductus
arteriosus. In addition, she had renal anomalies-a duplicated collecting system
on the left and mild right hydronephrosis. These heart and renal defects are not 
reported in other patients with 18q proximal interstitial deletions. Heterozygous
point mutations in GATA6, encoding for a zinc finger transcription factor, have
been shown to cause congenital heart defects. Given the well-established
biological role of GATA6 in cardiac development, a deletion of GATA6 is very
likely responsible for our patient's complex congenital heart defects. This is
the smallest and most proximal 18q11.2 deletion involving GATA6 that is
associated with complex congenital heart disease and renal anomalies.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23696469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Int J Biol Sci. 2013 May 9;9(5):463-71. doi: 10.7150/ijbs.5404. Print 2013.

Karyotypic and molecular genetic changes associated with fetal cardiovascular
abnormalities: results of a retrospective 4-year ultrasonic diagnosis study.

Bao B(1), Wang Y, Hu H, Yao H, Li Y, Tang S, Zheng L, Xu Y, Liang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Southwest Hospital, Third Military
Medical University, Chongqing 400038, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the incidence of aneuploidy in fetuses with congenital 
heart defects (CHDs) and to further identify submicroscopic changes and global
DNA methylation levels as potential biomarkers in complex CHD cases.
METHODS: Fetuses at high risk for birth defects or with obvious sonographic
anomalies were recruited at the Prenatal Diagnosis Center and Ultrasonic
Diagnosis Center. Elective fetal karyotyping and DNA copy number and promoter
methylation analyses were carried out following parental consent. G-banded
karyotyping was performed to detect fetal aneuploidy. Copy number variations
(CNVs) were detected using the Affymetrix SNP Array 6.0 and validated by real
time PCR. Global DNA methylation analyses were conducted using a Roche NimbleGen 
Human DNA Methylation 3x720K Array, and DNA methylation differences were assayed 
by a Sequenom MassARRAY EpiTYPER.
RESULTS: Conventional karyotyping identified 30 cases with aneuploidy in 179 CHD 
fetuses. Various CNVs were found in two aneuploid fetuses and in five euploid CHD
fetuses. Verified segmental deletion or duplications were not directly associated
with cardiovascular malformations except in DAAM1 and GATA6. Verifiable aberrant 
DNA methylation could not be identified in three complex CHD fetuses.
CONCLUSIONS: In this study, Trisomy 18, Trisomy 21 and 45,XO were the most common
aneuploidies identified in CHD fetuses. In the affected samples, only DAAM1
deletion and GATA6 amplification could be associated with cardiovascular
biological processes.

PMCID: PMC3654495
PMID: 23678296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nat Protoc. 2013 Jun;8(6):1028-41. doi: 10.1038/nprot.2013.049. Epub 2013 May 2.

Derivation of extraembryonic endoderm stem (XEN) cells from mouse embryos and
embryonic stem cells.

Niakan KK(1), Schrode N, Cho LT, Hadjantonakis AK.

Author information: 
(1)The Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, University of
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. kniakan@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

At the time of implantation in the maternal uterus, the mouse blastocyst
possesses an inner cell mass comprising two lineages: epiblast (Epi) and
primitive endoderm (PrE). Representative stem cells derived from these two cell
lineages can be expanded and maintained indefinitely in vitro as either embryonic
stem (ES) or XEN cells, respectively. Here we describe protocols that can be used
to establish XEN cell lines. These include the establishment of XEN cells from
blastocyst-stage embryos in either standard embryonic or trophoblast stem (TS)
cell culture conditions. We also describe protocols for establishing XEN cells
directly from ES cells by either retinoic acid and activin-based conversion or by
overexpression of the GATA transcription factor Gata6. XEN cells are a useful
model of PrE cells, with which they share gene expression, differentiation
potential and lineage restriction. The robust protocols for deriving XEN cells
described here can be completed within 2-3 weeks.

PMCID: PMC3927835
PMID: 23640167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Diabetes Metab. 2013 Sep;39(4):370-4. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2013.01.005. Epub
2013 Apr 30.

A novel GATA6 mutation leading to congenital heart defects and permanent neonatal
diabetes: a case report.

Catli G(1), Abaci A, Flanagan SE, De Franco E, Ellard S, Hattersley A, Guleryuz
H, Bober E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Dokuz Eylul University, Faculty of
Medicine, Balcova, 35340 Izmir, Turkey.

Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus is a rare condition mostly due to
heterozygous mutations in the KCNJ11, ABCC8 and INS genes. Neonatal diabetes due 
to pancreatic agenesis is extremely rare. Mutations in PDX1, PTF1A, HNF1B,
EIF2AK3, RFX6 and GATA6 genes have been shown to result in pancreatic agenesis or
hypoplasia. This report describes a 40-day-old male infant diagnosed with
permanent neonatal diabetes associated with atrial septal defect, pulmonary
stenosis, patent ductus arteriosus and a novel de novo heterozygous missense
mutation (p.N466S) in the GATA6 gene with no evidence of exocrine pancreas
insufficiency. In addition to permanent neonatal diabetes, the patient had
transient idiopathic neonatal cholestasis and hypoglycaemic episodes unrelated to
insulin treatment, features that are rarely described in children with permanent 
neonatal diabetes.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23639568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;79(4):250-6. doi: 10.1159/000348844. Epub 2013 Apr 26.

Two novel GATA6 mutations cause childhood-onset diabetes mellitus, pancreas
malformation and congenital heart disease.

Gong M(1), Simaite D, Kühnen P, Heldmann M, Spagnoli F, Blankenstein O, Hübner N,
Hussain K, Raile K.

Author information: 
(1)Max Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Charité, Berlin, Germany.

BACKGROUND: GATA6 mutations are the most frequent cause of pancreatic agenesis
and diabetes in human sporadic cases. In families, dominantly inherited mutations
show a variable phenotype also in terms of endocrine and exocrine pancreatic
disease. We report two novel GATA6 mutations in an independent cohort of 8
children with pancreas aplasia or hypoplasia and diabetes.
METHODS: We sequenced GATA6 in 8 children with diabetes and inborn pancreas
abnormalities, i.e. hypoplasia or aplasia in which other known candidate genes
causing monogenic diabetes and pancreatic defects had been excluded.
RESULTS: We found two novel heterozygous GATA6 mutations (c.951_954dup and
c.754_904del) in 2 patients with sporadic pancreas hypoplasia, diabetes and
severe cardiac defects (common truncus arteriosus and tetralogy of Fallot), but
not in the remaining 6 patients. GATA6 mutations in carriers exhibited
hypoplastic pancreas with absent head in 1 patient and with increased
echogenicity and decreasing exocrine function in the other patient. Additionally,
hepatobiliary malformations and brain atrophy were found in 1 patient.
CONCLUSION: Our 2 cases with novel GATA6 mutations add more phenotype
characteristics of GATA6 haploinsufficiency. In agreement with an increasing
number of published cases, the wide phenotypic spectrum of GATA6 diabetes
syndrome should draw the attention of both pediatric endocrinologists and
geneticists.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23635550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. FEBS Lett. 2013 Jun 19;587(12):1754-61. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.04.018. Epub 
2013 Apr 25.

miR-145 inhibits isoproterenol-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy by targeting the
expression and localization of GATA6.

Li R(1), Yan G, Zhang Q, Jiang Y, Sun H, Hu Y, Sun J, Xu B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing
University Medical School, Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

Excessive ßAR stimulation is an independent factor in inducing pathological
cardiac hypertrophy. Here, we report miR-145 regulates both expression and
localization of GATA6, thereby protecting the heart against cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy induced by isoproterenol (ISO). The protective activity of miR-145
was associated with down-regulation of ANF, BNP and ß-MHC expression, a decreased
rate of protein synthesis, inhibited cardiomyocyte growth and the modulation of
several signaling pathways including ERK1/2, JNK and Akt-GSK3ß. The
anti-hypertrophic effect was abrogated by exogenous over-expression of
transcription factor GATA6 which was further identified as a direct target of
miR-145. In addition, GSK3ß antagonists, LiCl and TDZD8, restored the nuclear
accumulation of GATA6, which was attenuated by miR-145 Finally, we observed a
dynamic pattern of miR-145 expression in ISO-treated NRCMs and in the hearts of
TAC mice. Together, our results identify miR-145 as an important regulator in
cardiac hypertrophy.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4183134
PMID: 23624080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Am J Pathol. 2013 Jun;182(6):2391-406. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.02.039. Epub
2013 Apr 11.

Endothelial GATA-6 deficiency promotes pulmonary arterial hypertension.

Ghatnekar A(1), Chrobak I, Reese C, Stawski L, Seta F, Wirrig E, Paez-Cortez J,
Markiewicz M, Asano Y, Harley R, Silver R, Feghali-Bostwick C, Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
Charleston, South Carolina, USA.

Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) is a chronic and progressive disease
characterized by pulmonary vasculopathy with elevation of pulmonary artery
pressure, often culminating in right ventricular failure. GATA-6, a member of the
GATA family of zinc-finger transcription factors, is highly expressed in
quiescent vasculature and is frequently lost during vascular injury. We
hypothesized that endothelial GATA-6 may play a critical role in the molecular
mechanisms underlying endothelial cell (EC) dysfunction in PAH. Here we report
that GATA-6 is markedly reduced in pulmonary ECs lining both occluded and
nonoccluded vessels in patients with idiopathic and systemic sclerosis-associated
PAH. GATA-6 transcripts are also rapidly decreased in rodent PAH models.
Endothelial GATA-6 is a direct transcriptional regulator of genes controlling
vascular tone [endothelin-1, endothelin-1 receptor type A, and endothelial nitric
oxide synthase (eNOS)], pro-inflammatory genes, CX3CL1 (fractalkine),
5-lipoxygenease-activating protein, and markers of vascular remodeling, including
PAI-1 and RhoB. Mice with the genetic deletion of GATA-6 in ECs (Gata6-KO)
spontaneously develop elevated pulmonary artery pressure and increased vessel
muscularization, and these features are further exacerbated in response to
hypoxia. Furthermore, innate immune cells including macrophages
(CD11b(+)/F4/80(+)), granulocytes (Ly6G(+)/CD45(+)), and dendritic cells
(CD11b(+)/CD11c(+)) are significantly increased in normoxic Gata6-KO mice.
Together, our findings suggest a critical role of endothelial GATA-6 deficiency
in development and disease progression in PAH.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3668018
PMID: 23583651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Diabetes Metab. 2013 May;39(3):276-80. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2013.02.007. Epub
2013 Apr 4.

Transcription factor gene MNX1 is a novel cause of permanent neonatal diabetes in
a consanguineous family.

Bonnefond A(1), Vaillant E, Philippe J, Skrobek B, Lobbens S, Yengo L, Huyvaert
M, Cavé H, Busiah K, Scharfmann R, Polak M, Abdul-Rasoul M, Froguel P, Vaxillaire
M.

Author information: 
(1)European Genomic Institute for Diabetes (EGID) FR 3508, 59000 Lille, France.

AIM: Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus (PNDM) is a rare monogenic form of
non-autoimmune diabetes. Genetic defects have been identified in~60% of cases,
with mutations in ABCC8, KCNJ11 and INS being the most frequent causes of PNDM.
Recognition of genetic subtypes strongly impacts on both patients' care and
family counseling. This study aimed to identify the genetic aetiology of PNDM in 
a diabetic girl born of consanguineous parents.
METHODS: DNA samples from both the proband and her non-diabetic parents were
analyzed for homozygosity mapping, using Illumina Infinium 660K SNP microarrays, 
focusing on the runs of homozygosity (ROHs) detected only in the patient.
Standard Sanger sequencing of candidate genes (MNX1 and GATA6) present in the
ROHs was subsequently performed, as well as expression analyses on human
embryonic and adult pancreatic islet samples.
RESULTS: A putative causal homozygous mutation in the transcription factor gene
MNX1 (c.816C>A/p.Phe272Leu) was identified in the PNDM patient, who was
clinically diagnosed as a typical case of PNDM with no developmental pancreatic
defects or other clinical features. The probable deleterious mutation was located
within the MNX1 homeodomain helix 2 that is highly conserved between species. In 
human embryonic pancreatic islet samples, it has been shown that MNX1 expression 
is significantly enriched in pancreatic epithelium compared with mesenchyme,
suggesting a role for MNX1 in human pancreatic beta-cell development.
CONCLUSION: This study found a new putative cause of PNDM in a consanguineous
family. Replication in other cohorts would help to clarify the clinical spectrum 
of MNX1 mutations in PNDM patients.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23562494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. BMC Genomics. 2013 Mar 15;14:182. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-182.

Distinct angiogenesis roles and surface markers of early and late endothelial
progenitor cells revealed by functional group analyses.

Cheng CC(1), Chang SJ, Chueh YN, Huang TS, Huang PH, Cheng SM, Tsai TN, Chen JW, 
Wang HW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine, Tri-Service General
Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) play a fundamental role in
post-natal vascular repair. Currently EPCs are defined as either early and late
EPCs based on their biological properties and their time of appearance during in 
vitro culture. EPCs are rare and therefore optimizing isolation and culture is
required before they can be applied as part of clinical therapies.
RESULTS: We compared the gene profiles of early/late EPCs to their ancestors
CD133+ or CD34+ stem cells and to matured endothelial cells pinpointing novel
biomarkers and stemness genes. Late EPCs were enriched with proliferation and
angiogenesis genes, participating in endothelial tubulogenesis and hence
neovascularization. Early EPCs expressed abundant inflammatory cytokines and
paracrine angiogenic factors, thereby promoting angiogenesis in a paracrine
manner. Transcription factors involved in EPC stemness were pinpointed in early
EPCs (MAF/MAFB) and in late EPCs (GATA6/IRF6).
CONCLUSIONS: The detailed mRNA expression profiles and functional module analysis
for different EPCs will help the development of novel therapeutic modalities
targeting cardiovascular disease, tumor angiogenesis and various ischemia-related
diseases.

PMCID: PMC3652793
PMID: 23496821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Development. 2013 Apr;140(8):1639-44. doi: 10.1242/dev.093260. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

GATA factors efficiently direct cardiac fate from embryonic stem cells.

Turbendian HK(1), Gordillo M, Tsai SY, Lu J, Kang G, Liu TC, Tang A, Liu S,
Fishman GI, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, NY 10065, USA.

The GATA4 transcription factor is implicated in promoting cardiogenesis in
combination with other factors, including TBX5, MEF2C and BAF60C. However, when
expressed in embryonic stem cells (ESCs), GATA4 was shown to promote endoderm,
not cardiac mesoderm. The capacity of related GATA factors to promote
cardiogenesis is untested. We found that expression of the highly related gene,
Gata5, very efficiently promotes cardiomyocyte fate from murine ESCs. Gata5
directs development of beating sheets of cells that express cardiac troponin T
and show a full range of action potential morphologies that are responsive to
pharmacological stimulation. We discovered that by removing serum from the
culture conditions, GATA4 and GATA6 are each also able to efficiently promote
cardiogenesis in ESC derivatives, with some distinctions. Thus, GATA factors can 
function in ESC derivatives upstream of other cardiac transcription factors to
direct the efficient generation of cardiomyocytes.

PMCID: PMC3621482
PMID: 23487308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Endocrinology. 2013 May;154(5):1754-67. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1892. Epub 2013 Mar 
7.

Conditional mutagenesis of Gata6 in SF1-positive cells causes gonadal-like
differentiation in the adrenal cortex of mice.

Pihlajoki M(1), Gretzinger E, Cochran R, Kyrönlahti A, Schrade A, Hiller T,
Sullivan L, Shoykhet M, Schoeller EL, Brooks MD, Heikinheimo M, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South 
Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Transcription factor GATA6 is expressed in the fetal and adult adrenal cortex and
has been implicated in steroidogenesis. To characterize the role of transcription
factor GATA6 in adrenocortical development and function, we generated mice in
which Gata6 was conditionally deleted using Cre-LoxP recombination with Sf1-cre. 
The adrenal glands of adult Gata6 conditional knockout (cKO) mice were small and 
had a thin cortex. Cytomegalic changes were evident in fetal and adult cKO
adrenal glands, and chromaffin cells were ectopically located at the periphery of
the glands. Corticosterone secretion in response to exogenous ACTH was blunted in
cKO mice. Spindle-shaped cells expressing Gata4, a marker of gonadal stroma,
accumulated in the adrenal subcapsule of Gata6 cKO mice. RNA analysis
demonstrated the concomitant upregulation of other gonadal-like markers,
including Amhr2, in the cKO adrenal glands, suggesting that GATA6 inhibits the
spontaneous differentiation of adrenocortical stem/progenitor cells into
gonadal-like cells. Lhcgr and Cyp17 were overexpressed in the adrenal glands of
gonadectomized cKO vs control mice, implying that GATA6 also limits sex
steroidogenic cell differentiation in response to the hormonal changes that
accompany gonadectomy. Nulliparous female and orchiectomized male Gata6 cKO mice 
lacked an adrenal X-zone. Microarray hybridization identified Pik3c2g as a novel 
X-zone marker that is downregulated in the adrenal glands of these mice. Our
findings offer genetic proof that GATA6 regulates the differentiation of
steroidogenic progenitors into adrenocortical cells.

PMCID: PMC3628026
PMID: 23471215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Evol Dev. 2013 Mar-Apr;15(2):119-32. doi: 10.1111/ede.12022.

Expression of a lung developmental cassette in the adult and developing zebrafish
swimbladder.

Cass AN(1), Servetnick MD, McCune AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca,
NY, 14853, USA.

The presence of an air-filled organ (AO), either lungs or a swimbladder, is a
defining character of the Osteichthyes (bony vertebrates, including tetrapods).
Despite the functional and structural diversity of AOs, it was not previously
known whether the same group of developmental regulatory genes are involved in
the early development of both lungs and swimbladders. This study demonstrates
that a suite of genes (Nkx2.1, FoxA2, Wnt7b, GATA6), previously reported to be
co-expressed only in the tetrapod lung, is also co-expressed in the zebrafish
swimbladder. We document the expression pattern of these genes in the adult and
developing zebrafish swimbladder and compare the expression patterns to those in 
the mouse lung. Early-acting genes involved in endoderm specification are
expressed in the same relative location and stage of AO development in both taxa 
(FoxA2 and GATA6), but the order of onset and location of expression are not
completely conserved for the later acting genes (Nkx2.1 and Wnt7b). Co-expression
of this suite of genes in both tetrapod lungs and swimbladders of ray-finned
fishes is more likely due to common ancestry than independent co-option, because 
these genes are not known to be co-expressed anywhere except in the AOs of
Osteichthyes. Any conserved gene product interactions may comprise a character
identity network (ChIN) for the osteichthyan AO.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25098637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e55226. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055226. Epub 2013 Jan 31.

Feeder-free generation and long-term culture of human induced pluripotent stem
cells using pericellular matrix of decidua derived mesenchymal cells.

Fukusumi H(1), Shofuda T, Kanematsu D, Yamamoto A, Suemizu H, Nakamura M,
Yamasaki M, Ohgushi M, Sasai Y, Kanemura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Clinical Research, Osaka
National Hospital, National Hospital Organization, Osaka, Japan.

Human ES cells (hESCs) and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) are
usually generated and maintained on living feeder cells like mouse embryonic
fibroblasts or on a cell-free substrate like Matrigel. For clinical applications,
a quality-controlled, xenobiotic-free culture system is required to minimize
risks from contaminating animal-derived pathogens and immunogens. We previously
reported that the pericellular matrix of decidua-derived mesenchymal cells
(PCM-DM) is an ideal human-derived substrate on which to maintain hiPSCs/hESCs.
In this study, we examined whether PCM-DM could be used for the generation and
long-term stable maintenance of hiPSCs. Decidua-derived mesenchymal cells (DMCs) 
were reprogrammed by the retroviral transduction of four factors (OCT4, SOX2,
KLF4, c-MYC) and cultured on PCM-DM. The established hiPSC clones expressed
alkaline phosphatase, hESC-specific genes and cell-surface markers, and
differentiated into three germ layers in vitro and in vivo. At over 20 passages, 
the hiPSCs cultured on PCM-DM held the same cellular properties with genome
integrity as those at early passages. Global gene expression analysis showed that
the GDF3, FGF4, UTF1, and XIST expression levels varied during culture, and GATA6
was highly expressed under our culture conditions; however, these gene
expressions did not affect the cells' pluripotency. PCM-DM can be conveniently
prepared from DMCs, which have a high proliferative potential. Our findings
indicate that PCM-DM is a versatile and practical human-derived substrate that
can be used for the feeder-cell-free generation and long-term stable maintenance 
of hiPSCs.

PMCID: PMC3561375
PMID: 23383118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Development. 2013 Mar;140(5):965-75. doi: 10.1242/dev.091629. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

Early cell lineage specification in a marsupial: a case for diverse mechanisms
among mammals.

Frankenberg S(1), Shaw G, Freyer C, Pask AJ, Renfree MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Melbourne, 3010 Victoria, Australia.
srfr@unimelb.edu.au

Early cell lineage specification in eutherian mammals results in the formation of
a pluripotent inner cell mass (ICM) and trophoblast. By contrast, marsupials have
no ICM. Here, we present the first molecular analysis of mechanisms of early cell
lineage specification in a marsupial, the tammar wallaby. There was no overt
differential localisation of key lineage-specific transcription factors in
cleavage and early unilaminar blastocyst stages. Pluriblast cells (equivalent to 
the ICM) became distinguishable from trophoblast cells by differential expression
of POU5F1 and, to a greater extent, POU2, a paralogue of POU5F1. Unlike in the
mouse, pluriblast-trophoblast differentiation coincided with a global
nuclear-to-cytoplasmic transition of CDX2 localisation. Also unlike in the mouse,
Hippo pathway factors YAP and WWTR1 showed mutually distinct localisation
patterns that suggest non-redundant roles. NANOG and GATA6 were conserved as
markers of epiblast and hypoblast, respectively, but some differences to the
mouse were found in their mode of differentiation. Our results suggest that there
is considerable evolutionary plasticity in the mechanisms regulating early
lineage specification in mammals.

PMID: 23344710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Eur J Cancer. 2013 May;49(7):1771-80. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2012.12.015. Epub 2013 
Jan 11.

Aberrant expression of GATA binding protein 6 correlates with poor prognosis and 
promotes metastasis in cholangiocarcinoma.

Tian F(1), Li D, Chen J, Liu W, Cai L, Li J, Jiang P, Liu Z, Zhao X, Guo F, Li X,
Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, China.

AIM: GATA6, a zinc-finger transcription factor, functions as a tumour promoter or
suppresser according to different tumour origins. We investigated the clinical
significance of GATA6 and its role in invasion and metastasis in
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA).
METHODS: Expression of GATA6 in 87 cancerous, 24 paracancerous, 32 lymph-node
metastatic and 8 liver metastatic samples from 87 CCA patients undergoing
surgical resection was detected by immunohistochemistry. Impact of GATA6 on
invasion, metastasis and 67kDa laminin receptor expression (67LR) was evaluated
in CCA cells by shRNA lentivirus or expressed-plasmid transfection.
RESULTS: Aberrant expression of GATA6 in CCAs was significantly associated with
lymph-node metastasis. GATA6 expression was higher in lymph-node and liver
metastatic tissues compared with primary cancerous tissues. Kaplan-Meier analysis
showed GATA6 expression correlated with poor overall survival and early
recurrence in CCAs. Cox analysis suggested GATA6 was an independent prognostic
marker for overall survival and recurrence-free survival. CCA cell invasion and
migration were decreased by GATA6 knockdown and enhanced by GATA6 overexpression 
in vitro. Knockdown of GATA6 reduced CCA cell metastasis by xenotransplantation
into nude mice. 67LR, which is overexpressed in CCAs and promotes invasion and
metastasis through several pathways, positively correlated with GATA6 expression 
in 87 CCAs. Both mRNA and protein levels of 67LR were regulated by GATA6 in CCA
cells. Moreover, ChIP analysis showed GATA6 bound to 67LR gene promoter in CCA
cells.
CONCLUSION: Aberrant expression of GATA6 correlates with poor prognosis and
promotes invasion and metastasis in CCA.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23313142  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51694. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051694. Epub 2012 Dec 17.

In vitro epigenetic reprogramming of human cardiac mesenchymal stromal cells into
functionally competent cardiovascular precursors.

Vecellio M(1), Meraviglia V, Nanni S, Barbuti A, Scavone A, DiFrancesco D,
Farsetti A, Pompilio G, Colombo GI, Capogrossi MC, Gaetano C, Rossini A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Cliniche e di Comunità, Università di Milano, Milano, 
Italy.

Adult human cardiac mesenchymal-like stromal cells (CStC) represent a relatively 
accessible cell type useful for therapy. In this light, their conversion into
cardiovascular precursors represents a potential successful strategy for cardiac 
repair. The aim of the present work was to reprogram CStC into functionally
competent cardiovascular precursors using epigenetically active small molecules. 
CStC were exposed to low serum (5% FBS) in the presence of 5 µM all-trans
Retinoic Acid (ATRA), 5 µM Phenyl Butyrate (PB), and 200 µM
diethylenetriamine/nitric oxide (DETA/NO), to create a novel epigenetically
active cocktail (EpiC). Upon treatment the expression of markers typical of
cardiac resident stem cells such as c-Kit and MDR-1 were up-regulated, together
with the expression of a number of cardiovascular-associated genes including KDR,
GATA6, Nkx2.5, GATA4, HCN4, NaV1.5, and a-MHC. In addition, profiling analysis
revealed that a significant number of microRNA involved in cardiomyocyte biology 
and cell differentiation/proliferation, including miR 133a, 210 and 34a, were
up-regulated. Remarkably, almost 45% of EpiC-treated cells exhibited a
TTX-sensitive sodium current and, to a lower extent in a few cells, also the
pacemaker I(f) current. Mechanistically, the exposure to EpiC treatment
introduced global histone modifications, characterized by increased levels of
H3K4Me3 and H4K16Ac, as well as reduced H4K20Me3 and H3s10P, a pattern compatible
with reduced proliferation and chromatin relaxation. Consistently, ChIP
experiments performed with H3K4me3 or H3s10P histone modifications revealed the
presence of a specific EpiC-dependent pattern in c-Kit, MDR-1, and Nkx2.5
promoter regions, possibly contributing to their modified expression. Taken
together, these data indicate that CStC may be epigenetically reprogrammed to
acquire molecular and biological properties associated with competent
cardiovascular precursors.

PMCID: PMC3524246
PMID: 23284745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Mar;33(5):1085-102. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00626-12. Epub 2012 Dec 
28.

GATA-6 and NF-<U+03BA>B activate CPI-17 gene transcription and regulate Ca2+
sensitization of smooth muscle contraction.

Boopathi E(1), Hypolite JA, Zderic SA, Gomes CM, Malkowicz B, Liou HC, Wein AJ,
Chacko S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, University of Pennsylvania, Glenolden, Pennsylvania, USA.

Protein kinase C (PKC)-potentiated inhibitory protein of 17 kDa (CPI-17) inhibits
myosin light chain phosphatase, altering the levels of myosin light chain
phosphorylation and Ca(2+) sensitivity in smooth muscle. In this study, we
characterized the CPI-17 promoter and identified binding sites for GATA-6 and
nuclear factor kappa B (NF-<U+03BA>B). GATA-6 and NF-<U+03BA>B upregulated CPI-17 expression in
cultured human and mouse bladder smooth muscle (BSM) cells in an additive manner.
CPI-17 expression was decreased upon GATA-6 silencing in cultured BSM cells and
in BSM from NF-<U+03BA>B knockout (KO) mice. Moreover, force maintenance by BSM strips
from KO mice was decreased compared with the force maintenance of BSM strips from
wild-type mice. GATA-6 and NF-<U+03BA>B overexpression was associated with CPI-17
overexpression in BSM from men with benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH)-induced
bladder hypertrophy and in a mouse model of bladder outlet obstruction. Thus,
aberrant expression of NF-<U+03BA>B and GATA-6 deregulates CPI-17 expression and the
contractile function of smooth muscle. Our data provide insight into how GATA-6
and NF-<U+03BA>B mediate CPI-17 transcription, PKC-mediated signaling, and BSM
remodeling associated with lower urinary tract symptoms in patients with BPH.

PMCID: PMC3623078
PMID: 23275439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. J Genet Genomics. 2012 Dec 20;39(12):643-51. doi: 10.1016/j.jgg.2012.07.013. Epub
2012 Nov 10.

Generation of tripotent neural progenitor cells from rat embryonic stem cells.

Wang Z(1), Sheng C, Li T, Teng F, Sang L, Cao F, Wang Z, Zhu W, Li W, Zhao X, Liu
Z, Wang L, Zhou Q.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Science, Northeast Agricultural University of China, Harbin
150030, China.

Rat is a valuable model for pharmacological and physiological studies.
Germline-competent rat embryonic stem (rES) cell lines have been successfully
established and the molecular networks maintaining the self-renewing,
undifferentiated state of rES cells have also been well uncovered. However,
little is known about the differentiation strategies and the underlying
mechanisms of how these authentic rat pluripotent stem cells give rise to
specific cell types. The aim of this study is to investigate the neural
differentiation capacity of rES cells. By means of a modified procedure based on 
previous publications - combination of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) inhibitors (two inhibitors, "2i") with
feeder-conditioned medium, we successfully obtained high-quality rat embryoid
bodies (rEBs) from rES cells and then differentiated them to tripotent neural
progenitors. These rES cell-derived neural progenitor cells (rNPCs) were capable 
of self-renewing and giving rise to all three neural lineages, including
astrocytes, oligodendrocytes, and neurons. Besides, these rES cell-derived
neurons stained positive for <U+03B3>-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and tyrosine hydroxylase 
(TH). In summary, we develop an experimental system for differentiating rES cells
to tripotent neural progenitors, which may provide a powerful tool for
pharmacological test and a valuable platform for studying the pathogenesis of
many neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's disease and the development 
of rat nervous system.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 23273768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Biomed Rep. 2013 Jan;1(1):18-22. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

Single-step protocol for the differentiation of human-induced pluripotent stem
cells into hepatic progenitor-like cells.

Tomizawa M(1), Shinozaki F(2), Sugiyama T(3), Yamamoto S(4), Sueishi M(3),
Yoshida T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Gastroenterology. (2)Radiology. (3)Rheumatology. (4)Pediatrics 
and. (5)Internal Medicine, National Hospital Organization Shimoshizu Hospital,
Yotsukaido, Chiba 284-0003, Japan.

Induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells are ideal sources of hepatocyte for
transplantation into patients experiencing hepatic failure. Growth and
transcription factors were analyzed to design a single-step protocol for the
differentiation of iPS cells into hepatocytes. The expression of transcription
factors was analyzed using reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) and compared among iPS cells, as well as fetal and adult liver cells.
iPS cells were cultured with growth factors and RT-PCR was performed to analyze
the expression of transcription factors. iPS cells were introduced with
transcription factors, cultured with growth factors and subjected to real-time
quantitative PCR. Indocyanine green (ICG) was added to the medium as a hepatocyte
marker. Sox17, GATA4, GATA6, FoxA2, HEX, HNF4a and C/EBPa were expressed in fetal
and adult liver cells, but not in iPS cells. Sox17, GATA6 and HNF4a were
expressed after exposure a combination of oncostatin M, epidermal growth factor, 
retinoic acid, dexamethasone and ITS (OERDITS). When iPS cells were introduced
with FoxA2, GATA4, HEX and C/EBPa and cultured with OERDITS for 8 days, the cells
expressed a-fetoprotein, d-like (Dlk)-1 and <U+03B3>-glutamyl transpeptidase (GTP), and 
ICG uptake was observed. Exposure to FoxA2, GATA4, HEX and C/EBPa and culturing
with OERDITS supplementation potentially serves as a single-step inducer for the 
differentiation of iPS cells into hepatic progenitor-like cells within 8 days.

PMCID: PMC3956730
PMID: 24648886  [PubMed]


183. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Mar;45(3):696-705. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2012.12.008. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

miR-181a promotes osteoblastic differentiation through repression of TGF-ß
signaling molecules.

Bhushan R(1), Grünhagen J, Becker J, Robinson PN, Ott CE, Knaus P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universitaet Berlin, Berlin,
Germany.

Osteoblastic differentiation is controlled by complex interplay of several
signaling pathways and associated key transcription factors, as well as by
microRNAs (miRNAs). In our current study, we found miR-181a to be highly
upregulated during BMP induced osteoblastic differentiation of C2C12 and MC3T3
cells. Overexpression of miR-181a led to upregulation of key markers of
osteoblastic differentiation as well as enhanced ALP levels and Alizarin red
staining, indicating the importance of this miRNA for osteoblastic
differentiation. Further, we show that miR-181 isoforms (181a, 181b, 181c) are
expressed during different stages of mouse calvarial and tibial development,
implying their role in both endochondral and intramembranous ossification. We
found several direct and indirect targets of miR-181a to be downregulated by
global mRNA expression profiling. Our results demonstrate that miR-181a promotes 
osteoblastic differentiation via repression of TGF-ß signaling molecules by
targeting the negative regulator of osteoblastic differentiation Tgfbi (Tgf-beta 
induced) and TßR-I/Alk5 (TGF-ß type I receptor). Furthermore, our findings
suggest that Rgs4 and Gata6 are direct targets of miR-181a. Taken together, we
provide evidence for a crucial functional link between a specific miRNA, miR-181a
and osteoblastic differentiation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23262291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Dev Biol. 2013 Mar 1;375(1):54-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.12.008. Epub 2012
Dec 19.

Analysis of human embryos from zygote to blastocyst reveals distinct gene
expression patterns relative to the mouse.

Niakan KK(1), Eggan K.

Author information: 
(1)The Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Harvard Stem Cell Institute and the
Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, 7 Divinity 
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. kkn21@cam.ac.uk

Early mammalian embryogenesis is controlled by mechanisms governing the balance
between pluripotency and differentiation. The expression of early
lineage-specific genes can vary significantly between species, with implications 
for developmental control and stem cell derivation. However, the mechanisms
involved in patterning the human embryo are still unclear. We analyzed the
appearance and localization of lineage-specific transcription factors in staged
preimplantation human embryos from the zygote until the blastocyst. We observed
that the pluripotency-associated transcription factor OCT4 was initially
expressed in 8-cell embryos at 3 days post-fertilization (dpf), and restricted to
the inner cell mass (ICM) in 128-256 cell blastocysts (6dpf), approximately 2
days later than the mouse. The trophectoderm (TE)-associated transcription factor
CDX2 was upregulated in 5dpf blastocysts and initially coincident with OCT4,
indicating a lag in CDX2 initiation in the TE lineage, relative to the mouse.
Once established, the TE expressed intracellular and cell-surface proteins
cytokeratin-7 (CK7) and fibroblast growth factor receptor-1 (FGFR1), which are
thought to be specific to post-implantation human trophoblast progenitor cells.
The primitive endoderm (PE)-associated transcription factor SOX17 was initially
heterogeneously expressed in the ICM where it co-localized with a sub-set of OCT4
expressing cells at 4-5dpf. SOX17 was progressively restricted to the PE adjacent
to the blastocoel cavity together with the transcription factor GATA6 by 6dpf. We
observed low levels of Laminin expression in the human PE, though this basement
membrane component is thought to play an important role in mouse PE cell sorting,
suggesting divergence in differentiation mechanisms between species.
Additionally, while stem cell lines representing the three distinct cell types
that comprise a mouse blastocyst have been established, the identity of cell
types that emerge during early human embryonic stem cell derivation is unclear.
We observed that derivation from plating intact human blastocysts resulted
predominantly in the outgrowth of TE-like cells, which impairs human embryonic
stem cell derivation. Altogether, our findings provide important insight into
developmental patterning of preimplantation human embryos with potential
consequences for stem cell derivation.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23261930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 May 1;22(9):1433-42. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0620. Epub 2013
Feb 19.

NKX2-1 activation by SMAD2 signaling after definitive endoderm differentiation in
human embryonic stem cell.

Li Y(1), Eggermont K, Vanslembrouck V, Verfaillie CM.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmentaal Stamcelinstituut, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.

Expression of NKX2-1 is required to specify definitive endoderm to respiratory
endoderm. However, the transcriptional regulation of NKX2-1 is not fully
understood. Here we demonstrate that aside from specifying undifferentiated human
embryonic stem cell (hESC) to definitive endoderm, high concentrations of
Activin-A are also necessary and sufficient to induce hESC-derived definitive
endodermal progeny to a FOXA2/NKX2-1/GATA6/PAX9 positive respiratory epithelial
fate. Activin-A directly mediates the induction of NKX2-1 by interacting with
ALK4, leading to phosphorylation of SMAD2, which binds directly to the NKX2-1
promoter and activates its expression. Activin-A can be replaced by GDF11 but not
transforming growth factor ß1. Addition of Wnt3a, SHH, FGF2, or BMP4 failed to
induce NKX2-1. These results suggest that direct binding of Activin-A-responsive 
SMAD2 to the NKX2-1 promoter plays essential role during respiratory endoderm
specification.

PMCID: PMC3629846
PMID: 23259454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Diabetes. 2013 Mar;62(3):993-7. doi: 10.2337/db12-0885. Epub 2012 Dec 6.

GATA6 mutations cause a broad phenotypic spectrum of diabetes from pancreatic
agenesis to adult-onset diabetes without exocrine insufficiency.

De Franco E(1), Shaw-Smith C, Flanagan SE, Shepherd MH; International NDM
Consortium, Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Collaborators: Akkurt I, Blessing H, Cinek O, Codner E, Hakeem V, Hennekam R,
Knerr I, Oostdijk W, Savova R, Sumnik Z, Thiele S, Tinklin T, Wagner V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical
School, Exeter, UK.

We recently reported de novo GATA6 mutations as the most common cause of
pancreatic agenesis, accounting for 15 of 27 (56%) patients with insulin-treated 
neonatal diabetes and exocrine pancreatic insufficiency requiring enzyme
replacement therapy. We investigated the role of GATA6 mutations in 171 subjects 
with neonatal diabetes of unknown genetic etiology from a cohort of 795 patients 
with neonatal diabetes. Mutations in known genes had been confirmed in 624
patients (including 15 GATA6 mutations). Sequencing of the remaining 171 patients
identified nine new case subjects (24 of 795, 3%). Pancreatic agenesis was
present in 21 case subjects (six new); two patients had permanent neonatal
diabetes with no enzyme supplementation and one had transient neonatal diabetes. 
Four parents with heterozygous GATA6 mutations were diagnosed with diabetes
outside the neonatal period (12-46 years). Subclinical exocrine insufficiency was
demonstrated by low fecal elastase in three of four diabetic patients who did not
receive enzyme supplementation. One parent with a mosaic mutation was not
diabetic but had a heart malformation. Extrapancreatic features were observed in 
all 24 probands and three parents, with congenital heart defects most frequent
(83%). Heterozygous GATA6 mutations cause a wide spectrum of diabetes
manifestations, ranging from pancreatic agenesis to adult-onset diabetes with
subclinical or no exocrine insufficiency.

PMCID: PMC3581234
PMID: 23223019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Development. 2013 Jan 15;140(2):267-79. doi: 10.1242/dev.084996. Epub 2012 Nov
28.

FGF4 is required for lineage restriction and salt-and-pepper distribution of
primitive endoderm factors but not their initial expression in the mouse.

Kang M(1), Piliszek A, Artus J, Hadjantonakis AK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

The emergence of pluripotent epiblast (EPI) and primitive endoderm (PrE) lineages
within the inner cell mass (ICM) of the mouse blastocyst involves initial
co-expression of lineage-associated markers followed by mutual exclusion and
salt-and-pepper distribution of lineage-biased cells. Precisely how EPI and PrE
cell fate commitment occurs is not entirely clear; however, previous studies in
mice have implicated FGF/ERK signaling in this process. Here, we investigated the
phenotype resulting from zygotic and maternal/zygotic inactivation of Fgf4. Fgf4 
heterozygous blastocysts exhibited increased numbers of NANOG-positive EPI cells 
and reduced numbers of GATA6-positive PrE cells, suggesting that FGF signaling is
tightly regulated to ensure specification of the appropriate numbers of cells for
each lineage. Although the size of the ICM was unaffected in Fgf4 null mutant
embryos, it entirely lacked a PrE layer and exclusively comprised
NANOG-expressing cells at the time of implantation. An initial period of
widespread EPI and PrE marker co-expression was however established even in the
absence of FGF4. Thus, Fgf4 mutant embryos initiated the PrE program but
exhibited defects in its restriction phase, when lineage bias is acquired.
Consistent with this, XEN cells could be derived from Fgf4 mutant embryos in
which PrE had been restored and these cells appeared indistinguishable from
wild-type cells. Sustained exogenous FGF failed to rescue the mutant phenotype.
Instead, depending on concentration, we noted no effect or conversion of all ICM 
cells to GATA6-positive PrE. We propose that heterogeneities in the availability 
of FGF produce the salt-and-pepper distribution of lineage-biased cells.

PMCID: PMC3597205
PMID: 23193166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Int J Mol Med. 2013 Jan;31(1):51-8. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1188. Epub 2012 Nov
20.

Somatic mutations in the GATA6 gene underlie sporadic tetralogy of Fallot.

Huang RT(1), Xue S, Xu YJ, Yang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200127, PR China.

Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is the most common cyanotic congenital heart disease
associated with significant morbidity and mortality in humans. However, the
molecular etiology underlying TOF in most patients remains largely unknown. In
the present study, sequence analysis of the GATA6 gene was performed from
fresh-frozen cardiac tissues and matched blood samples of 52 unrelated patients
who underwent surgical repair of TOF. The cardiac tissues and matched blood
specimens from 46 patients who underwent cardiac valve replacement due to
rheumatic heart disease and blood samples from 200 healthy individuals as
controls were genotyped. The functional characteristics of the mutations were
assessed using a luciferase reporter assay system. Based on the results, two
novel heterozygous GATA6 mutations, p.G367X and p.G394C, were identified in the
cardiac tissues of 2 TOF patients, respectively. No mutations were found in the
cardiac tissues from 46 patients with rheumatic heart disease and in the blood
samples from the 298 participants. Functional analysis demonstrated that the
GATA6 mutants were consistently associated with significantly reduced
transcriptional activation compared with their wild-type counterpart. This is the
first report on the link of somatic GATA6 mutation to TOF, providing novel
insight into the molecular mechanism involved in TOF.

PMID: 23175051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Sep 11;92(34):2402-5.

[Identification of novel mutations in GATA6 gene associated with tetralogy of
Fallot].

[Article in Chinese]

Zheng GF(1), Zhao H, Wei D, Zhou N, Liu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify the novel mutations in the GATA6 gene associated with
tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).
METHODS: The clinical data and blood samples from 120 unrelated Han Chinese TOF
patients and 200 unrelated ethnically matched healthy controls were collected.
The coding exons and flanking splice junctions of GATA6 gene were amplified by
polymerase chain reaction and sequenced by the technique of di-deoxynucleotide
chain termination. The acquired sequences were aligned with those derived from
GenBank by the aid of program BLAST to identify the sequence variations. The
software ClustalW was applied for the conservation analysis of altered amino
acids. The pathogenic probability for each sequence variation was predicted
automatically by software MutationTaster.
RESULTS: Three novel heterozygous missense GATA6 mutations were identified in 3
TOF patients. Specifically, the triplet substitutions of CTC for CCC at codon 73,
CGC for AGC at codon 364 and GGC for GCC at codon 591, predicting the transitions
of proline into leucine at amino acid residue 73 (p.P73L), serine into arginine
at amino acid residue 364 (p.S364R) and alanine into glycine at amino acid
residue 591 (p.A591G), were detected. None of three mutations was observed in 200
healthy controls. A cross-species alignment of GATA6 encoded protein sequences
showed that the mutated amino acids were highly conserved evolutionarily and all 
3 mutations were predicted to be pathogenic.
CONCLUSIONS: Novel mutations are identified in the GATA6 gene associated with
TOF. Such a finding may contribute to an early prophylaxis and therapy of TOF.

PMID: 23158662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e49079. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0049079. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Modulation of pluripotency in the porcine embryo and iPS cells.

Rodríguez A(1), Allegrucci C, Alberio R.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, Loughborough, United Kingdom.

The establishment of the pluripotent ICM during early mammalian development is
characterized by the differential expression of the transcription factors NANOG
and GATA4/6, indicative of the epiblast and hypoblast, respectively. Differences 
in the mechanisms regulating the segregation of these lineages have been reported
in many species, however little is known about this process in the porcine
embryo. The aim of this study was to investigate the signalling pathways
participating in the formation of the porcine ICM, and to establish whether their
modulation can be used to increase the developmental potential of pluripotent
cells. We show that blocking MEK signalling enhances the proportion of NANOG
expressing cells in the ICM, but does not prevent the segregation of GATA-4
cells. Interestingly, inhibition of FGF signalling does not alter the segregation
of NANOG and GATA-4 cells, but affects the number of ICM cells. This indicates
that FGF signalling participates in the formation of the founders of the ICM.
Inhibition of MEK signalling combined with GSK3ß inhibition and LIF
supplementation was used to modulate pluripotency in porcine iPS (piPS) cells. We
demonstrate that under these stringent culture conditions piPS cells acquire
features of naive pluripotency, characterized by the expression of STELLA and
REX1, and increased in vitro germline differentiation capacity. We propose that
small molecule inhibitors can be used to increase the homogeneity of induced
pluripotent stem cell cultures. These improved culture conditions will pave the
way for the generation of germline competent stem cells in this species.

PMCID: PMC3493503
PMID: 23145076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Dev Biol. 2013 Jan 15;373(2):359-72. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.10.026. Epub 2012 
Nov 1.

Depletion of Suds3 reveals an essential role in early lineage specification.

Zhang K(1), Dai X, Wallingford MC, Mager J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, University of Massachusetts at
Amherst, 455, 661 N. Pleasant Street, Amherst, MA 01003, USA.

Preimplantation development culminates with the emergence of three distinct
populations: the inner cell mass, primitive endoderm and trophectoderm. Here, we 
define the mechanisms underlying the requirement of Suds3 in
pre/peri-implantation development. Suds3 knockdown blastocysts exhibit a failure 
of both trophectoderm proliferation as well as a conspicuous lack of primitive
endoderm. Expression of essential lineage factors Nanog, Sox2, Cdx2, Eomes, Elf5 
and Sox17 are severely reduced in the absence of Suds3. Importantly, we document 
deficient FGF4/ERK signaling and show that exogenous FGF4 rescues primitive
endoderm formation and trophectoderm proliferation in Suds3 knockdown
blastocysts. We also show that Hdac1 knockdown reduces Sox2/FGF4/ERK signaling in
blastocysts. Collectively, these data define a role for Suds3 in activation of
FGF4/ERK signaling and determine an essential molecular role of Suds3/Sin3/HDAC
complexes in lineage specification in vivo.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23123966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Int Immunopharmacol. 2012 Dec;14(4):650-7. doi: 10.1016/j.intimp.2012.09.017.
Epub 2012 Oct 23.

Tanshinone IIA inhibits TNF-a-mediated induction of VCAM-1 but not ICAM-1 through
the regulation of GATA-6 and IRF-1.

Nizamutdinova IT(1), Kim YM, Jin H, Son KH, Lee JH, Chang KC, Kim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine and Institute of Health
Sciences, Gyeongsang Nat'l University, Jinju, South Korea.

The goal of this study was to investigate the differential effect of tanshinone
IIA on the induction of intercellular adhesion molecule-1 (ICAM-1) and vascular
cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) by TNF-a and the possible molecular mechanisms 
by which it regulates ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 expression differentially. Stimulation of
human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVEC) with TNF-a increased ICAM-1 and
VCAM-1 expressions, and the pretreatment with tanshinone IIA concentration
dependently inhibited VCAM-1 expression but not ICAM-1 expression. In previous
study, PI3K/Akt, PKC and Jak/STAT-3 pathways were involved in the TNF-a-mediated 
induction of VCAM-1 but not ICAM-1. Thus, we examined the effect of tanshinone
IIA on TNF-a-mediated activations of PI3K/Akt, PKC and Jak/STAT-3 pathways.
Tanshinone IIA efficiently inhibited the phosphorylations of Akt, PKC and STAT-3 
by TNF-a. Moreover, we determined the effect of tanshinone IIA on IRF-1 or GATAs 
induction and binding activity to VCAM-1 promoter since the upstream promoter
region of VCAM-1 but not ICAM-1 contains IRF-1 and GATA binding motifs. Western
blot analysis and ChIP assay showed that tanshinone IIA efficiently inhibited
TNF-a-increased nuclear level of IRF-1 and GATA-6 and their binding affinity to
VCAM-1 promoter region. Taken together, tanshinone IIA selectively inhibits
TNF-a-mediated expression of VCAM-1 but not ICAM-1 through modulation of PI3/Akt,
PKC and Jak/STAT-3 pathway as well as IRF-1 and GATA-6 binding activity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23085565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Nat Immunol. 2012 Nov;13(11):1118-28. doi: 10.1038/ni.2419. Epub 2012 Sep 30.

Gene-expression profiles and transcriptional regulatory pathways that underlie
the identity and diversity of mouse tissue macrophages.

Gautier EL(1), Shay T, Miller J, Greter M, Jakubzick C, Ivanov S, Helft J, Chow
A, Elpek KG, Gordonov S, Mazloom AR, Ma'ayan A, Chua WJ, Hansen TH, Turley SJ,
Merad M, Randolph GJ; Immunological Genome Consortium.

Collaborators: Gautier EL, Jakubzick C, Randolph GJ, Best AJ, Knell J, Goldrath
A, Miller J, Brown B, Merad M, Jojic V, Koller D, Cohen N, Brennan P, Brenner M, 
Shay T, Regev A, Fletcher A, Elpek K, Bellemare-Pelletier A, Malhotra D, Turley
S, Jianu R, Laidlaw D, Collins J, Narayan K, Sylvia K, Kang J, Gazit R, Garrison 
BS, Rossi DJ, Kim F, Rao TN, Wagers A, Shinton SA, Hardy RR, Monach P, Bezman NA,
Sun JC, Kim CC, Lanier LL, Heng T, Kreslavsky T, Painter M, Ericson J, Davis S,
Mathis D, Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine, New York, New York, USA.

We assessed gene expression in tissue macrophages from various mouse organs. The 
diversity in gene expression among different populations of macrophages was
considerable. Only a few hundred mRNA transcripts were selectively expressed by
macrophages rather than dendritic cells, and many of these were not present in
all macrophages. Nonetheless, well-characterized surface markers, including MerTK
and Fc<U+03B3>R1 (CD64), along with a cluster of previously unidentified transcripts,
were distinctly and universally associated with mature tissue macrophages. TCEF3,
C/EBP-a, Bach1 and CREG-1 were among the transcriptional regulators predicted to 
regulate these core macrophage-associated genes. The mRNA encoding other
transcription factors, such as Gata6, was associated with single macrophage
populations. We further identified how these transcripts and the proteins they
encode facilitated distinguishing macrophages from dendritic cells.

PMCID: PMC3558276
PMID: 23023392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. DNA Cell Biol. 2012 Nov;31(11):1610-7. doi: 10.1089/dna.2012.1814. Epub 2012 Sep 
28.

Novel GATA6 mutations associated with congenital ventricular septal defect or
tetralogy of fallot.

Wang J(1), Luo XJ, Xin YF, Liu Y, Liu ZM, Wang Q, Li RG, Fang WY, Wang XZ, Yang
YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, East Hospital, Tongji University School
of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Congenital heart disease (CHD) is the most common form of developmental
malformation and is the leading noninfectious cause of infant mortality. Emerging
evidence indicates that genetic defects are involved in the pathogenesis of CHD. 
Nevertheless, CHD is genetically heterogeneous, and the molecular basis for CHD
in a majority of patients remains unknown. In this study, the whole coding region
of GATA6, a gene encoding a zinc-finger transcription factor crucial for normal
cardiogenesis, was sequenced in 380 unrelated patients with CHD. The relatives of
the index patients harboring the identified mutations and 200 unrelated control
individuals were subsequently genotyped. The functional effect of the mutations
was characterized using a luciferase reporter assay system. As a result, two
novel heterozygous GATA6 mutations, p.D404Y and p.E460X, were identified in two
families with ventricular septal defect and tetralogy of Fallot, respectively.
The mutations co-segregated with CHD in the families with complete penetrance,
and were absent in 400 control chromosomes. Functional analysis demonstrated that
the mutated GATA6 proteins were associated with significantly decreased
transactivational activity in comparison with their wild-type counterpart. These 
findings provide novel insight into the molecular mechanism implicated in CHD,
suggesting potential implications for the early prophylaxis and personalized
treatment of CHD.

PMCID: PMC3482375
PMID: 23020118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3504-15. doi: 10.1172/JCI63240. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

GATA4 and GATA6 control mouse pancreas organogenesis.

Carrasco M(1), Delgado I, Soria B, Martín F, Rojas A.

Author information: 
(1)Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa (CABIMER),
Sevilla, Spain.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3469-71.

Recently, heterozygous mutations in GATA6 have been found in neonatal diabetic
patients with failed pancreatic organogenesis. To investigate the roles of GATA4 
and GATA6 in mouse pancreas organogenesis, we conditionally inactivated these
genes within the pancreas. Single inactivation of either gene did not have a
major impact on pancreas formation, indicating functional redundancy. However,
double Gata4/Gata6 mutant mice failed to develop pancreata, died shortly after
birth, and displayed hyperglycemia. Morphological defects in Gata4/Gata6 mutant
pancreata were apparent during embryonic development, and the epithelium failed
to expand as a result of defects in cell proliferation and differentiation. The
number of multipotent pancreatic progenitors, including PDX1+ cells, was reduced 
in the Gata4/Gata6 mutant pancreatic epithelium. Remarkably, deletion of only 1
Gata6 allele on a Gata4 conditional knockout background severely reduced
pancreatic mass. In contrast, a single WT allele of Gata4 in Gata6 conditional
knockout mice was sufficient for normal pancreatic development, indicating
differential contributions of GATA factors to pancreas formation. Our results
place GATA factors at the top of the transcriptional network hierarchy
controlling pancreas organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3461915
PMID: 23006330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3516-28. doi: 10.1172/JCI63352. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Pancreas-specific deletion of mouse Gata4 and Gata6 causes pancreatic agenesis.

Xuan S(1), Borok MJ, Decker KJ, Battle MA, Duncan SA, Hale MA, Macdonald RJ,
Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, New
York 10032, USA.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3469-71.

Pancreatic agenesis is a human disorder caused by defects in pancreas
development. To date, only a few genes have been linked to pancreatic agenesis in
humans, with mutations in pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1) and
pancreas-specific transcription factor 1a (PTF1A) reported in only 5 families
with described cases. Recently, mutations in GATA6 have been identified in a
large percentage of human cases, and a GATA4 mutant allele has been implicated in
a single case. In the mouse, Gata4 and Gata6 are expressed in several
endoderm-derived tissues, including the pancreas. To analyze the functions of
GATA4 and/or GATA6 during mouse pancreatic development, we generated
pancreas-specific deletions of Gata4 and Gata6. Surprisingly, loss of either
Gata4 or Gata6 in the pancreas resulted in only mild pancreatic defects, which
resolved postnatally. However, simultaneous deletion of both Gata4 and Gata6 in
the pancreas caused severe pancreatic agenesis due to disruption of pancreatic
progenitor cell proliferation, defects in branching morphogenesis, and a
subsequent failure to induce the differentiation of progenitor cells expressing
carboxypeptidase A1 (CPA1) and neurogenin 3 (NEUROG3). These studies address the 
conserved and nonconserved mechanisms underlying GATA4 and GATA6 function during 
pancreas development and provide a new mouse model to characterize the underlying
developmental defects associated with pancreatic agenesis.

PMCID: PMC3461916
PMID: 23006325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3469-71. doi: 10.1172/JCI65751. Epub 2012 Sep 24.

GATA believe it: new essential regulators of pancreas development.

Rodríguez-Seguí S(1), Akerman I, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Programming of Beta-cells Laboratory, Institut d’Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi I Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3504-15.
    J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3516-28.

Understanding the transcriptional mechanisms that underlie pancreas formation is 
central to the efforts to develop novel regenerative therapies for type 1
diabetes. Recently, mutations in the transcription factor GATA6 were unexpectedly
shown to be the most common cause of human pancreas agenesis. In this issue of
the JCI, Carrasco et al. and Xuan et al. investigate the role of Gata6 and its
paralogue Gata4 in mouse embryonic pancreas and show that GATA factors are
essential regulators of the proliferation, morphogenesis, and differentiation of 
multipotent pancreatic progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3461932
PMID: 23006323  [PubMed]


198. Gut. 2013 Oct;62(10):1481-8. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2012-303328. Epub 2012 Sep 21.

Gata6 is required for complete acinar differentiation and maintenance of the
exocrine pancreas in adult mice.

Martinelli P(1), Cañamero M, del Pozo N, Madriles F, Zapata A, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group, Molecular Pathology Programme, CNIO-Spanish
National Cancer Research Centre, Madrid, Spain.

OBJECTIVES: Previous studies have suggested an important role of the
transcription factor Gata6 in endocrine pancreas, while GATA6 haploinsufficient
inactivating mutations cause pancreatic agenesis in humans. We aimed to analyse
the effects of Gata6 inactivation on pancreas development and function.
DESIGN: We deleted Gata6 in all epithelial cells in the murine pancreas at the
onset of its development. Acinar proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation and
exocrine functions were assessed using reverse transcriptase quantitative PCR
(RT-qPCR), chromatin immunoprecipitation, immunohistochemistry and enzyme assays.
Adipocyte transdifferentiation was assessed using electron microscopy and genetic
lineage tracing.
RESULTS: Gata6 is expressed in all epithelial cells in the adult mouse pancreas
but it is only essential for exocrine pancreas homeostasis: while dispensable for
pancreatic development after e10.5, it is required for complete acinar
differentiation, for establishment of polarity and for the maintenance of acinar 
cells in the adult. Gata6 regulates directly the promoter of genes coding for
digestive enzymes and the transcription factors Rbpjl and Mist1. Upon
pancreas-selective Gata6 inactivation, massive loss of acinar cells and fat
replacement take place. This is accompanied by increased acinar apoptosis and
proliferation, acinar-to-ductal metaplasia and adipocyte transdifferentiation. By
contrast, the endocrine pancreas is spared.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that Gata6 is required for the complete
differentiation of acinar cells through multiple transcriptional regulatory
mechanisms. In addition, it is required for the maintenance of the adult acinar
cell compartment. Our studies suggest that GATA6 alterations may contribute to
diseases of the human adult exocrine pancreas.

PMID: 23002247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 8;32(32):3782-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.401. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Regulation of the tumor suppressor homeogene Cdx2 by HNF4a in intestinal cancer.

Saandi T(1), Baraille F, Derbal-Wolfrom L, Cattin AL, Benahmed F, Martin E,
Cardot P, Duclos B, Ribeiro A, Freund JN, Duluc I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, Unité 682, Strasbourg, France.

The gut-specific homeotic transcription factor Cdx2 is a crucial regulator of
intestinal development and homeostasis, which is downregulated in colorectal
cancers (CRC) and exhibits a tumor suppressor function in the colon. We have
previously established that several endodermal transcription factors, including
HNF4a and GATA6, are involved in Cdx2 regulation in the normal gut. Here we have 
studied the role of HNF4a in the mechanism of deregulation of Cdx2 in colon
cancers. Crossing Apc(<U+0394>14/+) mice prone to spontaneous intestinal tumor
development with pCdx2-9LacZ transgenic mice containing the LacZ reporter under
the control of the 9.3-kb Cdx2 promoter showed that this promoter segment
contains sequences recapitulating the decrease of Cdx2 expression in intestinal
cancers. Immunohistochemistry revealed that HNF4a, unlike GATA6, exhibited a
similar decrease to Cdx2 in genetic (Apc(min/+) and Apc(<U+0394>14/+)) and chemically
induced (Azoxymethane (AOM) treatment) models of intestinal tumors in mice. HNF4a
and Cdx2 also exhibited a comparable deregulated pattern in human CRC. Correlated
patterns were observed between HNF4a and Cdx2 in several experimental models of
human colon cancer cell lines: xenografts in nude mice, wound healing and glucose
starvation. Furthermore, Cdx2 decreased by knocking down HNF4a in human colon
cancer cells using siRNA and in the colon of mice conditionally knocked out for
the Hnf4a gene in the adult intestine (Hnf4a(f/f);VilCre(ERT2) mice). Finally,
the conditionally knocked out mice Hnf4a(f/f);VilCre(ERT2) treated with the
carcinogen AOM developed colorectal tumors earlier than wild-type mice, as
previously reported for mice with a reduced Cdx2 expression. In conclusion, this 
study provides evidence that the downregulation of HNF4a is an important
determinant of the reduced expression of the Cdx2 tumor suppressor gene in
intestinal cancers. Consistently, similar to Cdx2, HNF4a exerts a tumor
suppressor function in the colon in that its loss of function facilitates tumor
progression.

PMID: 22986531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Toxicol Sci. 2013 Jan;131(1):292-301. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfs282. Epub 2012 Sep
14.

Comparative gene expression profiling in human-induced pluripotent stem
cell--derived cardiocytes and human and cynomolgus heart tissue.

Puppala D(1), Collis LP, Sun SZ, Bonato V, Chen X, Anson B, Pletcher M, Fermini
B, Engle SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Compound Safety Prediction, Pfizer, Inc., Groton, Connecticut 06340, USA.
Dinesh.Puppala@pfizer.com

Cardiotoxicity is one of the leading causes of drug attrition. Current in vitro
models insufficiently predict cardiotoxicity, and there is a need for alternative
physiologically relevant models. Here we describe the gene expression profile of 
human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiocytes (iCC) postthaw over a
period of 42 days in culture and compare this profile to human fetal and adult as
well as adult cynomolgus nonhuman primate (NHP, Macaca fascicularis) heart
tissue. Our results indicate that iCC express relevant cardiac markers such as
ion channels (SCN5A, KCNJ2, CACNA1C, KCNQ1, and KCNH2), tissue-specific
structural markers (MYH6, MYLPF, MYBPC3, DES, TNNT2, and TNNI3), and
transcription factors (NKX2.5, GATA4, and GATA6) and lack the expression of stem 
cell markers (FOXD3, GBX2, NANOG, POU5F1, SOX2, and ZFP42). Furthermore, we
performed a functional evaluation of contractility of the iCC and showed
functional and pharmacological correlations with myocytes isolated from adult NHP
hearts. These results suggest that stem cell-derived cardiocytes may represent a 
novel in vitro model to study human cardiac toxicity with potential ex vivo and
in vivo translation.

PMID: 22982684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Med Genet. 2012 Oct;49(10):642-3. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2012-101161. Epub 2012
Sep 7.

Dominantly inherited diabetes mellitus caused by GATA6 haploinsufficiency:
variable intrafamilial presentation.

Yorifuji T(1), Kawakita R, Hosokawa Y, Fujimaru R, Yamaguchi E, Tamagawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Children's Medical
Center, Osaka City General Hospital, Osaka, Japan.
t-yorifuji@hospital.city.osaka.jp

GATA6 haploinsufficiency has recently been reported as the most frequent cause of
neonatal diabetes with pancreatic agenesis. Although all previously reported
cases represented a de novo mutation with complete agenesis or pronounced
hypoplasia of the pancreas, in this study we identified a family with a
dominantly inherited mutation. Unlike previously reported cases, the degree of
pancreatic hypoplasia and the severity of diabetes varied among members of the
family, ranging from neonatally lethal diabetes with only a remnant of pancreatic
tissue to adult-onset diabetes associated with dorsal agenesis of the pancreas.
These observations further broaden the clinical spectrum of diabetes associated
with GATA6 haploinsufficiency.

PMID: 22962692  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Development. 2012 Sep;139(18):3301-5. doi: 10.1242/dev.083675.

Germline potential of parthenogenetic haploid mouse embryonic stem cells.

Leeb M(1), Walker R, Mansfield B, Nichols J, Smith A, Wutz A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Stem Cell Research, Wellcome Trust and Medical Research Council
Stem Cell Institute, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, Cambridge CB2
1QR, UK. ml553@cam.ac.uk

Haploid embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have recently been derived from
parthenogenetic mouse embryos and offer new possibilities for genetic screens.
The ability of haploid ESCs to give rise to a wide range of differentiated cell
types in the embryo and in vitro has been demonstrated. However, it has remained 
unclear whether haploid ESCs can contribute to the germline. Here, we show that
parthenogenetic haploid ESCs at high passage have robust germline competence
enabling the production of transgenic mouse strains from genetically modified
haploid ESCs. We also show that differentiation of haploid ESCs in the embryo
correlates with the gain of a diploid karyotype and that diploidisation is the
result of endoreduplication and not cell fusion. By contrast, we find that a
haploid karyotype is maintained when differentiation to an extra-embryonic fate
is forced by induction of Gata6.

PMCID: PMC3424041
PMID: 22912412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Atherosclerosis. 2012 Nov;225(1):41-9. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.07.040. Epub 2012 Aug 5.

Sulforaphane inhibits restenosis by suppressing inflammation and the
proliferation of vascular smooth muscle cells.

Kwon JS(1), Joung H, Kim YS, Shim YS, Ahn Y, Jeong MH, Kee HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Heart Research Center of Chonnam National University Hospital, Jebong-ro,
Dong-ku, Gwangju 501-757, Republic of Korea.

Comment in
    Atherosclerosis. 2012 Nov;225(1):29-33.

OBJECTIVE: Sulforaphane, a naturally occurring organosulfur compound in broccoli,
has chemopreventive properties in cancer. However, the effects of sulforaphane in
vascular diseases have not been examined. We therefore aimed to investigate the
effects of sulforaphane on vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation and
neointimal formation and the related mechanisms.
METHODS: The expression of vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) and
intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM-1) was examined in VSMCs. The nuclear
translocation of nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and GATA6 expression was examined in
VSMCs and in a carotid artery injury model by Western blot and
immunohistochemistry. We also investigated whether local delivery of sulforaphane
affected neointimal formation.
RESULTS: Sulforaphane inhibited the mRNA and protein expression of VCAM-1 induced
by tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a in VSMCs. Treatment of VSMCs with sulforaphane
blocked TNF-a-induced I<U+03BA>Ba degradation and NF-<U+03BA>B p65 and GATA6 expression.
Furthermore, NF-<U+03BA>B p65 and GATA6 expression were reduced in sulforaphane-treated 
carotid injury sections. Notably, binding of GATA6 to the VCAM-1 promoter was
dramatically reduced by sulforaphane. The MTT, BrdU incorporation, and in vitro
scratch assays revealed that the proliferation and migration of VSMCs were
reduced by sulforaphane. Furthermore, local administration of sulforaphane
significantly reduced neointima formation 14 days after vascular injury in rats.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that sulforaphane inhibits neointima formation 
via targeting of adhesion molecules through the suppression of NF-<U+03BA>B/GATA6.
Furthermore, sulforaphane regulates migration and proliferation in VSMCs.
Sulforaphane may be a potential therapeutic agent for preventing restenosis after
vascular injury.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22898620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Theriogenology. 2012 Oct 1;78(6):1243-51.e1-2. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2012.05.020. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

Importance of culture conditions during the morula-to-blastocyst period on
capacity of inner cell-mass cells of bovine blastocysts for establishment of
self-renewing pluripotent cells.

Ozawa M(1), Sakatani M, Hankowski KE, Terada N, Dobbs KB, Hansen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida,
USA.

The hypothesis was tested that the pluripotency of the inner cell mass (ICM) of
the bovine embryo is enhanced by the glycogen synthase kinase-3ß inhibitor
CHIR99021 and the MAPK1 and MAPK3 inhibitor PD032591. Treatment with the two
inhibitors from Days 6 to 8 after insemination increased blastocyst steady state 
concentrations of mRNA for NANOG (P < 0.05) and SOX2 (P = 0.055) and tended to
decrease (P = 0.09) expression of GATA6. To evaluate pluripotency, the inner cell
mass was isolated by immunosurgery at Day 8, seeded on a feeder layer of bovine
embryonic fibroblasts, and cultured in the presence of the inhibitors. Ten of 52 
(19%) ICM from control embryos had primary outgrowth formation vs. 23 of 50 (46%)
of the ICM from embryos cultured with inhibitors (P < 0.01). For ICM outgrowths
from embryos cultured without inhibitors, colonies either did not persist through
Passage 2 or became differentiated. In contrast, for the inhibitor group, four
colonies survived beyond Passage 2, and one line persisted for 19 passages. This 
cell line possessed alkaline phosphatase activity, expressed several genes
characteristically expressed in pluripotent cells, and differentiated into
embryoid bodies when cultured in the absence of the signal transduction
inhibitors and the feeder layer. Propagation of the cells was difficult due to
slow growth and inefficiency in survival through each passage. In conclusion,
exposure to inhibitors during the morula-blastocyst transition facilitated
formation of self-renewing pluripotent cell lines from bovine blastocysts.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22898023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Mol Biol Cell. 2012 Sep;23(18):3754-63. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-04-0313. Epub 2012
Aug 1.

GATA-6 promotes cell survival by up-regulating BMP-2 expression during embryonic 
stem cell differentiation.

Rong L(1), Liu J, Qi Y, Graham AM, Parmacek MS, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick, NJ 08903, USA.

GATA-6 is a zinc-finger transcription factor essential for early embryogenesis.
Ablation of GATA-6 in mice impairs endoderm differentiation and causes apoptosis 
of epiblast cells. The endoderm defects have been attributed to the loss of HNF4,
disabled-2, and GATA-4. However, the mechanisms underlying epiblast apoptosis are
unclear. In this study we used mouse embryonic stem cell-derived embryoid bodies 
(EBs) as a model for peri-implantation development and found that ablation of
GATA-6 causes massive apoptosis during EB differentiation. Endoderm grafting
experiments and ectopic basement membrane (BM) assembly suggest that both BM and 
non-BM factors contribute to cell survival. Furthermore, the increased cell death
in mutant EBs is accompanied by reduced expression of bone morphogenetic protein 
2 (BMP-2). Chromatin immunoprecipitation reveals direct binding of GATA-6 to the 
Bmp2 promoter. Treatment of the mutant EBs with BMP-2 markedly suppresses
apoptosis, whereas stable overexpression of the BMP antagonist noggin or a
dominant-negative BMP receptor in normal EBs leads to increased apoptosis. Last, 
activation of SMAD1/5 by phosphorylation is significantly inhibited in the
absence of GATA-6, and this is reversed by exogenous BMP-2. Treatment of normal
EBs with SMAD phosphorylation inhibitor increases apoptosis. Collectively these
results suggest that GATA-6 promotes cell survival by regulating endoderm
expression of BMP-2 and BM during embryonic epithelial morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3442421
PMID: 22855527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Oct;30(4):783-90. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.1068. Epub 2012 Jul 
18.

Novel GATA6 loss-of-function mutation responsible for familial atrial
fibrillation.

Li J(1), Liu WD, Yang ZL, Yang YQ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency, Pu Nan Hospital, Shanghai 200125, PR China.

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most commonly sustained cardiac arrhythmia, and
confers a substantially increased risk of morbidity and mortality. Increasing
evidence has indicated that hereditary defects are implicated in AF. However, AF 
is genetically heterogeneous and the genetic etiology of AF in a significant
portion of patients remains unclear. In this study, the entire coding sequence
and splice junctions of the GATA6 gene, which encodes a zinc-finger transcription
factor crucial for cardiogenesis, were sequenced in 140 unrelated patients with
lone AF. The available relatives of the index patient carrying an identified
mutation and 200 unrelated ethnically-matched healthy individuals used as the
controls were genotyped. The functional characteristics of the mutant GATA6 were 
assessed in contrast to its wild-type counterpart using a luciferase reporter
assay system. As a result, a novel heterozygous GATA6 mutation, p.G469V, was
identified in a family with AF inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. The
mutation was absent in the 200 control individuals and the altered amino acid was
completely conserved across species. Functional analysis demonstrated that the
GATA6 mutation was associated with a significantly decreased transcriptional
activity. The findings provide novel insight into the molecular mechanism
involved in the pathogenesis of AF, as well as insight into potential therapies
for the prevention and treatment of AF.

PMID: 22824924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Diabetologia. 2012 Oct;55(10):2845-7. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2645-7. Epub 2012
Jul 18.

GATA6 inactivating mutations are associated with heart defects and,
inconsistently, with pancreatic agenesis and diabetes.

Bonnefond A, Sand O, Guerin B, Durand E, De Graeve F, Huyvaert M, Rachdi L,
Kerr-Conte J, Pattou F, Vaxillaire M, Polak M, Scharfmann R, Czernichow P,
Froguel P.

PMID: 22806356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Development. 2012 Aug;139(16):2866-77. doi: 10.1242/dev.078519. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Conversion from mouse embryonic to extra-embryonic endoderm stem cells reveals
distinct differentiation capacities of pluripotent stem cell states.

Cho LT(1), Wamaitha SE, Tsai IJ, Artus J, Sherwood RI, Pedersen RA, Hadjantonakis
AK, Niakan KK.

Author information: 
(1)The Anne McLaren Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, Stem Cell Institute,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SZ, UK.

The inner cell mass of the mouse pre-implantation blastocyst comprises epiblast
progenitor and primitive endoderm cells of which cognate embryonic (mESCs) or
extra-embryonic (XEN) stem cell lines can be derived. Importantly, each stem cell
type retains the defining properties and lineage restriction of their in vivo
tissue of origin. Recently, we demonstrated that XEN-like cells arise within mESC
cultures. This raises the possibility that mESCs can generate self-renewing XEN
cells without the requirement for gene manipulation. We have developed a novel
approach to convert mESCs to XEN cells (cXEN) using growth factors. We confirm
that the downregulation of the pluripotency transcription factor Nanog and the
expression of primitive endoderm-associated genes Gata6, Gata4, Sox17 and Pdgfra 
are necessary for cXEN cell derivation. This approach highlights an important
function for Fgf4 in cXEN cell derivation. Paracrine FGF signalling compensates
for the loss of endogenous Fgf4, which is necessary to exit mESC self-renewal,
but not for XEN cell maintenance. Our cXEN protocol also reveals that distinct
pluripotent stem cells respond uniquely to differentiation promoting signals.
cXEN cells can be derived from mESCs cultured with Erk and Gsk3 inhibitors (2i), 
and LIF, similar to conventional mESCs. However, we find that epiblast stem cells
(EpiSCs) derived from the post-implantation embryo are refractory to cXEN cell
establishment, consistent with the hypothesis that EpiSCs represent a pluripotent
state distinct from mESCs. In all, these findings suggest that the potential of
mESCs includes the capacity to give rise to both extra-embryonic and embryonic
lineages.

PMCID: PMC3403099
PMID: 22791892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 31;287(36):30507-17. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.388181. Epub
2012 Jul 11.

Fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 homodimerization rapidly reduces
transcription of the pluripotency gene Nanog without dissociation of activating
transcription factors.

Santostefano KE(1), Hamazaki T, Pardo CE, Kladde MP, Terada N.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pathology, University of Florida College of Medicine,
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

Nanog or Gata6-positive cells co-exist and are convertible within the inner cell 
mass of murine blastocysts and embryonic stem (ES) cells. Previous studies
demonstrate fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) triggers Nanog gene
down-regulation and differentiation to primitive endoderm (PE); however, the
underlying mechanisms responsible for reversible and fluctuating cell fate are
poorly understood. Using an inducible FGFR2 dimerization system in ES cells, we
demonstrate that FGFR2 activation rapidly down-regulated Nanog gene transcription
through activation of the Mek pathway and subsequently differentiated ES cells
into PE cells. FGFR2 rather selectively repressed the Nanog gene with minimal
effect on other pluripotency genes, including Oct4 and Sox2. We determined the
Nanog promoter region containing minimum Oct4/Sox2 binding sites was sufficient
for this transcriptional down-regulation by FGFR2, when the reporter transgenes
were integrated with insulators. Of interest, FGFR2-mediated Nanog
transcriptional reduction occurred without dissociation of RNA polymerase II,
p300, Oct4, Sox2, and Tet1 from the Nanog proximal promoter region and with no
increase in repressive histone methylation marks or DNA methylation, implying the
gene repression is in the early and transient phase. Furthermore, addition of a
specific FGFR inhibitor readily reversed this Nanog repression status. These
findings illustrate well how FGFR2 induces rapid but reversible Nanog repression 
within ES cells.

PMCID: PMC3436299
PMID: 22787153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Jan 15;22(2):296-306. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0256. Epub 2012 
Aug 6.

The combination of inhibitors of FGF/MEK/Erk and GSK3ß signaling increases the
number of OCT3/4- and NANOG-positive cells in the human inner cell mass, but does
not improve stem cell derivation.

Van der Jeught M(1), O'Leary T, Ghimire S, Lierman S, Duggal G, Versieren K,
Deforce D, Chuva de Sousa Lopes S, Heindryckx B, De Sutter P.

Author information: 
(1)Department for Reproductive Medicine, Ghent University Hospital, De Pintelaan 
185, Ghent, Belgium. margot.vanderjeught@ugent.be

In embryonic stem cell culture, small molecules can be used to alter key
signaling pathways to promote self-renewal and inhibit differentiation. In mice, 
small-molecule inhibition of both the FGF/MEK/Erk and the GSK3ß pathways during
preimplantation development suppresses hypoblast formation, and this results in
more pluripotent cells of the inner cell mass (ICM). In this study, we evaluated 
the effects of different small-molecule inhibitors of the FGF/MEK/Erk and GSK3ß
pathway on embryo preimplantation development, early lineage segregation, and
subsequent embryonic stem cell derivation in the humans. We did not observe any
effect on blastocyst formation, but small-molecule inhibition did affect the
number of OCT3/4- and NANOG-positive cells in the human ICM. We found that
combined inhibition of the FGF/MEK/Erk and GSK3ß pathways by PD0325901 and
CHIR99021, respectively, resulted in ICMs containing significantly more
OCT3/4-positive cells. Inhibition of FGF/MEK/Erk alone as well as in combination 
with inhibition of GSK3ß significantly increased the number of NANOG-positive
cells in blastocysts possessing good-quality ICMs. Secondly, we verified the
influence of this increased pluripotency after 2i culture on the efficiency of
stem cell derivation. Similar human embryonic stem cell (hESC) derivation rates
were observed after 2i compared to control conditions, resulting in 2 control
hESC lines and 1 hESC line from an embryo cultured in 2i conditions. In
conclusion, we demonstrated that FGF/MEK/Erk and GSK3ß signaling increases the
number of OCT3/4- and NANOG-positive cells in the human ICM, but does not improve
stem cell derivation.

PMCID: PMC3545355
PMID: 22784186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Aug 10;424(4):663-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.003. Epub 2012 Jul 7.

Angiotensin II induces apoptosis in intestinal epithelial cells through the AT2
receptor, GATA-6 and the Bax pathway.

Sun L(1), Wang W, Xiao W, Liang H, Yang Y, Yang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Xingqiao Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400037, China.

Angiotensin II (Ang II) has been shown to play an important role in cell
apoptosis. However, the mechanisms of Ang-II-induced apoptosis in intestinal
epithelial cells are not fully understood. GATA-6 is a zinc finger transcription 
factor expressed in the colorectal epithelium, which directs cell proliferation, 
differentiation and apoptosis. In the present study we investigated the
underlying mechanism of which GATA-6 affects Ang-II induced apoptosis in
intestinal epithelial cells. The in vitro intestinal epithelial cell apoptosis
model was established by co-culturing Caco-2 cells with Ang II. Pretreatment with
Angiotensin type 2 (AT2) receptor antagonist, PD123319, significantly reduced the
expression of Bax and prevented the Caco-2 cells apoptosis induced by Ang II. In 
addition, Ang II up-regulated the expression of GATA-6. Interestingly, GATA-6
short hairpin RNA prevented Ang II-induced intestinal epithelial cells apoptosis 
and reduced the expression of Bax, but not Bcl-2. Taken together, the present
study suggests that Angiotensin II promotes apoptosis in intestinal epithelial
cells through GATA-6 and the Bax pathway in an AT2 receptor-dependent manner.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22776205  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Eur J Med Genet. 2012 Oct;55(10):520-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.06.007. Epub
2012 Jun 26.

GATA6 loss-of-function mutation in atrial fibrillation.

Yang YQ(1), Li L, Wang J, Zhang XL, Li RG, Xu YJ, Tan HW, Wang XH, Jiang JQ, Fang
WY, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Research, Shanghai Chest Hospital, Medical
College of Shanghai Jiaotong University, 241 West Huaihai Road, Shanghai 200030, 
China. yang99yang66@hotmail.com

Atrial fibrillation (AF) is the most common type of sustained cardiac arrhythmia 
and is associated with substantial morbidity and mortality. Increasing evidence
demonstrates that hereditary defects are involved in the pathogenesis of AF.
However, AF is of remarkable genetic heterogeneity, and the heritable components 
responsible for AF in the majority of patients remain unclear. In this study, the
entire coding region of the GATA6 gene, which encodes a zinc-finger transcription
factor crucial for cardiogenesis, was sequenced in 138 unrelated patients with
lone AF, and a novel heterozygous GATA6 mutation, c.704A > C equivalent to
p.Y235S, was identified in a patient. The detected substitution, which altered
the amino acid highly conserved evolutionarily across species, was absent in 200 
unrelated ethnically matched healthy individuals, and was predicted to be
disease-causing by MutationTaster. Genetic analysis of the available relatives of
the mutation carrier showed that in the family the variation co-segregated with
the disease transmitted as an autosomal dominant trait, with complete penetrance.
The functional analysis performed using a luciferase reporter assay system
revealed that the mutant GATA6 protein resulted in significantly decreased
transcriptional activity compared with its wild-type counterpart. These findings 
provide novel insight into the molecular pathophysiology implicated in AF,
suggesting the potential implications in the prophylactic strategy and effective 
therapy for this common arrhythmia.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22750565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Sep;32(17):3392-402. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00070-12. Epub 2012 Jun
25.

GATA6 is required for proliferation, migration, secretory cell maturation, and
gene expression in the mature mouse colon.

Beuling E(1), Aronson BE, Tran LM, Stapleton KA, ter Horst EN, Vissers LA, Verzi 
MP, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Children's
Hospital Boston, and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Controlled renewal of the epithelium with precise cell distribution and gene
expression patterns is essential for colonic function. GATA6 is expressed in the 
colonic epithelium, but its function in the colon is currently unknown. To define
GATA6 function in the colon, we conditionally deleted Gata6 throughout the
epithelium of small and large intestines of adult mice. In the colon, Gata6
deletion resulted in shorter, wider crypts, a decrease in proliferation, and a
delayed crypt-to-surface epithelial migration rate. Staining techniques and
electron microscopy indicated deficient maturation of goblet cells, and
coimmunofluorescence demonstrated alterations in specific hormones produced by
the endocrine L cells and serotonin-producing cells. Specific colonocyte genes
were significantly downregulated. In LS174T, the colonic adenocarcinoma cell
line, Gata6 knockdown resulted in a significant downregulation of a similar
subset of goblet cell and colonocyte genes, and GATA6 was found to occupy active 
loci in enhancers and promoters of some of these genes, suggesting that they are 
direct targets of GATA6. These data demonstrate that GATA6 is necessary for
proliferation, migration, lineage maturation, and gene expression in the mature
colonic epithelium.

PMCID: PMC3422006
PMID: 22733991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Sep 1;40(17):8199-209. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Global identification of transcriptional regulators of pluripotency and
differentiation in embryonic stem cells.

Won KJ(1), Xu Z, Zhang X, Whitaker JW, Shoemaker R, Ren B, Xu Y, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, The Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism,
Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Civic Center 
Blvd., Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) hold great promise for regenerative medicine
because they can undergo unlimited self-renewal and retain the capability to
differentiate into all cell types in the body. Although numerous genes/proteins
such as Oct4 and Gata6 have been identified to play critical regulatory roles in 
self-renewal and differentiation of hESC, the majority of the regulators in these
cellular processes and more importantly how these regulators co-operate with each
other and/or with epigenetic modifications are still largely unknown. We propose 
here a systematic approach to integrate genomic and epigenomic data for
identification of direct regulatory interactions. This approach allows
reconstruction of cell-type-specific transcription networks in embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) and fibroblasts at an unprecedented scale. Many links in the
reconstructed networks coincide with known regulatory interactions or literature 
evidence. Systems-level analyses of these networks not only uncover novel
regulators for pluripotency and differentiation, but also reveal extensive
interplays between transcription factor binding and epigenetic modifications.
Especially, we observed poised enhancers characterized by both active (H3K4me1)
and repressive (H3K27me3) histone marks that contain enriched Oct4- and
Suz12-binding sites. The success of such a systems biology approach is further
supported by experimental validation of the predicted interactions.

PMCID: PMC3458541
PMID: 22730289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Genes Dev. 2012 Jul 1;26(13):1445-58. doi: 10.1101/gad.188193.112. Epub 2012 Jun 
19.

Bmi1 facilitates primitive endoderm formation by stabilizing Gata6 during early
mouse development.

Lavial F(1), Bessonnard S, Ohnishi Y, Tsumura A, Chandrashekran A, Fenwick MA,
Tomaz RA, Hosokawa H, Nakayama T, Chambers I, Hiiragi T, Chazaud C, Azuara V.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom.

The transcription factors Nanog and Gata6 are critical to specify the epiblast
versus primitive endoderm (PrE) lineages. However, little is known about the
mechanisms that regulate the protein stability and activity of these factors in
the developing embryo. Here we uncover an early developmental function for the
Polycomb group member Bmi1 in supporting PrE lineage formation through Gata6
protein stabilization. We show that Bmi1 is enriched in the extraembryonic
(endoderm [XEN] and trophectodermal stem [TS]) compartment and repressed by Nanog
in pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) cells. In vivo, Bmi1 overlaps with the nascent
Gata6 and Nanog protein from the eight-cell stage onward before it preferentially
cosegregates with Gata6 in PrE progenitors. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that 
Bmi1 interacts with Gata6 in a Ring finger-dependent manner to confer protection 
against Gata6 ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation. A direct role for Bmi1 
in cell fate allocation is established by loss-of-function experiments in
chimeric embryoid bodies. We thus propose a novel regulatory pathway by which
Bmi1 action on Gata6 stability could alter the balance between Gata6 and Nanog
protein levels to introduce a bias toward a PrE identity in a cell-autonomous
manner.

PMCID: PMC3403013
PMID: 22713603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Reprod Fertil Dev. 2012;24(5):691-703. doi: 10.1071/RD11068.

Gene expression profiling of pluripotency and differentiation-related markers in 
cat oocytes and preimplantation embryos.

Filliers M(1), Goossens K, Van Soom A, Merlo B, Pope CE, de Rooster H, Smits K,
Vandaele L, Peelman LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproduction, Obstetrics, and Herd Health, Faculty of Veterinary
Medicine, Ghent University, B-9820 Merelbeke, Belgium. muriel.filliers@ugent.be

During mammalian preimplantation development, two successive differentiation
events lead to the establishment of three committed lineages with separate fates:
the trophectoderm, the primitive endoderm and the pluripotent epiblast. In the
mouse embryo, the molecular mechanisms underlying these two cell fate decisions
have been studied extensively, leading to the identification of lineage-specific 
transcription factors. Species-specific differences in expression patterns of key
regulatory genes have been reported, raising questions regarding their role in
different species. The aim of the present study was to characterise the gene
expression patterns of pluripotency (OCT4, SOX2, NANOG) and differentiation
(CDX2, GATA6)-related markers during feline early development using reverse
transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction. In addition, we assessed
the impact of in vitro development on gene expression by comparing transcript
levels of the genes investigated between in vitro and in vivo blastocysts. To
normalise quantitative data within different preimplantation embryo stages, we
first validated a set of stable reference genes. Transcript levels of all genes
investigated were present and changed over the course of preimplantation
development; a highly significant embryo-stage effect on gene expression was
observed. Transcript levels of OCT4 were significantly reduced in in vitro
blastocysts compared with their in vivo counterparts. None of the other genes
investigated showed altered expression under in vitro conditions. The different
gene expression patterns of OCT4, SOX2, CDX2 and GATA6 in cat embryos resembled
those described in mouse embryos, indicative of a preserved role for these genes 
during early segregation. However, because of the absence of any upregulation of 
NANOG transcription levels after embryonic genome activation, it is unlikely that
NANOG is a key regular of lineage segregation. Such results support the
hypothesis that the behaviour of early lineage markers can be species specific.
The present study also revealed a pool of maternal NANOG mRNA transcripts, the
role of which remains to be elucidated. Comparing transcription levels of these
genes between in vivo and in vitro blastocysts revealed low levels of OCT4 mRNA
in the latter, which may contribute to the reduced developmental competence of
embryos under suboptimal conditions.

PMID: 22697119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jul 13;423(4):679-83. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.013. Epub 2012 Jun 10.

cAMP-dependent proteolysis of GATA-6 is linked to JNK-signaling pathway.

Ushijima H(1), Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy, Iwate Medical University,
2-1-1, Nishitokuta, Yahaba, Shiwagun, Iwate 028-3694, Japan.

A JNK inhibitor SP600125 inhibited cAMP-dependent proteolysis of GATA-6 by
proteasomes around its IC50. We further examined the effects of SP600125 on the
degradation of GATA-6 in detail, since an activator of JNK (anisomycin) is
available. Interestingly, anisomycin immediately stimulated the export of nuclear
GATA-6 into the cytoplasm, and then the cytoplasmic content of GATA-6 decreased
slowly through degradation by proteasomes. Such an effect of anisomycin was
inhibited by SP600125, indicating that the observed phenomenon might be linked to
the JNK signaling pathway. The inhibitory effect of SP600125 could not be
ascribed to the inhibition of PKA, since phosphorylation of CREB occurred in the 
presence of dbcAMP and SP600125. The nuclear export of GATA-6 was inhibited by
leptomycin B, suggesting that CRM1-mediated export could be activated by
anisomycin. Furthermore, it seems likely that the JNK activated by anisomycin may
stimulate not only the nuclear export of GATA-6 through CRM1 but also the
degradation of GATA-6 by cytoplasmic proteasomes. In contrast, A-kinase might
activate only the latter process through JNK.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22695114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Toxicol Sci. 2012;37(3):539-48.

Evaluation of the testicular toxicity of prenatal exposure to bisphenol A based
on microarray analysis combined with MeSH annotation.

Tainaka H(1), Takahashi H, Umezawa M, Tanaka H, Nishimune Y, Oshio S, Takeda K.

Author information: 
(1)The Center for Environmental Health Science for the Next Generation, Research 
Institute for Science and Technology, Tokyo University of Science, Chiba, Japan.

Bisphenol A (BPA) is known to be an endocrine disruptor that affects the
development of reproductive system. The aim of the present study was to
investigate a group of testicular genes dysregulated by prenatal exposure to BPA.
Pregnant ICR mice were treated with BPA by subcutaneous administration on days 7 
and 14 of pregnancy. Tissue and blood samples were collected from 6-week-old male
offspring. Testes were subjected to gene expression analysis using a
testis-specific microarray (Testis2), consisting of 2,482 mouse cDNA clones
annotated with Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) terms indicative of testicular
components and functions. To interpret the microarray data, we used the MeSH
terms significantly associated with the altered genes. As a result, MeSH terms
related to androgens and Sertoli cells were extracted in BPA-treated groups.
Among the genes related to Sertoli cells, downregulation of Msi1h, Ncoa1, Nid1,
Hspb2, and Gata6 were detected in the testis of mice treated with BPA (twice
administered 50 mg/kg). The MeSH terms associated with this group of genes may
provide useful means to interpret the testicular toxicity of BPA. This article
concludes that prenatal BPA exposure downregulates expression of genes associated
with Sertoli cell function and affects the reproductive function of male
offspring. Additionally, a method using MeSH to extract a group of genes was
useful for predicting the testicular and reproductive toxicity of prenatal BPA
exposure.

PMID: 22687993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. BMC Cancer. 2012 Jun 6;12:218. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-218.

MGMT, GATA6, CD81, DR4, and CASP8 gene promoter methylation in glioblastoma.

Skiriute D(1), Vaitkiene P, Saferis V, Asmoniene V, Skauminas K, Deltuva VP,
Tamasauskas A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurooncology and Genetics, Neuroscience Institute, Medical
Academy, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Eiveniu str, 4, Kaunas, LT,
50009, Lithuania. dainski@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Methylation of promoter region is the major mechanism affecting gene 
expression in tumors. Recent methylome studies of brain tumors revealed a list of
new epigenetically modified genes. Our aim was to study promoter methylation of
newly identified epigenetically silenced genes together with already known
epigenetic markers and evaluate its separate and concomitant role in glioblastoma
genesis and patient outcome.
METHODS: The methylation status of MGMT, CD81, GATA6, DR4, and CASP8 in 76
patients with primary glioblastomas was investigated. Methylation-specific PCR
reaction was performed using bisulfite treated DNA. Evaluating glioblastoma
patient survival time after operation, patient data and gene methylation effect
on survival was estimated using survival analysis.
RESULTS: The overwhelming majority (97.3%) of tumors were methylated in at least 
one of five genes tested. In glioblastoma specimens gene methylation was observed
as follows: MGMT in 51.3%, GATA6 in 68.4%, CD81 in 46.1%, DR4 in 41.3% and CASP8 
in 56.8% of tumors. Methylation of MGMT was associated with younger patient age
(p < 0.05), while CASP8 with older (p < 0.01). MGMT methylation was significantly
more frequent event in patient group who survived longer than 36 months after
operation (p < 0.05), while methylation of CASP8 was more frequent in patients
who survived shorter than 36 months (p < 0.05). Cox regression analysis showed
patient age, treatment, MGMT, GATA6 and CASP8 as independent predictors for
glioblastoma patient outcome (p < 0.05). MGMT and GATA6 were independent
predictors for patient survival in younger patients' group, while there were no
significant associations observed in older patients' group when adjusted for
therapy.
CONCLUSIONS: High methylation frequency of tested genes shows heterogeneity of
glioblastoma epigenome and the importance of MGMT, GATA6 and CASP8 genes
methylation in glioblastoma patient outcome.

PMCID: PMC3404983
PMID: 22672670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2012 Aug;29(8):723-33. doi: 10.1007/s10815-012-9797-8.
Epub 2012 May 26.

Developmental expression of lineage specific genes in porcine embryos of
different origins.

Kumar BM(1), Maeng GH, Jeon RH, Lee YM, Lee WJ, Jeon BG, Ock SA, Rho GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Theriogenology and Biotechnology, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Gyeongsang National University, 501, Jinju-daero, Jinju, 660-701,
Republic of Korea.

PURPOSE: This study compared the expression of genes involved in pluripotency,
segregation of inner cell mass (ICM) and trophectoderm (TE), and primitive
endoderm (PE) formation in porcine embryos produced by in vitro fertilization
(IVF), parthenogenetic activation (PA), and nuclear transfer (NT) using either
fetal fibroblasts (FF-NT) or mesenchymal stem cells (MSC-NT).
METHODS: Blastocyst formation and total cell number were analyzed. The expression
patterns of transcripts, including SRY-related HMG-box gene 2 (SOX2), reduced
expression gene 1 (REX1/ZFP42), LIN28, caudal type homeobox 2 (CDX2), TEA domain 
family member 4 (TEAD4), integrin beta 1 (ITGB1) and GATA6 were assessed at the
4-8 cell and blastocyst stage embryos by real-time PCR.
RESULTS: Developmental rates to blastocyst stage and total cell number were
higher in IVF and PA embryos than in NT embryos. But MSC-NT embryos had increased
blastocyst formation and higher total cell number compared to FF-NT embryos. The 
relative expressions of transcripts were higher in blastocysts than in 4-8 cell
stage embryos. The mRNA expression levels of SOX2 and REX1 were largely similar
in embryos of different origins. However, the genes such as LIN28, CDX2, TEAD4,
ITGB1 and GATA6 showed the differential expression pattern in PA and NT embryos
compared to IVF embryos. Importantly, the transcript levels in MSC-NT embryos
were relatively less variable to IVF than those in FF-NT embryos.
CONCLUSION: MSCs seem to be better donors for porcine NT as they improved the
developmental competency, and influenced the expression pattern of genes quite
similar with IVF embryos than that of FFs.

PMCID: PMC3430790
PMID: 22639061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Dev Biol. 2012 Jul 15;367(2):178-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2012.05.009. Epub 2012 
May 16.

The smooth muscle microRNA miR-145 regulates gut epithelial development via a
paracrine mechanism.

Zeng L(1), Childs SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary,
Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 4N1.

MicroRNAs are potent modulators of cellular differentiation. miR-145 is expressed
in, and promotes the differentiation of vascular and visceral smooth muscle cells
(SMCs). Interestingly, we have observed that miR-145 also promotes
differentiation of the gut epithelium in the developing zebrafish, a cell type
where it is not expressed. Here we identify that a paracrine pathway involving
the morphogens Sonic hedgehog (Shh) in epithelium and bone morphogenic protein 4 
(Bmp4) in SMCs is modulated by miR-145. We show that expression of miR-145 in
visceral SMCs normally represses the expression of the morphogen bmp4, as loss of
miR-145 leads to upregulation of bmp4 in SMCs. We show that bmp4 in turn controls
expression of Shh in the visceral epithelium. Conversely, in miR-145 morphants
where bmp4 expression is increased, expression of sonic hedgehog a (shha) is
strongly increased in gut epithelium. We show that expression of bmp4 is
modulated by the miR-145 direct target gata6 but not a second potential direct
target, klf5a. Thus although miR-145 is a tissue-restricted microRNA, it plays an
essential role in promoting the patterning of both gut layers during gut
development via a paracrine mechanism.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22609551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biosci Bioeng. 2012 Sep;114(3):342-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2012.04.012. Epub
2012 May 16.

Preferential emergence of cell types expressing markers for primitive endoderm
lineages in mouse embryonic stem cells expressing exogenous EGAM1 homeoprotein.

Soma M(1), Iha M, Kihara Y, Sato S, Sato Y, Sato S, Mori Y, Sugawara S, Kasuga K,
Kojima I, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Animal Cell Technology, Graduate School of Bioresource
Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, Akita 010-0195, Japan.

Embryonic stem (ES) cells have been considered as a valuable renewable source of 
materials in regenerative medicine. Recently, we identified the homeoprotein
EGAM1 both in preimplantation mouse embryos and mouse ES cells. Expression of the
Egam1 transcript and its encoded protein was detectable in differentiating mouse 
ES cells, while it was almost undetectable in undifferentiated cells. In the
present study, in order to clarify the effect of forced expression of EGAM1 on
the differentiation of mouse ES cells in vitro, transfectants expressing
exogenous EGAM1 were generated. Egam1 transfectants promoted differentiation into
cell types expressing Gata6, Gata4, Afp, or Plat, genes associated with emergence
of the extra-embryonic endoderm lineages. On the other hand, Egam1 transfectants 
inhibited the expression of specific genes for the embryonic lineages, including 
Fgf5 (epiblast) and T (mesoderm), in addition to Cdx2, a specific gene for the
extra-embryonic trophectoderm lineages. Changes in the percentage of cells
recognizing by antibodies against specific marker proteins closely correlated
with the expression patterns of their transcripts. Taken together, the results
obtained in this study suggested that mouse ES cells expressing exogenous EGAM1
preferentially differentiate into extra-embryonic primitive endoderm lineages,
rather than embryonic lineages or extra-embryonic trophectoderm lineages.

Copyright © 2012 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 22608553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Nov 20;21(17):3220-32. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0492. Epub 2012
Jun 25.

GATA6 and FOXA2 regulate Wnt6 expression during extraembryonic endoderm
formation.

Hwang JT(1), Kelly GM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, Department of Biology, Child Health Research
Institute, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada.

One of the earliest epithelial-to-mesenchymal transitions in mouse embryogenesis 
involves the differentiation of inner cell mass cells into primitive and then
into parietal endoderm. These processes can be recapitulated in vitro using F9
teratocarcinoma cells, which differentiate into primitive endoderm when treated
with retinoic acid (RA) and into parietal endoderm with subsequent treatment with
dibutyryl cyclic adenosine monophosphate (db-cAMP). Our previous work on how
primitive endoderm develops revealed that the Wnt6 gene is upregulated by RA,
leading to the activation of the canonical WNT-ß-catenin pathway. The mechanism
by which Wnt6 is regulated was not determined, but in silico analysis of the
human WNT6 promoter region had suggested that the GATA6 and FOXA2 transcription
factors might be involved [1]. Subsequent analysis determined that both Gata6 and
Foxa2 mRNA are upregulated in F9 cells treated with RA or RA and db-cAMP. More
specifically, overexpression of Gata6 or Foxa2 alone induced molecular and
morphological markers of primitive endoderm, which occurred concomitantly with
the upregulation of the Wnt6 gene. Gata6- or Foxa2-overexpressing cells were also
found to have increased levels in T-cell factor (TCF)-dependent transcription,
and when these cells were treated with db-cAMP, they developed into parietal
endoderm. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that GATA6 and FOXA2
were bound to the Wnt6 promoter, and overexpression studies showed that these
transcription factors were sufficient to switch on the gene expression of a Wnt6 
reporter construct. Together, these results provide evidence for the direct
regulation of Wnt6 that leads to the activation of the canonical WNT-ß-catenin
pathway and subsequent induction of primitive extraembryonic endoderm.

PMID: 22607194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Aug;1819(8):869-76. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.04.003.
Epub 2012 Apr 25.

GATA-4/-6 and HNF-1/-4 families of transcription factors control the
transcriptional regulation of the murine Muc5ac mucin during stomach development 
and in epithelial cancer cells.

Jonckheere N(1), Vincent A, Franquet-Ansart H, Witte-Bouma J, Korteland-van Male 
A, Leteurtre E, Renes IB, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Jean Pierre Aubert Research Center, Lille cedex, France.
nicolas.jonckheere@inserm.fr

During human embryonic and fetal development of the gastrointestinal tract, the
gene encoding the MUC5AC mucin has a spatio-temporal pattern of expression
restricted to the stomach. In order to better understand the molecular mechanisms
responsible for this restricted pattern of expression, we have studied Muc5ac
expression in the developing stomach of the mouse and correlated it to that of
transcription factors known to be involved in cell differentiation programs
during development. Our results indicate that GATA-6 and HNF-4a expression
increased concomitantly with the induction of Muc5ac expression in embryonic
stomach. We then studied Muc5ac transcriptional regulation by these transcription
factors and showed that they all transactivate Muc5ac promoter. We also
identified several active GATA-4/-5/-6 and HNF-1/-4 cis-elements using gel shift 
assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation and site-directed mutagenesis. Among all
Muc5ac regulators, only GATA-6 and HNF-4a expression was concomitant to that of
Muc5ac in the developing stomach. This is thus in favor of an important role for 
these two transcription factors as regulators of expression of the Muc5ac mucin
during stomach development and in epithelial cancer cells.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22554936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Clin Microbiol Infect. 2012 Aug;18(8):E273-82. doi:
10.1111/j.1469-0691.2012.03849.x. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

microRNA profiling in duodenal ulcer disease caused by Helicobacter pylori
infection in a Western population.

Lario S(1), Ramírez-Lázaro MJ, Aransay AM, Lozano JJ, Montserrat A, Casalots Á,
Junquera F, Álvarez J, Segura F, Campo R, Calvet X.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Medicina, Digestive Diseases Service, Hospital de Sabadell,
Institut Universitari Parc Taulí, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Sabadell,
Barcelona, Spain.

Although the connection of microRNAs (miRNAs) to some diseases is well
established, their involvement in chronic infections such as Helicobacter pylori 
has received less attention. The aim was to compare miRNA expression profiling in
patients with duodenal ulcer (DU) due to H. pylori infection with that in
infected patients without DU and in uninfected patients. The miRNA expression
profile was determined by microarrays in antral mucosal samples from
well-characterized dyspeptic patients (n = 46). The most significant set of
miRNAs was subsequently analysed in an independent validation group of patients
(n = 42). Transcripts for IL8, IL12p40, IL12p35 and IL23p19, the signalling
molecules MYD88, GATA6, SOCS2 and STAT6 and H. pylori virulence factors cagA and 
VacA were analysed. Microarray experiments showed that 17 miRNAs were deregulated
in the mucosa of H. pylori-infected patients. No significant differences were
observed between normal and DU patients. PCR confirmed the up-regulation of
miR-9, miR-146a, miR-155 and miR-650 and the down-regulation of miR-96 and
miR-204 in the independent validation set of patients. Importantly, miR-9,
miR-96, miR-146a and miR-650 expression was specific to chronic-active gastritis.
H. pylori-infected patients showed higher levels of IL8 and IL12p40 mRNAs and
lower levels of GATA6 and SOCS2 mRNAs. The antral mucosa of patients with
non-active or chronic-active gastritis showed significantly lower levels of
GATA6, MYD88, SOCS2 and STAT6 mRNAs compared with patients without gastritis. The
down-regulation of these factors was not correlated with the expression of any of
the validated miRNAs. The exact role of the miRNA changes observed will require
further study.

© 2012 The Authors. Clinical Microbiology and Infection © 2012 European Society
of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases.

PMID: 22524533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Gut. 2013 May;62(5):664-75. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301061. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

microRNA-145 in Barrett's oesophagus: regulating BMP4 signalling via GATA6.

van Baal JW(1), Verbeek RE, Bus P, Fassan M, Souza RF, Rugge M, ten Kate FJ,
Vleggaar FP, Siersema PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, F02.816, University Medical
Center Utrecht, Heidelberglaan 100, 3508 GA Utrecht, The Netherlands.
j.w.p.m.vanbaal-2@umcutrecht.nl

OBJECTIVE: Barrett's oesophagus (BE) is a metaplastic condition of the distal
oesophagus which predisposes to oesophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC). It has been
suggested that microRNAs (miRNAs) are involved in the process of development of
BE and EAC; however, few functional miRNA data are available. The aim of the
study was to perform a tissue-specific miRNA profile and, based on this, to
examine the function of miRNA-145 in the oesophagus.
DESIGN: miRNA expression profiling using microarray analysis in EAC, BE and
normal squamous epithelium of the oesophagus (SQ) was performed and validated
using real-time PCR in samples from 15 patients and in situ hybridisation in
samples from 10 patients. The proliferative effect of miRNA-145 precursor
transfection in the SQ (HET-1A) and BE cell line (BAR-T) was measured. Downstream
targets of miRNA-145 were determined by analysing mRNA and protein expression
from miRNA-145 transfected cells.
RESULTS: Three unique miRNA expression profiles were found in tissue from EAC, BE
and SQ, which showed that miRNA-145 was upregulated in BE compared with EAC and
SQ. Overexpression of miRNA-145 in HET-1A and BAR-T cells reduced cell
proliferation and inhibited GATA6, BMP4 and SOX9 mRNA expression. Furthermore,
altered BMP4 signalling was observed in vitro on miRNA-145 overexpression. These 
effects were blocked when cells were co-transfected with a miRNA-145 specific
inhibitor. Additionally, BMP4 incubation of HET-1A cells altered miRNA-145 and
GATA6 expression over time.
CONCLUSION: These results imply that miRNA-145 indirectly targets BMP4 via GATA6 
and is potentially involved in the development of BE.

PMID: 22504665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Circ J. 2012;76(7):1703-11. Epub 2012 Apr 13.

Genetic analysis of essential cardiac transcription factors in 256 patients with 
non-syndromic congenital heart defects.

Kodo K(1), Nishizawa T, Furutani M, Arai S, Ishihara K, Oda M, Makino S, Fukuda
K, Takahashi T, Matsuoka R, Nakanishi T, Yamagishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The genetic basis of most congenital heart defects (CHDs), especially
non-syndromic and non-familial conditions, remains largely unknown.
METHODS AND RESULTS: DNA samples were collected from immortalized cell lines and 
original genomes of 256 non-syndromic, non-familial patients with cardiac outflow
tract (OFT) defects. Genes encoding NKX2.5, GATA4, GATA6, MEF2C, and ISL1,
essential for heart development, were analyzed using PCR-based bidirectional
sequencing. The transcriptional activity of proteins with identified sequence
variations was analyzed using a luciferase assay. A novel sequence variant (A103V
in MEF2C) was identified, in addition to 4 unreported non-synonymous sequence
variants in 3 known causative genes (A6V in NKX2.5, T330R and S339R in GATA4, and
E142K in GATA6) in 5 individuals. None of these was found in 500 controls without
CHDs. In vitro functional assay showed that all proteins with identified sequence
variations exhibited significant changes in transcriptional activity and/or
synergistic activity with other transcription factors. Furthermore,
overexpression of the A103V MEF2C variant in a fish system disturbed early
cardiac development.
CONCLUSIONS: New mutations in the transcription factors NKX2.5, GATA4, GATA6, and
MEF2C that affect their protein function were identified in 2.3% (6/256) of
patients with OFT defects. Our results provide the first demonstration of MEF2C
mutation and suggest that disturbances in the regulatory circuits involving these
cardiac transcription factors may cause a subset of non-syndromic and
non-familial CHDs.

PMID: 22498567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Neoplasma. 2012;59(4):416-23. doi: 10.4149/neo_2012_054.

<U+0394>Np63a mediates proliferation and apoptosis in human gastric cancer cells by the 
regulation of GATA-6.

Wang H(1), Liu Z, Li J, Zhao X, Wang Z, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of China
Medical University, Shenyang 110001, People's Republic of China.

The oncogenic isoform of the p63 protein, <U+0394>Np63a, has been found to be
overexpressed in numerous human squamous cell carcinomas. However, the role of
<U+0394>Np63a in human gastric cancer remains unknown. To evaluate this role, we
screened a panel of gastric cancer cell lines for <U+0394>Np63a expression and found
that they are correlated with the differentiation status of the cell lines. Using
the MKN28 gastric cancer cell line for loss-of-function or gain-of-function of
<U+0394>Np63a in our experiments, we observed that forced expression of <U+0394>Np63a promoted 
cell proliferation as assessed by the MTT and colony formation assays, and
increased the GATA-6 expression. In contrast, down-regulation of <U+0394>Np63a via small
interfering RNA suppressed cell proliferation, induced cell apoptosis, and
reduced the expression of GATA-6. In conclusion, our data suggest that <U+0394>Np63a
plays an important role in cell growth and proliferation of gastric cancer cells,
which may be associated with the regulation of GATA-6 expression. This is the
first study exploring the biological functions and the underlying mechanism of
<U+0394>Np63a during gastric cancer development. It also identifies potential targets
for anti-tumor treatment.

PMID: 22489697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. J Cell Sci. 2012 Jul 15;125(Pt 14):3343-56. doi: 10.1242/jcs.096537. Epub 2012
Mar 30.

Dental pulp of the third molar: a new source of pluripotent-like stem cells.

Atari M(1), Gil-Recio C, Fabregat M, García-Fernández D, Barajas M, Carrasco MA, 
Jung HS, Alfaro FH, Casals N, Prosper F, Ferrés-Padró E, Giner L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Regenerative Medicine, College of Dentistry, Universitat
Internacional de Catalunya, Barcelona 08009, Spain. drmaher1972@csc.uic.es

Dental pulp is particularly interesting in regenerative medicine because of the
accessibility and differentiation potential of the tissue. Dental pulp has an
early developmental origin with multi-lineage differentiation potential as a
result of its development during childhood and adolescence. However, no study has
previously identified the presence of stem cell populations with embryonic-like
phenotypes in human dental pulp from the third molar. In the present work, we
describe a new population of dental pulp pluripotent-like stem cells (DPPSCs)
that were isolated by culture in medium containing LIF, EGF and PDGF. These cells
are SSEA4(+), OCT3/4(+), NANOG(+), SOX2(+), LIN28(+), CD13(+), CD105(+), CD34(-),
CD45(-), CD90(+), CD29(+), CD73(+), STRO1(+) and CD146(-), and they show genetic 
stability in vitro based on genomic analysis with a newly described CGH
technique. Interestingly, DPPSCs were able to form both embryoid-body-like
structures (EBs) in vitro and teratoma-like structures that contained tissues
derived from all three embryonic germ layers when injected in nude mice. We
examined the capacity of DPPSCs to differentiate in vitro into tissues that have 
similar characteristics to mesoderm, endoderm and ectoderm layers in both 2D and 
3D cultures. We performed a comparative RT-PCR analysis of GATA4, GATA6, MIXL1,
NANOG, OCT3/4, SOX1 and SOX2 to determine the degree of similarity between
DPPSCs, EBs and human induced pluripotent stem cells (hIPSCs). Our analysis
revealed that DPPSCs, hIPSC and EBs have the same gene expression profile.
Because DPPSCs can be derived from healthy human molars from patients of
different sexes and ages, they represent an easily accessible source of stem
cells, which opens a range of new possibilities for regenerative medicine.

PMID: 22467856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Endocrinology. 2012 May;153(5):2474-85. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1969. Epub 2012 Mar 
20.

Loss of GATA-6 and GATA-4 in granulosa cells blocks folliculogenesis, ovulation, 
and follicle stimulating hormone receptor expression leading to female
infertility.

Bennett J(1), Wu YG, Gossen J, Zhou P, Stocco C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, College of Medicine, University of
Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA.

Single GATA-6 (G6(gcko)), GATA-4 (G4(gcko)), and double GATA-4/6 (G4/6(gcko))
granulosa cell-specific knockout mice were generated to further investigate the
role of GATA transcription factors in ovarian function in vivo. No reproductive
defects were found in G6(gcko) animals. G4(gcko) animals were subfertile as
indicated by the reduced number of pups per litter and the release of
significantly fewer oocytes at ovulation. In marked contrast, G4/6(gcko) females 
fail to ovulate and are infertile. Furthermore, G4/6(gcko) females had irregular 
estrous cycles, which correlate with the abnormal ovarian histology found in
unstimulated adult G4/6(gcko) females showing lack of follicular development and 
increased follicular atresia. Moreover, treatment with exogenous gonadotropins
did not rescue folliculogenesis or ovulation in double-knockout G4/6(gcko) mice. 
In addition, ovary weight and estradiol levels were significantly reduced in
G4(gcko) and G4/6(gcko) animals when compared with control and G6(gcko) mice.
Aromatase, P450scc, and LH receptor expression was significantly lower in
G4(gcko) and G4/6(gcko) mice when compared with control animals. Most
prominently, FSH receptor (FSHR) protein was undetectable in granulosa cells of
G4(gcko) and G4/6(gcko). Accordingly, gel shift and reporter assays revealed that
GATA-4 binds and stimulates the activity of the FSHR promoter. These results
demonstrate that GATA-4 and GATA-6 are needed for normal ovarian function. Our
data are consistent with a role for GATA-4 in the regulation of the FSHR gene and
provide a possible molecular mechanism to explain the fertility defects observed 
in animals with deficient GATA expression in the ovary.

PMCID: PMC3339651
PMID: 22434075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Epigenetics. 2012 Apr;7(4):400-8. doi: 10.4161/epi.19463. Epub 2012 Apr 1.

Genome-wide DNA methylation studies suggest distinct DNA methylation patterns in 
pediatric embryonal and alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas.

Mahoney SE(1), Yao Z, Keyes CC, Tapscott SJ, Diede SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Biology, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA, USA.

Rhabdomyosarcoma is the most common soft-tissue sarcoma in children. While
cytogenetic abnormalities have been well characterized in this disease, aberrant 
epigenetic events such as DNA hypermethylation have not been described in
genome-wide studies. We have analyzed the methylation status of 25,500 promoters 
in normal skeletal muscle, and in cell lines and tumor samples of embryonal and
alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma from pediatric patients. We identified over 1,900 CpG
islands that are hypermethylated in rhabdomyosarcomas relative to skeletal
muscle. Genes involved in tissue development, differentiation, and oncogenesis
such as DNAJA4, HES5, IRX1, BMP8A, GATA4, GATA6, ALX3, and P4HTM were
hypermethylated in both RMS cell lines and primary samples, implicating aberrant 
DNA methylation in the pathogenesis of rhabdomyosarcoma. Furthermore, cluster
analysis revealed embryonal and alveolar subtypes had distinct DNA methylation
patterns, with the alveolar subtype being enriched in DNA hypermethylation of
polycomb target genes. These results suggest that DNA methylation signatures may 
aid in the diagnosis and risk stratification of pediatric rhabdomyosarcoma and
help identify new targets for therapy.

PMCID: PMC3368822
PMID: 22419069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Jun;29(6):1065-71. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2012.930. Epub 2012 Mar 
7.

A novel GATA6 mutation associated with congenital ventricular septal defect.

Zheng GF(1), Wei D, Zhao H, Zhou N, Yang YQ, Liu XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji University School of
Medicine, Shanghai 200065, PR China.

Ventricular septal defect (VSD) is the most common form of congenital
cardiovascular malformation and an important contributor to the substantially
increased morbidity and mortality in infants. Emerging evidence indicates the
genetic basis for the pathogenesis of congenital VSD in a significant proportion 
of patients. However, congenital VSD is a genetically heterogeneous disease and
the genetic defects responsible for VSD in the overwhelming majority of cases
remain unclear. In this study, the entire coding region of the GATA6 gene, which 
encodes a zinc-finger transcription factor crucial to normal cardiogenesis, was
sequenced in 130 unrelated patients with congenital VSD. The available relatives 
of the index patient carrying the identified mutation and 200 unrelated
ethnically matched healthy individuals used as controls were subsequently
genotyped. The functional characteristics of the mutant GATA6 were assessed in
contrast to its wild-type counterpart using a luciferase reporter assay system.
As a result, a novel heterozygous missense GATA6 mutation, p.G220S, was
identified in a proband with VSD. The variation was absent in 400 control
chromosomes and the altered amino acid was highly conserved evolutionarily across
species. Genetic analysis of the family members of the mutation carrier showed
that the substitution co-segregated with VSD was inherited as an autosomal
dominant trait. Functional analysis demonstrated that the p.G220S mutation of
GATA6 was associated with significantly decreased transcriptional activity. The
findings provide novel insight into the molecular mechanism involved in VSD,
implying the potential clinical implications in the gene-specific prophylaxis and
therapy of this common developmental abnormality in neonates.

PMID: 22407241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Mar 13;109(11):4251-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1011989109. Epub 2012 Feb 28.

Activation of GATA binding protein 6 (GATA6) sustains oncogenic lineage-survival 
in esophageal adenocarcinoma.

Lin L(1), Bass AJ, Lockwood WW, Wang Z, Silvers AL, Thomas DG, Chang AC, Lin J,
Orringer MB, Li W, Glover TW, Giordano TJ, Lam WL, Meyerson M, Beer DG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Department of Pathology, and Department of Human
Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. linlin@umich.edu

Gene amplification is a tumor-specific event during malignant transformation.
Recent studies have proposed a lineage-dependency (addiction) model of human
cancer whereby amplification of certain lineage transcription factors predisposes
a survival mechanism in tumor cells. These tumor cells are derived from tissues
where the lineage factors play essential developmental and maintenance roles.
Here, we show that recurrent amplification at 18q11.2 occurs in 21% of esophageal
adenocarcinomas (EAC). Utilization of an integrative genomic strategy reveals a
single gene, the embryonic endoderm transcription factor GATA6, as the selected
target of the amplification. Overexpression of GATA6 is found in EACs that
contain gene amplification. We find that EAC patients whose tumors carry GATA6
amplification have a poorer survival. We show that ectopic expression of GATA6,
together with FGFR2 isoform IIIb, increases anchorage-independent growth in
immortalized Barrett's esophageal cells. Conversely, siRNA-mediated silencing of 
GATA6 significantly reduces both cell proliferation and anchorage-independent
growth in EAC cells. We further demonstrate that induction of apoptotic/anoikis
pathways is triggered upon silencing of GATA6 in EAC cells but not in esophageal 
squamous cells. We show that activation of p38a signaling and up-regulation of
TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand are detected in apoptotic EAC cells upon
GATA6 deprivation. We conclude that selective gene amplification of GATA6 during 
EAC development sustains oncogenic lineage-survival of esophageal adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC3306720
PMID: 22375031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Cell Cycle. 2012 Feb 15;11(4):683-6. doi: 10.4161/cc.11.4.19130.

The emerging role of the TGFß tumor suppressor pathway in pancreatic cancer.

Birnbaum DJ(1), Mamessier E, Birnbaum D.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Laboratoire d'Oncologie
Moléculaire, UMR1068 Inserm, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is one of the most aggressive human cancers. It
displays many different chromosomal abnormalities and mutations. To design new
therapeutic strategies, it is important to identify the signaling pathways and
gene networks within this apparent complexity that are predominantly altered. The
TGFß signaling pathway and associated transcription network emerges as a central 
actor of pancreatic oncogenesis. Its tumor suppressor function in this tissue can
be affected by several alterations.

PMID: 22373528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Reproduction. 2012 Apr;143(4):477-89. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0379. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

Effect of ectopic expression of homeoprotein EGAM1C on the cell morphology,
growth, and differentiation in a mouse embryonic stem cell line, MG1.19 cells.

Iha M(1), Watanabe M, Kihara Y, Sugawara S, Saito K, Soma M, Sato S, Mori Y,
Kasuga K, Kojima I, Sasamura R, Murata J, Kobayashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Animal Cell Technology, Graduate School of Bioresource
Sciences, Akita Prefectural University, Akita 010-0195, Japan.

The homeoprotein EGAM1C was identified in preimplantation mouse embryos and
embryonic stem (ES) cells. To explore the impact of EGAM1C on the hallmarks of
mouse ES cells, MG1.19 cells stably expressing EGAM1C at levels similar to those 
in blastocysts were established using an episomal expression system. In the
presence of leukemia inhibitory factor (+LIF), control transfectants with an
empty vector formed flattened cell colonies, while Egam1c transfectants formed
compacted colonies with increased E-CADHERIN expression. In Egam1c transfectants,
the cellular contents of POU5F1 (OCT4), SOX2, TBX3, and NANOG increased. Cell
growth was accelerated in an undifferentiated state sustained by LIF and in the
course of differentiation. During clonal proliferation, EGAM1C stabilized the
undifferentiated state. In adherent culture conditions, EGAM1C partly inhibited
the progression of differentiation at least within a 4-day culture period in the 
presence of retinoic acid by preventing the downregulation of LIF signaling with 
a robust increase in TBX3 expression. Conversely, EGAM1C enhanced the expression 
of lineage marker genes Fgf5 (epiblast), T (mesoderm), Gata6 (primitive
endoderm), and Cdx2 (trophectoderm) in -LIF conditions. In embryoid bodies
expressing EGAM1C, the expression of marker genes for extraembryonic cell
lineages, including Tpbpa (spongiotrophoblast) and Plat (parietal endoderm),
increased. These results demonstrated that the ectopic expression of EGAM1C is
capable of affecting the stabilization of an undifferentiated state and the
progression of differentiation in MG1.19 ES cells, in addition to affecting
cellular morphology and growth.

PMID: 22367590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Physiol Genomics. 2012 May 1;44(9):518-41. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.00013.2012. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

Human gene copy number spectra analysis in congenital heart malformations.

Tomita-Mitchell A(1), Mahnke DK, Struble CA, Tuffnell ME, Stamm KD, Hidestrand M,
Harris SE, Goetsch MA, Simpson PM, Bick DP, Broeckel U, Pelech AN, Tweddell JS,
Mitchell ME.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Medical College of 
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. amitchell@mcw.edu

The clinical significance of copy number variants (CNVs) in congenital heart
disease (CHD) continues to be a challenge. Although CNVs including genes can
confer disease risk, relationships between gene dosage and phenotype are still
being defined. Our goal was to perform a quantitative analysis of CNVs involving 
100 well-defined CHD risk genes identified through previously published human
association studies in subjects with anatomically defined cardiac malformations. 
A novel analytical approach permitting CNV gene frequency "spectra" to be
computed over prespecified regions to determine phenotype-gene dosage
relationships was employed. CNVs in subjects with CHD (n = 945), subphenotyped
into 40 groups and verified in accordance with the European Paediatric Cardiac
Code, were compared with two control groups, a disease-free cohort (n = 2,026)
and a population with coronary artery disease (n = 880). Gains (=200 kb) and
losses (=100 kb) were determined over 100 CHD risk genes and compared using a
Barnard exact test. Six subphenotypes showed significant enrichment (P = 0.05),
including aortic stenosis (valvar), atrioventricular canal (partial),
atrioventricular septal defect with tetralogy of Fallot, subaortic stenosis,
tetralogy of Fallot, and truncus arteriosus. Furthermore, CNV gene frequency
spectra were enriched (P = 0.05) for losses at: FKBP6, ELN, GTF2IRD1, GATA4,
CRKL, TBX1, ATRX, GPC3, BCOR, ZIC3, FLNA and MID1; and gains at: PRKAB2, FMO5,
CHD1L, BCL9, ACP6, GJA5, HRAS, GATA6 and RUNX1. Of CHD subjects, 14% had causal
chromosomal abnormalities, and 4.3% had likely causal (significantly enriched),
large, rare CNVs. CNV frequency spectra combined with precision phenotyping may
lead to increased molecular understanding of etiologic pathways.

PMCID: PMC3426426
PMID: 22318994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Gut. 2012 May;61(5):673-84. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-301839. Epub 2012 Feb 7.

A comprehensive survey of genomic alterations in gastric cancer reveals
systematic patterns of molecular exclusivity and co-occurrence among distinct
therapeutic targets.

Deng N(1), Goh LK, Wang H, Das K, Tao J, Tan IB, Zhang S, Lee M, Wu J, Lim KH,
Lei Z, Goh G, Lim QY, Tan AL, Sin Poh DY, Riahi S, Bell S, Shi MM, Linnartz R,
Zhu F, Yeoh KG, Toh HC, Yong WP, Cheong HC, Rha SY, Boussioutas A, Grabsch H,
Rozen S, Tan P.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology Program, Duke-NUS Graduate Medical School, 8
College Road, Singapore 169857, Singapore. gmstanp@duke-nus.edu.sg

Comment in
    Korean J Gastroenterol. 2013 Aug 25;62(2):140-1.
    Gut. 2012 May;61(5):638-40.

OBJECTIVE: Gastric cancer is a major gastrointestinal malignancy for which
targeted therapies are emerging as treatment options. This study sought to
identify the most prevalent molecular targets in gastric cancer and to elucidate 
systematic patterns of exclusivity and co-occurrence among these targets, through
comprehensive genomic analysis of a large panel of gastric cancers.
DESIGN: Using high-resolution single nucleotide polymorphism arrays, copy number 
alterations were profiled in a panel of 233 gastric cancers (193 primary tumours,
40 cell lines) and 98 primary matched gastric non-malignant samples. For selected
alterations, their impact on gene expression and clinical outcome were evaluated.
RESULTS: 22 recurrent focal alterations (13 amplifications and nine deletions)
were identified. These included both known targets (FGFR2, ERBB2) and also novel 
genes in gastric cancer (KLF5, GATA6). Receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK)/RAS
alterations were found to be frequent in gastric cancer. This study also
demonstrates, for the first time, that these alterations occur in a mutually
exclusive fashion, with KRAS gene amplifications highlighting a clinically
relevant but previously underappreciated gastric cancer subgroup. FGFR2-amplified
gastric cancers were also shown to be sensitive to dovitinib, an orally
bioavailable FGFR/VEGFR targeting agent, potentially representing a
subtype-specific therapy for FGFR2-amplified gastric cancers.
CONCLUSION: The study demonstrates the existence of five distinct gastric cancer 
patient subgroups, defined by the signature genomic alterations FGFR2 (9% of
tumours), KRAS (9%), EGFR (8%), ERBB2 (7%) and MET (4%). Collectively, these
subgroups suggest that at least 37% of gastric cancer patients may be potentially
treatable by RTK/RAS directed therapies.

PMCID: PMC3322587
PMID: 22315472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 23;287(13):10590-601. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.285874. Epub
2012 Feb 1.

Role of epithelial-stem cell interactions during dental cell differentiation.

Arakaki M(1), Ishikawa M, Nakamura T, Iwamoto T, Yamada A, Fukumoto E, Saito M,
Otsu K, Harada H, Yamada Y, Fukumoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Dentistry, Department of Oral Health and Development
Sciences, Tohoku University Graduate School of Dentistry, Sendai 980-8575, Japan.

Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions regulate the growth and morphogenesis of
ectodermal organs such as teeth. Dental pulp stem cells (DPSCs) are a part of
dental mesenchyme, derived from the cranial neural crest, and differentiate into 
dentin forming odontoblasts. However, the interactions between DPSCs and
epithelium have not been clearly elucidated. In this study, we established a
mouse dental pulp stem cell line (SP) comprised of enriched side population cells
that displayed a multipotent capacity to differentiate into odontogenic,
osteogenic, adipogenic, and neurogenic cells. We also analyzed the interactions
between SP cells and cells from the rat dental epithelial SF2 line. When cultured
with SF2 cells, SP cells differentiated into odontoblasts that expressed dentin
sialophosphoprotein. This differentiation was regulated by BMP2 and BMP4, and
inhibited by the BMP antagonist Noggin. We also found that mouse iPS cells
cultured with mitomycin C-treated SF2-24 cells displayed an epithelial cell-like 
morphology. Those cells expressed the epithelial cell markers p63 and
cytokeratin-14, and the ameloblast markers ameloblastin and enamelin, whereas
they did not express the endodermal cell marker Gata6 or mesodermal cell marker
brachyury. This is the first report of differentiation of iPS cells into
ameloblasts via interactions with dental epithelium. Co-culturing with dental
epithelial cells appears to induce stem cell differentiation that favors an
odontogenic cell fate, which may be a useful approach for tooth bioengineering
strategies.

PMCID: PMC3323010
PMID: 22298769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Liver Int. 2012 May;32(5):732-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1478-3231.2011.02743.x. Epub
2012 Jan 31.

Novel developmental biology-based protocol of embryonic stem cell differentiation
to morphologically sound and functional yet immature hepatocytes.

Bukong TN(1), Lo T, Szabo G, Dolganiuc A.

Author information: 
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Liver diseases are common in the United States and often require
liver transplantation; however, donated organs are limited and thus alternative
sources for liver cells are in high demand. Embryonic stem cells (ESC) can
provide a continuous and readily available source of liver cells. ESC
differentiation to liver cells is yet to be fully understood and comprehensive
differentiation protocols are yet to be defined. Here, we aimed to achieve human 
(h)ESC differentiation into mature hepatocytes using defined recombinant
differentiation factors and metabolites.
METHODS: Embryonic stem cell H1 line was sub-cultured on feeder layer. We induced
hESCs into endodermal differentiation succeeded by early/late hepatic
specification and finally into hepatocyte maturation using step combinations of
Activin A and fibroblast growth factor (FGF)-2 for 7 days; followed by FGF-4 and 
bone morphogenic protein 2 (BMP2) for 7 days, succeeded by FGF-10 + hepatocyte
growth factor 4 + epidermal growth factor for 14 days. Specific
inhibitors/stimulators were added sequentially throughout differentiation. Cells 
were analysed by PCR, flow cytometry, microscopy or functional assays.
RESULTS: Our hESC differentiation protocol resulted in viable cells with
hepatocyte shape and morphology. We observed gradual changes in cell
transcriptome, including up-regulation of differentiation-promoting GATA4, GATA6,
POU5F1 and HNF4 transcription factors, steady levels of stemness-promoting SOX-2 
and low levels of Nanog, as defined by PCR. The hESC-derived hepatocytes
expressed alpha-antitrypsin, CD81, cytokeratin 8 and low density lipoprotein
(LDL) receptor. The levels of alpha-fetoprotein and proliferation marker Ki-67 in
hESC-derived hepatocytes remained elevated. Unlike stem cells, the hESC-derived
hepatocytes performed LDL uptake, produced albumin and alanine aminotransferase
and had functional alcohol dehydrogenase.
CONCLUSION: We report a novel protocol for hESC differentiation into
morphological and functional yet immature hepatocytes as an alternative method
for hepatocyte generation.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22292891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Development. 2012 Mar;139(5):871-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.071688. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

The roles of FGF and MAP kinase signaling in the segregation of the epiblast and 
hypoblast cell lineages in bovine and human embryos.

Kuijk EW(1), van Tol LT, Van de Velde H, Wubbolts R, Welling M, Geijsen N, Roelen
BA.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Institute-Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences and
University Medical Center Utrecht, Uppsalalaan 8, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

At the blastocyst stage of mammalian pre-implantation development, three distinct
cell lineages have formed: trophectoderm, hypoblast (primitive endoderm) and
epiblast. The inability to derive embryonic stem (ES) cell lines in a variety of 
species suggests divergence between species in the cell signaling pathways
involved in early lineage specification. In mouse, segregation of the primitive
endoderm lineage from the pluripotent epiblast lineage depends on FGF/MAP kinase 
signaling, but it is unknown whether this is conserved between species. Here we
examined segregation of the hypoblast and epiblast lineages in bovine and human
embryos through modulation of FGF/MAP kinase signaling pathways in cultured
embryos. Bovine embryos stimulated with FGF4 and heparin form inner cell masses
(ICMs) composed entirely of hypoblast cells and no epiblast cells. Inhibition of 
MEK in bovine embryos results in ICMs with increased epiblast precursors and
decreased hypoblast precursors. The hypoblast precursor population was not fully 
ablated upon MEK inhibition, indicating that other factors are involved in
hypoblast differentiation. Surprisingly, inhibition of FGF signaling upstream of 
MEK had no effects on epiblast and hypoblast precursor numbers in bovine
development, suggesting that GATA6 expression is not dependent on FGF signaling. 
By contrast, in human embryos, inhibition of MEK did not significantly alter
epiblast or hypoblast precursor numbers despite the ability of the MEK inhibitor 
to potently inhibit ERK phosphorylation in human ES cells. These findings
demonstrate intrinsic differences in early mammalian development in the role of
the FGF/MAP kinase signaling pathways in governing hypoblast versus epiblast
lineage choices.

PMCID: PMC3274353
PMID: 22278923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Int J Cardiol. 2012 Mar 22;155(3):494-6. doi: 10.1016/j.ijcard.2011.12.091. Epub 
2012 Jan 16.

Prevalence and spectrum of GATA6 mutations associated with familial atrial
fibrillation.

Yang YQ, Wang XH, Tan HW, Jiang WF, Fang WY, Liu X.

PMID: 22257684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Cell Signal. 2012 Apr;24(4):866-72. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2011.12.002. Epub 2011
Dec 13.

MKP-7, a negative regulator of JNK, regulates VCAM-1 expression through IRF-1.

Nizamutdinova IT(1), Kim YM, Lee JH, Chang KC, Kim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Institute of Health Sciences, 
Gyeongsang National University, Jinju, Republic of Korea.

Cell adhesion molecules (CAMs) are involved in a variety of pathologies including
cancer, inflammation, pathogenic infections and autoimmune disease. In
particular, VCAM-1, rather than ICAM-1, plays a major role in the initiation of
atherosclerosis and tumor progression. Therefore, we attempted to elucidate
differential mechanisms that regulate VCAM-1 and ICAM-1 expressions.
Down-regulation of JNK by a specific inhibitor (SP600125) or dominant negative
(DN) JNK1 plasmid enhanced TNF-a-induced VCAM-1 but not ICAM-1 expression.
Moreover, transfection with a JNK1-overexpressing vector resulted in the
inhibition of VCAM-1 expression stimulated by TNF-a in HUVECs, suggesting that
JNK negatively regulates TNF-a-induced VCAM-1 expression in endothelial cells
(ECs). Next, we investigated whether JNK signaling affects IRF-1 and/or GATA6,
which are transcription factors that mediate TNF-a induction of VCAM-1 but not
ICAM-1. The DN-JNK1 plasmid-transfected cells enhanced TNF-a up-regulation of
IRF-1 whereas JNK1-overexpressing cells displayed down-regulation; however,
neither DN-JNK1 transfection nor JNK1 overexpression affected GATA6 protein
levels in the nuclear fraction. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay
confirmed that the inhibition of JNK by DN-JNK1 transfection increases the
binding of IRF-1 to the VCAM-1 promoter whereas the overexpression of JNK1
inhibits IRF-1 binding to the VCAM-1 promoter. However, neither DN-JNK1 nor JNK1 
overexpression altered GATA6 affinity for the VCAM-1 promoter region. We also
examined whether MKP-7 affects ICAM-1 or VCAM-1 by regulating JNK. TNF-a-induced 
phosphor-JNK levels increased after 5min, peaked at 10 min, and decreased after
30 min. Interestingly, MKP-7 protein levels increased after 30 min, when
phosphor-JNK induction by TNF-a was decreased. In addition, silencing MKP-7 with 
specific siRNA resulted in an increase in phosphor-JNK and inhibited the
expression of VCAM-1 but not ICAM-1. Moreover, silencing MKP-7 caused the
down-regulation of IRF-1 protein levels and binding to the VCAM-1 promoter. Thus,
we suggest that MKP-7, a negative regulator of JNK, regulates VCAM-1 expression
in activated endothelial cells through IRF-1 but not GATA6.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22182512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Dev Cell. 2011 Dec 13;21(6):1051-61. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.10.005.

Specific GATA factors act as conserved inducers of an endodermal-EMT.

Campbell K(1), Whissell G, Franch-Marro X, Batlle E, Casanova J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologia Molecular de Barcelona-CSIC, Parc Cientific de Barcelona,
08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2011 Dec 13;21(6):983-4.

The epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) converts cells from static
epithelial to migratory mesenchymal states (Hay, 1995). Here, we demonstrate that
EMT in the Drosophila endoderm is dependent on the GATA-factor Serpent (Srp), and
that Srp acts as a potent trigger for this transition when activated ectopically.
We show that Srp affects endodermal-EMT through a downregulation of junctional
dE-Cadherin (dE-Cad) protein, without a block in its transcription. Moreover, the
relocalization of dE-Cad is achieved through the direct repression of crumbs
(crb) by Srp. Finally, we show that hGATA-6, an ortholog of Srp, induces a
similar transition in mammalian cells. Similar to Srp, hGATA-6 acts through the
downregulation of junctional E-Cad, without blocking its transcription, and
induces the repression of a Crumbs ortholog, crb2. Together, these results
identify a set of GATA factors as a conserved alternative trigger to repress
epithelial characteristics and confer migratory capabilities on epithelial cells 
in development and pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22172671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Dev Cell. 2011 Dec 13;21(6):1005-13. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.10.019.

Primitive endoderm differentiates via a three-step mechanism involving Nanog and 
RTK signaling.

Frankenberg S(1), Gerbe F, Bessonnard S, Belville C, Pouchin P, Bardot O, Chazaud
C.

Author information: 
(1)GReD; INSERM U931; CNRS UMR6247; Clermont University, 28 Place Dunant, 63001
Clermont-Ferrand, France.

During preimplantation mouse development, the inner cell mass (ICM)
differentiates into two cell lineages--the epiblast and the primitive endoderm
(PrE)--whose precursors are identifiable by reciprocal expression of Nanog and
Gata6, respectively. PrE formation depends on Nanog by a non-cell-autonomous
mechanism. To decipher early cell- and non-cell-autonomous effects, we performed 
a mosaic knockdown of Nanog and found that this is sufficient to induce a PrE
fate cell autonomously. Strikingly, in Nanog null embryos, Gata6 expression is
maintained, showing that initiation of the PrE program is Nanog independent.
Treatment of Nanog null embryos with pharmacological inhibitors revealed that RTK
dependency of Gata6 expression is initially direct but later indirect via Nanog
repression. Moreover, we found that subsequent expression of Sox17 and
Gata4--later markers of the PrE--depends on the presence of Fgf4 produced by
Nanog-expressing cells. Thus, our results reveal three distinct phases in the PrE
differentiation program.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22172669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Nat Genet. 2011 Dec 11;44(1):20-2. doi: 10.1038/ng.1035.

GATA6 haploinsufficiency causes pancreatic agenesis in humans.

Lango Allen H(1), Flanagan SE, Shaw-Smith C, De Franco E, Akerman I, Caswell R;
International Pancreatic Agenesis Consortium, Ferrer J, Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Collaborators: Aanstoot HJ, Aberg E, Adolfsson P, Anthony M, Batlle M, Bruining
J, Bühr P, Cummings E, Edge J, Garcia-Hurtado J, Hathout E, Ho J, Jefferies C,
Temple IK, Kaufman E, Kotori VM, de Krijger R, Kummer M, Mackay D, Mace J,
Noordam C, O'Brien F, Rubio-Cabezas O, Shield J, Skidmore D, White S, Zanier U.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula College of Medicine
and Dentistry, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

Understanding the regulation of pancreatic development is key for efforts to
develop new regenerative therapeutic approaches for diabetes. Rare mutations in
PDX1 and PTF1A can cause pancreatic agenesis, however, most instances of this
disorder are of unknown origin. We report de novo heterozygous inactivating
mutations in GATA6 in 15/27 (56%) individuals with pancreatic agenesis. These
findings define the most common cause of human pancreatic agenesis and establish 
a key role for the transcription factor GATA6 in human pancreatic development.

PMCID: PMC4062962
PMID: 22158542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Mar 5;350(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.11.014. Epub 
2011 Dec 2.

Luteinizing hormone (LH) regulates production of androstenedione and progesterone
via control of histone acetylation of StAR and CYP17 promoters in ovarian theca
cells.

Murayama C(1), Miyazaki H, Miyamoto A, Shimizu T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Animal and Food Hygiene, Obihiro University of Agriculture 
and Veterinary Medicine, Inada-machi, Obihiro, Hokkaido 080-8555, Japan.

Although luteinizing hormone (LH) affects androstenedione (A4) and progesterone
(P4) production in theca cells, it is still unknown how LH influences molecular
mechanism of A4 and P4 production. To examine the relationship between LH and
transcription factors involved in A4 and P4 production, ovarian theca cells were 
cultured in the presence or absence of high concentrations of LH for 24 h
(pre-treatment with high concentration of LH) and then cultured in the presence
or absence of low concentration of LH for 48 h. Low LH enhanced production of A4 
and P4, and expressions of CYP17 and StAR mRNA in theca cells without
pre-treatment with high LH. In addition, low LH stimulated the expression of SF-1
protein in nuclear fractions from theca cells with or without pre-treatment with 
high LH. The binding of SF-1 to the CYP17 and StAR promoter regions increased in 
theca cells treated with low LH. Although GATA-4 and GATA-6 are both found in the
nuclear fraction but not in the cytosol of theca cells, low LH enhanced the
binding of GATA-6, but not of GATA-4, to the CYP17 promoter region without
pre-treatment with high LH. Acetylation histone H3 in StAR and CYP17 promoter
regions were changed by different LH-dosage. Overall, we showed that LH regulates
the production of A4 and P4 by affecting the nuclear localization and switching
of transcription factors in theca cells and that target transcription factors
involved in steroid production in theca cells are changed by different LH
concentration.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22155568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Mar 20;21(5):814-28. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0551. Epub 2012
Jan 17.

Positional identity of murine mesenchymal stem cells resident in different organs
is determined in the postsegmentation mesoderm.

Sági B(1), Maraghechi P, Urbán VS, Hegyi B, Szigeti A, Fajka-Boja R, Kudlik G,
Német K, Monostori E, Gócza E, Uher F.

Author information: 
(1)National Blood Service, Stem Cell Biology Unit, Budapest, Hungary.

Although mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) of distinct tissue origin have a large
number of similarities and differences, it has not been determined so far whether
tissue-resident MSCs are the progenies of one ancestor cell lineage or the
results of parallel cell developmental events. Here we compared the expression
levels of 177 genes in murine MSCs derived from adult and juvenile bone marrow
and adult adipose tissue, as well as juvenile spleen, thymus, and aorta wall by
quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction and the results were partially
validated at protein level. All MSC lines uniformly expressed a large set of
genes including well-known mesenchymal markers, such as a-smooth muscle actin,
collagen type I a-chain, GATA6, Mohawk, and vimentin. In contrast, pluripotency
genes and the early mesodermal marker T-gene were not expressed. On the other
hand, different MSC lines consistently expressed distinct patterns of Hox genes
determining the positional identity of a given cell population. Moreover, MSCs of
different origin expressed a few other transcription factors also reflecting
their topological identity and so the body segment or organ to which they
normally contributed in vivo: (1) thymus-derived cells specifically expressed
Tbx5 and Pitx2; (2) spleen-derived MSCs were characterized with Tlx1 and Nkx2.5; 
(3) Pitx1 designated femoral bone marrow cells and (4) En2 appeared in aorta
wall-derived MSCs. Thus, MSCs exhibited topographic identity and memory even
after long-term cultivation in vitro. On the basis of these results, we suggest
that postnatal MSCs isolated from different anatomical sites descend from
precursor cells developing in the postsegmentation mesoderm.

PMID: 22149974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biomaterials. 2012 Feb;33(5):1414-27. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2011.11.007.
Epub 2011 Nov 26.

The differentiation and isolation of mouse embryonic stem cells toward
hepatocytes using galactose-carrying substrata.

Meng Q(1), Haque A, Hexig B, Akaike T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Engineering, Graduate School of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Midori-ku, Yokohama, Japan.

Erratum in
    Biomaterials. 2012 May;33(15):4010-1.

A simple culture system to achieve the differentiation of embryonic stem (ES)
cells toward hepatocytes with high efficiency is crucial in providing a cell
source for the medical application. In this study, we report the effect of a
matrix-dependent enrichment of ES cell-derived hepatocytes using immobilized
poly(N-p-vinylbenzyl-4-O-ß-D-galactopyranosyl-D-gluconamide) (PVLA) with
E-cadherin-IgG Fc (E-cad-Fc) as a galactose-carrying substratum. PVLA and
E-cad-Fc were confirmed to be stably co-adsorbed onto polystyrene surface by
quartz crystal microbalance (QCM). We showed that the E-cad-Fc/PVLA hybrid
substratum was efficient in culturing primary hepatocytes and maintaining liver
functions, on which the undifferentiated ES cells also maintained high
proliferative capability. Furthermore, ES cell-derived hepatocytes on this hybrid
matrix expressed elevated level of liver specific genes and functions together
with early expression of definitive hepatocyte marker, asialoglycoprotein
receptor (ASGPR). Finally, we isolated a high percentage of cells (about 60%)
with ASGPR expression after re-seeding onto PVLA-coated surface, and observed the
elimination of the poorly differentiated cells (Gata6(+) and Sox17(+)) and the
ones toward another cell lineage (brachyury(+) and Pdx1(+)). The system uses a
glycopolymer as an extracellular substratum for isolation and enrichment of ES
cell-derived hepatocytes with adequate homogeneity and functionality.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22118818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Mol Biol. 2012 Jan 6;415(1):143-58. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2011.11.011. Epub 2011
Nov 12.

Transcription factor GATA-6 recruits PPARa to cooperatively activate Glut4 gene
expression.

Yao CX(1), Xiong CJ, Wang WP, Yang F, Zhang SF, Wang TQ, Wang SL, Yu HL, Wei ZR, 
Zang MX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical
Sciences, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou City, Henan 450001, China.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a (PPARa) is a nuclear hormone
receptor that regulates energy metabolism, but its precise mechanisms remain
unknown. Here, we demonstrate that the PPARa agonist fenofibrate activated
expression of the glucose transporter Glut4. Moreover, PPARa was associated with 
the Glut4 promoter through GATA sites upon fenofibrate stimulation in
cardiomyocytes. This occupancy is achieved through an interaction between amino
acids 1-136 of PPARa with amino acids 276-443 of the cardiac transcription factor
GATA-6. In addition, the interaction of PPARa with GATA-6 activated Glut4 gene
expression, improved glucose consumption, and enhanced activity of mitochondrial 
citrate synthase in C2C12 myoblasts; both mutants of PPARa (1-101 aa) and GATA-6 
(227-331 aa) were unable to cooperate in Glut4 activation. Thus, GATA-6 is an
important component of the transcription network required for energy metabolism
mediated by PPARa, and these findings provide a molecular basis for understanding
the role of GATA-6 proteins in muscle development and disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22100307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Dev Biol. 2012 Jan 15;361(2):358-63. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.10.030. Epub 2011 
Oct 31.

Human hypoblast formation is not dependent on FGF signalling.

Roode M(1), Blair K, Snell P, Elder K, Marchant S, Smith A, Nichols J.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Centre for Stem Cell Research, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge CB2 1QR, UK.

Mouse embryos segregate three different lineages during preimplantation
development: trophoblast, epiblast and hypoblast. These differentiation processes
are associated with restricted expression of key transcription factors (Cdx2,
Oct4, Nanog and Gata6). The mechanisms of segregation have been extensively
studied in the mouse, but are not as well characterised in other species. In the 
human embryo, hypoblast differentiation has not previously been characterised.
Here we demonstrate co-exclusive immunolocalisation of Nanog and Gata4 in human
blastocysts, implying segregation of epiblast and hypoblast, as in rodent
embryos. However, the formation of hypoblast in the human is apparently not
dependent upon FGF signalling, in contrast to rodent embryos. Nonetheless, the
persistence of Nanog-positive cells in embryos following treatment with FGF
inhibitors is suggestive of a transient naïve pluripotent population in the human
blastocyst, which may be similar to rodent epiblast and ES cells but is not
sustained during conventional human ES cell derivation protocols.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3368271
PMID: 22079695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Stem Cells. 2011 Oct;29(10):1504-16. doi: 10.1002/stem.712.

The RNA-binding protein Unr prevents mouse embryonic stem cells differentiation
toward the primitive endoderm lineage.

Elatmani H(1), Dormoy-Raclet V, Dubus P, Dautry F, Chazaud C, Jacquemin-Sablon H.

Author information: 
(1)Physiopathologie du Cancer du Foie, Université de Bordeaux, Physiopathologie
du cancer du foie, U1053, Bordeaux, France.

The maintenance of embryonic stem cells (ESCs) pluripotency depends on key
transcription factors, chromatin remodeling proteins, and microRNAs. The roles of
RNA-binding proteins are however poorly understood. We report that the
cytoplasmic RNA-binding protein Unr prevents the differentiation of ESCs into
primitive endoderm (PrE). We show that unr knockout (unr(-/-) ) ESCs
spontaneously differentiate into PrE, and that Unr re-expression in unr(-/-) ESCs
reverses this phenotype. Nevertheless, unr(-/-) ESCs retain pluripotency,
producing differentiated teratomas, and the differentiated unr(-/-) ESCs
coexpress the PrE inducer Gata6 and the pluripotency factors Oct4, Nanog, and
Sox2. Interestingly, in the differentiated unr(-/-) ESCs, Nanog and Sox2 exhibit 
a dual nuclear and cytoplasmic localization. This situation, that has never been 
reported, likely reflects an early differentiation state toward PrE. Finally, we 
show that Unr destabilizes Gata6 mRNAs and we propose that the
post-transcriptional repression of Gata6 expression by Unr contributes to the
stabilization of the ESCs pluripotent state.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21954113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2012 Mar;32(2):237-44. doi: 10.1007/s10571-011-9753-7. Epub
2011 Sep 18.

The promoter hypermethylation status of GATA6, MGMT, and FHIT in glioblastoma.

Cecener G(1), Tunca B, Egeli U, Bekar A, Tezcan G, Erturk E, Bayram N, Tolunay S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine, Uludag University, Bursa,
Turkey. gcecener@uludag.edu.tr

Glioblastoma (GBM) is an aggressive and lethal cancer, accounting for the
majority of primary brain tumors in adults. GBMs are characterized by large and
small alterations in genes that control cell growth, apoptosis, angiogenesis, and
invasion. Epigenetic alterations also affect the expression of cancer genes,
either alone or in combination with genetic mechanisms. The current evidence
suggests that hypermethylation of promoter CpG islands is a common epigenetic
event in a variety of human cancers. A subset of GBMs is also characterized by a 
locus-specific and genome-wide decrease in DNA methylation. Epigenetic
alterations are important in the molecular pathology of GBM. However, there are
very limited data about these epigenetic alterations in GBM. Alterations in
promoter methylations are important to understand because histone deacetylases
are targets for drugs that are in clinical trial for GBMs. The aim of the current
study was to investigate whether the promoter hypermethylation of putative tumor 
suppressor genes was involved in GBM. We examined the methylation status at the
promoter regions of GATA6, MGMT, and FHIT using the methylation-specific
polymerase chain reaction in 61 primary GBMs. Our results reveal that there is no
promoter hypermethylation of FHIT in the examined GBM tissue specimens. In
contrast, the promoter hypermethylation of GATA6 and MGMT was detected in 42.8
and 11.11% of GBMs, respectively. The frequency of MGMT promoter hypermethylation
was low in the group of patients we evaluated. In conclusion, our study
demonstrates that promoter hypermethylation of MGMT is a common event in GBMs,
whereas GATA6 is epigenetically affected in GBMs. Furthermore, inactivation of
FHIT by epigenetic mechanisms in GBM may not be associated with brain
tumorigenesis.

PMID: 21928112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2011 Nov;301(5):H1952-64. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00635.2011. Epub 2011 Sep 9.

GATA6 reporter gene reveals myocardial phenotypic heterogeneity that is related
to variations in gap junction coupling.

Rémond MC(1), Iaffaldano G, O'Quinn MP, Mezentseva NV, Garcia V, Harris BS,
Gourdie RG, Eisenberg CA, Eisenberg LM.

Author information: 
(1)New York Medical College/Westchester Medical Center Stem Cell Laboratory,
Department of Physiology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY, USA.

This study examined transgenic mice whose expression of a ß-galactosidase (lacZ) 
reporter is driven by a GATA6 gene enhancer. Previous investigations established 
that transcription of the transgene was associated with precardiac mesoderm and
primary heart tube myocardium, which decreased progressively, so that its
expression was no longer observed within ventricular myocardium by midgestation. 
Expression of this reporter in the adult was investigated for insights into
myocyte homeostasis and cardiovascular biology. Morphometric analysis determined 
that <1% of myocytes, often found in small clusters, express this
GATA6-associated reporter in the adult heart. LacZ expression was also found in
the ascending aorta. Myocardial expression of the transgene was not associated
with a proliferative phenotype or new myocyte formation, as lacZ-positive
myocytes neither labeled with cell division markers nor following
5-bromodeoxyuridine pulse-chase experimentation. Despite exhibiting normal
adherens junctions, these myocytes appeared to exhibit decreased connexin 43 gap 
junctions. Treatment with the gap junctional blocker heptanol both in vivo and in
culture elevated myocardial ß-galactosidase activity, suggesting that deficient
gap junctional communication underlies expression of the transgenic reporter.
LacZ expression within the myocardium was also enhanced in response to cryoinjury
and isoproterenol-induced hypertrophy. These results reveal a previously
uncharacterized phenotypic heterogeneity in the myocardium and suggest that
decreased gap junctional coupling leads to induction of a signaling pathway that 
utilizes a unique GATA6 enhancer. Upregulation of lacZ reporter gene expression
following cardiac injury indicates this transgenic mouse may serve as a model for
examining the transition of the heart from healthy to pathological states.

PMCID: PMC3213955
PMID: 21908788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Stem Cells. 2011 Nov;29(11):1672-83. doi: 10.1002/stem.723.

TAp63 is important for cardiac differentiation of embryonic stem cells and heart 
development.

Rouleau M(1), Medawar A, Hamon L, Shivtiel S, Wolchinsky Z, Zhou H, De Rosa L,
Candi E, de la Forest Divonne S, Mikkola ML, van Bokhoven H, Missero C, Melino G,
Pucéat M, Aberdam D.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U898, Nice, France.

p63, a member of the p53 family, is essential for skin morphogenesis and
epithelial stem cell maintenance. Here, we report an unexpected role of TAp63 in 
cardiogenesis. p63 null mice exhibit severe defects in embryonic cardiac
development, including dilation of both ventricles, a defect in trabeculation and
abnormal septation. This was accompanied by myofibrillar disarray, mitochondrial 
disorganization, and reduction in spontaneous calcium spikes. By the use of
embryonic stem cells (ESCs), we show that TAp63 deficiency prevents expression of
pivotal cardiac genes and production of cardiomyocytes. TAp63 is expressed by
endodermal cells. Coculture of p63-knockdown ESCs with wild-type ESCs,
supplementation with Activin A, or overexpression of GATA-6 rescue cardiogenesis.
Therefore, TAp63 acts in a non-cell-autonomous manner by modulating expression of
endodermal factors. Our findings uncover a critical role for p63 in cardiogenesis
that could be related to human heart disease.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21898690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Sep 23;413(2):171-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.08.036. Epub 2011 Aug 23.

Conserved GC-boxes, E-box and GATA motif are essential for GATA-4 gene expression
in P19CL6 cells.

Ishibashi T(1), Yokura Y, Ohashi K, Yamamoto H, Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The promoter of the GATA-4 gene was analyzed in P19CL6 cells. A 124bp segment
containing conserved two GC-boxes and E-box was essential for the basal promoter 
activity, as determined with a transient luciferase reporter gene assay. However,
an extended 1312 bp reporter construct but not the 124 bp segment, when ligated
to the GFP gene and stably inserted into the chromosome, showed regulated
promoter activity since GFP was expressed upon DMSO addition. Mutations of the
two GC-boxes and/or E-box significantly impaired the GFP expression. Furthermore,
mutation of the distal conserved GATA motif in the 1312 bp sequence decreased the
expression of GFP. Chromatin immuno-precipitation assay showed that GATA-6 binds 
to this conserved GATA motif. These results suggest that the distal GATA motif
recognized by GATA-6 together with the GC- and E-boxes may be important for
transcriptional activation of the GATA-4 gene in the chromosome.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21878320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Stem Cells Dev. 2012 Jan 20;21(2):167-76. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0194. Epub 2011
Oct 18.

Snail promotes the cell-autonomous generation of Flk1(+) endothelial cells
through the repression of the microRNA-200 family.

Gill JG(1), Langer EM, Lindsley RC, Cai M, Murphy TL, Murphy KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Expression of the transcription factor Snail is required for normal
vasculogenesis in the developing mouse embryo. In addition, tumors expressing
Snail have been associated with a more malignant phenotype, with both increased
invasive properties and angiogenesis. Although the relationship between Snail and
vasculogenesis has been noted, no mechanistic analysis has been elucidated. Here,
we show that in addition to inducing an epithelial mesenchymal transition, Snail 
promotes the cell-autonomous induction of Flk1(+) endothelial cells in an early
subset of differentiating mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells. Cells that become
Flk1+ in response to Snail have a transcriptional profile specific to
Gata6+primitive endoderm, but not the early Nanog+epiblast. We further show that 
Snail's ability to promote Flk1(+) endothelium depends on fibroblast growth
factor signaling as well as the repression of the microRNA-200 (miR-200) family, 
which directly targets the 3' UTRs of Flk1 and Ets1. Together, our results show
that Snail is capable of inducing Flk1+ lineage commitment in a subset of
differentiating ES cells through the down-regulation of the miR-200 family. We
hypothesize that this mechanism of Snail-induced vasculogenesis may be conserved 
in both the early developing embryo and malignant cancers.

PMCID: PMC3636466
PMID: 21861700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Dev Biol. 2011 Oct 15;358(2):368-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.07.037. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

GATA5 interacts with GATA4 and GATA6 in outflow tract development.

Laforest B(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différentiation Cardiaque, Programme de
Biologie Moléculaire, Université de Montréal, Montréal QC, Canada H3C 3J7.

Members of the GATA family of transcription factors are critical regulators of
heart development and mutations in 2 of them, GATA4 and GATA6 are associated with
outflow tract and septal defects in human. The heart expresses 3 GATA factors,
GATA4, 5 and 6 in a partially overlapping pattern. Here, we report that compound 
Gata4/Gata5 and Gata5/Gata6 mutants die embryonically or perinatally due to
severe congenital heart defects. Almost all Gata4(+/-)Gata5(+/-) mutant embryos
have double outlet right ventricles (DORV), large ventricular septal defects
(VSD) as well as hypertrophied mitral and tricuspid valves. Only 25% of double
compound Gata4/Gata5 heterozygotes survive to adulthood and these mice have
aortic stenosis. Compound loss of a Gata5 and a Gata6 allele also leads to DORVs 
associated with subaortic VSDs. Expression of several transcription factors
important for endocardial and myocardial cell differentiation, such as Tbx20,
Mef2c, Hey1 and Hand2, was reduced in compound heterozygote embryos. These
findings suggest the existence of important genetic interactions between Gata5
and the 2 other cardiac GATA factors in endocardial cushion formation and outflow
tract morphogenesis. The data identify GATA5 as a potential genetic modifier of
congenital heart disease and provide insight for elucidating the genetic basis of
an important class of human birth defects.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21839733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22129. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022129. Epub 2011 Jul 19.

GATA6 activates Wnt signaling in pancreatic cancer by negatively regulating the
Wnt antagonist Dickkopf-1.

Zhong Y(1), Wang Z, Fu B, Pan F, Yachida S, Dhara M, Albesiano E, Li L, Naito Y, 
Vilardell F, Cummings C, Martinelli P, Li A, Yonescu R, Ma Q, Griffin CA, Real
FX, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center,
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of
America.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is a highly lethal disease characterized 
by late diagnosis and treatment resistance. Recurrent genetic alterations in
defined genes in association with perturbations of developmental cell signaling
pathways have been associated with PDAC development and progression. Here, we
show that GATA6 contributes to pancreatic carcinogenesis during the temporal
progression of pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia by virtue of Wnt pathway
activation. GATA6 is recurrently amplified by both quantitative-PCR and
fluorescent in-situ hybridization in human pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia
and in PDAC tissues, and GATA6 copy number is significantly correlated with
overall patient survival. Forced overexpression of GATA6 in cancer cell lines
enhanced cell proliferation and colony formation in soft agar in vitro and growth
in vivo, as well as increased Wnt signaling. By contrast siRNA mediated knockdown
of GATA6 led to corresponding decreases in these same parameters. The effects of 
GATA6 were found to be due to its ability to bind DNA, as forced overexpression
of a DNA-binding mutant of GATA6 had no effects on cell growth in vitro or in
vivo, nor did they affect Wnt signaling levels in these same cells. A microarray 
analysis revealed the Wnt antagonist Dickopf-1 (DKK1) as a dysregulated gene in
association with GATA6 knockdown, and direct binding of GATA6 to the DKK1
promoter was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays. Transient transfection of GATA6, but not mutant GATA6,
into cancer cell lines led to decreased DKK1 mRNA expression and secretion of
DKK1 protein into culture media. Forced overexpression of DKK1 antagonized the
effects of GATA6 on Wnt signaling in pancreatic cancer cells. These findings
illustrate that one mechanism by which GATA6 promotes pancreatic carcinogenesis
is by virtue of its activation of canonical Wnt signaling via regulation of DKK1.

PMCID: PMC3139620
PMID: 21811562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2012 Jan;54(1):101-8. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0b013e31822d52cf.

Transcription factor GATA-4 is abundantly expressed in childhood but not in adult
liver tumors.

Soini T(1), Haveri H, Elo JM, Kauppinen M, Kyrönlahti A, Salo MK, Lohi J,
Andersson LC, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Research Center, Children's Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

OBJECTIVES: Transcription factor GATA-4 is expressed in early fetal liver and
essential for organogenesis. It is also implicated in carcinogenesis in several
endoderm-derived organs. Hepatoblastoma (HB), the most common malignant pediatric
liver tumor, has features of fetal liver including extramedullary hematopoiesis. 
We investigated the expression of GATA-4 and its purported target gene
erythropoietin (Epo) in liver tumors and the role of GATA-4 in HB pathogenesis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Immunohistochemistry, Western blotting, and reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction were used for liver samples from patients
with HB or hepatocellular carcinoma. To further investigate the role of GATA-4 in
pediatric liver tumors, we used adenoviral transfections of wild-type or dominant
negative GATA-4 constructs in the human HB cell line, HUH6.
RESULTS: We found abundant GATA-4 expression in both types of liver tumors in
children, whereas it was absent in adult hepatocellular carcinoma. A close family
member GATA-6 was expressed in a minority of childhood but not adult liver
tumors. Epo, present in the fetal liver, was also expressed in childhood liver
tumors. Moreover, cell line HUH6 was GATA-4 positive and produced Epo. We found
that altering the amount of functional GATA-4 in HUH6 cells did not significantly
affect either proliferation or apoptosis.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA-4 is abundant in pediatric liver tumors, but unraveling its
exact role in these neoplasms requires further investigation.

PMID: 21788913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Biol Reprod. 2011 Nov;85(5):946-53. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.093203. Epub 2011
Jul 20.

Fibroblast growth factor 2 promotes primitive endoderm development in bovine
blastocyst outgrowths.

Yang QE(1), Fields SD, Zhang K, Ozawa M, Johnson SE, Ealy AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida
32611-0910, USA.

Primitive endoderm (PE) is the second extraembryonic tissue to form during
embryogenesis in mammals. The PE develops from pluripotent cells of the
blastocyst inner cell mass. Experimental results described herein provide
evidence that FGF2 stimulates PE development during bovine blastocyst development
in vitro. Bovine blastocysts were cultured individually on a feeder layer-free,
Matrigel-coated surface in the presence or absence of FGF2. A majority of
blastocysts cultures formed outgrowths (76.8%) and the rate of outgrowth
formation was not affected by FGF2 supplementation. However, supplementation with
FGF2 increased the incidence of PE outgrowths on Days 13 and 15 after in vitro
fertilization. Presumptive PE cultures contained cells with a phenotype distinct 
from trophectoderm (TE). Cell identity was validated by expression of GATA4 and
GATA6 mRNA and transferrin protein, all markers of the PE lineage. Expression of 
GATA4 occurred coincident with blastocyst expansion and hatching. These cells did
not express IFNT and CDX2 (TE lineage markers). Profiles of FGF receptor (FGFR)
isoforms were distinct between PE and TE cultures. Specifically, FGFR1b and
FGFR1c were the predominant FGFR transcripts in PE whereas FGFR2b transcripts
were abundant in TE. Supplementation with FGF2 increased the mitotic index of PE 
but not TE. Moreover, FGF signaling appears important for initiation of PE
formation in blastocysts, presumably by lineage committal from NANOG-positive
epiblast cells, because chemical disruption of FGFR kinase activity with PD173074
reduces GATA4 expression and increases NANOG expression. Collectively, these
results indicate that FGF2 and potentially other FGFs specify PE formation and
mediate PE proliferation during early pregnancy in cattle.

PMID: 21778141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Transplantation. 2011 Sep 15;92(5):529-35. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e318229f785.

Downregulation of mucins in graft bile ducts after liver transplantation in rats.

Tian F(1), Cheng L, Li D, Liu Z, Zeng Y, Xu J, Li X, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, No. 20 Gaotanyan Street, Shapingba, Chongqing, China.

BACKGROUND: Nonanastomotic biliary strictures represent a serious complication
after orthotopic liver transplantation (OLT). This study investigates the
potential role of mucins in bile duct injury after OLT.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into four groups: normal group (Normal,
n=5), sham-operated group (Sham, n=20), OLT group with 1 hr donor cold ischemic
time (n=20), and OLT group with 12 hr donor cold ischemic time (OLTn=20).
Expression of mucins and GATA factors in bile ducts was examined by real-time
polymerase chain reaction, immunohistochemistry, and immunoblotting. Bile was
collected for biochemical analysis, and the histological changes associated with 
bile duct injury were evaluated.
RESULTS: In normal bile ducts, Muc1, Muc2, Muc3A, Muc4, and Muc6 mRNA were
expressed, whereas Muc5AC mRNA was undetectable. The expression of Muc1, Muc3A,
and Muc4 but not Muc2 and Muc6 at mRNA level in graft bile ducts decreased
remarkably early after OLT. The decreased expression of Muc1 and Muc4 was further
confirmed at protein level by immunohistochemistry and immunoblotting.
Downregulation of Muc1 and Muc3A expression by prolonged cold ischemic time was
significantly associated with the injury severity scores of large but not small
bile ducts. Among six GATA factors, GATA3, GATA4, and GATA6 mRNA were expressed
in normal bile ducts. GATA4 and GATA6 mRNA levels decreased significantly after
OLT.
CONCLUSION: Downregulation of Muc1 and Muc3A expression by prolonged cold
ischemic time may play a potential role in large bile duct injury early after
OLT.

PMID: 21775928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 15;357(2):541-57. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.040. Epub 2011 
Jul 1.

An evolutionarily conserved kernel of gata5, gata6, otx2 and prdm1a operates in
the formation of endoderm in zebrafish.

Tseng WF(1), Jang TH, Huang CB, Yuh CH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, Zhunan Town, Miaoli County 350, Taiwan, ROC.

An evolutionarily conserved subcircuit (kernel) dedicated to a specific
developmental function is found at the top of the gene regulatory networks (GRNs)
hierarchy. Here we comprehensively demonstrate that a pan-deuterostome endoderm
specification kernel exists in zebrafish. We analyzed interactions among gata5,
gata6, otx2 and prdm1a using specific morpholino knockdowns and measured the gene
expression profiles by quantitative real-time RT-PCR and in situ hybridization.
The mRNA rescue experiment validated the specificity of the morpholino knockdown.
We found that the interactions among gata5, gata6, otx2 and prdm1a determine the 
initial specification of the zebrafish endoderm. Although otx2 can activate both 
gata5 and gata6, and the prdm1a/krox homologue also activates some endoderm
transcription factors, a feedback loop from Gata to otx2 and prdm1a is missing.
Furthermore, we found the positive regulation between gata5 and gata6 to further 
lock-on the mesendoderm specification by the Gata family. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation was used to further validate the recruitment of Otx2 to the
gata5 and gata6 loci. Functional assays revealed that module B of gata6 and the
basal promoter of gata5 drive the gene at the mesendoderm, and mutational
analysis demonstrated that Otx2 and Gata5/6 contribute to reporter gene
activation. This is the first direct evidence for evolutionarily conserved
endoderm specification across echinoderms and vertebrates.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21756893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Nov;112(11):3185-93. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23244.

Effect of dual-specificity protein phosphatase 5 on pluripotency maintenance and 
differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Chen Q(1), Zhou Y, Zhao X, Zhang M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang
University, 388 Yuhangtang Road, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province, China.

The MAPK/Erk signaling pathway is considered as a key regulator of the
pluripotency and differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells, while
dual-specificity protein phosphatases (DUSPs) are negative regulators of MAPK.
Although DUSPs are potential embryogenesis regulators, their functions in the
regulation of ES cell differentiation have not been demonstrated. The present
study revealed that Dusp5 was expressed in mouse ES (mES) cells and that its
expression was correlated with the undifferentiated state of these cells.
Exogenous Dusp5 expression enhanced mES cell clonogenicity and suppressed mES
cell differentiation by maintaining Nanog expression via the inhibition of the
Erk pathway. Following Dusp5 knockdown, Nanog and Oct4 expression was
significantly attenuated and the Erk signaling pathway was activated.
Additionally, EBs derived from Dusp5 knockdown mES cells (KDEBs) exhibited a weak
adherence capability, very little outgrowth, and a reduction in the number of
epithelial-like cells. The expression of Gata6 (an endodermal marker) and Flk1
and Twist1 (mesodermal markers) was inhibited in KDEBs, which indicated that
Dusp5 influenced the differentiation of these germ layers during EB development. 
Collectively, this study suggested that Dusp5 plays an important role in the
maintenance of pluripotency in mES cells, and that Dusp5 may be required for EB
development.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21732408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Respir Res. 2011 Jun 17;12:82. doi: 10.1186/1465-9921-12-82.

Immunohistochemical detection and regulation of a5 nicotinic acetylcholine
receptor (nAChR) subunits by FoxA2 during mouse lung organogenesis.

Porter JL(1), Bukey BR, Geyer AJ, Willnauer CP, Reynolds PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Developmental Biology, Brigham Young University, 
Provo, UT 84602, USA.

BACKGROUND: a5 nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subunits structurally
stabilize functional nAChRs in many non-neuronal tissue types. The expression of 
a5 nAChR subunits and cell-specific markers were assessed during lung
morphogenesis by co-localizing immunohistochemistry from embryonic day (E) 13.5
to post natal day (PN) 20. Transcriptional control of a5 nAChR expression by
FoxA2 and GATA-6 was determined by reporter gene assays.
RESULTS: Steady expression of a5 nAChR subunits was observed in distal lung
epithelial cells during development while proximal lung expression significantly 
alternates between abundant prenatal expression, absence at PN4 and PN10, and a
return to intense expression at PN20. a5 expression was most abundant on luminal 
edges of alveolar type (AT) I and ATII cells, non-ciliated Clara cells, and
ciliated cells in the proximal lung at various periods of lung formation.
Expression of a5 nAChR subunits correlated with cell differentiation and reporter
gene assays suggest expression of a5 is regulated in part by FoxA2, with possible
cooperation by GATA-6.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data reveal a highly regulated temporal-spatial pattern of a5
nAChR subunit expression during important periods of lung morphogenesis. Due to
specific regulation by FoxA2 and distinct identification of a5 in alveolar
epithelium and Clara cells, future studies may identify possible mechanisms of
cell differentiation and lung homeostasis mediated at least in part by
a5-containing nAChRs.

PMCID: PMC3127772
PMID: 21682884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 12;286(32):28520-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.236307. Epub
2011 Jun 13.

Global identification of SMAD2 target genes reveals a role for multiple
co-regulatory factors in zebrafish early gastrulas.

Liu Z(1), Lin X, Cai Z, Zhang Z, Han C, Jia S, Meng A, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Biology,
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100101 Beijing, China.

Nodal and Smad2/3 signals play pivotal roles in mesendoderm induction and axis
determination during late blastulation and early gastrulation in vertebrate
embryos. However, Smad2/3 direct target genes during those critical developmental
stages have not been systematically identified. Here, through ChIP-chip assay, we
show that the promoter/enhancer regions of 679 genes are bound by Smad2 in the
zebrafish early gastrulas. Expression analyses confirm that a significant
proportion of Smad2 targets are indeed subjected to Nodal/Smad2 regulation at the
onset of gastrulation. The co-existence of DNA-binding sites of other
transcription factors in the Smad2-bound regions allows the identification of
well known Smad2-binding partners, such as FoxH1 and Lef1/ß-catenin, as well as
many previously unknown Smad2 partners, including Oct1 and Gata6, during
embryogenesis. We demonstrate that Oct1 physically associates with and enhances
the transcription and mesendodermal induction activity of Smad2, whereas Gata6
exerts an inhibitory role in Smad2 signaling and mesendodermal induction. Thus,
our study systemically uncovers a large number of Smad2 targets in early
gastrulas and suggests cooperative roles of Smad2 and other transcription factors
in controlling target gene transcription, which will be valuable for studying
regulatory cascades during germ layer formation and patterning of vertebrate
embryos.

PMCID: PMC3151094
PMID: 21669877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e20389. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0020389. Epub 2011 May 24.

Sphingosine 1-phosphate induces differentiation of mesoangioblasts towards smooth
muscle. A role for GATA6.

Donati C(1), Marseglia G, Magi A, Serratì S, Cencetti F, Bernacchioni C, Nannetti
G, Benelli M, Brunelli S, Torricelli F, Cossu G, Bruni P.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biochimiche, Università di Firenze, Firenze, Italia.

Different cells can contribute to repair following vascular injury by
differentiating into smooth muscle (SM) cells; however the extracellular signals 
involved are presently poorly characterized. Mesoangioblasts are progenitor cells
capable of differentiating into various mesoderm cell types including SM cells.
In this study the biological action exerted by the pleiotropic sphingolipid
sphingosine 1-phosphate (S1P) in human mesoangioblasts has been initially
investigated by cDNA microarray analysis. Obtained data confirmed the
anti-apoptotic action of this sphingolipid and identified for the first time a
strong differentiating action toward SM cells. Quantitative mRNA and protein
analysis corroborated the microarray results demonstrating enhanced expression of
myogenic marker proteins and regulation of the expression of transcription factor
GATA6 and its co-regulator, LMCD1. Importantly, GATA6 up-regulation induced by
S1P was responsible for the enhanced expression of SM-specific contractile
proteins. Moreover, by specific gene silencing experiments GATA6 was critical in 
the pro-differentiating activity of the cytokine TGFß. Finally, the
pharmacological inhibition of endogenous S1P formation in response to TGFß
abrogated GATA6 up-regulation, supporting the view that the S1P pathway plays a
physiological role in mediating the pro-myogenic effect of TGFß. This study
individuates GATA6 as novel player in the complex transcriptional regulation of
mesoangioblast differentiation into SM cells and highlights a role for S1P to
favour vascular regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3101247
PMID: 21629665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Am J Pathol. 2011 May;178(5):2236-51. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2011.01.038.

Transcriptional repression of Caveolin-1 (CAV1) gene expression by GATA-6 in
bladder smooth muscle hypertrophy in mice and human beings.

Boopathi E(1), Gomes CM, Goldfarb R, John M, Srinivasan VG, Alanzi J, Malkowicz
SB, Kathuria H, Zderic SA, Wein AJ, Chacko S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urology, University of Pennsylvania, Glenolden, Pennsylvania, USA.

Hypertrophy occurs in urinary bladder wall smooth muscle (BSM) in men with
partial bladder outlet obstruction (PBOO) caused by benign prostatic hyperplasia 
(BPH) and in animal models of PBOO. Hypertrophied BSM from the rabbit model
exhibits down-regulation of caveolin-1, a structural and functional protein of
caveolae that function as signaling platforms to mediate interaction between
receptor proteins and adaptor and effector molecules to regulate signal
generation, amplification, and diversification. Caveolin-1 expression is
diminished in PBOO-induced BSM hypertrophy in mice and in men with BPH. The
proximal promoter of the human and mouse caveolin-1 (CAV1) gene was
characterized, and it was observed that the transcription factor GATA-6 binds
this promoter, causing reduced expression of caveolin-1. Furthermore, caveolin-1 
expression levels inversely correlate with the abundance of GATA-6 in BSM
hypertrophy in mice and human beings. Silencing of GATA6 gene expression
up-regulates caveolin-1 expression, whereas overexpression of GATA-6 protein
sustains the transcriptional repression of caveolin-1 in bladder smooth muscle
cells. Together, these data suggest that GATA-6 acts as a transcriptional
repressor of CAV1 gene expression in PBOO-induced BSM hypertrophy in men and
mice. GATA-6-induced transcriptional repression represents a new regulatory
mechanism of CAV1 gene expression in pathologic BSM, and may serve as a target
for new therapy for BPH-induced bladder dysfunction in aging men.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3081182
PMID: 21514437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Cell Cycle. 2011 Apr 15;10(8):1312-21. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

p53-dependent regulation of growth, epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
stemness in normal pancreatic epithelial cells.

Pinho AV(1), Rooman I, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Patología Molecular, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 1;10(11):1715.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Aug 15;10(16):2616-7.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 1;10(11):1717.

Pancreatic acinar cells acquire in vitro a pancreatic progenitor phenotype
associated with activation of p53, growth arrest and senescence. A similar
program is also activated in chronic pancreatitis. To assess the mechanisms
involved in this process, we cultured pancreatic acinar cells from wild-type,
p53(-/-), p16(-/-) and p21(-/-) mice. Cultures from p53(-/-) mice, but not those 
from p16(-/-) or p21(-/-) mice, display an enhanced proliferation and can be
expanded continuously for more than 20 passages. p53(-/-) cells also display
features of stemness such as enhanced sphere formation, increased expression of
pancreatic multipotent progenitor markers (Ptf1a, Pdx1, Cpa1, c-myc, Sox9 and
Hnf1b), and of the stemness regulators Bmi1 and Klf4. Upon subculture, p53(-/-)
cells undergo an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and express high levels 
of vimentin and of the transcriptional regulators Snai1, Snai2, Twist, Zeb1 and
Zeb2. Genetic lineage tracing unequivocally demonstrates the epithelial origin of
the cells with mesenchymal phenotype. These cells express the endodermal markers 
Hhex, Pdx1, Sox9, Hnf1b, Foxa2, Gata6 and Sox17, and the stem cell markers c-myc,
Bmi1 and Klf4. Cultures from p53(+/-) mice display intermediate levels of the
transcription factors involved in EMT but do not surpass the growth arrest. Our
findings support the notion that p53 controls both growth and epithelial cell
differentiation in the pancreas. These observations have important implications
regarding the mechanisms through which p53 inactivation in tumors may be
associated with aggressive biological behavior.

PMID: 21490434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. PLoS Genet. 2011 Mar;7(3):e1001356. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001356. Epub 2011 
Mar 31.

Widespread hypomethylation occurs early and synergizes with gene amplification
during esophageal carcinogenesis.

Alvarez H(1), Opalinska J, Zhou L, Sohal D, Fazzari MJ, Yu Y, Montagna C,
Montgomery EA, Canto M, Dunbar KB, Wang J, Roa JC, Mo Y, Bhagat T, Ramesh KH,
Cannizzaro L, Mollenhauer J, Thompson RF, Suzuki M, Meltzer SJ, Melnick A,
Greally JM, Maitra A, Verma A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2011 May;7(5). doi:
10.1371/annotation/8dcded85-a924-40f4-a7ea-56961b87447f. Meltzer, Stephen
[corrected to Meltzer, Stephen J].

Although a combination of genomic and epigenetic alterations are implicated in
the multistep transformation of normal squamous esophageal epithelium to Barrett 
esophagus, dysplasia, and adenocarcinoma, the combinatorial effect of these
changes is unknown. By integrating genome-wide DNA methylation, copy number, and 
transcriptomic datasets obtained from endoscopic biopsies of neoplastic
progression within the same individual, we are uniquely able to define the
molecular events associated progression of Barrett esophagus. We find that the
previously reported global hypomethylation phenomenon in cancer has its origins
at the earliest stages of epithelial carcinogenesis. Promoter hypomethylation
synergizes with gene amplification and leads to significant upregulation of a
chr4q21 chemokine cluster and other transcripts during Barrett neoplasia. In
contrast, gene-specific hypermethylation is observed at a restricted number of
loci and, in combination with hemi-allelic deletions, leads to downregulatation
of selected transcripts during multistep progression. We also observe that
epigenetic regulation during epithelial carcinogenesis is not restricted to
traditionally defined "CpG islands," but may also occur through a mechanism of
differential methylation outside of these regions. Finally, validation of novel
upregulated targets (CXCL1 and 3, GATA6, and DMBT1) in a larger independent panel
of samples confirms the utility of integrative analysis in cancer biomarker
discovery.

PMCID: PMC3069107
PMID: 21483804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Nat Med. 2011 Apr;17(4):500-3. doi: 10.1038/nm.2344. Epub 2011 Apr 3.

Subtypes of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma and their differing responses to
therapy.

Collisson EA(1), Sadanandam A, Olson P, Gibb WJ, Truitt M, Gu S, Cooc J, Weinkle 
J, Kim GE, Jakkula L, Feiler HS, Ko AH, Olshen AB, Danenberg KL, Tempero MA,
Spellman PT, Hanahan D, Gray JW.

Author information: 
(1)Life Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley,
California, USA.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a lethal disease. Overall survival is
typically 6 months from diagnosis. Numerous phase 3 trials of agents effective in
other malignancies have failed to benefit unselected PDA populations, although
patients do occasionally respond. Studies in other solid tumors have shown that
heterogeneity in response is determined, in part, by molecular differences
between tumors. Furthermore, treatment outcomes are improved by targeting drugs
to tumor subtypes in which they are selectively effective, with breast and lung
cancers providing recent examples. Identification of PDA molecular subtypes has
been frustrated by a paucity of tumor specimens available for study. We have
overcome this problem by combined analysis of transcriptional profiles of primary
PDA samples from several studies, along with human and mouse PDA cell lines. We
define three PDA subtypes: classical, quasimesenchymal and exocrine-like, and we 
present evidence for clinical outcome and therapeutic response differences
between them. We further define gene signatures for these subtypes that may have 
utility in stratifying patients for treatment and present preclinical model
systems that may be used to identify new subtype specific therapies.

PMCID: PMC3755490
PMID: 21460848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Tissue Eng Part A. 2011 Aug;17(15-16):1901-9. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2010.0563.
Epub 2011 Apr 25.

Geometric control of cardiomyogenic induction in human pluripotent stem cells.

Bauwens CL(1), Song H, Thavandiran N, Ungrin M, Massé S, Nanthakumar K, Seguin C,
Zandstra PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Although it has been observed that aggregate size affects cardiac development, an
incomplete understanding of the cellular mechanisms underlying human pluripotent 
stem cell-derived cardiomyogenesis has limited the development of robust
defined-condition cardiac cell generation protocols. Our objective was thus to
elucidate cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the endogenous control of 
human embryonic stem cell (hESC) cardiac tissue development, and to test the
hypothesis that hESC aggregate size influences extraembryonic endoderm (ExE)
commitment and cardiac inductive properties. hESC aggregates were generated with 
100, 1000, or 4000 cells per aggregate using microwells. The frequency of
endoderm marker (FoxA2 and GATA6)-expressing cells decreased with increasing
aggregate size during early differentiation. Cardiogenesis was maximized in
aggregates initiated from 1000 cells, with frequencies of 0.49±0.06 cells
exhibiting a cardiac progenitor phenotype (KDR(low)/C-KIT(neg)) on day 5 and
0.24±0.06 expressing cardiac Troponin T on day 16. A direct relationship between 
ExE and cardiac differentiation efficiency was established by forming aggregates 
with varying ratios of SOX7 (a transcription factor required for ExE development)
overexpressing or knockdown hESCs to unmanipulated hESCs. We demonstrate, in a
defined, serum-free cardiac induction system, that robust and efficient cardiac
differentiation is a function of endogenous ExE cell concentration, a parameter
that can be directly modulated by controlling hESC aggregate size.

PMID: 21417693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Jun;50(6):456-65. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20870. Epub
2011 Mar 15.

Genome profiling of pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Birnbaum DJ(1), Adélaïde J, Mamessier E, Finetti P, Lagarde A, Monges G, Viret F,
Gonçalvès A, Turrini O, Delpero JR, Iovanna J, Giovannini M, Birnbaum D,
Chaffanet M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Laboratoire d'Oncologie
Moléculaire, UMR891 Inserm, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Marseille, France.

Pancreatic adenocarcinoma is one of the most aggressive human cancers. It
displays many different chromosomal abnormalities and mutations. By using 244 K
high-resolution array-comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) we studied the
genome alterations of 39 fine-needle aspirations from pancreatic adenocarcinoma
and eight human adenocarcinoma pancreatic cell lines. Using both visual
inspection and GISTIC analysis, recurrent losses were observed on 1p, 3p, 4p, 6, 
8p, 9, 10, 11q, 15q, 17, 18, 19p, 20p, 21, and 22 and comprised several known or 
suspected tumor suppressor genes such as ARHGEF10, ARID1A, CDKN2A/B, FHIT, PTEN, 
RB1, RUNX1-3, SMAD4, STK11/LKB1, TP53, and TUSC3. Heterozygous deletion of the
1p35-p36 chromosomal region was identified in one-third of the tumors and three
of the cell lines. This region, commonly deleted in human cancers, contains
several tumor suppressor genes including ARID1A and RUNX3. We identified frequent
genetic gains on chromosome arms 1q, 3q, 5p, 6p, 7q, 8q, 12q, 15q, 18q, 19q, and 
20q. Amplifications were observed in 16 tumors. AKT2, CCND3, CDK4, FOXA2, GATA6, 
MDM2, MYC, and SMURF1 genes were gained or amplified. The most obvious
amplification was located at 18q11.2 and targeted the GATA6 gene, which plays a
predominant role in the initial specification of the pancreas and in pancreatic
cell type differentiation. In conclusion, we have identified novel biomarkers and
potential therapeutic targets in pancreatic adenocarcinoma.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21412932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Br J Cancer. 2011 Mar 15;104(6):971-81. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2011.66.

Exon-array profiling unlocks clinically and biologically relevant gene signatures
from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tumour samples.

Hall JS(1), Leong HS, Armenoult LS, Newton GE, Valentine HR, Irlam JJ,
Möller-Levet C, Sikand KA, Pepper SD, Miller CJ, West CM.

Author information: 
(1)Translational Radiobiology Group, School of Cancer and Enabling Sciences,
Manchester Academic Health Science Centre, The University of Manchester, Wilmslow
Road, Manchester M20 4BX, UK.

BACKGROUND: Degradation and chemical modification of RNA in formalin-fixed
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples hamper their use in expression profiling
studies. This study aimed to show that useful information can be obtained by
Exon-array profiling archival FFPE tumour samples.
METHODS: Nineteen cervical squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and 9 adenocarcinoma
(AC) FFPE samples (10-16-year-old) were profiled using Affymetrix Exon arrays.
The gene signature derived was tested on a fresh-frozen non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) series. Exploration of biological networks involved gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA). Differential gene expression was confirmed using
Quantigene, a multiplex bead-based alternative to qRT-PCR.
RESULTS: In all, 1062 genes were higher in SCC vs AC, and 155 genes higher in AC.
The 1217-gene signature correctly separated 58 NSCLC into SCC and AC. A gene
network centered on hepatic nuclear factor and GATA6 was identified in AC,
suggesting a role in glandular cell differentiation of the cervix. Quantigene
analysis of the top 26 differentially expressed genes correctly partitioned
cervix samples as SCC or AC.
CONCLUSION: FFPE samples can be profiled using Exon arrays to derive gene
expression signatures that are sufficiently robust to be applied to independent
data sets, identify novel biology and design assays for independent platform
validation.

PMCID: PMC3065290
PMID: 21407225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cell Death Dis. 2010 Oct 7;1:e80. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2010.57.

Low concentrations of nitric oxide delay the differentiation of embryonic stem
cells and promote their survival.

Tejedo JR(1), Tapia-Limonchi R, Mora-Castilla S, Cahuana GM, Hmadcha A, Martin F,
Bedoya FJ, Soria B.

Author information: 
(1)Andalusian Center for Molecular Biology and Regenerative Medicine-University
Pablo de Olavide, CIBERDEM, Seville, Spain. juan.tejedo@cabimer.es

Nitric oxide (NO) is an intracellular messenger in several cell systems, but its 
contribution to embryonic stem cell (ESC) biology has not been characterized.
Exposure of ESCs to low concentrations (2-20<U+2009>µM) of the NO donor
diethylenetriamine NO adduct confers protection from apoptosis elicited by
leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) withdrawal. NO blocked caspase 3 activation,
PARP degradation, downregulation of the pro-apoptotic genes Casp7, Casp9, Bax and
Bak1 and upregulation of the anti-apoptotic genes Bcl-2 111, Bcl-2 and Birc6.
These effects were also observed in cells overexpressing eNOS. Exposure of
LIF-deprived mESCs to low NO prevented the loss of expression of self-renewal
genes (Oct4, Nanog and Sox2) and the SSEA marker. Moreover, NO blocked the
differentiation process promoted by the absence of LIF and bFGF in mouse and
human ESCs. NO treatment decreased the expression of differentiation markers,
such as Brachyury, Gata6 and Gata4. Constitutive overexpression of eNOS in cells 
exposed to LIF deprivation maintained the expression of self-renewal markers,
whereas the differentiation genes were repressed. These effects were reversed by 
addition of the NOS inhibitor L-NMMA. Altogether, the data suggest that low NO
has a role in the regulation of ESC differentiation by delaying the entry into
differentiation, arresting the loss of self-renewal markers and promoting cell
survival by inhibiting apoptosis.

PMCID: PMC3035898
PMID: 21368853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Development. 2011 Apr;138(7):1235-45. doi: 10.1242/dev.061762. Epub 2011 Feb 24.

Regulation of lung endoderm progenitor cell behavior by miR302/367.

Tian Y(1), Zhang Y, Hurd L, Hannenhalli S, Liu F, Lu MM, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

The temporal and spatial control of organ-specific endoderm progenitor
development is poorly understood. miRNAs affect cell function by regulating
programmatic changes in protein expression levels. We show that the miR302/367
cluster is a target of the transcription factor Gata6 in mouse lung endoderm and 
regulates multiple aspects of early lung endoderm progenitor development.
miR302/367 is expressed at early stages of lung development, but its levels
decline rapidly as development proceeds. Gain- and loss-of-function studies show 
that altering miR302/367 expression disrupts the balance of lung endoderm
progenitor proliferation and differentiation, as well as apical-basal polarity.
Increased miR302/367 expression results in the formation of an undifferentiated
multi-layered lung endoderm, whereas loss of miR302/367 activity results in
decreased proliferation and enhanced lung endoderm differentiation. miR302/367
coordinates the balance between proliferation and differentiation, in part,
through direct regulation of Rbl2 and Cdkn1a, whereas apical-basal polarity is
controlled by regulation of Tiam1 and Lis1. Thus, miR302/367 directs lung
endoderm development by coordinating multiple aspects of progenitor cell
behavior, including proliferation, differentiation and apical-basal polarity.

PMCID: PMC3050657
PMID: 21350014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Mar;155A(3):618-21. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33816. Epub 2011
Feb 22.

Isolated skeletal malformations in a child with a small mosaic ring
microduplication of 18 p11.21q11.2: genotype-phenotype correlations.

Slavin TP(1), Kuruvilla K, Curtis CA, Christ LA, Mitchell AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Center for Human Genetics, University Hospitals of
Cleveland and Case Western Reserve University, Ohio, USA. tjslavin1@gmail.com

We describe a developmentally normal Amish child who has a karyotype with 47
chromosomes, including a supernumerary ring-shaped chromosome 18 in each
metaphase studied. The only phenotypic findings in the patient were hemivertebrae
and rib anomalies. Further analysis of interphase cells revealed an additional,
less frequent mosaic, apparently normal cell population. Genes in the triplicated
region that possibly are contributing to her skeletal phenotype include GATA6,
MC2R, MC5R, RBBP8, ESCO1, and ROCK1, among others. By studying such patients with
abnormal genetic dosage, genotype-phenotype correlations can be used to refine
gene function.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4467729
PMID: 21344631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Dev Dyn. 2011 Mar;240(3):649-62. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22570. Epub 2011 Feb 8.

Different requirements for GATA factors in cardiogenesis are mediated by
non-canonical Wnt signaling.

Afouda BA(1), Hoppler S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, Cell and Developmental Biology Research
Program, School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, Scotland, 
United Kingdom. boni.afouda@abdn.ac.uk

GATA factors and Wnt signals are key regulators of vertebrate cardiogenesis, but 
specific roles for individual GATA factors and how they interact with Wnt
signaling remain unknown. We use loss of function and overexpression approaches
to elucidate how these molecules regulate early cardiogenesis in Xenopus. In
order to minimize indirect effects due to abnormal early embryogenesis, we use
pluripotent embryonic tissues as cardiogenic assays. We confirm central roles for
GATA4, 5, and 6 in cardiogenesis, but also discover individual and different
requirements. We show that GATA4 or 6 regulate both cardiogenic potential and
subsequent cardiomyocyte differentiation but that GATA5 is involved in regulating
cardiomyocyte differentiation. We also show that Wnt11b signaling can rescue
reduced cardiac differentiation resulting from loss of function of GATA4 and 6
but not GATA5. We conclude that Wnt11b mediates the differential requirements for
GATA factors during vertebrate cardiogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21305652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Cell Cycle. 2011 Feb 15;10(4):592-7. Epub 2011 Feb 15.

Myc orchestrates a regulatory network required for the establishment and
maintenance of pluripotency.

Smith KN(1), Lim JM, Wells L, Dalton S.

Author information: 
(1)Paul D. Coverdell Center for Biomedical and Health Sciences, University of
Georgia, Athens, GA USA.

Pluripotent stem cells (PSCs) are maintained by a complex regulatory network
orchestrated by transcription factors, epigenetic modifiers and non-coding RNAs. 
Central to this regulatory network is the Myc family of transcription factors.
Defining roles for Myc in PSCs has been problematic but recently, a number of
reports have provided insight into this question. An emerging picture now places 
Myc as a key regulator of the cell cycle, genomic maintenance and general
metabolic activity in PSCs through its ability to directly regulate large numbers
of target genes and more indirectly through control of microRNAs. One of Myc's
main roles is to repress the activity of genes required for differentiation such 
as the endoderm master regulator, GATA6. The general mechanism by which Myc
activates target genes is well understood but a remaining major challenge is to
understand how it represses gene activity. Here we discuss potential mechanisms
for how Myc establishes and maintains the pluripotent state and incorporate
proteomics data that supports a model where Myc acts as part of a regulatory
network with epigenetic modifiers.

PMCID: PMC3173999
PMID: 21293186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Stem Cells. 2011 Jan;29(1):141-53. doi: 10.1002/stem.562.

Distinct roles for Wnt-4 and Wnt-11 during retinoic acid-induced neuronal
differentiation.

Elizalde C(1), Campa VM, Caro M, Schlangen K, Aransay AM, Vivanco Md, Kypta RM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell biology and Stem Cells Unit, Center for Cooperative Research in
Biosciences, CIC bioGUNE, 48160 Derio, Spain.

Retinoic acid and Wnt/ß-catenin signals play important roles during neuronal
differentiation but less is known about noncanonical Wnt signals in this context.
We examined retinoic acid and Wnt signaling in two human embryonal carcinoma cell
lines, NTERA-2 (clone D1), which undergoes neuronal differentiation in response
to retinoic acid, and 2102Ep, which does not. Retinoic acid treatment inhibited
ß-catenin/Tcf activity in NTERA-2 cells but not in 2102Ep cells. Inhibition
occurred downstream of ß-catenin but did not involve competition between retinoic
acid receptors and ß-catenin for binding to p300 or Tcf-4. Ectopic expression of 
FZD1 partially restored inhibition in 2102Ep cells, suggesting the involvement of
Wnt ligands. Retinoic acid treatment of NTERA-2 cells induced the expression of
Wnt-4 and Wnt-11, both of which were able to inhibit ß-catenin/Tcf activity.
Wnt-4 and Wnt-11 were found at cell borders in islands of cells that expressed
OCT4 and GFAP and were predominantly negative for Nestin, PAX6, and GATA6. Gene
silencing of Wnt-4, but not Wnt-11, reduced retinoic acid downregulation of OCT4 
and Nanog and upregulation of PAX6, ASCL1, HOXC5, and NEUROD1, suggesting that
Wnt-4 promotes early neuronal differentiation. Gene expression analysis of
NTERA-2 cells stably overexpressing Wnt-11 suggested that Wnt-11 potentiates
retinoic acid induction of early neurogenesis. Consistent with this,
overexpression of Wnt-11 maintained a population of proliferating progenitor
cells in cultures treated with retinoic acid for several weeks. These
observations highlight the distinct roles of two noncanonical Wnts during the
early stages of retinoic acid-induced neuronal differentiation.

Copyright © 2010 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21280163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2011 Mar;124(1-2):58-64. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2011.01.008. Epub 2011 Jan 22.

Alterations of folliculogenesis in women with polycystic ovary syndrome.

Sander VA(1), Hapon MB, Sícaro L, Lombardi EP, Jahn GA, Motta AB.

Author information: 
(1)Centro de Estudios Farmacológicos y Botánicos (CEFYBO), Universidad de Buenos 
Aires (UBA), Consejo Nacional de Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas
(CONICET), Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The objective of the present study was to examine some factors involved in
follicular development of women with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). Women with
PCOS showed increased levels of serum luteinizing hormone (LH) but decreased
follicular production of progesterone and estradiol by pre-ovulatory follicles.
The mRNA expression corresponding to steroidogenic acute regulatory protein
(StAR), and 20alpha-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (20a-HSD) was increased, while
that corresponding to cytochrome P450 aromatase (P450arom) was decreased in PCOS 
follicles as compared to controls. No changes in the mRNA expression for
3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 2 (3ß-HSD2), cytochrome P450 side-chain
cleavage (P450scc), cytochrome P450 17 alpha hydroxylase/lyase (P450c17),
cyclooxygenase 2 (COX2), and transcription factors (GATA-4 and GATA-6) were
found. We conclude that despite the hyper-luteinized environment of PCOS
follicles, these follicles produce lower levels of progesterone and estradiol,
and that this is characterized by increased degradation of progesterone and
decreased estradiol synthesis. Our data demonstrate that the synthesis of
prostaglandin F2a (PGF2a) may be affected in PCOS-follicles and that the
transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 are present in PCOS-follicles but they
are not involved in the abnormal transcription observed in the steroidogenic
enzymes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21262361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Gastroenterology. 2011 Apr;140(4):1219-1229.e1-2. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.01.033. Epub 2011 Jan 21.

GATA factors regulate proliferation, differentiation, and gene expression in
small intestine of mature mice.

Beuling E(1), Baffour-Awuah NY, Stapleton KA, Aronson BE, Noah TK, Shroyer NF,
Duncan SA, Fleet JC, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Children's
Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: GATA transcription factors regulate proliferation,
differentiation, and gene expression in multiple organs. GATA4 is expressed in
the proximal 85% of the small intestine and regulates the jejunal-ileal gradient 
in absorptive enterocyte gene expression. GATA6 is co-expressed with GATA4 but
also is expressed in the ileum; its function in the mature small intestine is
unknown.
METHODS: We investigated the function of GATA6 in small intestine using adult
mice with conditional, inducible deletion of Gata6, or Gata6 and Gata4,
specifically in the intestine.
RESULTS: In ileum, deletion of Gata6 caused a decrease in crypt cell
proliferation and numbers of enteroendocrine and Paneth cells, an increase in
numbers of goblet-like cells in crypts, and altered expression of genes specific 
to absorptive enterocytes. In contrast to ileum, deletion of Gata6 caused an
increase in numbers of Paneth cells in jejunum and ileum. Deletion of Gata6 and
Gata4 resulted in a jejunal and duodenal phenotype that was nearly identical to
that in the ileum after deletion of Gata6 alone, revealing common functions for
GATA6 and GATA4.
CONCLUSIONS: GATA transcription factors are required for crypt cell
proliferation, secretory cell differentiation, and absorptive enterocyte gene
expression in the small intestinal epithelium.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3541694
PMID: 21262227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Reproduction. 2011 Mar;141(3):321-32. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0536. Epub 2011 Jan 5.

Trophoblast stem cell marker gene expression in inner cell mass-derived cells
from parthenogenetic equine embryos.

Desmarais JA(1), Demers SP, Suzuki J Jr, Laflamme S, Vincent P, Laverty S, Smith 
LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Biomedicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Centre
de Recherche en Reproduction Animale, University of Montreal, 3200 Sicotte,
St-Hyacinthe, Quebec J2S 7C6, Canada.

Although putative horse embryonic stem (ES)-like cell lines have been obtained
recently from in vivo-derived embryos, it is currently not known whether it is
possible to obtain ES cell (ESC) lines from somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) 
and parthenogenetic (PA) embryos. Our aim is to establish culture conditions for 
the derivation of autologous ESC lines for cell therapy studies in an equine
model. Our results indicate that both the use of early-stage blastocysts with a
clearly visible inner cell mass (ICM) and the use of pronase to dissect the ICM
allow the derivation of a higher proportion of primary ICM outgrowths from PA and
SCNT embryos. Primary ICM outgrowths express the molecular markers of
pluripotency POU class 5 homeobox 1 (POU5F1) and (sex determining region-Y)-box2 
(SOX2), and in some cases, NANOG. Cells obtained after the passages of PA primary
ICM outgrowths display alkaline phosphatase (AP) activity and POU5F1, SOX2,
caudal-related homeobox-2 (CDX2) and eomesodermin (EOMES) expression, but may
lose NANOG. Cystic embryoid body-like structures expressing POU5F1, CDX2 and
EOMES were produced from these cells. Immunohistochemical analysis of equine
embryos reveals the presence of POU5F1 in trophectoderm, primitive endoderm and
ICM. These results suggest that cells obtained after passages of primary ICM
outgrowths are positive for trophoblast stem cell markers while expressing POU5F1
and displaying AP activity. Therefore, these cells most likely represent
trophoblast cells rather than true ESCs. This study represents an important first
step towards the production of autologous equine ESCs for pre-clinical cell
therapy studies on large animal models.

PMID: 21209071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 2011 Mar 11;286(10):8425-36. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.202150. Epub 2010
Dec 28.

Dual functions of T-box 3 (Tbx3) in the control of self-renewal and
extraembryonic endoderm differentiation in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Lu R(1), Yang A, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences,
CAS/Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) possess the capacity to proliferate indefinitely in
an undifferentiated state and to differentiate into various cell types in an
organism. However, the critical question of how self-renewal and differentiation 
are precisely regulated in ESCs is not entirely understood at present. Here, we
report the essential role of Tbx3, a pluripotency-related transcription factor of
the T-box gene family, for both the maintenance of self-renewal of mouse ESCs and
for their differentiation into extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn). We show that Tbx3 
is highly expressed in ExEn cells in addition to undifferentiated ESCs. Knockdown
of Tbx3 expression using tetracycline-regulated Tbx3 siRNA resulted in the
attenuation of ESC self-renewal ability and aberrant differentiation processes,
including reduced ExEn differentiation but enhanced ectoderm and trophectoderm
differentiation. Conversely, inducible forced expression of Tbx3 triggered ExEn
lineage commitment. Mechanistically, Tbx3 directly activated the expression of
Gata6, an essential regulator of ExEn. Interestingly, Tbx3 modulated H3K27me3
modification and the association of the PRC2 complex with the promoter region of 
Gata6. Taken together, the results of this study revealed a previously
unappreciated role of a pluripotency factor in ExEn differentiation.
Additionally, our data reveal that Tbx3 may function through direct binding and
epigenetic modification of histones on the Gata6 promoter to maintain the ExEn
differentiation potential of ESCs.

PMCID: PMC3048727
PMID: 21189255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Development. 2011 Jan;138(2):197-202. doi: 10.1242/dev.056606. Epub 2010 Dec 9.

Choice of random rather than imprinted X inactivation in female embryonic stem
cell-derived extra-embryonic cells.

Murakami K(1), Araki K, Ohtsuka S, Wakayama T, Niwa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Stem Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology (CDB), Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Erratum in
    Development. 2014 Jul;141(14):2913-7.

In female mammals, one of two X chromosomes is epigenetically inactivated for
gene dosage compensation, known as X inactivation (Xi). Inactivation occurs
randomly in either the paternal or maternal X chromosome in all embryonic cell
lineages, designated as random Xi. By contrast, in extra-embryonic cell lineages,
which are segregated from somatic cell lineages in pre-implantation development, 
the paternal X chromosome is selectively inactivated, known as imprinted Xi.
Although it is speculated that erasure of the imprinted mark on either the
maternal or paternal X chromosome in somatic cell lineages might change the mode 
of Xi from imprinted to random, it is not known when this event is completed in
development. Here, we tested the mode of Xi during the differentiation of female 
mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells derived from the inner cell mass (ICM) of
blastocyst-stage embryos toward trophectoderm (TE) and primitive endoderm (PrE)
lineages induced by artificial activation of transcription factor genes Cdx2 and 
Gata6, respectively. We found that random Xi occurs in both TE and PrE cells.
Moreover, cloned embryos generated by the transfer of nuclei from the female ES
cells showed random Xi in TE, suggesting the complete erasure of all X imprints
for imprinted Xi in ICM-derived ES cells.

PMID: 21148183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 15;350(2):393-404. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.12.007. Epub 2010
Dec 10.

The primitive endoderm lineage of the mouse blastocyst: sequential transcription 
factor activation and regulation of differentiation by Sox17.

Artus J(1), Piliszek A, Hadjantonakis AK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, New York, NY 10065, 
USA.

Cells of the primitive endoderm (PrE) and the pluripotent epiblast (EPI), the two
lineages specified within the inner cell mass (ICM) of the mouse blastocyst stage
embryo, are segregated into adjacent tissue layers by the end of the
preimplantation period. The PrE layer which emerges as a polarized epithelium
adjacent to the blastocoel, with a basement membrane separating it from the EPI, 
has two derivatives, the visceral and parietal endoderm. In this study we have
investigated the localization of two transcriptional regulators of the SOX
family, SOX17 and SOX7, within the PrE and its derivatives. We noted that SOX17
was first detected in a salt-and-pepper distribution within the ICM, subsequently
becoming restricted to the nascent PrE epithelium. This dynamic distribution of
SOX17 resembled the localization of GATA6 and GATA4, two other PrE
lineage-specific transcription factors. By contrast, SOX7 was only detected in
PrE cells positioned in contact with the blastocoel, raising the possibility that
these cells are molecularly distinct. Our observations support a model of
sequential GATA6 > SOX17 > GATA4 > SOX7 transcription factor activation within
the PrE lineage, perhaps correlating with the consecutive periods of cell lineage
'naïvete', commitment and sorting. Furthermore our data suggest that
co-expression of SOX17 and SOX7 within sorted PrE cells could account for the
absence of a detectable phenotype of Sox17 mutant blastocysts. However, analysis 
of implantation-delayed blastocysts, revealed a role for SOX17 in the maintenance
of PrE epithelial integrity, with the absence of SOX17 leading to premature
delamination and migration of parietal endoderm.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3461954
PMID: 21146513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 18;286(7):5680-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.176925. Epub 2010 
Dec 2.

GATA6 promotes angiogenic function and survival in endothelial cells by
suppression of autocrine transforming growth factor beta/activin receptor-like
kinase 5 signaling.

Froese N(1), Kattih B, Breitbart A, Grund A, Geffers R, Molkentin JD, Kispert A, 
Wollert KC, Drexler H, Heineke J.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Klinik für Kardiologie und Angiologie,
Institut für Molekularbiologie, Rebirth-Cluster of Excellence,
Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Understanding the transcriptional regulation of angiogenesis could lead to the
identification of novel therapeutic targets. We showed here that the
transcription factor GATA6 is expressed in different human primary endothelial
cells as well as in vascular endothelial cells of mice in vivo. Activation of
endothelial cells was associated with GATA6 nuclear translocation, chromatin
binding, and enhanced GATA6-dependent transcriptional activation. siRNA-mediated 
down-regulation of GATA6 after growth factor stimulation led to a dramatically
reduced capacity of macro- and microvascular endothelial cells to proliferate,
migrate, or form capillary-like structures on Matrigel. Adenoviral overexpression
of GATA6 in turn enhanced angiogenic function, especially in cardiac endothelial 
microvascular cells. Furthermore, GATA6 protected endothelial cells from
undergoing apoptosis during growth factor deprivation. Mechanistically,
down-regulation of GATA6 in endothelial cells led to increased expression of
transforming growth factor (TGF) ß1 and TGFß2, whereas enhanced GATA6 expression,
accordingly, suppressed Tgfb1 promoter activity. High TGFß1/ß2 expression in
GATA6-depleted endothelial cells increased the activation of the activin
receptor-like kinase 5 (ALK5) and SMAD2, and suppression of this signaling axis
by TGFß neutralizing antibody or ALK5 inhibition restored angiogenic function and
survival in endothelial cells with reduced GATA6 expression. Together, these
findings indicate that GATA6 plays a crucial role for endothelial cell function
and survival, at least in part, by suppressing autocrine TGFß expression and
ALK5-dependent signaling.

PMCID: PMC3037681
PMID: 21127043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. FEBS J. 2011 Jan;278(2):282-94. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2010.07945.x. Epub 2010 
Dec 3.

The mouse Muc5b mucin gene is transcriptionally regulated by thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and GATA-6 transcription factors.

Jonckheere N(1), Velghe A, Ducourouble MP, Copin MC, Renes IB, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U837, Jean Pierre Aubert Research Center, Lille, France.
nicolas.jonckheere@inserm.fr

MUC5B is one of the major mucin genes expressed in the respiratory tract.
Previous studies in our laboratory have demonstrated that MUC5B is expressed in
human lung adenocarcinomas and during lung morphogenesis. Moreover, in human lung
adenocarcinoma tissues, a converse correlation between MUC5B and thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) expression, a lung-specific transcription factor, 
has been established. However, the molecular mechanisms that govern the
regulation of MUC5B expression in the lung are largely unknown. In order to
better understand the biological role of MUC5B in lung pathophysiology, we report
the characterization of the promoter region of the mouse Muc5b mucin gene. The
promoter is flanked by a TATA box (TACATAA) identical to that in the human gene. 
Human and murine promoters share 67.5% similarity over the first 170 nucleotides.
By RT-PCR, co-transfection studies and gel-shift assays, we show that Muc5b
promoter activity is completely inhibited by TTF-1, whereas factors of the GATA
family (GATA-4/GATA-5/GATA-6) are activators. Together, these results
demonstrate, for the first time, that Muc5b is a target gene of transcription
factors (TTF-1, GATA-6) involved in lung differentiation programs during
development and carcinogenesis, and identify TTF-1 as a strong repressor of
Muc5b. The characterization of the structural and functional features of the
Muc5b mucin gene will provide us with a strong base to develop studies in murine 
models aimed at the identification of its biological role in lung
pathophysiology.

Journal compilation © 2010 FEBS. No claim to original French governments works.

PMID: 21126317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2011 Feb;43(2):103-9. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmq104. Epub 2010 Nov 29.

SIRT1 inhibits angiotensin II-induced vascular smooth muscle cell hypertrophy.

Li L(1), Gao P, Zhang H, Chen H, Zheng W, Lv X, Xu T, Wei Y, Liu D, Liang C.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, China.

Angiotensin II (Ang II) stimulates vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) hypertrophy
as a critical event in the development of vascular diseases such as
atherosclerosis. Sirtuin (SIRT) 1, a nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide dependent 
deacetylase, has been demonstrated to exert protective effects in atherosclerosis
by promoting endothelium-dependent vascular relaxation and reducing macrophage
foam cell formation, but its role in VSMC hypertrophy remains unknown. In this
study, we tried to investigate the effect of SIRT1 on Ang II-induced VSMC
hypertrophy. Results showed that adenoviral-mediated over-expression of SIRT1
significantly inhibited Ang II-induced VSMC hypertrophy, while knockdown of SIRT1
by RNAi resulted in an increased [(3)H]-leucine incorporation of VSMC.
Accordingly, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate oxidase 1 (Nox1)
expression induced by Ang II was inhibited by SIRT1 in VSMCs. SIRT1 activator
resveratrol decreased, whereas endogenous SIRT1 inhibitor nicotinamide increased 
Nox1 expression in A7r5 VSMCs. Furthermore, transcription factor GATA-6 was
involved in the down-regulation of Nox1 expression by SIRT1. These results
provide new insight into SIRT1's anti-atherogenic properties by suppressing Ang
II-induced VSMC hypertrophy.

PMID: 21118843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Neoplasia. 2010 Nov;12(11):856-65.

GATA6 promotes colon cancer cell invasion by regulating urokinase plasminogen
activator gene expression.

Belaguli NS(1), Aftab M, Rigi M, Zhang M, Albo D, Berger DH.

Author information: 
(1)Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical Center, Michael E. DeBakey Department of
Surgery, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA. elaguli@bcm.edu

GATA6 is a zinc finger transcription factor expressed in the colorectal
epithelium. We have examined the expression of GATA6 in colon cancers and
investigated the mechanisms by which GATA6 regulates colon cancer cell invasion. 
GATA6 was overexpressed in colorectal polyps and primary and metastatic tumors.
GATA6 was strongly expressed in both the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments of 
the colon cancer cells. GATA6 expression was upregulated in invasive HT29 and
KM12L4 cells compared with the parental HT29 and KM12 cells and positively
correlated with urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) gene expression. Small
interfering RNA (siRNA) knockdown of GATA6 resulted in reduced uPA gene
expression and cell invasion. GATA6 bound to the uPA gene regulatory sequences in
vivo and activated uPA promoter activity in vitro. uPA promoter deletion analysis
indicated that the promoter proximal Sp1 sites were required for GATA6 activation
of the uPA promoter. Accordingly, GATA6 physically associated with Sp1 and siRNA 
knockdown of Sp1 decreased GATA6 activation of the uPA promoter activity
suggesting that Sp1 recruits GATA6 to the uPA promoter and mediates GATA6 induced
activation of the uPA promoter activity. On the basis of our results, we conclude
that GATA6 is an important regulator of uPA gene expression, and the dysregulated
expression of GATA6 contributes to colorectal tumorigenesis and tumor invasion.

PMCID: PMC2978909
PMID: 21076612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Dev Cell. 2010 Nov 16;19(5):713-26. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.10.006.

Differentiation-specific histone modifications reveal dynamic chromatin
interactions and partners for the intestinal transcription factor CDX2.

Verzi MP(1), Shin H, He HH, Sulahian R, Meyer CA, Montgomery RK, Fleet JC, Brown 
M, Liu XS, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2014 Dec 22;31(6):801.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2010 Nov 16;19(5):647-8.

VIDEO ABSTRACT: Cell differentiation requires remodeling of tissue-specific gene 
loci and activities of key transcriptional regulators, which are recognized for
their dominant control over cellular programs. Using epigenomic methods, we
characterized enhancer elements specifically modified in differentiating
intestinal epithelial cells and found enrichment of transcription factor-binding 
motifs corresponding to CDX2, a critical regulator of the intestine. Directed
investigation revealed surprising lability in CDX2 occupancy of the genome, with 
redistribution from hundreds of sites occupied only in proliferating cells to
thousands of new sites in differentiated cells. Knockout mice confirmed distinct 
Cdx2 requirements in dividing and mature adult intestinal cells, including
responsibility for the active enhancer configuration associated with maturity.
Dynamic CDX2 occupancy corresponds with condition-specific gene expression and,
importantly, to differential co-occupancy with other tissue-restricted
transcription factors, such as GATA6 and HNF4A. These results reveal dynamic,
context-specific functions and mechanisms of a prominent transcriptional
regulator within a cell lineage.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3001591
PMID: 21074721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Neonatology. 2011;99(3):231-40. doi: 10.1159/000317827. Epub 2010 Nov 12.

Expression of Transcription Factor GATA-6 in Alveolar Epithelial Cells Is Linked 
to Neonatal Lung Disease.

Vähätalo R(1), Asikainen TM, Karikoski R, Kinnula VL, White CW, Andersson S,
Heikinheimo M, Myllärniemi M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Premature birth and respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) are risk
factors for disturbed lung development and bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD). The 
molecular mechanisms related to prematurity and BPD remain largely unknown.
Epithelial expression of the transcription factor GATA-6 has been implicated in
normal and abnormal murine lung development.
OBJECTIVES: The possible involvement of GATA-6 in the normal development and in
RDS and BPD was investigated in the human and baboon lung.
METHODS: Immunohistochemistry was used to study the expression of GATA-6 and
thyroid transcription factor 1 in lung specimens from different age groups of
human and baboon fetuses and newborns with lung disease. Furthermore, the
regulatory role of TGF-ß1 in GATA-6 expression was investigated in human
pulmonary epithelial cell lines using RT-PCR.
RESULTS: GATA-6 expression increased in the developing human airway epithelium
along with advancing gestation, but diminished to negligible at birth. In RDS,
GATA-6 expression was enhanced at 5-7 days after birth, and decreased thereafter.
In BPD, the expression of GATA-6 in alveolar epithelial cells was low. These
results were confirmed and extended using an established baboon model of
prematurity. The in vitro experiments revealed that TGF-ß1 induces GATA-6 and
thyroid transcription factor 1 expression in lung epithelial cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the expression of GATA-6 at the early
stages of the preterm lung may be related to impaired postnatal alveolar
development.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2992637
PMID: 21071980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Mol Cancer. 2010 Nov 8;9:290. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-290.

The two most common histological subtypes of malignant germ cell tumour are
distinguished by global microRNA profiles, associated with differential
transcription factor expression.

Murray MJ(1), Saini HK, van Dongen S, Palmer RD, Muralidhar B, Pett MR, Piipari
M, Thornton CM, Nicholson JC, Enright AJ, Coleman N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Cancer Cell Unit, Cambridge, CB2 0XZ, UK.
mjm16@hutchison-mrc.cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: We hypothesised that differences in microRNA expression profiles
contribute to the contrasting natural history and clinical outcome of the two
most common types of malignant germ cell tumour (GCT), yolk sac tumours (YSTs)
and germinomas.
RESULTS: By direct comparison, using microarray data for paediatric GCT samples
and published qRT-PCR data for adult samples, we identified microRNAs
significantly up-regulated in YSTs (n = 29 paediatric, 26 adult, 11 overlapping) 
or germinomas (n = 37 paediatric). By Taqman qRT-PCR we confirmed differential
expression of 15 of 16 selected microRNAs and further validated six of these
(miR-302b, miR-375, miR-200b, miR-200c, miR-122, miR-205) in an independent
sample set. Interestingly, the miR-302 cluster, which is over-expressed in all
malignant GCTs, showed further over-expression in YSTs versus germinomas,
representing six of the top eight microRNAs over-expressed in paediatric YSTs and
seven of the top 11 in adult YSTs. To explain this observation, we used mRNA
expression profiles of paediatric and adult malignant GCTs to identify 10
transcription factors (TFs) consistently over-expressed in YSTs versus
germinomas, followed by linear regression to confirm associations between TF and 
miR-302 cluster expression levels. Using the sequence motif analysis environment 
iMotifs, we identified predicted binding sites for four of the 10 TFs (GATA6,
GATA3, TCF7L2 and MAF) in the miR-302 cluster promoter region. Finally, we showed
that miR-302 family over-expression in YST is likely to be functionally
significant, as mRNAs down-regulated in YSTs were enriched for 3' untranslated
region sequences complementary to the common seed of miR-302a~miR-302d. Such
mRNAs included mediators of key cancer-associated processes, including tumour
suppressor genes, apoptosis regulators and TFs.
CONCLUSIONS: Differential microRNA expression is likely to contribute to the
relatively aggressive behaviour of YSTs and may enable future improvements in
clinical diagnosis and/or treatment.

PMCID: PMC2993676
PMID: 21059207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. PLoS One. 2010 Oct 26;5(10):e13615. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0013615.

Functional genomics of 5- to 8-cell stage human embryos by blastomere single-cell
cDNA analysis.

Galán A(1), Montaner D, Póo ME, Valbuena D, Ruiz V, Aguilar C, Dopazo J, Simón C.

Author information: 
(1)Valencia Node of The National Stem Cell Bank, Centro de Investigación Príncipe
Felipe, Valencia, Spain.

Blastomere fate and embryonic genome activation (EGA) during human embryonic
development are unsolved areas of high scientific and clinical interest.
Forty-nine blastomeres from 5- to 8-cell human embryos have been investigated
following an efficient single-cell cDNA amplification protocol to provide a
template for high-density microarray analysis. The previously described markers, 
characteristic of Inner Cell Mass (ICM) (n = 120), stemness (n = 190) and
Trophectoderm (TE) (n = 45), were analyzed, and a housekeeping pattern of 46
genes was established. All the human blastomeres from the 5- to 8-cell stage
embryo displayed a common gene expression pattern corresponding to ICM markers
(e.g., DDX3, FOXD3, LEFTY1, MYC, NANOG, POU5F1), stemness (e.g., POU5F1, DNMT3B, 
GABRB3, SOX2, ZFP42, TERT), and TE markers (e.g., GATA6, EOMES, CDX2, LHCGR). The
EGA profile was also investigated between the 5-6- and 8-cell stage embryos, and 
compared to the blastocyst stage. Known genes (n = 92) such as depleted maternal 
transcripts (e.g., CCNA1, CCNB1, DPPA2) and embryo-specific activation (e.g.,
POU5F1, CDH1, DPPA4), as well as novel genes, were confirmed. In summary, the
global single-cell cDNA amplification microarray analysis of the 5- to 8-cell
stage human embryos reveals that blastomere fate is not committed to ICM or TE.
Finally, new EGA features in human embryogenesis are presented.

PMCID: PMC2964308
PMID: 21049019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Stem Cells Int. 2010 May 11;2010:602068. doi: 10.4061/2010/602068.

Alteration of Differentiation Potentials by Modulating GATA Transcription Factors
in Murine Embryonic Stem Cells.

Capo-Chichi CD(1), Smedberg JL, Rula M, Nicolas E, Yeung AT, Adamo RF, Frolov A, 
Godwin AK, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 1550 NW 10th Avenue (M877),
Miami, FL 33156, USA.

Background. Mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells can be differentiated in vitro by
aggregation and/or retinoic acid (RA) treatment. The principal differentiation
lineage in vitro is extraembryonic primitive endoderm. Dab2, Laminin, GATA4,
GATA5, and GATA6 are expressed in embryonic primitive endoderm and play critical 
roles in its lineage commitment. Results. We found that in the absence of GATA4
or GATA5, RA-induced primitive endoderm differentiation of ES cells was reduced. 
GATA4 (-/-) ES cells express higher level of GATA5, GATA6, and hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4 alpha marker of visceral endoderm lineage. GATA5 (-/-) ES cells express 
higher level of alpha fetoprotein marker of early liver development. GATA6 (-/-) 
ES cells express higher level of GATA5 as well as mesoderm and cardiomyocyte
markers which are collagen III alpha-1 and tropomyosin1 alpha. Thus, deletion of 
GATA6 precluded endoderm differentiation but promoted mesoderm lineages.
Conclusions. GATA4, GATA5, and GATA6 each convey a unique gene expression pattern
and influences ES cell differentiation. We showed that ES cells can be directed
to avoid differentiating into primitive endoderm and to adopt unique lineages in 
vitro by modulating GATA factors. The finding offers a potential approach to
produce desirable cell types from ES cells, useful for regenerative cell therapy.

PMCID: PMC2956456
PMID: 21048850  [PubMed]


295. Dev Dyn. 2011 Mar;240(3):566-76. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22447. Epub 2010 Oct 5.

Ectopic expression of GATA6 bypasses requirement for Grb2 in primitive endoderm
formation.

Wang Y, Smedberg JL, Cai KQ, Capo-Chichi DC, Xu XX.

Gene knockouts in mice have showed that Grb2 and GATA6 are essential for the
formation of primitive endoderm in blastocysts. Here, we confirmed that implanted
Grb2-null blastocysts lack primitive or extraembryonic endoderm cells either at
E4.5 or E5.5 stages. We analyzed the relationship between Grb2 and GATA6 in the
differentiation of embryonic stem (ES) cells to primitive endoderm in embryoid
body models. Upon transfection with GATA6 expression vector, Grb2-null ES cells
underwent endoderm differentiation as indicated by the expression of the
extraembryonic endoderm markers Dab2 and GATA4. Transfection of GATA4 expression 
vector also had the same differentiation potency. When GATA6- or
GATA4-transfected Grb2-null ES cells were allowed to aggregate, fragments of an
endoderm layer formed on the surface of the spheroids. The results suggest that
GATA6 is downstream of Grb2 in the inductive signaling pathway and the expression
of GATA6 is sufficient to compensate for the defects caused by Grb2 deficiency in
the development of the primitive and extraembryonic endoderm.

Copyright © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3299199
PMID: 20925113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Atherosclerosis. 2010 Nov;213(1):115-21. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2010.07.061. Epub 2010 Aug 19.

PTEN differentially regulates expressions of ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 through
PI3K/Akt/GSK-3ß/GATA-6 signaling pathways in TNF-a-activated human endothelial
cells.

Tsoyi K(1), Jang HJ, Nizamutdinova IT, Park K, Kim YM, Kim HJ, Seo HG, Lee JH,
Chang KC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Health Sciences, School of Medicine, 
and Biomedical Center (BK21), Gyeongsang National University, 92 Chilam-dong,
Jinju 660-751, Republic of Korea.

Phosphotase and tensin homolog deleted on chromosome 10 (PTEN) is a potent
negative regulator of PI3K/Akt pathway. Here, we tried to elucidate the role of
PTEN in the regulation of endothelial adhesion molecules, vascular cell adhesion 
molecule (VCAM)-1 and intracellular adhesion molecule (ICAM)-1, induced by TNF-a 
in human endothelial cells (ECs). Transfection with PTEN overexpressing vector
resulted in the significant decrease in phosphorylation of Akt in TNF-a-treated
ECs. PTEN strongly inhibited VCAM-1 but not ICAM-1, however this inhibitory
effect was reversed by co-transfection with constitutively active-Akt (CA-Akt-HA)
in TNF-a-stimulated ECs. Additionally, silencing of PTEN with specific siRNA
showed significant increase of phosphor-Akt compared with TNF-a alone treated
ECs. siPTEN significantly upregulated VCAM-1 but was indifferent to ICAM-1 in
TNF-a-treated cells. Further, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed
that PTEN targets GATA-6 but not IRF-1 binding to VCAM-1 promoter. In addition,
GATA-6 is associated with glycogen synthesis kinase-3beta (GSK-3ß) which is in
turn regulated by PTEN-dependent Akt activity. Finally, PTEN significantly
prevented monocyte adhesion to TNF-a-induced ECs probably through VCAM-1
regulation. It is concluded that PTEN selectively inhibits expression of VCAM-1
but not ICAM-1 through modulation of PI3K/Akt/GSK-3ß/GATA-6 signaling cascade in 
TNF-a-treated ECs.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20864106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Development. 2010 Oct;137(20):3361-72. doi: 10.1242/dev.050864. Epub 2010 Sep 8.

A role for PDGF signaling in expansion of the extra-embryonic endoderm lineage of
the mouse blastocyst.

Artus J(1), Panthier JJ, Hadjantonakis AK.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Sloan-Kettering Institute, 1275 York Avenue,
New York, NY 10065, USA.

The inner cell mass (ICM) of the implanting mammalian blastocyst comprises two
lineages: the pluripotent epiblast (EPI) and primitive endoderm (PrE). We have
identified platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha (PDGFRa) as an early
marker of the PrE lineage and its derivatives in both mouse embryos and ex vivo
paradigms of extra-embryonic endoderm (ExEn). By combining live imaging of
embryos and embryo-derived stem cells expressing a histone H2B-GFP fusion
reporter under the control of Pdgfra regulatory elements with the analysis of
lineage-specific markers, we found that Pdgfra expression coincides with that of 
GATA6, the earliest expressed transcriptional regulator of the PrE lineage. We
show that GATA6 is required for the activation of Pdgfra expression. Using
pharmacological inhibition and genetic inactivation we addressed the role of the 
PDGF pathway in the PrE lineage. Our results demonstrate that PDGF signaling is
essential for the establishment, and plays a role in the proliferation, of XEN
cells, which are isolated from mouse blastocyst stage embryos and represent the
PrE lineage. Implanting Pdgfra mutant blastocysts exhibited a reduced number of
PrE cells, an effect that was exacerbated by delaying implantation. Surprisingly,
we also noted an increase in the number of EPI cells in implantation-delayed
Pdgfra-null mutants. Taken together, our data suggest a role for PDGF signaling
in the expansion of the ExEn lineage. Our observations also uncover a possible
role for the PrE in regulating the size of the pluripotent EPI compartment.

PMCID: PMC2947752
PMID: 20826533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cell Stem Cell. 2010 Sep 3;7(3):343-54. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2010.06.023.

Myc represses primitive endoderm differentiation in pluripotent stem cells.

Smith KN(1), Singh AM, Dalton S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Paul D. Coverdell Center for
Biomedical and Health Sciences, The University of Georgia, 500 D.W. Brooks Drive,
Athens, GA 30602, USA.

The generation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) provides a novel method 
to facilitate investigations into the mechanisms that control stem cell
pluripotency and self-renewal. Myc has previously been shown to be critical for
murine embryonic stem cell (mESC) maintenance, while also enhancing directed
reprogramming of fibroblasts by effecting widespread changes in gene expression. 
Despite several studies identifying in vivo target genes, the precise mechanism
by which Myc regulates pluripotency remains unknown. Here we report that
codeletion of c- and N-MYC in iPSCs and ESCs results in their spontaneous
differentiation to primitive endoderm. We show that Myc sustains pluripotency
through repression of the primitive endoderm master regulator GATA6, while also
contributing to cell cycle control by regulation of the mir-17-92 miRNA cluster. 
Our findings demonstrate the indispensable requirement for c- or N-myc in
pluripotency beyond proliferative and metabolic control.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2954754
PMID: 20804970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Hum Genet. 2010 Oct;55(10):637-8. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2010.105. Epub 2010 Aug 26.

GATA transcription factors in congenital heart defects: a commentary on a novel
GATA6 mutation in patients with tetralogy of Fallot or atrial septal defect.

Kodo K(1), Yamagishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Department of Pediatrics, Keio University
School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjyuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Comment on
    J Hum Genet. 2010 Oct;55(10):662-7.

PMID: 20739941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Biol Reprod. 2010 Dec;83(6):1015-26. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.085969. Epub
2010 Aug 25.

GATA depletion impacts insulin-like growth factor 1 mRNA and protein levels in
luteinizing porcine granulosa cells.

LaVoie HA(1), Kordus RJ, Nguyen JB, Barth JL, Hui YY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of South Carolina School of
Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA. holly.lavoie@uscmed.sc.edu

GATA4 and GATA6 are zinc-finger transcription factors that regulate specific
genes involved in steroidogenesis. Using RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated
reduction of GATA4 and/or GATA6 with microarray analysis, we aimed to identify
novel GATA target genes in luteinizing porcine granulosa cells under vehicle- and
cAMP-treated conditions. Microarray analysis identified IGF1 mRNA to be cAMP- and
GATA-responsive, and real-time PCR demonstrated that the cAMP-induced increase in
IGF1 mRNA was reduced under conditions of GATA6 depletion and GATA4 plus GATA6
depletion, but not GATA4 depletion. Insulin-like growth factor 1 protein levels
in media were also decreased by GATA6 or GATA4 plus GATA6 reduction. IGFBP2 and
IGFBP4 mRNAs were increased and IGFBP5 mRNA decreased with vehicle and cAMP
treatment under GATA4 plus GATA6 RNAi conditions. GATA6 reduction alone increased
basal IGFBP4 and decreased IGFBP5 with both vehicle and cAMP, and GATA4 reduction
alone lowered cAMP IGFBP5 levels with cAMP. No changes in IGFBP3 mRNA were
observed with GATA reduction relative to the control RNAi condition. Levels of
insulin-like growth factor binding proteins 2-5 in media as assessed by Western
ligand blotting were not altered by GATA reduction. Electromobility gel shift
assays with two GATA-containing oligonucleotides of the IGF1 5'-regulatory region
showed GATA4 and GATA6 could bind the more proximal GATA-B site. These studies
indicate that although GATA4 and GATA6 can bind the porcine IGF1 5'-region, GATA6
is functionally most important for cAMP-stimulated mRNA levels. Using microarray 
analysis, we identified other mRNAs that were altered by GATA-reduced conditions,
including ALDH1, DIO2, and EDNRB. Our findings further support GATA as a
coordinator of endocrine/paracrine/autocrine signals in the ovary.

PMCID: PMC2994327
PMID: 20739664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Vis Exp. 2010 Aug 11;(42). pii: 2020. doi: 10.3791/2020.

A reverse genetic approach to test functional redundancy during embryogenesis.

Rikin A(1), Rosenfeld GE, McCartin K, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell University,
USA.

Gene function during embryogenesis is typically defined by loss-of-function
experiments, for example by targeted mutagenesis (knockout) in the mouse. In the 
zebrafish model, effective reverse genetic techniques have been developed using
microinjection of gene-specific antisense morpholinos. Morpholinos target an mRNA
through specific base-pairing and block gene function transiently by inhibiting
translation or splicing for several days during embryogenesis (knockdown).
However, in vertebrates such as mouse or zebrafish, some gene functions can be
obscured by these approaches due to the presence of another gene that compensates
for the loss. This is especially true for gene families containing sister genes
that are co-expressed in the same developing tissues. In zebrafish, functional
compensation can be tested in a relatively high-throughput manner, by
co-injection of morpholinos that target knockdown of both genes simultaneously.
Likewise, using morpholinos, a genetic interaction between any two genes can be
demonstrated by knockdown of both genes together at sub-threshold levels. For
example, morpholinos can be titrated such that neither individual knockdown
generates a phenotype. If, under these conditions, co-injection of both
morpholinos causes a phenotype, a genetic interaction is shown. Here we
demonstrate how to show functional redundancy in the context of two related GATA 
transcription factors. GATA factors are essential for specification of cardiac
progenitors, but this is revealed only by the loss of both Gata5 and Gata6. We
show how to carry out microinjection experiments, validate the morpholinos, and
evaluate the compensated phenotype for cardiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3156006
PMID: 20736915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Circ Res. 2010 Oct 15;107(8):1032-40. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.110.220764. Epub
2010 Aug 12.

The transcription factor GATA-6 regulates pathological cardiac hypertrophy.

van Berlo JH(1), Elrod JW, van den Hoogenhof MM, York AJ, Aronow BJ, Duncan SA,
Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, 240 Albert Sabin Way, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

RATIONALE: The transcriptional code that programs maladaptive cardiac hypertrophy
involves the zinc finger-containing DNA binding factor GATA-4. The highly related
transcription factor GATA-6 is also expressed in the adult heart, although its
role in controlling the hypertrophic program is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of GATA-6 in cardiac hypertrophy and
homeostasis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here, we performed a cardiomyocyte-specific conditional gene
targeting approach for Gata6, as well as a transgenic approach to overexpress
GATA-6 in the mouse heart. Deletion of Gata6-loxP with Nkx2.5-cre produced late
embryonic lethality with heart defects, whereas deletion with ß-myosin heavy
chain-cre (ßMHC-cre) produced viable adults with >95% loss of GATA-6 protein in
the heart. These latter mice were subjected to pressure overload-induced
hypertrophy for 2 and 6 weeks, which showed a significant reduction in cardiac
hypertrophy similar to that observed Gata4 heart-specific deleted mice.
Gata6-deleted mice subjected to pressure overload also developed heart failure,
whereas control mice maintained proper cardiac function. Gata6-deleted mice also 
developed less cardiac hypertrophy following 2 weeks of angiotensin
II/phenylephrine infusion. Controlled GATA-6 overexpression in the heart induced 
hypertrophy with aging and predisposed to greater hypertrophy with pressure
overload stimulation. Combinatorial deletion of Gata4 and Gata6 from the adult
heart resulted in dilated cardiomyopathy and lethality by 16 weeks of age.
Mechanistically, deletion of Gata6 from the heart resulted in fundamental changes
in the levels of key regulatory genes and myocyte differentiation-specific genes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that GATA-6 is both necessary and sufficient 
for regulating the cardiac hypertrophic response and differentiated gene
expression, both alone and in coordination with GATA-4.

PMCID: PMC2967029
PMID: 20705924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Int J Mol Med. 2010 Sep;26(3):365-72.

GATA-4 promotes the differentiation of P19 cells into cardiac myocytes.

Hu DL(1), Chen FK, Liu YQ, Sheng YH, Yang R, Kong XQ, Cao KJ, Gu HT, Qian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, PR China.

The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of GATA-4 on the
differentiation of P19 cells into cardiomyocytes and to examine the relationship 
between GATA-4 and cardiomyocytes. We constructed vectors to overexpress and
silence GATA-4. These vectors, as well as empty ones were transfected into P19
cells. Subsequently, reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
Western blot analysis were performed. The morphology of P19 cells during
differentiation was observed using an inverted microscope. Total RNA was
extracted from P19 cells. We used real-time PCR to evaluate the expression levels
of 6 genes: GATA-4, GATA-6, transthyretin (TTR), alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), Nkx2.5,
and alpha-myosin heavy chain (alpha-MHC). The gene expression pattern of these 6 
genes is graphically shown for each group. The GATA-4 mRNA level in cells
overexpressing GATA-4 was notably higher than that in the controls, whereas the
levels in the controls were notably higher than those in the GATA-4-silenced P19 
cells. The cell lines overexpressing GATA-4 expressed higher levels of Nkx2.5 and
alpha-MHC than the controls. However, the controls expressed higher levels of
AFP, GATA-6 and TTR than the cells overexpressing GATA-4. The RNAi group
expressed lower levels of TTR, Nkx2.5, and alpha-MHC than the controls, but there
were no differences in the RNAi group and the controls with regard to the
expression levels of AFP and GATA-6. The gene expression pattern in the cells
overexpressing GATA-4 was biased toward the Nkx2.5 and alpha-MHC. On the other
hand, the gene expression pattern in GATA-4-silenced cells and the controls was
biased toward the TTR and AFP. The overexpression of GATA-4 enhances the
differentiation of P19 cells into cardiac myocytes, whereas its down-regulation
suppresses this trend.

PMID: 20664952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. BMC Genomics. 2010 Jul 26;11:451. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-451.

A systems approach to mapping transcriptional networks controlling surfactant
homeostasis.

Xu Y(1), Zhang M, Wang Y, Kadambi P, Dave V, Lu LJ, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, OH, USA. Yan.Xu@cchmc.org

BACKGROUND: Pulmonary surfactant is required for lung function at birth and
throughout life. Lung lipid and surfactant homeostasis requires regulation among 
multi-tiered processes, coordinating the synthesis of surfactant proteins and
lipids, their assembly, trafficking, and storage in type II cells of the lung.
The mechanisms regulating these interrelated processes are largely unknown.
RESULTS: We integrated mRNA microarray data with array independent knowledge
using Gene Ontology (GO) similarity analysis, promoter motif searching, protein
interaction and literature mining to elucidate genetic networks regulating lipid 
related biological processes in lung. A Transcription factor (TF)-target gene
(TG) similarity matrix was generated by integrating data from different analytic 
methods. A scoring function was built to rank the likely TF-TG pairs. Using this 
strategy, we identified and verified critical components of a transcriptional
network directing lipogenesis, lipid trafficking and surfactant homeostasis in
the mouse lung.
CONCLUSIONS: Within the transcriptional network, SREBP, CEBPA, FOXA2, ETSF, GATA6
and IRF1 were identified as regulatory hubs displaying high connectivity. SREBP, 
FOXA2 and CEBPA together form a common core regulatory module that controls
surfactant lipid homeostasis. The core module cooperates with other factors to
regulate lipid metabolism and transport, cell growth and development, cell death 
and cell mediated immune response. Coordinated interactions of the TFs influence 
surfactant homeostasis and regulate lung function at birth.

PMCID: PMC3091648
PMID: 20659319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 13;5(7):e11513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011513.

All-trans retinoic acid directs urothelial specification of murine embryonic stem
cells via GATA4/6 signaling mechanisms.

Mauney JR(1), Ramachandran A, Yu RN, Daley GQ, Adam RM, Estrada CR.

Author information: 
(1)Urological Diseases Research Center, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

The urinary bladder and associated tract are lined by the urothelium, a
transitional epithelium that acts as a specialized permeability barrier that
protects the underlying tissue from urine via expression of a highly specific
group of proteins known as the uroplakins (UP). To date, our understanding of the
developmental processes responsible for urothelial differentiation has been
hampered due to the lack of suitable models. In this study, we describe a novel
in vitro cell culture system for derivation of urothelial cells from murine
embryonic stem cells (ESCs) following cultivation on collagen matrices in the
presence all trans retinoic acid (RA). Upon stimulation with micromolar
concentrations of RA, ESCs significantly downregulated the pluripotency factor
OCT-4 but markedly upregulated UP1A, UP1B, UP2, UP3A, and UP3B mRNA levels in
comparison to naïve ESCs and spontaneously differentiating controls. Pan-UP
protein expression was associated with both p63- and cytokeratin 20-positive
cells in discrete aggregating populations of ESCs following 9 and 14 days of RA
stimulation. Analysis of endodermal transcription factors such as GATA4 and GATA6
revealed significant upregulation and nuclear enrichment in RA-treated UP2-GFP+
populations. GATA4-/- and GATA6-/- transgenic ESC lines revealed substantial
attenuation of RA-mediated UP expression in comparison to wild type controls. In 
addition, EMSA analysis revealed that RA treatment induced formation of
transcriptional complexes containing GATA4/6 on both UP1B and UP2 promoter
fragments containing putative GATA factor binding sites. Collectively, these data
suggest that RA mediates ESC specification toward a urothelial lineage via
GATA4/6-dependent processes.

PMCID: PMC2903484
PMID: 20644631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Hum Genet. 2010 Oct;55(10):662-7. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2010.84. Epub 2010 Jul 15.

A novel GATA6 mutation in patients with tetralogy of Fallot or atrial septal
defect.

Lin X(1), Huo Z, Liu X, Zhang Y, Li L, Zhao H, Yan B, Liu Y, Yang Y, Chen YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, East Hospital, Tongji University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, PR China.

Comment in
    J Hum Genet. 2010 Oct;55(10):637-8.

GATA6 is a member of the GATA family of transcription factors, and its expression
and functions overlap with those of GATA4 during heart development. Mutations in 
GATA4 have been related to human congenital heart diseases (CHDs) in several
studies, whereas mutations in GATA6 have only recently been reported in patients 
with persistent truncus arteriosus. Animal experiments have revealed critical
roles for GATA6 in the development of the myocardium and cardiac morphogenesis,
thereby highlighting the potential involvement of GATA6 defects in the
pathogenesis of CHDs. Here, we screened the GATA6 in 270 individuals with
sporadic CHDs by direct sequencing. After identification of the mutation, a
luciferase reporter assay and real-time quantitative polymerase chain reaction
were performed to detect functional changes in the mutant transcription factor.
The same heterozygous missense mutation (Ser184Asn) was identified in three
patients, including one with tetralogy of Fallot and two with atrial septal
defects. This mutation was not found in 500 unrelated ethnically matched healthy 
subjects. Direct sequencing of this region in the parents of these three patients
revealed the same mutation in one of the parents for each patient, and one of the
parent carriers presented with a bicuspid aortic valve. Biological analysis
revealed clearly decreased transcriptional activity of GATA6 Ser184Asn in vitro. 
All these data suggest that GATA6 Ser184Asn is a novel mutation associated with
CHDs and has an important role in disease pathogenesis.

PMID: 20631719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Pediatr Res. 2010 Oct;68(4):281-5. doi: 10.1203/00006450-201011001-00549.

Identification of GATA6 sequence variants in patients with congenital heart
defects.

Maitra M(1), Koenig SN, Srivastava D, Garg V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Although the etiology for the majority of congenital heart disease (CHD) remains 
poorly understood, the known genetic causes are often the result of mutations in 
cardiac developmental genes. GATA6 encodes for a cardiac transcription factor,
which is broadly expressed in the developing heart and is critical for normal
cardiac morphogenesis, making it a candidate gene for congenital heart defects in
humans. The objective of this study was to determine the frequency of GATA6
sequence variants in a population of individuals with a spectrum of cardiac
malformations. The coding regions of GATA6 were sequenced in 310 individuals with
CHD. We identified two novel sequence variations in GATA6 that altered highly
conserved amino acid residues (A178V and L198V) and were not found in a control
population. These variants were identified in two individuals (one with tetralogy
of Fallot and the other with an atrioventricular septal defect in the setting of 
complex CHD). Biochemical studies demonstrate that the GATA6 A178V mutant protein
results in increased transactivation ability when compared with wild-type GATA6. 
These data suggest that nonsynonymous GATA6 sequence variants are infrequently
found in individuals with CHD.

PMCID: PMC2940936
PMID: 20581743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. BMC Cancer. 2010 Jun 16;10:295. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-295.

Establishment and characterization of a new human pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell 
line with high metastatic potential to the lung.

Kalinina T(1), Güngör C, Thieltges S, Möller-Krull M, Penas EM, Wicklein D,
Streichert T, Schumacher U, Kalinin V, Simon R, Otto B, Dierlamm J, Schwarzenbach
H, Effenberger KE, Bockhorn M, Izbicki JR, Yekebas EF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Visceral and Thoracic Surgery, University Hospital
Hamburg, Eppendorf, Martinistrasse 52, 20246 Hamburg, Germany. tkalinin@uke.de

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer is still associated with devastating prognosis.
Real progress in treatment options has still not been achieved. Therefore new
models are urgently needed to investigate this deadly disease. As a part of this 
process we have established and characterized a new human pancreatic cancer cell 
line.
METHODS: The newly established pancreatic cancer cell line PaCa 5061 was
characterized for its morphology, growth rate, chromosomal analysis and
mutational analysis of the K-ras, EGFR and p53 genes. Gene-amplification and RNA 
expression profiles were obtained using an Affymetrix microarray, and
overexpression was validated by IHC analysis. Tumorigenicity and spontaneous
metastasis formation of PaCa 5061 cells were analyzed in pfp-/-/rag2-/- mice.
Sensitivity towards chemotherapy was analysed by MTT assay.
RESULTS: PaCa 5061 cells grew as an adhering monolayer with a doubling time
ranging from 30 to 48 hours. M-FISH analyses showed a hypertriploid complex
karyotype with multiple numerical and unbalanced structural aberrations. Numerous
genes were overexpressed, some of which have previously been implicated in
pancreatic adenocarcinoma (GATA6, IGFBP3, IGFBP6), while others were detected for
the first time (MEMO1, RIOK3). Specifically highly overexpressed genes (fold
change > 10) were identified as EGFR, MUC4, CEACAM1, CEACAM5 and CEACAM6.
Subcutaneous transplantation of PaCa 5061 into pfp-/-/rag2-/- mice resulted in
formation of primary tumors and spontaneous lung metastasis.
CONCLUSION: The established PaCa 5061 cell line and its injection into
pfp-/-/rag2-/- mice can be used as a new model for studying various aspects of
the biology of human pancreatic cancer and potential treatment approaches for the
disease.

PMCID: PMC2927995
PMID: 20553613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Pancreas. 2010 Nov;39(8):1140-6. doi: 10.1097/MPA.0b013e3181dc67fc.

Alterations in gene expression in MEN1-associated insulinoma development.

Serewko-Auret MM(1), Mould AW, Loffler KA, Duncan R, Kay GF, Hayward NK.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Population Health, Queensland Institute of Medical Research,
Brisbane, Australia. Magdalena.Auret@qimr.edu.au

OBJECTIVES: To identify gene expression alterations associated with insulinoma
formation and progression in 2 mouse models of multiple endocrine neoplasia type 
1.
METHODS: Mice were killed at 12 or 16 months, and pancreatic islets were isolated
by enzymatic and physical disruption. Islets were separated by size representing 
control, normal, hyperplastic, and adenomous islets. RNA was isolated from these 
islets and profiled on Sentrix Mouse-6 Expression version 1 BeadChips. Array data
were analyzed in GeneSpring.
RESULTS: One hundred and one genes that were significantly (P = 0.05) altered in 
hyperplastic islets and insulinomas compared with normal islets were identified. 
Of these, 64 gene elements showed reduced messenger RNA levels and 37 gene
elements had increased gene expression compared with control islets. Altered
expression of 3 genes, namely, Gata6, Tspan8, and s100a8, was confirmed by
quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction, and aberrant levels
of Tspan8 and Lmo2 protein measured by Western blot correlated with the changes
in messenger RNA levels.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that alterations in gene expression of Gata6, 
Tspan8, S100a8, and Lmo2 may act via novel pathways that play functionally
important roles in Men1-associated tumor progression.

PMID: 20531244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. BMC Dev Biol. 2010 Apr 27;10:42. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-10-42.

Pre-gastrula expression of zebrafish extraembryonic genes.

Hong SK(1), Levin CS, Brown JL, Wan H, Sherman BT, Huang da W, Lempicki RA,
Feldman B.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

BACKGROUND: Many species form extraembryonic tissues during embryogenesis, such
as the placenta of humans and other viviparous mammals. Extraembryonic tissues
have various roles in protecting, nourishing and patterning embryos. Prior to
gastrulation in zebrafish, the yolk syncytial layer - an extraembryonic nuclear
syncytium - produces signals that induce mesoderm and endoderm formation.
Mesoderm and endoderm precursor cells are situated in the embryonic margin, an
external ring of cells along the embryo-yolk interface. The yolk syncytial layer 
initially forms below the margin, in a domain called the external yolk syncytial 
layer (E-YSL).
RESULTS: We hypothesize that key components of the yolk syncytial layer's
mesoderm and endoderm inducing activity are expressed as mRNAs in the E-YSL. To
identify genes expressed in the E-YSL, we used microarrays to compare the
transcription profiles of intact pre-gastrula embryos with pre-gastrula embryonic
cells that we had separated from the yolk and yolk syncytial layer. This
identified a cohort of genes with enriched expression in intact embryos. Here we 
describe our whole mount in situ hybridization analysis of sixty-eight of them.
This includes ten genes with E-YSL expression (camsap1l1, gata3, znf503, hnf1ba, 
slc26a1, slc40a1, gata6, gpr137bb, otop1 and cebpa), four genes with expression
in the enveloping layer (EVL), a superficial epithelium that protects the embryo 
(zgc:136817, zgc:152778, slc14a2 and elovl6l), three EVL genes whose expression
is transiently confined to the animal pole (elovl6l, zgc:136359 and clica), and
six genes with transient maternal expression (mtf1, wu:fj59f04, mospd2, rftn2,
arrdc1a and pho). We also assessed the requirement of Nodal signaling for the
expression of selected genes in the E-YSL, EVL and margin. Margin expression was 
Nodal dependent for all genes we tested, including the concentrated margin
expression of an EVL gene: zgc:110712. All other instances of EVL and E-YSL
expression that we tested were Nodal independent.
CONCLUSION: We have devised an effective strategy for enriching and identifying
genes expressed in the E-YSL of pre-gastrula embryos. To our surprise, maternal
genes and genes expressed in the EVL were also enriched by this strategy. A
number of these genes are promising candidates for future functional studies on
early embryonic patterning.

PMCID: PMC2873407
PMID: 20423468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Mol Cell. 2010 Apr 23;38(2):191-201. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.03.005.

SUMO-specific protease 2 is essential for suppression of polycomb group
protein-mediated gene silencing during embryonic development.

Kang X(1), Qi Y, Zuo Y, Wang Q, Zou Y, Schwartz RJ, Cheng J, Yeh ET.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cell Biology, The Key
Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of
Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2010 Apr 23;38(2):157-9.

SUMO-specific protease 2 (SENP2) has a broad de-SUMOylation activity in vitro.
However, the biological function of SENP2 is largely unknown. Here, we show that 
deletion of SENP2 gene in mouse causes defects in the embryonic heart and reduces
the expression of Gata4 and Gata6, which are essential for cardiac development.
SENP2 regulates transcription of Gata4 and Gata6 mainly through alteration of
occupancy of Pc2/CBX4, a polycomb repressive complex 1 (PRC1) subunit, on its
promoters. We demonstrate that Pc2/CBX4 is a target of SENP2 in vivo and that
SUMOylation is essential for Pc2/CBX4-mediated PRC1 recruitment to methylated
histone 3 at K27 (H3K27me3). In SENP2 null embryos, SUMOylated Pc2/CBX4
accumulates and Pc2/CBX4 occupancy on the promoters of PcG target genes is
markedly increased, leading to repression of Gata4 and Gata6 transcription. Our
results reveal a critical role for de-SUMOylation in the regulation of PcG target
gene expression.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2879644
PMID: 20417598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Anat. 2010 Jan;216(1):92-107. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2009.01171.x.

Wnt/beta-catenin signalling regulates cardiomyogenesis via GATA transcription
factors.

Martin J(1), Afouda BA, Hoppler S.

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Research Programme, Institute of Medical
Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, UK.

A functioning heart muscle is required continuously throughout life. During
embryonic development the heart muscle tissue differentiates from mesoderm that
has heart-forming potential. Heart-forming potential in the embryonic mesoderm is
regulated by pro-cardiogenic transcription factors, such as members of the GATA
and NK-2 transcription factor families. Subsequent heart muscle differentiation
involves the expression of cytoskeletal proteins, including myosins and
troponins. Different Wnt signalling pathways have various functions in heart
development. So-called 'canonical' (Wnt/beta-catenin-mediated) signalling has a
conserved role in vertebrate heart development, regulating and restricting heart 
development and subsequent heart muscle differentiation. Here we investigated the
way in which Wnt/beta-catenin signalling functionally interacts with the GATA
family of pro-cardiogenic transcription factors to regulate subsequent heart
muscle differentiation. We used whole Xenopus embryos as an accessible
experimental model system for vertebrate heart development. Our experiments
confirmed that activation of Wnt signalling results in reduced gata gene
expression, as well as reduced gene expression of other pro-cardiogenic
transcription factors and heart muscle differentiation markers. Remarkably, we
discovered that when GATA function is experimentally restored, the expression of 
other pro-cardiogenic transcription factors and heart muscle differentiation
markers is rescued. These findings, obtained from whole-embryo experiments, show 
that Wnt signalling regulates heart development at the level of GATA factors,
confirming earlier results from tissue-culture experiments. Furthermore, our
rescue experiments in Xenopus embryos revealed differences in functional activity
between the various GATA transcription factors involved in heart development. We 
discovered that GATA4 is more efficient at reinstating the gene expression of
other pro-cardiogenic transcription factors, whereas GATA6 is more potent at
promoting the expression of genes associated with terminal heart muscle
differentiation. In conclusion, our findings show that the inhibition of heart
development by Wnt/beta-catenin signalling during organogenesis is mediated by
the loss of expression of GATA pro-cardiogenic transcription factors and reveal
functional differences between those GATA factors in heart development.

PMCID: PMC2807978
PMID: 20402826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Aug;38(14):4635-50. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq230. Epub 2010
Apr 8.

Identification and characterization of alternative promoters of zebrafish
Rtn-4/Nogo genes in cultured cells and zebrafish embryos.

Chen YC(1), Wu BK, Chu CY, Cheng CH, Han HW, Chen GD, Lee MT, Hwang PP, Kawakami 
K, Chang CC, Huang CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

In mammals, the Nogo family consists of Nogo-A, Nogo-B and Nogo-C. However, there
are three Rtn-4/Nogo-related transcripts were identified in zebrafish. In
addition to the common C-terminal region, the N-terminal regions of
Rtn4-n/Nogo-C1, Rtn4-m/Nogo-C2 and Rtn4-l/Nogo-B, respectively, contain 9, 25 and
132 amino acid residues. In this study, we isolated the 5'-upstream region of
each gene from a BAC clone and demonstrated that the putative promoter regions,
P1-P3, are functional in cultured cells and zebrafish embryos. A transgenic
zebrafish Tg(Nogo-B:GFP) line was generated using P1 promoter region to drive
green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression through Tol2-mediated transgenesis.
This line recapitulates the endogenous expression pattern of Rtn4-l/Nogo-B mRNA
in the brain, brachial arches, eyes, muscle, liver and intestines. In contrast,
GFP expressions by P2 and P3 promoters were localized to skeletal muscles of
zebrafish embryos. Several GATA and E-box motifs are found in these promoter
regions. Using morpholino knockdown experiments, GATA4 and GATA6 were involved in
the control of P1 promoter activity in the liver and intestine, while Myf5 and
MyoD for the control of P1 and P3 promoter activities in muscles. These data
demonstrate that zebrafish Rtn4/Nogo transcripts might be generated by coupling
mechanisms of alternative first exons and alternative promoter usage.

PMCID: PMC2919723
PMID: 20378713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Apr 6;107(14):6364-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0915063107. Epub 2010 Mar 22.

Origin and formation of the first two distinct cell types of the inner cell mass 
in the mouse embryo.

Morris SA(1), Teo RT, Li H, Robson P, Glover DM, Zernicka-Goetz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Wellcome Trust/Cancer Research UK Gurdon Institute, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 3EH, United Kingdom.

A crucial question in mammalian development is how cells of the early embryo
differentiate into distinct cell types. The first decision is taken when cells
undertake waves of asymmetric division that generate one daughter on the inside
and one on the outside of the embryo. After this division, some cells on the
inside remain pluripotent and give rise to the epiblast, and hence the future
body, whereas others develop into the primitive endoderm, an extraembryonic
tissue. How the fate of these inside cells is decided is unknown: Is the process 
random, or is it related to their developmental origins? To address this
question, we traced all cells by live-cell imaging in intact, unmanipulated
embryos until the epiblast and primitive endoderm became distinct. This analysis 
revealed that inner cell mass (ICM) cells have unrestricted developmental
potential. However, cells internalized by the first wave of asymmetric divisions 
are biased toward forming pluripotent epiblast, whereas cells internalized in the
next two waves of divisions are strongly biased toward forming primitive
endoderm. Moreover, we show that cells internalized by the second wave
up-regulate expression of Gata6 and Sox17, and changing the expression of these
genes determines whether the cells become primitive endoderm. Finally, with our
ability to determine the origin of cells, we find that inside cells that are
mispositioned when they are born can sort into the correct layer. In conclusion, 
we propose a model in which the timing of cell internalization, cell position,
and cell sorting combine to determine distinct lineages of the preimplantation
mouse embryo.

PMCID: PMC2852013
PMID: 20308546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Eur J Pharmacol. 2010 Jun 10;635(1-3):156-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.02.050. 
Epub 2010 Mar 19.

Heme oxygenase-1 and carbon monoxide promote neovascularization after myocardial 
infarction by modulating the expression of HIF-1alpha, SDF-1alpha and VEGF-B.

Lakkisto P(1), Kytö V, Forsten H, Siren JM, Segersvärd H, Voipio-Pulkki LM, Laine
M, Pulkki K, Tikkanen I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Helsinki University Central Hospital,
Haartmaninkatu, Helsinki, Finland. paivi.lakkisto@helsinki.fi

Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1), a known cytoprotective enzyme implicated also in the
cell cycle regulation and angiogenesis, exerts many of its beneficial effects
through carbon monoxide (CO). We studied the roles of HO-1 and CO in cardiac
regeneration after myocardial infarction. Prior to coronary artery ligation, male
Wistar rats were given either cobolt protoporphyrin IX to induce HO-1 or CO-donor
methylene chloride. Cardiac regeneration was assessed by immunohistochemistry and
confocal microscopy. CO significantly increased the accumulation of c-kit+
stem/progenitor cells into the infarct area and induced formation of new coronary
arteries by promoting a substantial differentiation of c-kit+ cells into vascular
smooth muscle cells (c-kit+/GATA6+ cells). Furthermore, CO increased
proliferation of cardiomyocytes in the infarct border area at 4weeks
post-infarction. This suggests proliferation of newly formed cardiomyocytes
derived from c-kit+ cells as 10% of c-kit+ cells expressed early cardiac marker
Nkx2.5. Increased expression of hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha (HIF-1alpha),
stromal cell derived factor-1alpha (SDF-1alpha) and vascular endothelial growth
factor-B (VEGF-B) were found in the infarct areas of CO-donor pretreated hearts
suggesting that these factors potentially promoted the migration of c-kit+ cells 
into the infarct area and subsequent vasculogenesis and myocardial regeneration
by CO. HO-1 increased both capillary and vascular densities, while only a small
increase of c-kit+ cells was found. HO-1 upregulated SDF-1alpha, but did not have
effect on HIF-1alpha and VEGF-B. In conclusion, HO-1 and CO have differential
roles and mechanisms of action in cardiac regeneration. Modulation of the HO-1/CO
axis may provide a novel tool for the repair of cardiac injury.

PMID: 20303947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Genetika. 2010 Feb;46(2):282-6.

[Expression of early developmental genes in vole Microtus rossiaemeridionalis].

[Article in Russian]

Sorokin MA, Medvedev SP, Shevchenko AI, Slyn'ko NM, Zakiian SM.

The expression of genes Sox2, Klf4, Myc, Sall4, Gata6, Foxa2, Hnf4a, Cdx2, Esrrb,
Hand1 in cultivated cells, embryos and organs of adult voles Microtus
rossiaemeridionalis was studied. High resemblance of the expression patterns of
these genes in the organs of adult voles, mice and humans was demonstrated. It
was established that genes Gata6, Foxa2 and Hnf4a were specifically expressed in 
vole extraembryonic endoderm cells, while Cdx2 and Handl genes, in trophoblast
stem cells. This shows that these genes can be used markers for corresponding
vole cell lines. Indirect confirmation pointing to the fact that Oct4 gene is a
marker gene for epiblast cells both in the vole and mouse was obtained.

PMID: 20297663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Dev Cell. 2010 Feb 16;18(2):275-87. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.01.008.

Characterization and in vivo pharmacological rescue of a Wnt2-Gata6 pathway
required for cardiac inflow tract development.

Tian Y(1), Yuan L, Goss AM, Wang T, Yang J, Lepore JJ, Zhou D, Schwartz RJ, Patel
V, Cohen ED, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

Little is understood about the molecular mechanisms underlying the morphogenesis 
of the posterior pole of the heart. Here we show that Wnt2 is expressed
specifically in the developing inflow tract mesoderm, which generates portions of
the atria and atrio-ventricular canal. Loss of Wnt2 results in defective
development of the posterior pole of the heart, resulting in a phenotype
resembling the human congenital heart syndrome complete common atrio-ventricular 
canal. The number and proliferation of posterior second heart field progenitors
is reduced in Wnt2(-/-) mutants. Moreover, these defects can be rescued in a
temporally restricted manner through pharmacological inhibition of Gsk-3beta. We 
also show that Wnt2 works in a feedforward transcriptional loop with Gata6 to
regulate posterior cardiac development. These data reveal a molecular pathway
regulating the posterior cardiac mesoderm and demonstrate that cardiovascular
defects caused by loss of Wnt signaling can be rescued pharmacologically in vivo.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2846539
PMID: 20159597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Development. 2010 Mar;137(5):715-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.043471.

FGF signal-dependent segregation of primitive endoderm and epiblast in the mouse 
blastocyst.

Yamanaka Y(1), Lanner F, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Hospital for Sick Children
Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario M5G 1X8, Canada. yojiro.yamanaka@mcgill.ca

Primitive endoderm (PE) and epiblast (EPI) are two lineages derived from the
inner cell mass (ICM) of the E3.5 blastocyst. Recent studies showed that EPI and 
PE progenitors expressing the lineage-specific transcriptional factors Nanog and 
Gata6, respectively, arise progressively as the ICM develops. Subsequent sorting 
of the two progenitors during blastocyst maturation results in the ormation of
morphologically distinct EPI and PE layers at E4.5. It is, however, unknown how
the initial differences between the two populations become established in the
E3.5 blastocyst. Because the ICM cells are derived from two distinct rounds of
polarized cell divisions during cleavage, a possible role for cell lineage
history in promoting EPI versus PE fate has been proposed. We followed cell
lineage from the eight-cell stage by live cell tracing and could find no clear
linkage between developmental history of individual ICM cells and later cell
fate. However, modulating FGF signaling levels by inhibition of the receptor/MAP 
kinase pathway or by addition of exogenous FGF shifted the fate of ICM cells to
become either EPI or PE, respectively. Nanog- or Gata6-expressing progenitors
could still be shifted towards the alternative fate by modulating FGF signaling
during blastocyst maturation, suggesting that the ICM progenitors are not fully
committed to their final fate at the time that initial segregation of gene
expression occurs. In conclusion, we propose a model in which stochastic and
progressive specification of EPI and PE lineages occurs during maturation of the 
blastocyst in an FGF/MAP kinase signal-dependent manner.

PMID: 20147376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2009 Oct;15(10):932-6.

[The GATA family in reproduction].

[Article in Chinese]

Jing CX(1), Yang JZ, Ai QY, Miao NZ, Zhao YF, Wang YM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Parasitology, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic
Medicine, Sichuan University, Cheng-du, Sichuan 610041, China.

The GATA family proteins are a group of zinc finger transcription factors that
are expressed in human and mammalian animals and play an important role in
mammalian organ morphogenesis, cell proliferation and sex differentiation. GATA-4
and GATA-6 have been identified in the ovaries and testes of humans, mice, pigs
and chickens. GATA-4 contributes to fetal male gonadal development by regulating 
the genes that mediate Müllerian duct regression and the onset of testosterone
production. GATA-4 and GATA-6 are localized in and regulate the function of the
ovarian and testicular somatic cells of fetal mice, especially granulosa cells,
thecal cells, Sertoli cells and Leydig cells. GATA-4 is also present in the germ 
cells of fetal and prepubertal mice.

PMID: 20112745  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Gene Ther. 2010 Apr;17(4):541-9. doi: 10.1038/gt.2009.166. Epub 2010 Jan 7.

The SP-C promoter facilitates alveolar type II epithelial cell-specific plasmid
nuclear import and gene expression.

Degiulio JV(1), Kaufman CD, Dean DA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Feinberg School of Medicine,
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.

Although nonviral gene therapy has great potential for use in the lung, the
relative lack of cell-specific targeting has limited its applications. We have
developed a new approach for cell-specific targeting based on selective nuclear
import of plasmids in nondividing cells. Using a microinjection and in situ
hybridization approach, we tested several potential DNA sequences for the ability
to mediate plasmid nuclear import in alveolar type II epithelial (ATII) cells. Of
these, only a sequence within the human surfactant protein C (SP-C) promoter was 
able to mediate nuclear localization of plasmid DNA specifically in ATII cells
but not in other cell types. We have mapped the minimal import sequence to the
proximal 318 nucleotides of the promoter, and demonstrate that binding sites for 
nuclear factor I, thyroid transcriptional factor 1, and GATA-binding protein 6
and the proteins themselves are required for import activity. Using intratracheal
delivery of DNA followed by electroporation, we demonstrate that the SP-C
promoter sequence will enhance gene expression specifically in ATII cells in
mouse lung. This represents a new activity for the SP-C promoter, and thus ATII
cell-specific nuclear import of DNA may prove to be a safe and effective method
for targeted and enhanced gene expression in ATII cells.

PMCID: PMC3482943
PMID: 20054353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Development. 2010 Jan;137(1):3; author reply 3-4. doi: 10.1242/dev.044917.

MHCalpha and cardiogenesis.

Samuel LJ, Latinkic BV.

Comment on
    Development. 2008 Oct;135(19):3185-90.

PMID: 20023154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Lung Cancer. 2010 Apr;68(1):1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lungcan.2009.11.001. Epub 2009
Dec 8.

Are adenosquamous lung carcinomas a simple mix of adenocarcinomas and squamous
cell carcinomas, or more complex at the molecular level?

Bastide K(1), Ugolin N, Levalois C, Bernaudin JF, Chevillard S.

Author information: 
(1)CEA, DSV, IRCM, SREIT, Laboratoire de Cancérologie Expérimentale, BP6,
Fontenay-aux-Roses Cedex F-92265, France. kristell.bastide@cea.fr

Adenocarcinomas (AC), squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) and adenosquamous carcinomas
(ASC) are three histological subtypes of non-small-cell lung carcinomas (NSCLC). 
ASC are morphologically mixed tumours that contain the two cell components AC and
SCC. To understand if they are a "simple" mix of AC and SCC or if they present
molecular specificities, as compared with the molecular characterization of both 
components, we performed a comparative transcriptome analysis on a series of nine
ASC, five AC and five SCC induced in rats by radon exposure. We found that 72, 40
and 39 genes were differentially expressed when comparing AC_SCC, ASC_SCC and
AC_ASC, respectively. Moreover, when classifying the three histological subtypes,
using genes that discriminated AC and SCC, we observed that all ASC were
classified as intermediate between the AC and SCC, some being closer to AC,
others to SCC. These results indicated that, regarding gene expression, ASC could
be considered as a mix of AC and SCC, both in various proportions. However, they 
also exhibit molecular specificities since we found specific genes discriminating
ASC_SCC and AC_ASC. In conclusion, the ASC mixed lung tumours are more complex
than simple mixes of AC and SCC components. Neuroendocrine differentiation and
ERK proliferation pathways seemed preferentially deregulated in ASC compared to
AC and SCC respectively, pathways that are worthy of being explored because they 
could partially explain the high clinical aggressiveness of ASC.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20004040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. BMC Biotechnol. 2009 Dec 15;9:101. doi: 10.1186/1472-6750-9-101.

Unrestricted somatic stem cells from human umbilical cord blood grow in
serum-free medium as spheres.

Zaibak F(1), Bello P, Kozlovski J, Crombie D, Ang H, Dottori M, Williamson R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Royal Children's
Hospital, Victoria, 3052, Australia. fzaibak@unimelb.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Human umbilical cord blood-derived unrestricted somatic stem cells
(USSCs), which are capable of multilineage differentiation, are currently under
investigation for a number of therapeutic applications. A major obstacle to their
clinical use is the fact that in vitro expansion is still dependent upon fetal
calf serum, which could be a source of pathogens. In this study, we investigate
the capacity of three different stem cell culture media to support USSCs in
serum-free conditions; HEScGRO, PSM and USSC growth medium ACF. Our findings
demonstrate that USSCs do not grow in HEScGRO or PSM, but we were able to
isolate, proliferate and maintain multipotency of three USSC lines in USSC growth
medium ACF.
RESULTS: For the first one to three passages, cells grown in USSC growth medium
ACF proliferate and maintain their morphology, but with continued passaging the
cells form spherical cell aggregates. Upon dissociation of spheres, cells
continue to grow in suspension and form new spheres. Dissociated cells can also
revert to monolayer growth when cultured on extracellular matrix support
(fibronectin or gelatin), or in medium containing fetal calf serum. Analysis of
markers associated with pluripotency (Oct4 and Sox2) and differentiation (FoxA2, 
Brachyury, Goosecoid, Nestin, Pax6, Gata6 and Cytokeratin 8) confirms that cells 
in the spheres maintain their gene expression profile. The cells in the spheres
also retain the ability to differentiate in vitro to form cells representative of
the three germline layers after five passages.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that USSC growth medium ACF maintains USSCs in an
undifferentiated state and supports growth in suspension. This is the first
demonstration that USSCs can grow in a serum- and animal component-free medium
and that USSCs can form spheres.

PMCID: PMC2805630
PMID: 20003538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010 Mar;38(3):415-21. doi: 10.1124/dmd.109.029405. Epub 2009 
Dec 7.

New insights into the regulation of CYP2C9 gene expression: the role of the
transcription factor GATA-4.

Mwinyi J(1), Nekvindová J, Cavaco I, Hofmann Y, Pedersen RS, Landman E, Mkrtchian
S, Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section of
Pharmacogenetics, Stockholm, Sweden. Jessica.Mwinyi@ki.se

CYP2C9 is an important drug-metabolizing enzyme that metabolizes, e.g., warfarin,
antidiabetics, and antiphlogistics. However, the endogenous regulation of this
enzyme is largely unknown. In this study, we examined the role of GATA
transcription factors in the gene expression of CYP2C9. We investigated four
putative GATA binding sites within the first 200 base pairs of CYP2C9 promoter at
the positions I: -173/-170, II: -167/-164, III: -118/-115, and IV: -106/-103.
Luciferase activity driven by a wild-type CYP2C9 promoter construct was strongly 
up-regulated in Huh-7 cells upon cotransfection with expression plasmids for
GATA-2 and GATA-4, whereas mutations introduced into GATA binding site III or I
and II reduced this induction to a significant extent. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays revealed specific binding of GATA-4 and GATA-6 to the
oligonucleotides containing GATA binding sites I and II. Furthermore, the
association of GATA-4 with CYP2C9 promoter was confirmed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays in HepG2 cells. Taken together, these data strongly
suggest an involvement of liver-specific transcription factor GATA-4 in the
transcriptional regulation of CYP2C9.

PMID: 19995889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 Mar;162(3):625-31. doi: 10.1530/EJE-09-0734. Epub 2009 Dec
7.

Differential developmental expression of transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6,
their cofactor FOG-2 and downstream target genes in testicular carcinoma in situ 
and germ cell tumors.

Salonen J(1), Rajpert-De Meyts E, Mannisto S, Nielsen JE, Graem N, Toppari J,
Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedicine, Paediatric Research Center, Children's Hospital,
University of Helsinki, Biomedicum Helsinki, PO Box 20, SF-00014 Helsinki,
Finland.

OBJECTIVE: Testicular germ cell cancer is the most common malignancy among young 
males. The pre-invasive precursor, carcinoma in situ testis (CIS), presumably
originates from arrested and transformed fetal gonocytes. Given that GATA
transcription factors have essential roles in embryonic and testicular
development, we explored the expression of GATA-4, GATA-6, cofactor friend of
GATA (FOG)-2, and downstream target genes during human testis development and
addressed the question whether changes in this pathway may contribute to germ
cell neoplasms.
METHODS: Fetal testis, testicular CIS, and overt tumor samples were analyzed by
immunohistochemistry for GATA-4, GATA-6, FOG-2, steroidogenic factor 1
(NR5A1/SF1), anti-Müllerian hormone/Müllerian-inhibiting substance (AMH), and
inhibin-alpha (INHalpha).
RESULTS: GATA-4 was not expressed in normal germ cells, except for a subset of
gonocytes at the 15th gestational week. The CIS cells expressed GATA-4 and GATA-6
heterogeneously, whereas most of the CIS cells expressed GATA-4 cofactor FOG-2.
GATA target gene SF-1 was expressed heterogeneously in CIS cells, whereas
INHalpha and AMH were mostly negative. Seminomas and yolk sac tumors were
positive for GATA-4 and GATA-6, but mostly negative for FOG-2 and the GATA target
genes. In contrast, pluripotent embryonal carcinomas and choriocarcinomas were
GATA-4 and GATA-6 negative.
CONCLUSIONS: Differential expression of the GATA-4 target genes suggested
cell-specific functions of GATA-4 in the germ and somatic cells. The GATA-4
expression in early fetal gonocytes, CIS, and seminoma cells but the absence in
more mature germ cells is consistent with the early fetal origin of CIS cells and
suggests that GATA-4 is involved in early germ cell differentiation.

PMID: 19969558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Stem Cells. 2010 Feb;28(2):191-200. doi: 10.1002/stem.265.

Heparan sulfation-dependent fibroblast growth factor signaling maintains
embryonic stem cells primed for differentiation in a heterogeneous state.

Lanner F(1), Lee KL, Sohl M, Holmborn K, Yang H, Wilbertz J, Poellinger L,
Rossant J, Farnebo F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm,
Sweden. Lanner@Sickkids.ca

Embryonic stem (ES) cells continuously decide whether to maintain pluripotency or
differentiate. While exogenous leukemia inhibitory factor and BMP4 perpetuate a
pluripotent state, less is known about the factors initiating differentiation. We
show that heparan sulfate (HS) proteoglycans are critical coreceptors for signals
inducing ES cell differentiation. Genetic targeting of NDST1 and NDST2, two
enzymes required for N-sulfation of proteoglycans, blocked differentiation. This 
phenotype was rescued by HS presented in trans or by soluble heparin. NaClO(3)
(-), which reduces sulfation of proteoglycans, potently blocked differentiation
of wild-type cells. Mechanistically, N-sulfation was identified to be critical
for functional autocrine fibroblast growth factor 4 (FGF4) signaling. Microarray 
analysis identified the pluripotency maintaining transcription factors Nanog,
KLF2/4/8, Tbx3, and Tcf3 to be negatively regulated, whereas markers of
differentiation such as Gbx2, Dnmt3b, FGF5, and Brachyury were induced by
sulfation-dependent FGF receptor (FGFR) signaling. We show that several of these 
genes are heterogeneously expressed in ES cells, and that targeting of heparan
sulfation or FGFR-signaling facilitated a homogenous Nanog/KLF4/Tbx3 positive ES 
cell state. This finding suggests that the recently discovered heterogeneous
state of ES cells is regulated by HS-dependent FGFR signaling. Similarly,
culturing blastocysts with NaClO(3) (-) eliminated GATA6-positive primitive
endoderm progenitors generating a homogenous Nanog-positive inner cell mass.
Functionally, reduction of sulfation robustly improved de novo ES cell derivation
efficiency. We conclude that N-sulfated HS is required for FGF4 signaling to
maintain ES cells primed for differentiation in a heterogeneous state. Inhibiting
this pathway facilitates a more naïve ground state.

PMID: 19937756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Exp Lung Res. 2009 Jun;35(5):411-26.

Simvastatin restores down-regulated GATA-6 expression in pulmonary hypertensive
rats.

Liu B(1), Wang XQ, Yu L, Zhou TF, Wang XM, Liu HM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Cardiology, West China Second University Hospital,
University, Chengdu, Sichuan, China.

Vascular smooth muscle cell proliferation has been known to be predominant in
vascular remodeling of pulmonary hypertensive. The GATA family proteins, a group 
of zinc finger transcription factors, play an important role during cell
proliferation. The aim of present study was to investigate the expression of
GATA-6 gene in experimental pulmonary hypertensive rats and explore the effect of
regulation of GATA-6 expression by simvastatin on pulmonary vascular remodeling. 
The male Sprague-Dawley rats model was established with receiving pneumonectomy
and monocrotaline (MCT) administration. Right pulmonary artery remodeling in
these animals was compared with untreated rats or rats receiving simvastatin. The
level of GATA-6 mRNA and protein expression was detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting,
respectively. Pneumonectomized, MCT-treated rats had significantly increased mean
pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP), RV/(LV + S) ratio (ratio of the right
ventricular to left ventricular and septum weights), vascular occlusion scores
(VOSs), and percent media wall thickness on day 35, all the indices were
significantly decreased after simvastatin administration in these rats. The level
of GATA-6 mRNA and protein were markedly decreased in these pneumonectomy and
MCT-treated rats, and they were significantly up-regulated in these rats after
receiving simvastatin. These results indicate that the development and
progression of pulmonary hypertension is prevented by simvastatin by
up-regulating GATA-6 expression in the lung tissue.

PMCID: PMC2707177
PMID: 19842842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010 Feb;48(2):415-23. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.10.006. Epub
2009 Oct 22.

Mesoangioblasts from ventricular vessels can differentiate in vitro into cardiac 
myocytes with sinoatrial-like properties.

Barbuti A(1), Galvez BG, Crespi A, Scavone A, Baruscotti M, Brioschi C, Cossu G, 
DiFrancesco D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomolecular Sciences and Biotechnology, The PaceLab, University
of Milano, via Celoria 26, 20133 Milan, Italy. andrea.barbuti@unimi.it

Cardiac mesoangioblasts (MABs) are a class of vessel-associated clonogenic,
self-renewing progenitor cells, recently identified in the post-natal murine
heart and committed to cardiac differentiation. Cardiomyocytes generated during
cardiogenesis from progenitor cells acquire several distinct phenotypes,
corresponding to different functional properties in diverse structures of the
adult heart. Given the special functional relevance to rhythm generation and rate
control of sinoatrial cells, and in view of their prospective use in
therapeutical applications, we sought to determine if, and to what extent,
cardiac mesoangioblasts could also differentiate into myocytes with properties
typical of mature pacemaker myocytes. We report here that a subpopulation of
cardiac mesoangioblasts, induced to differentiate in vitro into cardiomyocytes,
do acquire a phenotype with specific mature pacemaker myocytes properties. These 
include expression of the HCN4 isoform of pacemaker ("funny", f-) channels and
connexin 45 (Cx45), as well as reduced expression of inwardly-rectifying
potassium channels. Furthermore, MAB-derived myocytes form agglomerates of pacing
cells displaying stable rhythmic activity, and as in native cardiac pacemaker
cells, f-channel modulation by autonomic transmitters contributes to control of
spontaneous rate in differentiated mesoangioblasts. These data represent the
first evidence for in vitro generation of pacemaker-like myocytes from
proliferating non-embryonic stem/progenitor cells.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19837079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Stem Cells. 2009 Dec;27(12):3001-11. doi: 10.1002/stem.237.

RNA polymerase II associated factor 1/PD2 maintains self-renewal by its
interaction with Oct3/4 in mouse embryonic stem cells.

Ponnusamy MP(1), Deb S, Dey P, Chakraborty S, Rachagani S, Senapati S, Batra SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Nebraska
Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-5870, USA.

Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) maintain self-renewal while ensuring a rapid response
to differentiation signals, but the exact mechanism of this process remains
unknown. PD2 is the human homolog of the RNA polymerase II-associated factor 1
(Paf1). The Paf1/PD2 is a member of the human PAF complex that consists of four
other subunits, hCdc73, hLeo1, hCtr9, and hSki8, and is involved in the
regulation of transcriptional elongation and further downstream events. Here, we 
show that Paf1/PD2 is overexpressed in mouse ESCs and is involved in the
maintenance of mouse ESCs. The Paf1/PD2 knockdown and knockout ESCs grown under
self-renewal conditions express substantially reduced levels of self-renewal
regulators, including Oct3/4, SOX2, Nanog, and Shh. We observed that the level of
Paf1/PD2 expression is much higher in self-renewing mouse embryonic carcinoma
cells than in the differentiating cells. Knockout of Paf1/PD2 altered ESC
phenotype by increasing apoptosis and decreasing the percentage of cells in
S-phase of the cell cycle. Interestingly, we found that the key genes that
regulate endodermal differentiation (Gata4, Gata6, and Fgf8) are induced in the
Paf1/PD2 heterozygous knockout ESCs. This suggests that Paf1/PD2 plays a specific
role in regulating early commitment of ESCs to endodermal differentiation.
Furthermore, for the first time, we showed that Paf1/PD2 protein interacts with
Oct3/4 and RNA polymerase II, and through this interaction Paf1/PD2 may regulate 
Oct3/4-mediated gene expression. Thus, the Paf1/PD2 protein is a newly discovered
element of the interconnected regulatory network that maintains the self-renewal 
of mouse ESCs.

PMCID: PMC2891238
PMID: 19821493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Oct 20;106(42):17793-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0903693106. Epub 2009 Oct 5.

miR-145 directs intestinal maturation in zebrafish.

Zeng L(1), Carter AD, Childs SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, and Smooth Muscle Research Group,
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 4N1.

The rapid specification and differentiation of the embryonic zebrafish gut is
essential to provide contractility for the digestion of food. The role of
microRNAs in modulating gut epithelial or smooth muscle differentiation is
currently not known. Here we show that the microRNA miR-145 is strongly expressed
in zebrafish gut smooth muscle and regulates its development. Modulation of
miR-145 levels results in gut smooth muscle and epithelium maturation defects.
Loss of miR-145 results in defects of smooth muscle function as measured by
decreased nitric oxide production but also leads to increased expression of the
embryonic smooth muscle markers sm22alpha-b, nm-mhc-b, and smoothelin. Defects in
gut epithelial maturation are also present as observed by immature morphology and
a complete loss of alkaline phosphatase expression. Loss or gain of miR-145
function phenocopies defects observed with altered gata6 expression and
accordingly, we show that miR-145 directly represses gata6, and that gata6 is a
major miR-145 target in vitro and in vivo. miR-145 therefore plays a critical
role in promoting the maturation of both layers of the gut during development
through regulation of gata6.

PMCID: PMC2764920
PMID: 19805048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 28;4(9):e7216. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007216.

Isolation of Oct4-expressing extraembryonic endoderm precursor cell lines.

Debeb BG(1), Galat V, Epple-Farmer J, Iannaccone S, Woodward WA, Bader M,
Iannaccone P, Binas B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical
Sciences, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The extraembryonic endoderm (ExEn) defines the yolk sac, a set of
membranes that provide essential support for mammalian embryos. Recent findings
suggest that the committed ExEn precursor is present already in the embryonic
Inner Cell Mass (ICM) as a group of cells that intermingles with the closely
related epiblast precursor. All ICM cells contain Oct4, a key transcription
factor that is first expressed at the morula stage. In vitro, the epiblast
precursor is most closely represented by the well-characterized embryonic stem
(ES) cell lines that maintain the expression of Oct4, but analogous ExEn
precursor cell lines are not known and it is unclear if they would express Oct4.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here we report the isolation and characterization
of permanently proliferating Oct4-expressing rat cell lines ("XEN-P cell lines"),
which closely resemble the ExEn precursor. We isolated the XEN-P cell lines from 
blastocysts and characterized them by plating and gene expression assays as well 
as by injection into embryos. Like ES cells, the XEN-P cells express Oct4 and
SSEA1 at high levels and their growth is stimulated by leukemia inhibitory
factor, but instead of the epiblast determinant Nanog, they express the ExEn
determinants Gata6 and Gata4. Further, they lack markers characteristic of the
more differentiated primitive/visceral and parietal ExEn stages, but exclusively 
differentiate into these stages in vitro and contribute to them in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our findings (i) suggest strongly that the ExEn
precursor is a self-renewable entity, (ii) indicate that active Oct4 gene
expression (transcription plus translation) is part of its molecular identity,
and (iii) provide an in vitro model of early ExEn differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2747266
PMID: 19784378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Eur Cell Mater. 2009 Sep 21;18:1-13; discussion 13-4.

Substrate stiffness affects early differentiation events in embryonic stem cells.

Evans ND(1), Minelli C, Gentleman E, LaPointe V, Patankar SN, Kallivretaki M,
Chen X, Roberts CJ, Stevens MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Materials, Imperial College London, London, UK.

Embryonic stem cells (ESC) are both a potential source of cells for tissue
replacement therapies and an accessible tool to model early embryonic
development. Chemical factors such as soluble growth factors and insoluble
components of the extracellular matrix are known to affect the differentiation of
murine ESCs. However, there is also evidence to suggest that undifferentiated
cells can both sense the mechanical properties of their environment and
differentiate accordingly. By growing ESCs on flexible polydimethylsiloxane
substrates with varying stiffness, we tested the hypothesis that substrate
stiffness can influence ESC differentiation. While cell attachment was unaffected
by the stiffness of the growth substrate, cell spreading and cell growth were all
increased as a function of substrate stiffness. Similarly, several genes
expressed in the primitive streak during gastrulation and implicated in early
mesendoderm differentiation, such as Brachyury, Mixl1 and Eomes, were upregulated
in cell cultures on stiffer compared to softer substrates. Finally, we
demonstrated that osteogenic differentiation of ESCs was enhanced on stiff
substrates compared to soft substrates, illustrating that the mechanical
environment can play a role in both early and terminal ESC differentiation. Our
results suggest a fundamental role for mechanosensing in mammalian development
and illustrate that the mechanical environment should be taken into consideration
when engineering implantable scaffolds or when producing therapeutically relevant
cell populations in vitro.

PMID: 19768669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Cancer Treat Res. 2009;149:147-63. doi: 10.1007/978-0-387-98094-2_7.

Aberrant epithelial differentiation in ovarian cancer.

Smith ER(1), Cai KQ, Capo-Chichi CD, Xu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, and Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
UM/Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Miami School of Medicine,
Miami, FL 33136, USA.

PMID: 19763435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Tumour Biol. 2009;30(4):185-99. doi: 10.1159/000236864. Epub 2009 Sep 10.

15-lipoxygenase-1 in colorectal cancer: a review.

Bhattacharya S(1), Mathew G, Jayne DG, Pelengaris S, Khan M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, George Eliot Hospital, Nuneaton, UK.
Sayantan.Bhattacharya@geh.nhs.uk

OBJECTIVE: Enzymes involved in the oxidative metabolism of n-6 polyunsaturated
fatty acids, like lipoxygenase (LOX) and cyclooxygenase (COX), are significant in
the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer. Of these enzymes, 15-LOX-1 is expressed in
colon. Aim of this article is to describe the role and regulation of 15-LOX-1 in 
colorectal cancer and highlight its importance in cancer therapeutics.
METHODS: For our electronic literature research in PubMed and MEDLINE, key words 
related to 15-LOX-1 and colorectal cancer were used to find articles for this
review.
RESULTS: From the evidences, we believe that 15-LOX-1 has anti-carcinogenic
effects in colorectal cancer, dependent or independent of its metabolites, and is
manifested through downstream pathways involving cGMP, PPAR, p53, p21 and NAG-1, 
increasing apoptosis and decreasing proliferation in cancer cells. Regulation of 
15-LOX-1 expression is achieved at transcription level by global histone
acetylation and may also be dependent on GATA-6, IL-4 and IL-13. Positive
relationship exists between 15-LOX-1 and survival in colorectal cancer.
CONCLUSION: Evidences strongly support that therapeutic modulation of 15-LOX-1
may be a key to the treatment of colorectal cancer. However, it is still
undecided whether the up-regulation of 15-LOX-1 alone can be sufficient to treat 
colorectal cancer and further studies are awaited.

PMID: 19752603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Aug 18;106(33):13933-8. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0904744106. Epub 2009 Aug 4.

GATA6 mutations cause human cardiac outflow tract defects by disrupting
semaphorin-plexin signaling.

Kodo K(1), Nishizawa T, Furutani M, Arai S, Yamamura E, Joo K, Takahashi T,
Matsuoka R, Yamagishi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Cardiology, Keio University
School of Medicine, 35 Shinanomachi, Shinjyuku-ku, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan.

Congenital heart diseases (CHD) occur in nearly 1% of all live births and are the
major cause of infant mortality and morbidity. Although an improved understanding
of the genetic causes of CHD would provide insight into the underlying
pathobiology, the genetic etiology of most CHD remains unknown. Here we show that
mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor GATA6 cause CHD
characteristic of a severe form of cardiac outflow tract (OFT) defect, namely
persistent truncus arteriosus (PTA). Two different GATA6 mutations were
identified by systematic genetic analysis using DNA from patients with PTA. Genes
encoding the neurovascular guiding molecule semaphorin 3C (SEMA3C) and its
receptor plexin A2 (PLXNA2) appear to be regulated directly by GATA6, and both
GATA6 mutant proteins failed to transactivate these genes. Transgenic analysis
further suggests that, in the developing heart, the expression of SEMA3C in the
OFT/subpulmonary myocardium and PLXNA2 in the cardiac neural crest contributing
to the OFT is dependent on GATA transcription factors. Together, our data
implicate mutations in GATA6 as genetic causes of CHD involving OFT development, 
as a result of the disruption of the direct regulation of semaphorin-plexin
signaling.

PMCID: PMC2728998
PMID: 19666519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Cell Transplant. 2009;18(12):1319-40. doi: 10.3727/096368909X12483162197321. Epub
2009 Aug 5.

Sequential hepatogenic transdifferentiation of adipose tissue-derived stem cells:
relevance of different extracellular signaling molecules, transcription factors
involved, and expression of new key marker genes.

Bonora-Centelles A(1), Jover R, Mirabet V, Lahoz A, Carbonell F, Castell JV,
Gómez-Lechón MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología Experimental, Centro de Investigación, Hospital La Fe,
Valencia, Spain.

Adipose tissue contains a mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) population known as
adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) capable of differentiating into different cell 
types. Our aim was to induce hepatic transdifferentiation of ASCs by sequential
exposure to several combinations of cytokines, growth factors, and hormones. The 
most efficient hepatogenic protocol includes fibroblastic growth factors (FGF) 2 
and 4 and epidermal growth factor (EGF) (step 1), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF),
FGF2, FGF4, and nicotinamide (Nic) (step 2), and oncostatin M (OSM),
dexamethasone (Dex), and insulin-tranferrin-selenium (step 3). This protocol
activated transcription factors [GATA6, Hex, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha
and beta (CEBPalpha and beta), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma, 
coactivator 1 alpha (PGC1alpha), and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha
(HNF4alpha)], which promoted a characteristic hepatic phenotype, as assessed by
new informative markers for the step-by-step hepatic transdifferentiation of hMSC
[early markers: albumin (ALB), alpha-2-macroglobuline (alpha2M), complement
protein C3 (C3), and selenoprotein P1 (SEPP1); late markers: cytochrome P450 3A4 
(CYP3A4), apolipoprotein E (APOE), acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 1
(ACSL1), and angiotensin II receptor, type 1 (AGTR1)]. The loss of adipose adult 
stem cell phenotype was detected by losing expression of Thy1 and inhibitor of
DNA binding 3 (Id3). The reexpression of phosphoenolpyruvate corboxykinase
(PEPCK), apolipoprotein C3 (APOCIII), aldolase B (ALDOB), and cytochrome P450 1A2
(CYP1A2) was achieved by transduction with a recombinant adenovirus for HNF4alpha
and finally hepatic functionality was also assessed by analyzing specific
biochemical markers. We conclude that ASCs could represent an alternative tool in
clinical therapy for liver dysfunction and regenerative medicine.

PMID: 19660180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. PLoS One. 2009 Jul 31;4(7):e6454. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006454.

Loss of GATA4 and GATA6 expression specifies ovarian cancer histological subtypes
and precedes neoplastic transformation of ovarian surface epithelia.

Cai KQ(1), Caslini C, Capo-chichi CD, Slater C, Smith ER, Wu H, Klein-Szanto AJ, 
Godwin AK, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Ovarian Cancer Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: The family of zinc finger-containing GATA transcription factors plays
critical roles in cell lineage specification during early embryonic development
and organ formation. GATA4 and GATA6 were found to be frequently lost in ovarian 
cancer, and the loss is proposed to account for dedifferentiation of the cancer
cells.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We further investigated the expression of GATA4
and GATA6 in ovarian surface epithelial lesions and histological subtypes of
ovarian carcinomas by immunostaining. GATA4 and GATA6 were found to be absent in 
high percentages (80 to 90%) of serous, clear cell, and endometrioid ovarian
cancer examined. In contrast, both were found positive in 11 out of 12 cases of
mucinous carcinomas, suggesting the expression of the GATA factors can
distinguish mucinous cancer from other histological subtypes. GATA4 was
frequently lost in preneoplastic lesions such as morphologically normal inclusion
cysts and epithelial hyperplasia adjacent to malignant cells. The loss of GATA6
correlates closely with neoplastic morphological transformation of ovarian
surface epithelia. In culture, GATA4 expression was progressively reduced upon
passaging primary ovarian surface epithelial cells, which correlated with changes
in histone modification of the GATA4 locus. A reduced GATA6 gene dosage as in
GATA6 (+/-) mice led to an increased pre-neoplastic changes and inclusion cysts
in the ovaries, suggesting the loss of GATA6 contributes to ovarian cancer
development.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study suggests that the expression status of GATA4
and GATA6 may dictate distinct pathologic pathways leading to serous or mucinous 
ovarian carcinomas. The readily loss of GATA4 expression through changes in
chromatin conformation suggests a potential non-phenotypic initiating event,
leading to subsequent loss of GATA6, morphological transformation, and ultimate
tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2715102
PMID: 19649254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Circ Res. 2009 Aug 28;105(5):422-30. doi: 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.109.203323. Epub
2009 Jul 23.

Angiotensin II-inducible smooth muscle cell apoptosis involves the angiotensin II
type 2 receptor, GATA-6 activation, and FasL-Fas engagement.

Tan NY(1), Li JM, Stocker R, Khachigian LM.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Vascular Research, University of New South Wales, Sydney NSW 2052, 
Australia.

RATIONALE: Fas ligand (FasL)-mediated smooth muscle cell (SMC) apoptosis within
the vulnerable plaque may lead to plaque instability and rupture, events that
underlie myocardial infarction and stroke.
OBJECTIVE: The molecular mechanisms underlying FasL transcription and
FasL-dependent SMC apoptosis were investigated in this study in vitro and in
vivo.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We demonstrate that GATA-6, the predominant GATA family
member expressed in SMCs, stimulates SMC apoptosis in an extracellular
FasL-dependent manner. Both GATA-6 and FasL were inducibly and transiently
expressed following balloon injury to rat carotid arteries. We identified two
potential GATA binding in the FasL promoter and demonstrated using DNA binding
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays that GATA-6 regulates FasL through one
((-298)TTATCA(-303)) but not both these elements. Angiotensin II (Ang II)
stimulated expression of both GATA-6 and FasL. Ang II increased SMC apoptosis in 
an Ang II type 2 receptor-, caspase 8-, and FasL-dependent fashion. GATA-6
activation was MEK-ERK1/2- and JNK-dependent, and GATA-6 small interfering RNA
blocked Ang II-inducible FasL expression and SMC apoptosis. Administration of Ang
II to rats increased FasL expression and apoptosis in carotid artery SMCs in an
Ang II type 2 receptor- and GATA-6-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides new insights into the transcriptional events
underpinning FasL-dependent SMC apoptosis after exposure to Ang II.

PMID: 19628789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Mol Reprod Dev. 2009 Dec;76(12):1143-52. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21082.

Involvement of GATA transcription factors in the regulation of endogenous bovine 
interferon-tau gene transcription.

Bai H(1), Sakurai T, Kim MS, Muroi Y, Ideta A, Aoyagi Y, Nakajima H, Takahashi M,
Nagaoka K, Imakawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Animal Breeding, Faculty of Agriculture, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8657, Japan.

Expression of interferon-tau (IFNT), necessary for pregnancy establishment in
ruminant ungulates, is regulated in a temporal and spatial manner. However,
molecular mechanisms by which IFNT gene transcription is regulated in this manner
have not been firmly established. In this study, DNA microarray/RT-PCR analysis
between bovine trophoblast CT-1 and Mardin-Darby bovine kidney (MDBK) cells was
initially performed, finding that transcription factors GATA2, GATA3, and GATA6
mRNAs were specific to CT-1 cells. These mRNAs were also found in Days 17, 20,
and 22 (Day 0 = day of estrus) bovine conceptuses. In examining other bovine cell
lines, ovary cumulus granulosa (oCG) and ear fibroblast (EF) cells, GATA2 and
GATA3, but not GATA6, were found specific to the bovine trophoblast cells. In
transient transfection analyses using the upstream region (-631 to +59 bp) of
bovine IFNT gene (bIFNT, IFN-tau-c1), over-expression of GATA2/GATA3 did not
affect the transcription of bIFNT-reporter construct in human choriocarcinoma
JEG3 cells. Transfection of GATA2, GATA3, ETS2, and/or CDX2, however, was
effective in the up-regulation of the bIFNT construct transfected into bovine oCG
and EF cells. One Point mutation studies revealed that among six potential GATA
binding sites located on the upstream region of the bIFNT gene, the one next to
ETS2 site exhibited reduced luciferase activity. In CT-1 cells, endogenous bIFNT 
gene transcription was up-regulated by over-expression of GATA2 or GATA3, but
down-regulated by siRNA specific to GATA2 mRNA. These data suggest that GATA2/3
is involved in trophoblast-specific regulation of bIFNT gene transcription.

PMID: 19598245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2010 May;42(5):626-32. doi: 10.1165/rcmb.2009-0021OC. 
Epub 2009 Jul 13.

Transcription factor GATA-6 is expressed in quiescent myofibroblasts in
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Leppäranta O(1), Pulkkinen V, Koli K, Vähätalo R, Salmenkivi K, Kinnula VL,
Heikinheimo M, Myllärniemi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Pulmonary Division, FI-00014 University of Helsinki
and Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.
outi.lepparanta@helsinki.fi

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) (histopathology of usual interstitial
pneumonia [UIP]) is a progressive disease with poor prognosis. Characteristic
features of IPF/UIP include fibroblastic foci, which are patchy lesions of focal,
disarranged myofibroblasts. GATA-6 is a transcription factor linked with cell
differentiation. Its role in the development of IPF has not previously been
investigated. We hypothesized that GATA-6 participates in the differentiation of 
fibroblasts into myofibroblasts in IPF/UIP lungs. The expression patterns of
GATA-6, the mesenchymal marker alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA), and markers
for proliferation (Ki67) and apoptosis (caspase-3) were analyzed in human IPF/UIP
tissue samples. The effects of GATA-6 overexpression and silencing were studied
in cell cultures. The results show that the alpha-SMA-positive fibroblastic foci 
in IPF/UIP lungs are positive for GATA-6, but negative for Ki67 and caspase-3.
Cultured human IPF/UIP fibroblasts expressed GATA-6 mRNA, whereas cells from the 
normal adult lung did not. In cultured A549 lung epithelial cells, the induction 
of GATA-6 by transforming growth factor-beta1 resulted in simultaneous expression
of alpha-SMA and decrease of E-cadherin. The inhibition of GATA-6 expression in
fibroblasts showed that GATA-6 mediates the alpha-SMA-inducing signal of
transforming growth factor-beta1. In conclusion, the hallmark of IPF/UIP
histopathology, the fibroblast focus, consists of differentiated, quiescent cells
that prominently express GATA-6.

PMID: 19597127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Nature. 2009 Aug 13;460(7257):863-8. doi: 10.1038/nature08212. Epub 2009 Jul 8.

Chd1 regulates open chromatin and pluripotency of embryonic stem cells.

Gaspar-Maia A(1), Alajem A, Polesso F, Sridharan R, Mason MJ, Heidersbach A,
Ramalho-Santos J, McManus MT, Plath K, Meshorer E, Ramalho-Santos M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ob/Gyn and Pathology, Center for Reproductive Sciences and Eli
and Edythe Broad Center of Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California, San Francisco, 513 Parnassus Avenue, San Francisco,
California 94143-0525, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2009 Aug 13;460(7257):802-3.

An open chromatin largely devoid of heterochromatin is a hallmark of stem cells. 
It remains unknown whether an open chromatin is necessary for the differentiation
potential of stem cells, and which molecules are needed to maintain open
chromatin. Here we show that the chromatin remodelling factor Chd1 is required to
maintain the open chromatin of pluripotent mouse embryonic stem cells. Chd1 is a 
euchromatin protein that associates with the promoters of active genes, and
downregulation of Chd1 leads to accumulation of heterochromatin. Chd1-deficient
embryonic stem cells are no longer pluripotent, because they are incapable of
giving rise to primitive endoderm and have a high propensity for neural
differentiation. Furthermore, Chd1 is required for efficient reprogramming of
fibroblasts to the pluripotent stem cell state. Our results indicate that Chd1 is
essential for open chromatin and pluripotency of embryonic stem cells, and for
somatic cell reprogramming to the pluripotent state.

PMCID: PMC3891576
PMID: 19587682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Hepatology. 2009 Aug;50(2):472-80. doi: 10.1002/hep.22989.

Identification of microRNA-181 by genome-wide screening as a critical player in
EpCAM-positive hepatic cancer stem cells.

Ji J(1), Yamashita T, Budhu A, Forgues M, Jia HL, Li C, Deng C, Wauthier E, Reid 
LM, Ye QH, Qin LX, Yang W, Wang HY, Tang ZY, Croce CM, Wang XW.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Carcinogenesis Section, Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, Center for
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2009 Dec;50(6):2047-8; author reply 448.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small noncoding RNAs that regulate gene
expression with functional links to tumorigenesis. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)
is the most common type of liver cancer, and it is heterogeneous in clinical
outcomes and biological activities. Recently, we have identified a subset of
highly invasive epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM)(+) HCC cells from
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP)(+) tumors with cancer stem/progenitor cell features, that
is, the abilities to self-renew, differentiate, and initiate aggressive tumors in
vivo. Here, using a global microarray-based miRNA profiling approach followed by 
validation with quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction, we 
have demonstrated that conserved miR-181 family members were up-regulated in
EpCAM(+)AFP(+) HCCs and in EpCAM(+) HCC cells isolated from AFP(+) tumors.
Moreover, miR-181 family members were highly expressed in embryonic livers and in
isolated hepatic stem cells. Importantly, inhibition of miR-181 led to a
reduction in EpCAM(+) HCC cell quantity and tumor initiating ability, whereas
exogenous miR-181 expression in HCC cells resulted in an enrichment of EpCAM(+)
HCC cells. We have found that miR-181 could directly target hepatic
transcriptional regulators of differentiation (for example, caudal type homeobox 
transcription factor 2 [CDX2] and GATA binding protein 6 [GATA6]) and an
inhibitor of Wnt/beta-catenin signaling (nemo-like kinase [NLK]). Taken together,
our results define a novel regulatory link between miR-181s and human EpCAM(+)
liver cancer stem/progenitor cells and imply that molecular targeting of miR-181 
may eradicate HCC.

PMCID: PMC2721019
PMID: 19585654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Cancer Res. 2009 Jul 15;69(14):5784-92. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-4428. Epub 
2009 Jul 7.

Bone morphogenetic proteins 2 and 5 are down-regulated in adrenocortical
carcinoma and modulate adrenal cell proliferation and steroidogenesis.

Johnsen IK(1), Kappler R, Auernhammer CJ, Beuschlein F.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, University Hospital Innenstadt, Ludwig Maximilians
University, Munich, Germany.

Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP) have been shown to affect tumorigenesis in a
variety of tumors. Quantitative PCR analysis revealed down-regulation of BMP2 and
BMP5 in tissue samples from adrenocortical carcinoma and adrenocortical tumor
cell lines compared with normal adrenal glands. Integrity of BMP-dependent
pathways in these cell lines could be shown by activation of the Smad1/5/8
pathway with subsequent increase of ID protein expression upon incubation with
BMP2 or BMP5. On a functional level, BMP treatment resulted in inhibition of cell
proliferation and viability in a dose- and time-dependent manner. This growth
inhibitory effect was associated with BMP-dependent reduction of AKT
phosphorylation under baseline conditions and under insulin-like growth factor
costimulation. Furthermore, steroidogenic function, including melanocortin-2
receptor and steroidogenic enzyme expressions, was profoundly reduced. In vitro
demethylation treatment and overexpression of GATA6 resulted in reactivation of
BMP-dependent pathways with concomitant modulation of steroidogenesis. Taken
together, we show that loss of expression of members of the BMP family of ligands
is a common finding in adrenocortical tumors and we provide evidence that
BMP-dependent pathways are likely to be involved in the modulation of the
malignant and functional phenotype of adrenocortical cancer cells.

PMID: 19584291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(17):4766-77. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00087-09. Epub 2009 Jul 
6.

Loss of GATA6 leads to nuclear deformation and aneuploidy in ovarian cancer.

Capo-chichi CD(1), Cai KQ, Testa JR, Godwin AK, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Sylvester Comprehensive Cancer Center, Department of Medicine, and Department 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Miami School of Medicine, Miami,
Florida 33136, USA.

A prominent hallmark of most human cancer is aneuploidy, which is a result of the
chromosomal instability of cancer cells and is thought to contribute to the
initiation and progression of most carcinomas. The developmentally regulated
GATA6 transcription factor is commonly lost in ovarian cancer, and the loss of
its expression is closely associated with neoplastic transformation of the
ovarian surface epithelium. In the present study, we found that reduction of
GATA6 expression with small interfering RNA (siRNA) in human ovarian surface
epithelial cells resulted in deformation of the nuclear envelope, failure of
cytokinesis, and formation of polyploid and aneuploid cells. We further
discovered that loss of the nuclear envelope protein emerin may mediate the
consequences of GATA6 suppression. The nuclear phenotypes were reproduced by
direct suppression of emerin with siRNA. Thus, we conclude that diminished
expression of GATA6 leads to a compromised nuclear envelope that is causal for
polyploidy and aneuploidy in ovarian tumorigenesis. The loss of emerin may be the
basis of nuclear morphological deformation and subsequently the cause of
aneuploidy in ovarian cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2725711
PMID: 19581290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Epigenetics. 2009 May 16;4(4):255-64. Epub 2009 May 29.

A microarray-based DNA methylation study of glioblastoma multiforme.

Martinez R(1), Martin-Subero JI, Rohde V, Kirsch M, Alaminos M, Fernandez AF,
Ropero S, Schackert G, Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Goettingen, Goettingen WT-084071,
Germany. ramon.martinez@med.uni-goettingen.de

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is the most frequent and devastating primary brain 
tumor in adults. The presence of epigenetic lesions, like hypermethylation of
known tumor suppressor genes such as MGMT, has been widely described in GBM, but 
to our knowledge, a genome-wide profile of DNA methylation changes in these
lethal tumors is not yet available. In the present analysis, we have quantified
the DNA methylation level of 1,505 CpG dinucleotides (807 genes) in 87
consecutive GBMs using universal BeadArrays. Supervised cluster analyses
identified 25 and seven genes that were respectively hypermethylated and
hypomethylated in more than 20% of the cases studied. The most frequently
hypermethylated genes were HOXA11, CD81, PRKCDBP, TES, MEST, TNFRSF10A and FZD9, 
being involved in more than half of the cases. Studying the biological features
of hypermethylated genes, we found that the group of genes hypermethylated in GBM
was highly enriched (41%, p < 0.001) for targets of the PRC2 (Polycomb repressive
complex 2) in embryonic stem cells. This suggests that GBM might be derived from 
precursor cells with stem cell-like features. DNA methylation profiles were
associated with overall survival in GBM, and we confirmed the favorable
prognostic impact of MGMT methylation in patients treated with alkylating agents.
Furthermore, we identified that promoter hypermethylation of the transcription
factor gene GATA6 (occurring in 30% of GBM) was significantly associated with
unfavorable patient survival.

PMID: 19550145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Oncogene. 2009 Aug 27;28(34):3033-46. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.159. Epub 2009 Jun
22.

GATA4 is a regulator of astrocyte cell proliferation and apoptosis in the human
and murine central nervous system.

Agnihotri S(1), Wolf A, Picard D, Hawkins C, Guha A.

Author information: 
(1)The Arthur and Sonia Labatt's Brain Tumor Research Centre, The Hospital for
Sick Children's Research Institute, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

The GATA transcription factors consist of six family members, which bind to the
consensus DNA-binding element, W-GATA-R, and are poorly characterized in the
central nervous system (CNS). Using retroviral gene trapping on transgenic mouse 
glioma models, we identified GATA6 to be a novel tumor suppressor gene in
glioblastoma multiforme. We now show GATA4, a family member of GATA6, to be
expressed in the neurons and glia of normal murine and human embryonic and adult 
CNS. Silencing GATA4 in normal astrocytes did not alter their growth properties. 
In contrast, knockdown of Gata4 in p53 null non-transformed murine astrocytes
induced transformation, with increased proliferation and resistance to
chemotherapy or radiation-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, GATA4 expression was
lost in a panel of human malignant astrocytoma cell lines. GATA4 overexpression
in normal human and murine astrocytes resulted in a cell cycle block in G1 phase,
with increased apoptosis. Mechanistically, GATA4 was a transcriptional inducer of
the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p15INK4B, leading to the attenuation of
cyclin D1. GATA4 expression was also induced by transforming growth factor-beta, 
leading to the inhibition of astrocyte proliferation. Collectively, we show that 
GATA4 is expressed in the embryonic and adult CNS and acts as a negative
regulator of astrocyte proliferation and growth.

PMID: 19543315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Exp Hematol. 2009 Sep;37(9):1038-53. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2009.05.011. Epub 2009
Jun 6.

VEGF and IHH rescue definitive hematopoiesis in Gata-4 and Gata-6-deficient
murine embryoid bodies.

Pierre M(1), Yoshimoto M, Huang L, Richardson M, Yoder MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Herman B Wells Center for Pediatric Research,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Murine embryonic stem cells can be differentiated into embryoid bodies
(EBs), which serve as an in vitro model recapitulating many aspects of embryonic 
yolk sac hematopoiesis. Differentiation of embryonic stem cells deficient in
either Gata-4 or Gata-6 results in EBs with disrupted visceral endoderm (VE).
While lack of VE has detrimental effects on hematopoiesis in vivo, it is unclear 
whether lack of VE affects hematopoiesis in EBs. Therefore, we compared Gata-4
null (G4N) and Gata-6 null (G6N) EBs with wild-type EBs to assess their ability
to commit to hematopoietic cells.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: EB VE formation was examined using cell-sorting techniques
and analysis visceral endoderm gene expression. Hematopoietic progenitor
potential of EBs cultured under various conditions was assessed using
colony-forming assays.
RESULTS: Definitive erythroid, granulocyte-macrophage, and mixed colonies were
significantly reduced in G4N and G6N EBs compared to wild-type EBs. Vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) expression and secretion were also reduced in
both G4N and G6N EBs, consistent with VE serving as a site of VEGF production.
Addition of exogenous VEGF(165), to EB cultures completely rescued definitive
colony-forming cells in G4N and G6N EBs. This rescue response could be blocked by
addition of soluble Flk-1 Fc to EB cultures. Similarly, addition of exogenous
Indian hedgehog to EB cultures also recovers the diminishment in definitive
hematopoiesis in a reversible manner.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the absence of VE in G4N and G6N EBs does 
not prevent emergence of definitive progenitors from EBs. However, the decreased 
level of VEGF and Indian hedgehog production in VE devoid G4N and G6N EBs
attenuates definitive hematopoietic progenitor cell expansion.

PMCID: PMC2727578
PMID: 19501129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Endocrinology. 2009 Sep;150(9):4145-53. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0006. Epub 2009 Jun 
4.

The mediator complex subunit 1 enhances transcription of genes needed for adrenal
androgen production.

Nakamura Y(1), Xing Y, Sasano H, Rainey WE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Veterinary Medicine, 30173 Hannover,
Germany.

There are three enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of the adrenal androgen
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) sulfate. Cholesterol side-chain cleavage (CYP11A1) 
and 17alpha-hydroxylase/17,20-lyase (CYP17) metabolize cholesterol into DHEA,
whereas steroid sulfotransferase family 2A1 (SULT2A1) is responsible for
conversion of DHEA to DHEA sulfate. We previously examined the mechanisms
regulating CYP11A1, CYP17, and SULT2A1 transcription and found that each is
regulated, in part, by the transcription factor GATA-6. Previous studies
suggested that mediator complex subunit 1 (MED1, also called PPARBP or TRAP220)
is a cofactor involved in not only the regulation of nuclear receptors but also
the activation of GATA-6 transcription. Herein we demonstrated a role for MED1 in
the regulation of CYP11A1, CYP17, and SULT2A1 transcription. Transient
transfection assays with SULT2A1 deletion and mutation promoter constructs
allowed the determination of specific the GATA-6 binding cis-regulatory elements 
necessary for transactivation of SULT2A1 transcription. Binding of MED1 and
GATA-6 was confirmed by coimmunoprecipitation/Western analysis and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay. We demonstrated expression of MED1 mRNA and protein in
the human adrenal and determined that knockdown of MED1 expression via specific
small interfering RNA attenuated CYP11A1, CYP17, and SULT2A1 expression levels in
H295R cells. In addition, we demonstrated that MED1 enhanced GATA-6 stimulated
transcription of promoter constructs for each of these genes. Moreover, the
activity of MED1 for SULT2A1 promoter was mediated by GATA-6 via the -190
GATA-binding site. These data support the hypothesis that MED1 and GATA-6 are key
regulators of SULT2A1 expression, and they play important roles in adrenal
androgen production.

PMCID: PMC2736083
PMID: 19497978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 Nov;18(9):1309-18. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0115.

Developmental potential of rat extraembryonic stem cells.

Galat V(1), Binas B, Iannaccone S, Postovit LM, Debeb BG, Iannaccone P.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Program, Northwestern University Feinberg School of
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA. v-galat@northwestern.edu

We have previously found that certain stem cells that are derived from rat
blastocysts and named extraembryonic endoderm precursor (XEN-P) cells show a
unique molecular signature sharing some of the characteristics of embryonic stem 
cells (ES), trophoblast stem cells (TS), and extraembryonic endoderm stem cells
(XEN). These XEN-P cells are positive for AP, SSEA1, Oct4, and Rex1 markers
similar to ES cells and also express signature markers of TS-eomesodermin (Eomes)
and XEN-Gata6. Here we show that these cells integrate into the visceral and
parietal extraembryonic endoderm lineages as well as into the inner cell mass
(ICM), the primitive endoderm, and the polar and mural trophectoderm (TE) of
cultured embryos. In addition, we find that the XEN-P cells colonize yolk sac and
contribute to trophoblast lineages of postimplantation embryos following transfer
to surrogate mothers. We also find that the XEN-P cell culture propagates by
shedding cell clusters into the media in addition to typical expansion of
colonies. Interestingly, the cell cultures exist as mixed populations of two
interconvertible phenotypes of flat and round cells with preferential expression 
of stem cell markers Oct4 and SSEA1 in round cells. We believe these cells
represent a metastable stage during ICM cellular segregation. These results are
important for developing hypotheses of cell fate plasticity in the ICM and
provide a model for the study of development and differentiation along the
extraembryonic lineages.

PMID: 19480599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Mol Reprod Dev. 2009 Sep;76(9):873-80. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21054.

The expression of the nuclear receptors NR5A1 and NR5A2 and transcription factor 
GATA6 correlates with steroidogenic gene expression in the bovine corpus luteum.

Taniguchi H(1), Komiyama J, Viger RS, Okuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Centre de Recherche en Biologie de la
Reproduction (CRBR), Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.

The corpus luteum (CL) is the major site of progesterone (P4) production during
the luteal phase of the estrous cycle in cattle. To better understand the
molecular mechanisms underlying P4 production, we compared the mRNA and protein
expression profiles of key components of the steroidogenic pathway (StAR, CYP11A,
and 3beta-HSD) during the bovine CL luteal phase with that of several
transcription factors (NR5A1, NR5A2, GATA4, GATA6) known for their roles in the
control of steroidogenic gene expression. In the bovine CL, StAR, CYP11A, and
3beta-HSD mRNA and protein levels remained constant at the mid and late luteal
phases but markedly declined at the regressed luteal stage. NR5A1 and NR5A2
exhibited a similar pattern with a significant decrease in expression at the
regressed luteal stage. Both GATA4 and GATA6 mRNA and proteins could be detected 
in bovine CL; GATA6 levels, however, were generally higher. Although GATA4
expression did not change during the luteal phase, GATA6 showed a marked decrease
at the regressed luteal stage, like NR5A1, NR5A2, and the other steroidogenic
markers. Thus, we suggest that NR5A1, NR5A2, and GATA6, but not GATA4, contribute
to the transcriptional regulation of steroidogenic gene expression, and hence P4 
production, in the bovine CL. Furthermore, we have demonstrated the association
of NR5A1 and NR5A2 with the bovine StAR promoter in the mid-luteal CL using
chromatin immunoprecipitation, suggesting that these factors have definitive
roles in the regulation of StAR gene transcription in vivo.

PMID: 19455657  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Dev Dyn. 2009 Jun;238(6):1574-81. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21964.

Isolation of a ventricle-specific promoter for the zebrafish ventricular myosin
heavy chain (vmhc) gene and its regulation by GATA factors during embryonic heart
development.

Park JS(1), Kim HS, Kim JD, Seo J, Chung KS, Lee HS, Huh TL, Jo I, Kim YO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Intractable Diseases, Center for Biomedical Sciences, Korea
National Institute of Health, Seoul, Korea.

We investigated chamber-specific gene expression by isolating a 2.2-kb polymerase
chain reaction product containing the 5'-flanking region of the zebrafish
ventricular myosin heavy-chain gene (vmhc). Promoter analysis revealed that the
fragment, consisting of nucleotides from -301 to +26, is sufficient for vmhc
promoter activity. Among several putative cis-acting elements in the region, a
GATA-binding site was identified to be crucial for the activity of the promoter, 
as evidenced by the complete abolishment of promoter activity by a single
nucleotide substitution of GATA-binding site (-287, C-->T). Knockdown of
GATA-binding proteins 4 and 6 (GATA4 and -6) by their antisense morpholino
oligonucleotides resulted in reduced green fluorescent protein (GFP) reporter
gene and endogenous vmhc expression. These findings suggest that GATA4 and -6
play a key role in the regulation of vmhc expression in the ventricle. In
addition, the vmhc promoter and the transgenic zebrafish (vmhc:gfp) are useful
tools to study the formation and function of the ventricle. Developmental
Dynamics 238:1574-1581, 2009. (c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19441085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Dev Biol. 2009 Jul 15;331(2):210-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.04.036. Epub 2009 
May 5.

Active cell movements coupled to positional induction are involved in lineage
segregation in the mouse blastocyst.

Meilhac SM(1), Adams RJ, Morris SA, Danckaert A, Le Garrec JF, Zernicka-Goetz M.

Author information: 
(1)Gurdon Institute, University of Cambridge, UK.

In the mouse blastocyst, some cells of the inner cell mass (ICM) develop into
primitive endoderm (PE) at the surface, while deeper cells form the epiblast. It 
remained unclear whether the position of cells determines their fate, such that
gene expression is adjusted to cell position, or if cells are pre-specified at
random positions and then sort. We have tracked and characterised dynamics of all
ICM cells from the early to late blastocyst stage. Time-lapse microscopy in
H2B-EGFP embryos shows that a large proportion of ICM cells change position
between the surface and deeper compartments. Most of this cell movement depends
on actin and is associated with cell protrusions. We also find that while most
cells are precursors for only one lineage, some give rise to both, indicating
that lineage segregation is not complete in the early ICM. Finally, changing the 
expression levels of the PE marker Gata6 reveals that it is required in surface
cells but not sufficient for the re-positioning of deeper cells. We provide
evidence that Wnt9A, known to be expressed in the surface ICM, facilitates
re-positioning of Gata6-expressing cells. Combining these experimental results
with computer modelling suggests that PE formation involves both cell sorting
movements and position-dependent induction.

PMCID: PMC3353123
PMID: 19422818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Clin Immunol. 2009 Jul;29(4):444-53. doi: 10.1007/s10875-009-9292-x. Epub 2009 
Apr 8.

Enhanced expression of transcription factor GATA-4 in inflammatory bowel disease 
and its possible regulation by TGF-beta1.

Haveri H(1), Ashorn M, Iltanen S, Wilson DB, Andersson LC, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.

BACKGROUND: Transforming growth factor beta 1 (TGF-beta1) promotes epithelial
healing in inflammatory bowel disease. We hypothesized that GATA-4, a
transcription factor cooperating with TGF-beta signaling pathway, is upregulated 
by TGF-beta1 in the inflamed intestinal epithelium.
METHODS: Normal and inflamed intestinal samples were subjected to
immunohistochemistry for GATA-4/6 and the TGF-beta signaling pathway components
Smad2/3/4. Proliferation and apoptosis were analyzed using Ki-67 and in situ DNA 
3'-end labeling assays and Bax and Bcl-2 immunohistochemistry. Furthermore,
GATA-4 was assessed in intestinal Caco-2 cells stimulated with TGF-beta1, or
interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor alpha.
RESULTS: GATA-4 was detected in only 20% of normal intestinal samples, but was
upregulated in corresponding inflamed regions. GATA-6 expression remained
unchanged during inflammation. TGF-beta1 and Smad3/4, but not Smad2, were
expressed concomitantly with GATA-4 in inflamed bowel mucosa. In intestinal
Caco-2 cells, TGF-beta1 upregulated GATA-4 and Smad2/3/4, whereas treatment with 
control cytokines had no effect. Inflammation was associated with increased
epithelial cell apoptosis and the enhancement of Bcl-2, but not Bax.
CONCLUSIONS: We surmise GATA-4 expression is upregulated in inflamed intestine
correlating with the activation of TGF-beta signaling pathway. We speculate that 
TGF-beta1 drives GATA-4 expression during intestinal inflammation, these two
components cooperating to promote epithelial healing.

PMID: 19353247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Stem Cells Dev. 2009 Oct;18(8):1167-78. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0336.

Characterization of canine embryonic stem cell lines derived from different niche
microenvironments.

Wilcox JT(1), Semple E, Gartley C, Brisson BA, Perrault SD, Villagómez DA, Tayade
C, Becker S, Lanza R, Betts DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Ontario Veterinary College, University of
Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada.

Embryo-derived stem cells hold enormous potential for producing cell-based
transplantation therapies, allowing high-throughput drug screening and
delineating early embryonic development. However, potential clinical applications
must first be tested for safety and efficacy in preclinical animal models. Due to
physiological and genetic parity to humans, the domestic dog is widely used as a 
clinically relevant animal model for cardiovascular, neurodegenerative,
orthopedic, and oncologic diseases. Therefore, we established numerous putative
canine embryonic stem cell (cESC) lines by immunodissection of the inner cell
mass (ICM), which we termed OVC.ID.1-23, and by explant outgrowths from whole
canine blastocysts, named OVC.EX.1-16. All characterized lines were
immunopositive for OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, SSEA-3, and SSEA-4; displayed high
telomerase and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activities; and were maintained in this
state up to 37 passages ( approximately 160 days). Colonies from OVC.EX lines
showed classic domed hESC-like morphology surrounded by a ring of fibroblast-like
cells, whereas all OVC.ID lines exhibited a mixed cell colony of tightly packed
cESCs surrounded by a GATA6+/CDX2- hypoblast-derived support layer. Spontaneous
serum-only differentiation without feeder layers demonstrated a strong lineage
selection associated with the colony niche type, and not the isolation method.
Upon differentiation, cESC lines formed embryoid bodies (EB) comprised of cells
representative of all germinal layers, and differentiated into cell types of each
layer. Canine ESC lines such as these have the potential to identify differences 
between embryonic stem cell line derivations, and to develop or to test
cell-based transplantation therapies in the dog before attempting human clinical 
trials.

PMID: 19327015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Development. 2009 May;136(9):1465-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.032748. Epub 2009 Mar 18.

Common genetic control of haemangioblast and cardiac development in zebrafish.

Peterkin T(1), Gibson A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, Headington, 
Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

Over the past few years it has become clear that over half of the mammalian heart
derives from outside the heart field as originally defined. Such a second heart
field, however, has not been described in zebrafish, which could explain its
smaller, two-chambered heart. Instead, zebrafish have a population of
haemangioblasts, which is absent in mammalian embryos, raising the possibility
that these cells represent the evolutionary ancestor of the second heart field.
Here, we show for the first time that the genetic programmes of these anterior
haemangioblasts and the adjacent heart field are co-regulated, by transcription
factors previously associated with heart but not blood or endothelial
development. We demonstrate that gata4, gata5 and gata6 are essential for
anterior haemangioblast specification, and for subsequent myelopoiesis, acting as
early as cloche and upstream of scl. The requirement for gata4, gata5 and gata6
in myeloid, endothelial and cardiac specification is in the mesoderm, but these
factors also control, from within the endoderm and the yolk syncytial layer, the 
migration of the cardiac precursors as they differentiate. This genetic link
between the blood/endothelial and cardiac programmes supports the notion that
this haemangioblast population in zebrafish is an evolutionary antecedent of the 
second heart field, and has implications for the differentiation of
haemangioblasts and cardiomyocytes from pluripotent cells, and for the origins of
stem cells in the adult heart.

PMCID: PMC2730399
PMID: 19297410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Genes Cells. 2009 Mar;14(3):407-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2443.2009.01281.x. Epub
2009 Feb 17.

Identification of mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-transcription factors by microarray
and knockdown analyses, and signature molecule-marked MSC in bone marrow by
immunohistochemistry.

Kubo H(1), Shimizu M, Taya Y, Kawamoto T, Michida M, Kaneko E, Igarashi A,
Nishimura M, Segoshi K, Shimazu Y, Tsuji K, Aoba T, Kato Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dental and Medical Biochemistry, Graduate School of Biomedical
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Although ex vivo expanded mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) have been used in numerous
studies, the molecular signature and in vivo distribution status of MSC remain
unknown. To address this matter, we identified numerous human MSC-characteristic 
genes--including nine transcription factor genes--using DNA microarray and
real-time RT-PCR analyses: Most of the MSC-characteristic genes were
down-regulated 24 h after incubation with osteogenesis-, chondrogenesis- or
adipogenesis-induction medium, or 48-72 h after knockdown of the nine
transcription factors. Furthermore, knockdowns of ETV1, ETV5, FOXP1, GATA6,
HMGA2, SIM2 or SOX11 suppressed the self-renewal capacity of MSC, whereas those
of FOXP1, SOX11, ETV1, SIM2 or PRDM16 reduced the osteogenic- and/or adipogenic
potential. In addition, immunohistochemistry using antibodies for the MSC
characteristic molecules--including GATA6, TRPC4, FLG and TGM2--revealed that
MSC-like cells were present near the endosteum and in the interior of bone marrow
of adult mice. These findings indicate that MSC synthesize a set of MSC markers
in vitro and in vivo, and that MSC-characteristic transcription factors are
involved in MSC stemness regulation.

PMID: 19228201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. World J Surg. 2009 Apr;33(4):638-46. doi: 10.1007/s00268-008-9865-5.

MicroRNA and colorectal cancer.

Yang L(1), Belaguli N, Berger DH.

Author information: 
(1)Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, 112OCL, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 2002 Holcombe Blvd., Houston,
TX 77030, USA.

MicroRNAs are small 19 to 22 nucleotide sequences of RNA that participate in the 
regulation of cell differentiation, cell cycle progression, and apoptosis.
MicroRNAs act much like small interfering RNA, annealing with RISC, to cleave
messenger RNA, and microRNAs exert translational inhibition that is incompletely 
understood. They are important factors in tumorigenesis and have been the subject
of research in many types of cancers, including colon cancer. MicroRNAs may be
abnormally down-regulated or up-regulated in colon-cancer tissue. Artificial
dysregulation of certain microRNAs will trigger tumorigenesis or apoptosis
depending on which microRNA is manipulated. Although the natural mechanisms for
the dysregulation of microRNAs is still largely unknown, one theory tested in
colon cancers proposes that DNA hypermethylation leads to down-regulation of
certain microRNAs. Specific microRNA expression patterns help characterize
specific cancers and may be used as a prognostication factor and in following
patient response to 5-fluorouracil chemotherapy. This article reviews the
existing literature pertaining to the study of microRNA in colorectal cancer.

PMID: 19123024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Zhonghua Er Ke Za Zhi. 2008 Aug;46(8):623-5.

[Effects of gene regulation by simvastatin on proliferation and phenotype of the 
pulmonary vascular smooth muscle cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang J, Liu HM, Wang XQ.

PMID: 19099838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 15;326(2):368-77. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.11.004. Epub 2008 
Nov 20.

Interaction of Gata4 and Gata6 with Tbx5 is critical for normal cardiac
development.

Maitra M(1), Schluterman MK, Nichols HA, Richardson JA, Lo CW, Srivastava D, Garg
V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Congenital heart disease is the most common type of birth defect with an
incidence of 1%. Previously, we described a point mutation in GATA4 that
segregated with cardiac defects in a family with autosomal dominant disease. The 
mutation (G296S) exhibited biochemical deficits and disrupted a novel interaction
between Gata4 and Tbx5. To determine if Gata4 and Tbx5 genetically interact in
vivo, we generated mice heterozygous for both alleles. We found that nearly 100% 
of mice heterozygous for Gata4 and Tbx5 were embryonic or neonatal lethal and had
complete atrioventricular (AV) septal defects with a single AV valve and
myocardial thinning. Consistent with this phenotype, Gata4 and Tbx5 are
co-expressed in the developing endocardial cushions and myocardium. In mutant
embryos, cardiomyocyte proliferation deficits were identified compatible with the
myocardial hypoplasia. Similar to Gata4, Gata6 and Tbx5 are co-expressed in the
embryonic heart, and the transcription factors synergistically activate the
atrial natiuretic factor promoter. We demonstrate a genetic interaction between
Gata6 and Tbx5 with an incompletely penetrant phenotype of neonatal lethality and
thin myocardium. Gene expression analyses were performed on both sets of compound
heterozygotes and demonstrated downregulation of alpha-myosin heavy chain only in
Gata4/Tbx5 heterozygotes. These findings highlight the unique genetic
interactions of Gata4 and Gata6 with Tbx5 for normal cardiac morphogenesis in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC2651674
PMID: 19084512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Clin Pathol. 2009 Apr;62(4):339-44. doi: 10.1136/jcp.2008.060533. Epub 2008 Dec
5.

Expression of GATA-6 transcription factor in pleural malignant mesothelioma and
metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinoma.

Lindholm PM(1), Soini Y, Myllärniemi M, Knuutila S, Heikinheimo M, Kinnula VL,
Salmenkivi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Central
Hospital, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Malignant mesothelioma (MM) is a highly aggressive tumour with poor
prognosis and limited response to therapy. New markers for the prediction of
prognosis in MM and in pulmonary adenocarcinoma of the pleura are valuable.
GATA-6 belongs to a six member zinc finger transcription factor family named
after their recognition motif W-GATA-R.
AIM: To clarify the distribution and possible function of GATA-6 transcription
factor in MM and in pleural metastasis of lung adenocarcinomas.
METHODS: 63 pleural MM and 36 pleural metastatic pulmonary adenocarcinomas were
studied for GATA-6 expression by immunohistochemistry using tissue microarrays.
Expression of GATA-6 was examined in relation to thyroid transcription factor-1
expression, survival, proliferation and apoptosis.
RESULTS: Nuclear immunoreactivity for GATA-6 was stronger and more frequent in MM
than in metastatic pleural adenocarcinoma. Prognosis was better in patients with 
GATA-6 expression when compared to those with no GATA-6 expression (p = 0.002);
in the subgroup analysis the difference was significant in epithelial and
sarcomatous mesothelioma. GATA-6 was not associated with spontaneous
proliferation or apoptosis of the tumour cells in situ.
CONCLUSION: Results suggest that GATA-6 plays a role in pleural malignancies,
predicting longer survival in subgroups of MM.

PMID: 19060016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Int J Cancer. 2009 Mar 1;124(5):1122-32. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24057.

Global expression profiling of sex cord stromal tumors from Men1 heterozygous
mice identifies altered TGF-beta signaling, decreased Gata6 and increased Csf1r
expression.

Mould AW(1), Duncan R, Serewko-Auret M, Loffler KA, Biondi C, Gartside M, Kay GF,
Hayward NK.

Author information: 
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, QLD, Australia.
Arne.Mould@qimr.edu.au

Heterozygous disruption of the Men1 gene predisposes mice to the development of
multiple endocrine tumors, accurately mimicking the human MEN1 cancer
predisposition syndrome. Additionally, Men1(+/-) mice frequently develop sex cord
adenomas. The mechanism underlying the susceptibility of these mice to sex cord
tumor development has not been fully determined, but data suggest it may involve 
transcriptional regulation of key growth promoting/repressing genes. To identify 
potential menin-regulated genes that may be important for tumor suppression in
sex cord cells, we compared the global gene expression profiles of testis and
ovary adenomas with other endocrine tumors of the pancreas and pituitary from
Men1 heterozygous mice and with control tissues. Gonadal tumors clustered
separately from pancreas and pituitary tumors with only a few genes (e.g.,
Cdkn2c) commonly dysregulated in all tumor types. Testis and ovary tumors
displayed a higher level of transcriptional similarity to each other than they
did to their respective control tissues. Among genes that had decreased
expression in tumors was significant over-representation of genes associated with
the TGF-beta, hedgehog and Wnt signaling, indicating that loss of menin function 
affects these pathways at the level of transcription. Aberrant protein expression
in Leydig and granulosa cells of 2 transcriptionally dysregulated gene products, 
Gata6 and Csf1r were confirmed by immunohistochemistry. We propose that sex cord 
tumor susceptibility in Men1(+/-) mice involves deregulated cell proliferation
due to dysregulation of multiple cell growth regulating genes including: reduced 
Cdkn2c transcription, loss of TGF-beta pathway tumor suppressor function (e.g.,
Gata6) and transcriptional activation of Csf1r.

PMID: 19058182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Nov 18;105(46):17824-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805491105. Epub 2008 Nov 12.

Serum response factor orchestrates nascent sarcomerogenesis and silences the
biomineralization gene program in the heart.

Niu Z(1), Iyer D, Conway SJ, Martin JF, Ivey K, Srivastava D, Nordheim A,
Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Development, Section of Cardiovascular Sciences,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Our conditional serum response factor (SRF) knockout, Srf (Cko), in the
heart-forming region blocked the appearance of rhythmic beating myocytes, one of 
the earliest cardiac defects caused by the ablation of a cardiac-enriched
transcription factor. The appearance of Hand1 and Smyd1, transcription and
chromatin remodeling factors; Acta1, Acta2, Myl3, and Myom1, myofibril proteins; 
and calcium-activated potassium-channel gene activity (KCNMB1), the channel
protein, were powerfully attenuated in the Srf(CKO) mutant hearts. A requisite
role for combinatorial cofactor interactions with SRF, as a major determinant for
regulating the appearance of organized sarcomeres, was shown by viral rescue of
SRF-null ES cells with SRF point mutants that block cofactor interactions. In the
absence of SRF genes associated with biomineralization, GATA-6, bone
morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4), and periostin were strongly up-regulated,
coinciding with the down regulation of many SRF dependent microRNA, including
miR1, which exerted robust silencer activity over the induction of GATA-6 leading
to the down regulation of BMP4 and periostin.

PMCID: PMC2584699
PMID: 19004760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. PLoS One. 2008;3(10):e3478. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0003478. Epub 2008 Oct 22.

A computational model for understanding stem cell, trophectoderm and endoderm
lineage determination.

Chickarmane V(1), Peterson C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have associated the transcription factors, Oct4, Sox2 
and Nanog as parts of a self-regulating network which is responsible for
maintaining embryonic stem cell properties: self renewal and pluripotency. In
addition, mutual antagonism between two of these and other master regulators have
been shown to regulate lineage determination. In particular, an excess of Cdx2
over Oct4 determines the trophectoderm lineage whereas an excess of Gata-6 over
Nanog determines differentiation into the endoderm lineage. Also,
under/over-expression studies of the master regulator Oct4 have revealed that
some self-renewal/pluripotency as well as differentiation genes are expressed in 
a biphasic manner with respect to the concentration of Oct4.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We construct a dynamical model of a minimalistic 
network, extracted from ChIP-on-chip and microarray data as well as literature
studies. The model is based upon differential equations and makes two plausible
assumptions; activation of Gata-6 by Oct4 and repression of Nanog by an
Oct4-Gata-6 heterodimer. With these assumptions, the results of simulations
successfully describe the biphasic behavior as well as lineage commitment. The
model also predicts that reprogramming the network from a differentiated state,
in particular the endoderm state, into a stem cell state, is best achieved by
over-expressing Nanog, rather than by suppression of differentiation genes such
as Gata-6.
CONCLUSIONS: The computational model provides a mechanistic understanding of how 
different lineages arise from the dynamics of the underlying regulatory network. 
It provides a framework to explore strategies of reprogramming a cell from a
differentiated state to a stem cell state through directed perturbations. Such an
approach is highly relevant to regenerative medicine since it allows for a rapid 
search over the host of possibilities for reprogramming to a stem cell state.

PMCID: PMC2566811
PMID: 18941526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Dev Dyn. 2008 Nov;237(11):3373-86. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21749.

Induction and modulation of smooth muscle differentiation in Xenopus embryonic
cells.

Barillot W(1), Tréguer K, Faucheux C, Fédou S, Thézé N, Thiébaud P.

Author information: 
(1)Université Bordeaux, UMR CNRS 5164, Bordeaux, France.

By comparison with skeletal or cardiac developmental programs, little is known
regarding the specific factors that promote specification and differentiation of 
smooth muscle cells from pluripotent cells. We have analyzed the developmental
expression of a subset of smooth muscle genes during Xenopus early development
and showed that similar to mammals and avians, Xenopus smooth muscle myosin heavy
chain (SM-MHC) is a highly specific marker of smooth muscle differentiation.
Embryonic cells from animal pole explants of Xenopus blastula can be induced by
basic fibroblast growth factor, Wnt, and bone morphogenetic protein signals to
adopt the smooth muscle pathway. Explants from early embryos that contain neural 
crest cells can also differentiate into cells expressing smooth muscle genes. We 
examined the interplay of several transcription factors, that is SRF, myocardin, 
and GATA6, that induce the expression of SM-MHC in animal cap cells and found
that myocardin-dependent expression of smooth muscle genes in animal cap cells is
synergized by SRF but is strongly antagonized by GATA6.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18855898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Endocrinology. 2009 Feb;150(2):946-56. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0573. Epub 2008 Oct
1.

Regulation of P450c17 expression in the early embryo depends on GATA factors.

Shi Y(1), Schonemann MD, Mellon SH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Science, University of 
California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-0556, USA.

The enzyme P450c17 is required for glucocorticoid, sex steroid, and some
neurosteroid biosynthesis. Defective human P450c17 causes sexual infantilism and 
46,XY sex reversal but is compatible with life, whereas ablation of the
corresponding mouse gene causes embryonic lethality at around E7. Normal mouse
embryos express P450c17 protein and activity in the embryonic endoderm at E7.
Adult adrenal and gonadal steroidogenesis requires steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1),
but SF-1 is not expressed in the early mouse embryo. We show that P450c17 is
expressed in differentiated mouse parietal and visceral endoderm lineages, in
cultured mouse F9 embryonic carcinoma stem cells, in mouse embryonic stem cells, 
and in cultured mouse P19 stem cells. Bases -110 to -55 (which contain an SF-1
site and two potential GATA sites) of the rat cyp17 gene confer promoter activity
in F9 cells. Overexpression of SF-1 has no effect, whereas overexpression of
GATA4 in F9 cells increases transcription from -110/-55 fused to a reporter and
increases endogenous P450c17 mRNA. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that
GATA4 binds to -215/+55 of mouse cyp17. Stimulating F9 cells with retinoic acid
and cAMP differentiates them into visceral and parietal endoderm. Commensurate
with cell differentiation, quantitative PCR showed increased GATA4 and GATA6
mRNAs, temporally followed by increased P450c17 mRNA. Small interfering RNA
inhibition of GATA4 or GATA6 in undifferentiated or differentiated F9 cells
diminished endogenous cyp17 expression. Thus, P450c17 is expressed in mouse
embryonic stem cells, its expression increases upon differentiation to an early
embryonic endoderm lineage, and GATA4/6 are responsible for activation of P450c17
gene expression at this early stage of embryonic development.

PMCID: PMC2646537
PMID: 18832096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Cloning Stem Cells. 2008 Dec;10(4):495-502. doi: 10.1089/clo.2008.0030.

BMP4 induces primitive endoderm but not trophectoderm in monkey embryonic stem
cells.

Kobayashi M(1), Takada T, Takahashi K, Noda Y, Torii R.

Author information: 
(1)Research Center for Animal Life Science, Shiga University of Medical Science, 
Otsu, Shiga, Japan.

Monkey embryonic stem (ES) cells share similar characteristics to human ES cells 
and provide a primate model of allotransplantation, which allows to validate
efficacy and safety of cell transplantation therapy in regenerative medicine.
Bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) is known to promote trophoblast
differentiation in human ES cells in contrast to mouse ES cells where BMP4
synergistically maintains self-renewal with leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF),
which represents a significant difference in signal transduction of self-renewal 
and differentiation between murine and human ES cells. As the similarity of the
differentiation mechanism between monkey and human ES cells is of critical
importance for their use as a primate model system, we investigated whether BMP4 
induces trophoblast differentiation in monkey ES cells. Interestingly, BMP4 did
not induce trophoblast differentiation, but instead induced primitive endoderm
differentiation. Prominent downregulation of Sox2, which plays a pivotal role not
only in pluripotency but also placenta development, was observed in cells treated
with BMP4. In addition, upregulation of Hand1, Cdx2, and chorionic gonadotropin
beta (CG-beta), which are markers of trophoblast, was not observed. In contrast, 
BMP4 induced significant upregulation of Gata6, Gata4, and LamininB1, suggesting 
differentiation into the primitive endoderm, visceral endoderm, and parietal
endoderm, respectively. The threshold of BMP4 activity was estimated as about 10 
ng/mL. These findings suggest that BMP4 induced differentiation into the
primitive endoderm lineage but not into trophoblast in monkey ES cells.

PMID: 18823266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Dev Dyn. 2008 Oct;237(10):2820-9. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21703.

Dynamic GATA6 expression in primitive endoderm formation and maturation in early 
mouse embryogenesis.

Cai KQ(1), Capo-Chichi CD, Rula ME, Yang DH, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Ovarian Cancer Programs, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 
USA.

The derivation of the primitive endoderm layer from the pluripotent cells of the 
inner cell mass is one of the earliest differentiation and morphogenic events in 
embryonic development. GATA4 and GATA6 are the key transcription factors in the
formation of extraembryonic endoderms, but their specific contribution to the
derivation of each endoderm lineage needs clarification. We further analyzed the 
dynamic expression and mutant phenotypes of GATA6 in early mouse embryos. GATA6
and GATA4 are both expressed in primitive endoderm cells initially. At embryonic 
day (E) 5.0, parietal endoderm cells continue to express both GATA4 and GATA6;
however, visceral endoderm cells express GATA4 but exhibit a reduced expression
of GATA6. By and after E5.5, visceral endoderm cells no longer express GATA6. We 
also found that GATA6 null embryos did not form a morphologically recognizable
primitive endoderm layer, and subsequently failed to form visceral and parietal
endoderms. Thus, the current study establishes that GATA6 is essential for the
formation of primitive endoderm, at a much earlier stage then previously
recognized, and expression of GATA6 discriminates parietal endoderm from visceral
endoderm lineages.

Copyright (c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2739724
PMID: 18816845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cell Stem Cell. 2008 Nov 6;3(5):543-54. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2008.08.004. Epub
2008 Sep 18.

Sall4 regulates distinct transcription circuitries in different
blastocyst-derived stem cell lineages.

Lim CY(1), Tam WL, Zhang J, Ang HS, Jia H, Lipovich L, Ng HH, Wei CL, Sung WK,
Robson P, Yang H, Lim B.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Developmental Biology, Genome Institute of Singapore, 138672
Singapore.

Stem cells self-renew or differentiate under the governance of a
stem-cell-specific transcriptional program, with each transcription factor
orchestrating the activities of a particular set of genes. Here we demonstrate
that a single transcription factor is able to regulate distinct core circuitries 
in two different blastocyst-derived stem cell lines, embryonic stem cells (ESCs) 
and extraembryonic endoderm (XEN) cells. The transcription factor Sall4 is
required for early embryonic development and for ESC pluripotency. Sall4 is also 
expressed in XEN cells, and depletion of Sall4 disrupts self-renewal and induces 
differentiation. Genome-wide analysis reveals that Sall4 is regulating different 
gene sets in ESCs and XEN cells, and depletion of Sall4 targets in the respective
cell types induces differentiation. With Oct4, Sox2, and Nanog, Sall4 forms a
crucial interconnected autoregulatory network in ESCs. In XEN cells, Sall4
regulates the key XEN lineage-associated genes Gata4, Gata6, Sox7, and Sox17. Our
findings demonstrate how Sall4 functions as an essential stemness factor for two 
different stem cell lines.

PMID: 18804426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Cancer Biol Ther. 2008 Oct;7(10):1593-601. Epub 2008 Oct 7.

Frequent genomic copy number gain and overexpression of GATA-6 in pancreatic
carcinoma.

Fu B(1), Luo M, Lakkur S, Lucito R, Iacobuzio-Donahue CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sol Goldman Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, Johns 
Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Multiple genetic alterations are well recognized as contributing to pancreatic
carcinogenesis, although the finding of recurrent copy number changes indicates
additional targets remain to be found. The objective of this study was to
identify novel targets of genetic alteration that contribute to pancreatic cancer
development or progression. We used Representational Oligonucleotide Microarray
Analysis (ROMA) to identify copy number changes in pancreatic cancer xenografts, 
and validated these findings using FISH, quantitative PCR, Western blotting and
immunohistochemical labeling. With this approach, we identified a 0.36-Mb
amplification at 18q11.2 containing two known genes, GATA-6 and cTAGE1. Using a
cutoff value of 3.0 fold compared to haploid controls, copy number gain or
amplification was confirmed in 4 of 42 (9.5%) pancreatic carcinomas analyzed.
Combined genetic and transcriptional analyses showed consistent overexpression of
GATA-6 in all carcinomas with 18q11.2 gain, as well as in the majority of
pancreatic cancers examined (17 of 30 cancers, 56.7%) that did not have gain of
this region. By contrast, overexpression of cTAGE1 was rare in these same cancers
suggesting GATA-6 is the true target of this copy number increase. GATA-6 mRNA
overexpression corresponded to robust nuclear protein expression in cancer cell
lines and resected tissues consistent with its role as a transcription factor.
Intense nuclear labeling was significantly increased in PanIN-3 lesions and
infiltrating carcinomas compared to normal duct epithelium (p < 0.000001 and p < 
0.003, respectively). Forced overexpression of GATA6 in MiaPaca2 cells resulted
in increased proliferation and growth in soft-agar. Gain and overexpression of
the development-related transcription factor GATA-6 may play an important and
hitherto unrecognized role in pancreatic carcinogenesis.

PMID: 18769116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2008 Nov;295(5):C1141-50. doi:
10.1152/ajpcell.00120.2008. Epub 2008 Sep 3.

GATA-6 mediates transcriptional activation of aquaporin-5 through interactions
with Sp1.

Zhou B(1), Francis TA, Yang H, Tseng W, Zhong Q, Frenkel B, Morrisey EE, Ann DK, 
Minoo P, Crandall ED, Borok Z.

Author information: 
(1)Will Rogers Institute Pulmonary Research Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

We investigated mechanisms underlying GATA-6-mediated transcriptional activation 
of the alveolar epithelial type I cell-enriched gene aquaporin-5 (AQP5). GATA-6
expression increases in alveolar epithelial cells in primary culture, concurrent 
with upregulation of AQP5 and transition to a type I cell-like phenotype.
Cotransfections in MLE-15 and NIH 3T3 cells demonstrated trans-activation by
GATA-6 of a rat 1,716-bp-AQP5-luciferase (-1716-AQP5-Luc) reporter.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation identified
an interaction between GATA-6 and putative binding sites in the AQP5 promoter.
However, mutation of these sites did not reduce GATA-6-mediated activation,
implicating mechanisms in addition to direct binding of GATA-6 to DNA. A
5'-deletion construct, -358-AQP5-Luc, that does not encompass GATA motifs was
still activated by GATA-6 by as much as 50% relative to -1716-AQP5-Luc. Internal 
deletion of the -358/-173 GC-rich domain, which includes several putative Sp1
consensus sites, reduced trans-activation by approximately 60%, suggesting
importance of this region for GATA-mediated activity. -358-AQP5-Luc was similarly
activated by both GATA-6 and a GATA DNA-binding defective mutant, whereas
cotransfections in Schneider S2 cells demonstrated dose-dependent
trans-activation of -358-AQP5-Luc by Sp1. Activation of -358-AQP5-Luc by GATA-6
was dramatically reduced by Sp1 small-interfering RNA, and -358-AQP5-Luc was
activated synergistically by GATA-6 and Sp1 in NIH 3T3 cells. Furthermore,
association between endogenous GATA-6 and Sp1 was demonstrated by
coimmunoprecipitation. These results suggest that transcriptional activation of
AQP5 by GATA-6 is mediated at least in part through cooperative interactions with
Sp1 occurring at the proximal promoter.

PMCID: PMC2584994
PMID: 18768929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2009 Mar;41(3):531-8. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2008.06.020.
Epub 2008 Aug 13.

Transcriptional control of the calreticulin gene in health and disease.

Qiu Y(1), Michalak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
T6G 2H7.

Calreticulin is a multifunctional Ca(2+) binding chaperone in the endoplasmic
reticulum and expression of the protein is tightly regulated at the
transcriptional level. There are two calreticulin genes, named calreticulin-1 and
calreticulin-2 gene. The calreticulin-1 promoter contains a number of putative
binding sites for transcription factors including tissue specific factors. Direct
regulation of the calreticulin-1 promoter by several of these factors has been
confirmed experimentally including Nkx2.5, MEF2C, GATA6, PPAR, COUP-TF1 and Evi-1
factors. Studies on calreticulin-deficient mice and transgenic animal models
indicate that calreticulin is critical for cardiac development and that
expression of the protein must be tightly regulated during cardiogenesis.
Moreover, differential expression of calreticulin has been associated with
several diseases, including neurodegenerative problems, cancers, autoimmune
diseases and wound healing. Understanding the mechanisms responsible for the
regulation of expression of calreticulin may contribute to the treatment of many 
diverse diseases.

PMID: 18765291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Development. 2008 Oct;135(19):3185-90. doi: 10.1242/dev.026443. Epub 2008 Aug 20.

GATA transcription factors integrate Wnt signalling during heart development.

Afouda BA(1), Martin J, Liu F, Ciau-Uitz A, Patient R, Hoppler S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, Cell and Developmental Biology Research
Programme, School of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK.

Comment in
    Development. 2010 Jan;137(1):3; author reply 3-4.

Cardiogenesis is inhibited by canonical Wnt/beta-catenin signalling and
stimulated by non-canonical Wnt11/JNK signalling, but how these two signalling
pathways crosstalk is currently unknown. Here, we show that Wnt/beta-catenin
signalling restricts cardiogenesis via inhibition of GATA gene expression, as
experimentally reinstating GATA function overrides beta-catenin-mediated
inhibition and restores cardiogenesis. Furthermore, we show that GATA
transcription factors in turn directly regulate Wnt11 gene expression, and that
Wnt11 is required to a significant degree for mediating the
cardiogenesis-promoting function of GATA transcription factors. These results
demonstrate that GATA factors occupy a central position between canonical and
non-canonical Wnt signalling in regulating heart muscle formation.

PMID: 18715946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Oct 3;374(4):731-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.07.098. Epub 2008 Jul 29.

Statins activate GATA-6 and induce differentiated vascular smooth muscle cells.

Wada H(1), Abe M, Ono K, Morimoto T, Kawamura T, Takaya T, Satoh N, Fujita M,
Kita T, Shimatsu A, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research, National Hospital Organization Kyoto
Medical Center, 1-1 Mukaihata-cho, Fukakusa, Fushimi-ku, Kyoto 612-8555, Japan.

The beneficial effects of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase
inhibitors (statins) beyond cholesterol lowering involve their direct actions on 
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). However, the effects of statins on
phenotypic modulation of VSMCs are unknown. We herein show that simvastatin (Sm) 
and atorvastatin (At) inhibited DNA synthesis in human aortic VSMCs
dose-dependently, while cell toxicity was not observed below the concentration of
1 microM of Sm or 100 nM of At. Stimulating proliferative VSMCs with Sm or At
induced the expression of SM-alpha-actin and SM-MHC, highly specific markers of
differentiated phenotype. Sm up-regulated the binding activity of GATA-6 to
SM-MHC GATA site and activated the transfected SM-MHC promoter in proliferative
VSMCs, while mutating the GATA-6 binding site abolished this activation.
Geranylgeranylpyrophosphate (10 microM), an inhibitor of Rho family proteins,
abolished the statin-mediated induction of the differentiated phenotype in VSMCs.
These findings suggest that statins activate GATA-6 and induce differentiated
VSMCs.

PMID: 18671946  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Jul 28;8:74. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-74.

GATA4 and GATA5 are essential for heart and liver development in Xenopus embryos.

Haworth KE(1), Kotecha S, Mohun TJ, Latinkic BV.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Museum Avenue, Cardiff, CF10 3US,
Wales, UK. haworthk@cardiff.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: GATA factors 4/5/6 have been implicated in the development of the
heart and endodermal derivatives in vertebrates. Work in zebrafish has indicated 
that GATA5 is required for normal development earlier than GATA4/6. However, the 
GATA5 knockout mouse has no apparent embryonic phenotype, thereby questioning the
importance of the gene for vertebrate development.
RESULTS: In this study we show that in Xenopus embryos GATA5 is essential for
early development of heart and liver precursors. In addition, we have found that 
in Xenopus embryos GATA4 is important for development of heart and liver
primordia following their specification, and that in this role it might interact 
with GATA6.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that GATA5 acts earlier than GATA4 to regulate
development of heart and liver precursors, and indicate that one early direct
target of GATA5 is homeobox gene Hex.

PMCID: PMC2526999
PMID: 18662378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Gastroenterology. 2008 Oct;135(4):1238-1247, 1247.e1-3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.06.045. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Multiple regulatory regions control the complex expression pattern of the mouse
Cdx2 homeobox gene.

Benahmed F(1), Gross I, Gaunt SJ, Beck F, Jehan F, Domon-Dell C, Martin E,
Kedinger M, Freund JN, Duluc I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U682, Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The Cdx2 homeobox gene exerts multiple functions including
trophectoderm specification, antero-posterior patterning, and determination of
intestinal identity. The aim of this study was to map genomic regions that
regulate the transcription of Cdx2, with a particular interest in the gut.
METHODS: Genomic fragments covering 13 kilobase (kb) of the mouse Cdx2 locus were
analyzed in transgenic mice and in cell assays.
RESULTS: No fragment was active in the trophectoderm. Fragments containing the
first intron and extending up to -5-kb upstream of the transcription start site
became active posteriorly at gastrulation and then inactive at midgestation in
every tissue including the endoderm. Specific persistence of activity in the
intestinal endoderm/epithelium beyond midgestation requires extending the genomic
fragment up to -9 kb. We identified a 250-base pair segment around -8.5-kb
binding and responding to endodermal factors, with a stimulatory effect exerted
synergistically by HNF4alpha, GATA6, Tcf4, and beta-catenin. These factors were
able to activate endogenous expression of Cdx2 in nonintestinal Hela cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple regulatory regions control the complex developmental
pattern of Cdx2, including far upstream sequences required for the persistence of
gene expression specifically in the gut epithelium throughout life. Cooperation
between HNF4alpha, GATA6, beta-catenin, and Tcf4 contributes to the
intestine-specific expression of Cdx2.

PMID: 18655789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Endocrinology. 2008 Nov;149(11):5557-67. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0484. Epub 2008 Jul
24.

GATA4 reduction enhances 3',5'-cyclic adenosine 5'-monophosphate-stimulated
steroidogenic acute regulatory protein messenger ribonucleic acid and
progesterone production in luteinized porcine granulosa cells.

Hui YY(1), Lavoie HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Anatomy, University of South 
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, South Carolina 29208, USA.

Previous studies with cultured granulosa cells implicated GATA4 in gonadotropin
regulation of the steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (STAR) gene. Caveats to 
these prior studies exist. First, GATA4 levels are reduced in granulosa-luteal
cells after the LH surge when GATA6 expression is relatively high. Second, STAR
mRNA expression is negligible in granulosa cells until after the LH surge. Both
exogenous GATA4 and GATA6 can transactivate STAR gene promoter constructs. We
used an RNA interference (RNAi) approach to determine the contributions of GATA4 
and GATA6 to cAMP analog regulation of the endogenous STAR gene in luteinizing
granulosa cells. STAR mRNA was stimulated by cAMP under control RNAi conditions. 
Surprisingly, GATA4 reduction by its respective RNAi approximately doubled the
cAMP induction of STAR mRNA. At 24 h cAMP treatment, this augmentation was
abolished by co-down-regulation of GATA4+GATA6. GATA6 down-regulation by itself
did not alter STAR mRNA levels. GATA4+GATA6 co-down-regulation elevated basal
CYP11A mRNA at 24 h treatment but did not affect its induction by cAMP. Basal
levels of HSD3B mRNA were reduced by GATA4 RNAi conditions leading to a greater
fold induction of its mRNA by cAMP. Fold cAMP-stimulated progesterone production 
was enhanced by GATA4 down-regulation but not by GATA4+GATA6 co-down-regulation. 
These data implicate GATA6 as the facilitator in cAMP-stimulated STAR mRNA and
downstream progesterone accumulation under reduced GATA4 conditions. Data also
demonstrate that basal levels of GATA4/6 are not required for cAMP induction of
the STAR gene. The altered ratio of GATA4 to GATA6 after ovulation may allow
GATA6 to enhance STAR mRNA accumulation.

PMCID: PMC2584590
PMID: 18653717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):822-4. doi: 10.1038/ng0708-822.

Lung stem cells in the balance.

Bellusci S.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):862-70.

PMID: 18583977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Stem Cells. 2008 Sep;26(9):2300-10. doi: 10.1634/stemcells.2008-0183. Epub 2008
Jun 26.

Control of human embryonic stem cell colony and aggregate size heterogeneity
influences differentiation trajectories.

Bauwens CL(1), Peerani R, Niebruegge S, Woodhouse KA, Kumacheva E, Husain M,
Zandstra PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry, University Health
Network and Heart & Stroke Richard Lewar Centre of Excellence, University of
Toronto,Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

To better understand endogenous parameters that influence pluripotent cell
differentiation we used human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) as a model system. We 
demonstrate that differentiation trajectories in aggregate (embryoid body
[EB])-induced differentiation, a common approach to mimic some of the spatial and
temporal aspects of in vivo development, are affected by three factors: input
hESC composition, input hESC colony size, and EB size. Using a microcontact
printing approach, size-specified hESC colonies were formed by plating
single-cell suspensions onto micropatterned (MP) extracellular matrix islands.
Subsequently, size-controlled EBs were formed by transferring entire colonies
into suspension culture enabling the independent investigation of colony and
aggregate size effects on differentiation induction. Gene and protein expression 
analysis of MP-hESC populations revealed that the ratio of Gata6
(endoderm-associated marker) to Pax6 (neural-associated marker) expression
increased with decreasing colony size. Moreover, upon forming EBs from these
MP-hESCs, we observed that differentiation trajectories were affected by both
colony and EB size-influenced parameters. In MP-EBs generated from
endoderm-biased (high Gata6/Pax6) input hESCs, higher mesoderm and cardiac
induction was observed at larger EB sizes. Conversely, neural-biased (low
Gata6/Pax6) input hESCs generated MP-EBs that exhibited higher cardiac induction 
in smaller EBs. Our analysis demonstrates that heterogeneity in hESC colony and
aggregate size, typical in most differentiation strategies, produces subsets of
appropriate conditions for differentiation into specific cell types. Moreover,
our findings suggest that the local microenvironment modulates endogenous
parameters that can be used to influence pluripotent cell differentiation
trajectories.

PMID: 18583540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Genome Res. 2008 Sep;18(9):1433-45. doi: 10.1101/gr.078378.108. Epub 2008 Jun 18.

Long noncoding RNAs in mouse embryonic stem cell pluripotency and
differentiation.

Dinger ME(1), Amaral PP, Mercer TR, Pang KC, Bruce SJ, Gardiner BB,
Askarian-Amiri ME, Ru K, Soldà G, Simons C, Sunkin SM, Crowe ML, Grimmond SM,
Perkins AC, Mattick JS.

Author information: 
(1)ARC Special Research Centre for Functional and Applied Genomics, Institute for
Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St Lucia QLD 4072, Australia.

The transcriptional networks that regulate embryonic stem (ES) cell pluripotency 
and lineage specification are the subject of considerable attention. To date such
studies have focused almost exclusively on protein-coding transcripts. However,
recent transcriptome analyses show that the mammalian genome contains thousands
of long noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs), many of which appear to be expressed in a
developmentally regulated manner. The functions of these remain untested. To
identify ncRNAs involved in ES cell biology, we used a custom-designed microarray
to examine the expression profiles of mouse ES cells differentiating as embryoid 
bodies (EBs) over a 16-d time course. We identified 945 ncRNAs expressed during
EB differentiation, of which 174 were differentially expressed, many correlating 
with pluripotency or specific differentiation events. Candidate ncRNAs were
identified for further characterization by an integrated examination of
expression profiles, genomic context, chromatin state, and promoter analysis.
Many ncRNAs showed coordinated expression with genomically associated
developmental genes, such as Dlx1, Dlx4, Gata6, and Ecsit. We examined two novel 
developmentally regulated ncRNAs, Evx1as and Hoxb5/6as, which are derived from
homeotic loci and share similar expression patterns and localization in mouse
embryos with their associated protein-coding genes. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation, we provide evidence that both ncRNAs are associated with
trimethylated H3K4 histones and histone methyltransferase MLL1, suggesting a role
in epigenetic regulation of homeotic loci during ES cell differentiation. Taken
together, our data indicate that long ncRNAs are likely to be important in
processes directing pluripotency and alternative differentiation programs, in
some cases through engagement of the epigenetic machinery.

PMCID: PMC2527704
PMID: 18562676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Allergy. 2008 Sep;63(9):1136-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1398-9995.2008.01677.x. Epub 2008
Jun 10.

Activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma suppresses mast
cell maturation involved in allergic diseases.

Tachibana M(1), Wada K, Katayama K, Kamisaki Y, Maeyama K, Kadowaki T, Blumberg
RS, Nakajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Division, Yokohama City University School of Medicine,
Yokohama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mast cells play a central role in allergic and inflammatory diseases.
Several reports indicated role of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
gamma (PPARgamma) on mast cell function. However, there is no report about the
role of PPARgamma on differentiation of mast cells from the progenitors. In this 
study, we investigated the role of PPARgamma in regulating bone marrow-derived
mast cell maturation and the therapeutic implications for mast cell-related
diseases such as atopic or contact dermatitis.
METHODS: We used in vitro cell culture system for mast cell differentiation from 
bone marrow-progenitors using specific ligands and lentiviral-mediated short
hairpin RNA of PPARgamma, and in vivo murine dermatitis models.
RESULTS: Activation of PPARgamma inhibited the maturation of bone marrow
progenitors into connective tissue-type mast cells (CTMCs) through up-regulation 
of GATA-4 and GATA-6 resulting in a decrease in expression of histidine
decarboxylase and mast cell histamine content. In comparison, the differentiation
of bone marrow progenitors into CTMCs was significantly accelerated by the
knockdown of PPARgamma expression by lentiviral-mediated short hairpin RNA.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma ligand administration to mice
inhibited the maturation of mast cells resulting in attenuation of atopic and
contact dermatitis via diminishment of the number of mature mast cells.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that PPARgamma is one of master regulators on
mast cell maturation and potentially useful for the therapy in various disorders 
involving mast cell activation.

PMCID: PMC4023568
PMID: 18547288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):862-70. doi: 10.1038/ng.157. Epub 2008 Jun 8.

A Gata6-Wnt pathway required for epithelial stem cell development and airway
regeneration.

Zhang Y(1), Goss AM, Cohen ED, Kadzik R, Lepore JJ, Muthukumaraswamy K, Yang J,
DeMayo FJ, Whitsett JA, Parmacek MS, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 956 BRB II/III, 421 Curie 
Boulevard, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2008 Jul;40(7):822-4.

Epithelial organs, including the lung, are known to possess regenerative
abilities through activation of endogenous stem cell populations, but the
molecular pathways regulating stem cell expansion and regeneration are not well
understood. Here we show that Gata6 regulates the temporal appearance and number 
of bronchioalveolar stem cells (BASCs) in the lung, its absence in Gata6-null
lung epithelium leading to the precocious appearance of BASCs and concurrent loss
in epithelial differentiation. This expansion of BASCs was the result of a
pronounced increase in canonical Wnt signaling in lung epithelium upon loss of
Gata6. Expression of the noncanonical Wnt receptor Fzd2 was downregulated in
Gata6 mutants and increased Fzd2 or decreased beta-catenin expression rescued, in
part, the lung epithelial defects in Gata6 mutants. During lung epithelial
regeneration, canonical Wnt signaling was activated in the niche containing BASCs
and forced activation of Wnt signaling led to a large increase in BASC numbers.
Moreover, Gata6 was required for proper lung epithelial regeneration, and
postnatal loss of Gata6 led to increased BASC expansion and decreased
differentiation. Together, these data demonstrate that Gata6-regulated Wnt
signaling controls the balance between progenitor expansion and epithelial
differentiation required for both lung development and regeneration.

PMCID: PMC2562713
PMID: 18536717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. PLoS Genet. 2008 May 23;4(5):e1000081. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000081.

Genomic profiling identifies GATA6 as a candidate oncogene amplified in
pancreatobiliary cancer.

Kwei KA(1), Bashyam MD, Kao J, Ratheesh R, Reddy EC, Kim YH, Montgomery K,
Giacomini CP, Choi YL, Chatterjee S, Karikari CA, Salari K, Wang P,
Hernandez-Boussard T, Swarnalata G, van de Rijn M, Maitra A, Pollack JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, United
States of America.

Pancreatobiliary cancers have among the highest mortality rates of any cancer
type. Discovering the full spectrum of molecular genetic alterations may suggest 
new avenues for therapy. To catalogue genomic alterations, we carried out
array-based genomic profiling of 31 exocrine pancreatic cancers and 6 distal bile
duct cancers, expanded as xenografts to enrich the tumor cell fraction. We
identified numerous focal DNA amplifications and deletions, including in 19% of
pancreatobiliary cases gain at cytoband 18q11.2, a locus uncommonly amplified in 
other tumor types. The smallest shared amplification at 18q11.2 included GATA6, a
transcriptional regulator previously linked to normal pancreas development. When 
amplified, GATA6 was overexpressed at both the mRNA and protein levels, and
strong immunostaining was observed in 25 of 54 (46%) primary pancreatic cancers
compared to 0 of 33 normal pancreas specimens surveyed. GATA6 expression in
xenografts was associated with specific microarray gene-expression patterns,
enriched for GATA binding sites and mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation
activity. siRNA mediated knockdown of GATA6 in pancreatic cancer cell lines with 
amplification led to reduced cell proliferation, cell cycle progression, and
colony formation. Our findings indicate that GATA6 amplification and
overexpression contribute to the oncogenic phenotypes of pancreatic cancer cells,
and identify GATA6 as a candidate lineage-specific oncogene in pancreatobiliary
cancer, with implications for novel treatment strategies.

PMCID: PMC2413204
PMID: 18535672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Oncogene. 2008 Aug 21;27(36):4921-32. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.133. Epub 2008 May 5.

Oncogenic Ras upregulates NADPH oxidase 1 gene expression through
MEK-ERK-dependent phosphorylation of GATA-6.

Adachi Y(1), Shibai Y, Mitsushita J, Shang WH, Hirose K, Kamata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Shinshu University School of
Medicine, Nagano, Japan.

Ras oncogene upregulates the expression of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
phosphate oxidase (Nox) 1 via the Raf/MEK/ERK pathway, leading to the elevated
production of reactive oxygen species that is essential for maintenance of
Ras-transformation phenotypes. However, the precise transcriptional control
mechanism underlying Ras-induced Nox1 expression remains to be elucidated. Here
we demonstrated that via the MEK/ERK pathway, Ras signaling enhances the activity
of the functional Nox1 promoter (nt -321 to -1) in colon cancer CaCo-2 cells and 
thereby induces the formation of the specific protein-DNA complexes in the two
GATA-binding site-containing regions (nt -161 to -136 and -125 to -100).
Supershift assays with GATA antibodies, protein analyses and chromatin
immunoprecipitation revealed that GATA-6 is a component of the specific
protein-DNA complexes at the Nox1 promoter. GATA-6 was able to trans-activate the
Nox1 promoter but not a promoter in which the GATA-binding sites are mutated.
Moreover, GATA-6 was phosphorylated at serine residues by MEK-activated ERK,
which increased GATA-6 DNA binding, correlating with suppression of the Nox1
promoter activity by an MEK inhibitor PD98059. Finally, the site-directed
mutation of the consensus ERK phosphorylation site (PYS(120)P to PYA(120)P) of
GATA-6 abolished its trans-activation activity, suppressing of the growth of
CaCo-2 cells. On the basis of these results, we propose that oncogenic Ras
signaling upregulates the transcription of Nox1 through MEK-ERK-dependent
phosphorylation of GATA-6.

PMID: 18454176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Reproduction. 2008 May;135(5):635-47. doi: 10.1530/REP-07-0359.

Expression of genes involved in early cell fate decisions in human embryos and
their regulation by growth factors.

Kimber SJ(1), Sneddon SF, Bloor DJ, El-Bareg AM, Hawkhead JA, Metcalfe AD,
Houghton FD, Leese HJ, Rutherford A, Lieberman BA, Brison DR.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, University of 
Manchester, Manchester M13 9PT, UK. susan.kimber@manchester.ac.uk

Little is understood about the regulation of gene expression in human
preimplantation embryos. We set out to examine the expression in human
preimplantation embryos of a number of genes known to be critical for early
development of the murine embryo. The expression profile of these genes was
analysed throughout preimplantation development and in response to growth factor 
(GF) stimulation. Developmental expression of a number of genes was similar to
that seen in murine embryos (OCT3B/4, CDX2, NANOG). However, GATA6 is expressed
throughout preimplantation development in the human. Embryos were cultured in
IGF-I, leukaemia inhibitory factor (LIF) or heparin-binding EGF-like growth
factor (HBEGF), all of which are known to stimulate the development of human
embryos. Our data show that culture in HBEGF and LIF appears to facilitate human 
embryo expression of a number of genes: ERBB4 (LIF) and LIFR and DSC2 (HBEGF)
while in the presence of HBEGF no blastocysts expressed EOMES and when cultured
with LIF only two out of nine blastocysts expressed TBN. These data improve our
knowledge of the similarities between human and murine embryos and the influence 
of GFs on human embryo gene expression. Results from this study will improve the 
understanding of cell fate decisions in early human embryos, which has important 
implications for both IVF treatment and the derivation of human embryonic stem
cells.

PMID: 18411410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. BMC Gastroenterol. 2008 Apr 11;8:9. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-8-9.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in normal and neoplastic human
gastrointestinal mucosa.

Haveri H(1), Westerholm-Ormio M, Lindfors K, Mäki M, Savilahti E, Andersson LC,
Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
hanna.haveri@helsinki.fi

BACKGROUND: Human gastrointestinal mucosa regenerates vigorously throughout life,
but the factors controlling cell fate in mature mucosa are poorly understood.
GATA transcription factors direct cell proliferation and differentiation in many 
organs, and are implicated in tumorigenesis. GATA-4 and GATA-6 are considered
crucial for the formation of murine gastrointestinal mucosa, but their role in
human gastrointestinal tract remains unexplored. We studied in detail the
expression patterns of these two GATA factors and a GATA-6 down-stream target,
Indian hedgehog (Ihh), in normal human gastrointestinal mucosa. Since these
factors are considered important for proliferation and differentiation, we also
explored the possible alterations in their expression in gastrointestinal
neoplasias. The expression of the carcinogenesis-related protein Indian hedgehog 
was also investigated in comparison to GATA factors.
METHODS: Samples of normal and neoplastic gastrointestinal tract from children
and adults were subjected to RNA in situ hybridization with 33P labelled probes
and immunohistochemistry, using an avidin-biotin immunoperoxidase system. The
pathological tissues examined included samples of chronic and atrophic gastritis 
as well as adenomas and adenocarcinomas of the colon and rectum.
RESULTS: GATA-4 was abundant in the differentiated epithelial cells of the
proximal parts of the gastrointestinal tract but was absent from the distal
parts. In contrast, GATA-6 was expressed throughout the gastrointestinal
epithelium, and in the distal gut its expression was most intense at the bottom
of the crypts, i.e. cells with proliferative capacity. Both factors were also
present in Barrett's esophagus and metaplasia of the stomach. GATA-6 expression
was reduced in colon carcinoma. Ihh expression overlapped with that of GATA-6
especially in benign gastrointestinal neoplasias.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest differential but overlapping functions for GATA-4
and GATA-6 in the normal gastrointestinal mucosa. Furthermore, GATA-4, GATA-6 and
Ihh expression is altered in premalignant dysplastic lesions and reduced in overt
cancer.

PMCID: PMC2323380
PMID: 18405344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Dev Biol. 2008 May 15;317(2):614-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.03.013. Epub 2008
Mar 20.

Loss of both GATA4 and GATA6 blocks cardiac myocyte differentiation and results
in acardia in mice.

Zhao R(1), Watt AJ, Battle MA, Li J, Bondow BJ, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI, USA.

Despite significant advances in identifying signaling molecules that induce
cardiogenesis in mammals, the transcription factors that control the onset of
cardiac myocyte gene expression have remained elusive. Candidates include the
zinc finger transcription factors GATA binding proteins 4 and 6 (GATA4, GATA6).
The individual loss of either protein in mice results in lethality prior to the
onset of heart development due to defects in the extra-embryonic endoderm;
however, when this extra-embryonic deficiency is circumvented using tetraploid
embryo complementation, cardiac myocyte differentiation initiates normally. Here 
we show that these factors have redundant roles in controlling the onset of
cardiac myocyte differentiation. As a consequence, Gata4(-/-)Gata6(-/-) embryos
completely lack hearts, although second heart field progenitor cells are still
generated. Our data support a model whereby GATA4 or GATA6 are essential for
expression of the network of transcription factors that regulate the onset of
cardiac myocyte gene expression during mammalian development.

PMCID: PMC2423416
PMID: 18400219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Development. 2008 Apr;135(8):1513-24. doi: 10.1242/dev.014340. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Polycomb group proteins Ring1A/B are functionally linked to the core
transcriptional regulatory circuitry to maintain ES cell identity.

Endoh M(1), Endo TA, Endoh T, Fujimura Y, Ohara O, Toyoda T, Otte AP, Okano M,
Brockdorff N, Vidal M, Koseki H.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Research Center for Allergy and Immunology, 1-7-22 Suehiro, Tsurumi-ku, 
Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

The Polycomb group (PcG) proteins mediate heritable silencing of developmental
regulators in metazoans, participating in one of two distinct multimeric protein 
complexes, the Polycomb repressive complexes 1 (PRC1) and 2 (PRC2). Although PRC2
has been shown to share target genes with the core transcription network,
including Oct3/4, to maintain embryonic stem (ES) cells, it is still unclear
whether PcG proteins and the core transcription network are functionally linked. 
Here, we identify an essential role for the core PRC1 components Ring1A/B in
repressing developmental regulators in mouse ES cells and, thereby, in
maintaining ES cell identity. A significant proportion of the PRC1 target genes
are also repressed by Oct3/4. We demonstrate that engagement of PRC1 at target
genes is Oct3/4-dependent, whereas engagement of Oct3/4 is PRC1-independent.
Moreover, upon differentiation induced by Gata6 expression, most of the Ring1A/B 
target genes are derepressed and the binding of Ring1A/B to their target loci is 
also decreased. Collectively, these results indicate that Ring1A/B-mediated
Polycomb silencing functions downstream of the core transcriptional regulatory
circuitry to maintain ES cell identity.

PMID: 18339675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Dev Dyn. 2008 Apr;237(4):918-27. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.21480.

Differences in early lineage segregation between mammals.

Kuijk EW(1), Du Puy L, Van Tol HT, Oei CH, Haagsman HP, Colenbrander B, Roelen
BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Farm Animal Health, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Two lineage segregation events in mammalian development form the trophectoderm,
primitive endoderm, and pluripotent primitive ectoderm. In mouse embryos, Oct4,
Cdx2, Nanog, and Gata6 govern these events, but it is unknown whether this is
conserved between mammals. Here, the expression patterns of these genes and their
products were determined in porcine oocytes and embryos and in bovine embryos.
CDX2 and GATA6 expression in porcine and bovine blastocysts resembled that of
mouse, indicating conserved functions. However, NANOG expression was undetectable
in porcine oocytes and embryos. Some inner cell mass cells in bovine blastocysts 
expressed NANOG protein. OCT4 protein was undetectable in porcine morulae, but
present in both the trophectoderm and the inner cell mass of blastocysts,
suggesting that downregulation of OCT4 in the trophectoderm does not precede
trophectoderm formation. Combined, the results indicate differences in lineage
segregation between mammals.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18330925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Biochemistry. 2008 Mar 25;47(12):3697-704. doi: 10.1021/bi702524v. Epub 2008 Feb 
28.

Regulation of the calreticulin gene by GATA6 and Evi-1 transcription factors.

Qiu Y(1), Lynch J, Guo L, Yatsula B, Perkins AS, Michalak M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
T6G 2H7.

Calreticulin is a Ca (2+)-buffering chaperone of the endoplasmic reticulum. The
protein is highly expressed in embryonic heart but downregulated in postnatal
heart, indicating that expression of calreticulin in the heart is highly
regulated. In this study we identify GATA6 and Evi-1 transcription factors as new
regulators of the calreticulin gene. In neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes
and mouse fibroblasts the calreticulin gene is activated by GATA6 but repressed
by Evi-1. Furthermore, transactivation of the calreticulin gene by GATA6 is
suppressed by Evi-1, suggesting an antagonistic role between both GATA6 and
Evi-1. Using EMSA, ChIP analysis, and site-specific mutagenesis, we showed that
GATA6 and Evi-1 bind to site 1 on the calreticulin promoter. GATA6 and Evi-1 are 
highly expressed early during cardiogenesis of ES cells, suggesting that they may
regulate expression of the calreticulin gene during cardiac development.

PMID: 18303859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Pediatr Surg. 2008 Feb;43(2):362-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2007.10.047.

Downregulation of GATA4 and GATA6 in the heart of rats with nitrofen-induced
diaphragmatic hernia.

Takayasu H(1), Sato H, Sugimoto K, Puri P.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Hospital for Sick Children, University 
College Dublin, 12 Dublin, Ireland.

PURPOSE: The high incidence of cardiac malformations in humans and animal models 
with congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) is well known. The precise molecular
mechanisms underlying cardiac maldevelopment in CDH are still unclear. It has
been reported that GATA4 and GATA6, members of the GATA transcription factor
family, act cooperatively to regulate cardiovascular development, and the levels 
of cardiac GATA4 and GATA6 are important regulators of cardiomyocyte
proliferation, cardiac morphogenesis, and embryo survival. In addition, the
GATA4/GATA6 double heterozygous mutant embryo model displayed a spectrum of
cardiovascular malformations similar to those seen in human CDH and
nitrofen-induced animal models, including ventricular and aortopulmonary septal
defects and thin ventricular myocardium. To test the hypothesis that expression
of GATA4 and GATA6 is reduced in early stages of gestation in a CDH hypoplastic
heart, we investigated the expression of GATA4 and GATA6 in the hearts of
nitrofen-treated rats in early gestation. Wnt2, bone morphogenetic protein 4
(BMP4), and myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C) were also investigated as GATA4/6 
target genes involved in cardiogenesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fetal rat hearts of normal (n = 7) and nitrofen-treated (n
= 7) dams were harvested on embryonic day 13. The expression of GATA4, GATA6,
Wnt2, BMP4, and MEF2C was analyzed in each heart by real-time reverse
transcription-polymerase reaction.
RESULTS: The gene expression of GATA4, GATA6, Wnt2, BMP4, and MEF2C on embryonic 
day 13 were significantly reduced (P < .05) in the hearts of nitrofen-treated
animals compared with normal hearts of equivalent age.
CONCLUSION: Decreased expression of GATA4 and GATA6 and their target genes in the
developing fetal heart may perturb the delicate regulation of cardiovascular
development, resulting in cardiovascular malformations in the nitrofen rat model.

PMID: 18280291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 11;283(15):9828-35. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M707391200. Epub 2008 
Feb 5.

Identification of p300-targeted acetylated residues in GATA4 during hypertrophic 
responses in cardiac myocytes.

Takaya T(1), Kawamura T, Morimoto T, Ono K, Kita T, Shimatsu A, Hasegawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Translational Research and Clinical Research Institute, Kyoto
Medical Center, National Hospital Organization, 1-1 Mukaihata-cho, Fukakusa,
Fushimi-ku, Kyoto, Japan.

A zinc finger protein, GATA4, is one of the hypertrophy-responsive transcription 
factors and increases its DNA binding and transcriptional activities in response 
to hypertrophic stimuli in cardiac myocytes. Activation of GATA4 during this
process is mediated, in part, through acetylation by intrinsic histone
acetyltransferases such as a transcriptional coactivator p300. However,
p300-targeted acetylated sites of GATA4 during myocardial cell hypertrophy have
not been identified. By mutational analysis, we showed that 4 lysine residues
located between amino acids 311 and 322 are required for synergistic activation
of atrial natriuretic factor and endothelin-1 promoters by GATA4 and p300. A
tetra-mutant GATA4, in which these 4 lysine residues were simultaneously mutated,
retained the ability to localize in nuclei and to interact with cofactors
including FOG-2, GATA6, and p300 but lacked p300-induced acetylation, DNA
binding, and transcriptional activities. Furthermore, coexpression of the
tetra-mutant GATA4 with wild-type GATA4 impaired the p300-induced acetylation,
DNA binding, and transcriptional activities of the wild type. When we expressed
the tetra-mutant GATA4 in neonatal rat cardiac myocytes using a lentivirus
vector, this mutant suppressed phenylephrine-induced increases in cell size,
protein synthesis, and expression of hypertrophy-responsive genes. However, its
expression did not affect the basal state. Thus, we have identified the most
critical lysine residues acting as p300-mediated acetylation targets in GATA4
during hypertrophic responses in cardiac myocytes. The results also demonstrate
that GATA4 with simultaneous mutation of these sites specifically suppresses
hypertrophic responses as a dominant-negative form, providing further evidence
for the acetylation of GATA4 as one of critical nuclear events in myocardial cell
hypertrophy.

PMID: 18252717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Appl Immunohistochem Mol Morphol. 2008 Mar;16(2):153-8. doi:
10.1097/PAI.0b013e31815b629c.

GATA-4 and GATA-6 expression in human ovarian surface epithelial carcinoma.

McEachin MD(1), Xu XX, Santoianni RA, Lawson D, Cotsonis G, Cohen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University School of
Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.

GATA-4 and GATA-6 are zinc finger transcription factors named for their
recognition motif and involved in ovarian development and function. GATA factors 
are strongly expressed and primarily localized within the nuclei of ovarian
surface epithelial cells. GATA factors have been previously shown to be expressed
in sex-cord stromal ovarian tumors and may contribute to the tumor phenotype.
Differential expression of GATA-4 within serous and mucinous ovarian carcinomas
has been reported. Using immunohistochemistry, we studied GATA-4 and GATA-6
expression in 50 ovarian surface epithelial carcinomas and examined the
relationship to clinicopathologic parameters and outcome. We found that the
majority of the carcinomas retained GATA-4 expression, whereas approximately
two-thirds of the carcinomas had mislocalization or loss of GATA-6 expression. No
statistically significant correlations were found between histologic type,
histologic grade, or patient outcome and GATA-4. Cytoplasmic GATA-6 expression
tended to correlate with overall survival (P=0.0756). These findings suggest that
although GATA factors play a role in ovarian surface epithelial carcinoma
oncogenesis, they do not seem to affect clinicopathologic parameters.

PMID: 18227727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Dev Biol. 2008 Feb 15;314(2):457-70. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.12.001. Epub 2007 
Dec 8.

A role for GATA-6 in vertebrate chondrogenesis.

Alexandrovich A(1), Qureishi A, Coudert AE, Zhang L, Grigoriadis AE, Shah AM,
Brewer AC, Pizzey JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, King's College London, London SE5 9NU,
UK.

The GATA family of transcription factors are known to play multiple critical
roles in vertebrate developmental processes, including erythropoiesis, endoderm
formation and cardiogenesis. There have been no previous demonstrations of a
functional role for any GATA family member being associated with musculoskeletal 
development but we now identify a possible role for GATA-6 in chondrogenesis. We 
detect abundant levels of GATA-6 mRNA in precartilaginous condensations (PCCs) in
both the axial and appendicular skeleton of mouse embryos and in committed
primary chondrocyte precursors. We also show that the G-protein coupled receptor,
Gpr49, is a target of GATA-6 regulation in differentiating embryonal carcinoma
cells and that, in vivo, the expression domains of the two genes overlap within
PCCs. Finally, we have identified conserved, canonical GATA binding sites within 
the Gpr49 gene locus, and show by EMSAs that GATA-6 can bind to these sites in
vitro. These data therefore suggest that GATA-6 also plays a role in
chondrogenesis and that Gpr49 is a potential direct target of GATA regulation in 
this process.

PMID: 18191120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Mar;1779(3):145-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2007.11.012.
Epub 2007 Dec 14.

GATA-6 is a novel transcriptional repressor of the human Tenascin-C gene
expression in fibroblasts.

Ghatnekar A(1), Trojanowska M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology and Immunology, Medical University of South Carolina,
CSB 912, SC 29425-2229, USA.

In this study we show that GATA-6 is a novel repressor of TN-C gene expression.
We demonstrated that overexpression of GATA-6 in fibroblasts inhibited basal
levels, as well as markedly decreased IL-4- and TGF-beta-induced TN-C mRNA and
protein levels. A GATA-6 response element was mapped to position -467 to -460 of 
the TN-C promoter. In addition, we showed that GATA-6 binds this site both in
vitro and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2295212
PMID: 18177748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Differentiation. 2008 Sep;76(7):760-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-0436.2007.00258.x.
Epub 2008 Jan 3.

Overexpression of COUP-TF1 in murine embryonic stem cells reduces retinoic
acid-associated growth arrest and increases extraembryonic endoderm gene
expression.

Zhuang Y(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Room 
E-409, 1300 York Ave., New York, NY 10021, USA.

Vitamin A (retinol [Rol]) and its metabolites are essential for embryonic
development. The Rol metabolite all-trans retinoic acid (RA) is a biologically
active form of Rol. The orphan nuclear receptor chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter-transcription-factors (COUP-TF) proteins have been implicated in the
regulation of several important biological processes, such as embryonic
development and neuronal cell differentiation. Because there is evidence that
COUP-TFs function in the retinoid signaling network during development and
differentiation, we generated murine embryonic stem (ES) cell lines which stably 
and constitutively overexpress COUP-TF1 (NR2F1) and we analyzed RA-induced
differentiation. COUP-TF1 overexpression resulted in reduced RA-associated growth
arrest. A 2.4+/-0.17-fold higher Nanog mRNA level was seen in COUP-TF1
overexpressing lines, as compared with wild-type (WT) ES cells, after a 72 hr RA 
treatment. We also showed that COUP-TF1 overexpression enhanced RA-induced
extraembryonic endoderm gene expression. Specifically, COUP-TF1 overexpression
increased mRNA levels of GATA6 by 3.3+/-0.3-fold, GATA4 by 3.6+/-0.1-fold,
laminin B1 (LAMB1) by 3.4+/-0.1-fold, LAMC1 by 3.4+/-0.2-fold, Dab2 by
2.4+0.1-fold, and SOX17 by 2.5-fold at 72 hr after RA treatment plus LIF, as
compared with the increases seen in WT ES cells. However, RA-induced neurogenesis
was unaffected by COUP-TF1 overexpression, as shown by the equivalent levels of
expression of NeuroD1, nestin, GAP43 and other neuronal markers. Our results
revealed for the first time that COUP-TF1 is an important signaling molecule
during vitamin A (Rol)-mediated very early stage of embryonic development.

PMID: 18177425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Apr;22(4):781-98. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0513. Epub 2008 Jan
3.

Role of the GATA family of transcription factors in endocrine development,
function, and disease.

Viger RS(1), Guittot SM, Anttonen M, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny-Reproduction Research Unit, Room T1-49, CHUQ Research Centre, 2705
Laurier Boulevard, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada G1V 4G2.
robert.viger@crchul.ulaval.ca

The WGATAR motif is a common nucleotide sequence found in the transcriptional
regulatory regions of numerous genes. In vertebrates, these motifs are bound by
one of six factors (GATA1 to GATA6) that constitute the GATA family of
transcriptional regulatory proteins. Although originally considered for their
roles in hematopoietic cells and the heart, GATA factors are now known to be
expressed in a wide variety of tissues where they act as critical regulators of
cell-specific gene expression. This includes multiple endocrine organs such as
the pituitary, pancreas, adrenals, and especially the gonads. Insights into the
functional roles played by GATA factors in adult organ systems have been hampered
by the early embryonic lethality associated with the different Gata-null mice.
This is now being overcome with the generation of tissue-specific knockout models
and other knockdown strategies. These approaches, together with the increasing
number of human GATA-related pathologies have greatly broadened the scope of
GATA-dependent genes and, importantly, have shown that GATA action is not
necessarily limited to early development. This has been particularly evident in
endocrine organs where GATA factors appear to contribute to the transcription of 
multiple hormone-encoding genes. This review provides an overview of the GATA
family of transcription factors as they relate to endocrine function and disease.

PMCID: PMC2276466
PMID: 18174356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Cell Biol Int. 2008 Feb;32(2):298-303. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Cyclic AMP-dependent proteolysis of GATA-6 expressed on the intracellular
membrane.

Tsuge T(1), Uetani K, Sato R, Ohashi-Kobayashi A, Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Cyclic AMP-dependent proteolysis of GATA-6 was characterized by fusing GATA-6
with the carboxyl-terminal membrane domain of SREBP-2. When the fusion protein
was stably expressed in CHO-K1 cells, it was recovered in the ER membrane. This
protein was processed in a similar manner to SREBP-2 upon cholesterol starvation,
and the GATA-6 moiety moved into the nucleus. The GATA-6 moiety on the membrane
became undetectable in the presence of dbcAMP or cholera toxin. However, H-89,
K-252a, MG115 and lactacystin inhibited this decrease, suggesting that the
cytoplasmic GATA-6 moiety of the fusion protein was degraded by proteasomes
though A-kinase upon elevation of the cellular cAMP concentration.

PMID: 18078765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;19(6):618-27. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Serum response factor micromanaging cardiogenesis.

Niu Z(1), Li A, Zhang SX, Schwartz RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cardiovascular Sciences, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX
77030, USA.

Serum response factor (SRF), a cardiac-enriched transcription factor, is required
for the appearance of beating sarcomeres in the heart. SRF may also direct the
expression of microRNAs (miRs) that inhibit the expression of cardiac regulatory 
factors. The recent knockout of miR-1-2, an SRF gene target, showed defective
heart development, caused in part by the induction of GATA6, Irx4/5, and Hand2,
that may alter cardiac morphogenesis, channel activity, and cell cycling. SRF and
cofactors play an obligatory role in cardiogenesis, as major determinants of
myocyte differentiation not only by regulating the biogenesis of muscle
contractile proteins but also by driving the expression of silencer miRNA.

PMCID: PMC2735128
PMID: 18023168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Dev Biol. 2007 Dec 15;312(2):613-22. Epub 2007 Sep 22.

Gata5 and Gata6 are functionally redundant in zebrafish for specification of
cardiomyocytes.

Holtzinger A(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

An outstanding problem in vertebrate development has been to define the genetic
program that specifies the cardiomyocyte lineage. It has been a challenge to
define the transcription factors that control specification, since candidate gene
knockouts typically cause rather complex morphogenetic defects. In contrast,
Drosophila genetics identified single transcription factors that are essential
for specification of cardiomyocytes from uncommitted mesoderm. For those
vertebrate orthologs, it has been considered that paralogous family members might
compensate for the loss-of-function of individual genes. However, this hypothesis
had not been formally tested. In zebrafish, defects in gata5 can lead to a loss
of myocardial tissue, but most embryos depleted for any single vertebrate
Gata4/5/6 transcription factor develop a cardiac morphogenetic defect, and
cardiomyocytes are specified and differentiate. Here we show that in zebrafish
the gata5 and gata6 genes are redundant for specification of cardiomyocytes.
Embryos depleted of these two gene products are heartless. Restoring either gene 
product is sufficient to rescue cardiomyocyte specification. In contrast, embryos
depleted of Gata4 and Gata6, or Gata4 and Gata5, develop defective heart tubes.
Our study identifies a specific pair of vertebrate transcription factor paralogs 
that is essential for cardiomyocyte specification.

PMCID: PMC2170521
PMID: 17950269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2008 Feb;108(3-5):281-6. Epub 2007 Sep 11.

Regulation of the adrenal androgen biosynthesis.

Rainey WE(1), Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical College of Georgia, 1120 15th Street,
Augusta, GA 30912, USA. wrainey@mcg.edu

The human adrenal reticularis produces the so-called adrenal androgens,
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and DHEA-sulfate (DHEA-S). As opposed to the
cortisol and aldosterone little is known regarding the mechanisms that regulate
the production of the adrenal androgens. Several recent studies have shown that
type II 3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (HSD3B2), cytochrome b5 (CYB5), and
steroid sulfotransferase (SULT2A1) play an important role in the regulation of
adrenal androgen production. Specifically, adrenal production of DHEA-S is
correlated with reticularis expression of SULT2A1 and CYB5. In contrast, HSD3B2
has an inverse correlation with adrenal androgen production likely due to its
unique ability to remove precursors from the pathway leading to DHEA. Therefore, 
its expression is limited to the adrenal glomerulosa/fasciculata but not in
reticularis. The differential expression of these three proteins appears to be
critical for reticularis function. In this review, we focus on studies that have 
begun to define the mechanisms regulating the transcription of these genes.
Understanding the mechanisms controlling differential expression of these
proteins should provide novel information about the human adrenal reticularis and
its production of DHEA and DHEA-S.

PMCID: PMC2699571
PMID: 17945481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Nov 30;363(4):994-1000. Epub 2007 Oct 1.

Determination of genes involved in the early process of molar root development
initiation in rat by modified subtractive hybridization.

Xing X(1), Deng Z, Yang F, Watanabe S, Wen L, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Dentistry, School of Stomatology, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xian 710032, China.

Rat molars and incisors have different root patterning mechanisms: the former
form a multirooted pattern while the latter form a single-rooted analogue. But
the genetic signals that control root patterning are poorly understood. In this
study, to identify the special molecular signals which may lead to the molar root
development, we firstly observed that at embryonic day 19 the molar and the
incisor began differentially developing: the molar formed double-layered cells of
the root sheath while the incisor formed a cervical loop. By using the
subtractive hybridization method, we successfully constructed a subtraction cDNA 
library of the rat molar and incisor tissues. Differentially expressed gene
clones were evaluated by dot-blot and sequencing. Sel1l, Nfic, Edar, GATA6, and
some novel genes were found differentially expressed, which were strongly related
the tooth root patterning. It is anticipated that further study of genes
identified will provide insights into their specific roles in the tooth root
patterning.

PMID: 17923110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 16;282(46):33367-80. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

A cysteine-rich LIM-only protein mediates regulation of smooth muscle-specific
gene expression by cGMP-dependent protein kinase.

Zhang T(1), Zhuang S, Casteel DE, Looney DJ, Boss GR, Pilz RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Cancer Center, University of California, San Diego,
California 92093-0652, USA.

Vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) undergo phenotypic modulation, changing from
a differentiated, contractile to a de-differentiated, synthetic phenotype; the
change is associated with decreased expression of smooth muscle (SM)-specific
genes and loss of cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG), but transfection of PKG
into de-differentiated VSMCs restores SM-specific gene expression. We show that
small interference RNA-mediated down-regulation or pharmacologic inhibition of
PKG reduced SM-specific gene expression in differentiated VSMCs and provide a
mechanism for cGMP/PKG regulation of SM-specific genes involving the
cysteine-rich LIM-only protein CRP4. PKG associated with CRP4 and phosphorylated 
the protein in intact cells. CRP4 had no intrinsic transcriptional activity, but 
exhibited adaptor function, because it acted synergistically with serum response 
factor (SRF) and GATA6 to activate the SM-alpha-actin promoter. cGMP stimulation 
of the promoter required PKG and CRP4 co-expression with SRF and GATA6. A
phosphorylation-deficient mutant CRP4 and a CRP4 deletion mutant deficient in PKG
binding did not support cGMP/PKG stimulation of the SM-alpha-actin promoter. In
the presence of wild-type but not mutant CRP4, cGMP/PKG enhanced SRF binding to a
probe encoding the distal SM-alpha-actin promoter CArG (CC(AT)(6)GG) element.
CRP4 and SRF associated with CArG elements of endogenous SM-specific genes in
intact chromatin. Small interference RNA-mediated down-regulation of CRP4
prevented the positive effects of cGMP/PKG on SM-specific gene expression. In the
presence of CRP4, cGMP/PKG increased SRF- and GATA6-dependent expression of
endogenous SM-specific genes in pluripotent 10T1/2 cells. Thus, CRP4 mediates
cGMP/PKG stimulation of SM-specific gene expression, and PKG plays an important
role in regulating the phenotype of VSMCs.

PMID: 17878170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Dev Biol. 2007 Nov 15;311(2):623-35. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Redundancy and evolution of GATA factor requirements in development of the
myocardium.

Peterkin T(1), Gibson A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

The transcription factors, GATA4, 5 and 6, recognize the same DNA sequence and
are all expressed in the developing myocardium. However, knockout studies in the 
mouse have indicated that none of them are absolutely required for the
specification of the myocardium. Here we present evidence for redundancy in this 
family for the first time. Using morpholinos in both Xenopus and zebrafish
embryos, we show that GATA4 knockdown, for example, only affects cardiac marker
expression in the absence of either GATA5 or GATA6. A similar situation pertains 
for GATA5 in Xenopus whereas, in zebrafish, GATA5 (faust) plays a major role in
driving the myocardial programme. This requirement for GATA5 in zebrafish is for 
induction of the myocardium, in contrast to the GATA6 requirement in both
species, which is for differentiation. This early role for GATA5 in zebrafish
correlates with its earlier expression and with an earlier requirement for BMP
signalling, suggesting that a mutual maintenance loop for GATA, BMP and Nkx
expression is the evolutionarily conserved entity.

PMCID: PMC2279743
PMID: 17869240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Dec;92(12):4792-801. Epub 2007 Sep 11.

Developmental changes in human fetal testicular cell numbers and messenger
ribonucleic acid levels during the second trimester.

O'Shaughnessy PJ(1), Baker PJ, Monteiro A, Cassie S, Bhattacharya S, Fowler PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Sciences, University of Glasgow Veterinary School, Bearsden
Road, Glasgow G61 1QH, United Kingdom. p.j.o'shaughnessy@vet.gla.ac.uk

CONTEXT: Normal fetal testis development is essential for masculinization and
subsequent adult fertility. The second trimester is a critical period of human
testicular development and masculinization, but there is a paucity of reliable
developmental data.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to analyze second-trimester human
testicular morphology and function.
DESIGN: This was an observational study of second-trimester testis development.
SETTING: The study was conducted at the Universities of Glasgow and Aberdeen.
PATIENTS/PARTICIPANTS: Testes were collected from 57 morphologically normal
fetuses of women undergoing elective termination of normally progressing
pregnancies (11-19 wk gestation).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Testicular morphology, cell numbers, and quantitative
expression of 22 key testicular genes were determined.
RESULTS: Sertoli cell and germ cell number increased exponentially throughout the
second trimester. Leydig cell number initially increased exponentially but slowed
toward 19 wk. Transcripts encoding Sertoli (KITL, FGF9, SOX9, FSHR, WT1) and germ
(CKIT, TFAP2C) cell-specific products increased per testis through the second
trimester, but expression per cell was static apart from TFAP2C, which declined. 
Leydig cell transcripts (HSD17B3, CYP11A1, PTC1, CYP17, LHR, INSL3) also remained
static per cell. Testicular expression of adrenal transcripts MC2R, CYP11B1, and 
CYP21 was detectable but unchanged. Expression of other transcripts known or
postulated to be involved in testicular development (GATA4, GATA6, CXORF6, WNT2B,
WNT4, WNT5A) increased significantly per testis during the second trimester.
CONCLUSIONS: The second trimester is essential for the establishment of Sertoli
and germ cell numbers. Sertoli and Leydig cells are active throughout the period,
but there is no evidence of changing transcript levels.

PMID: 17848411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Endocr J. 2007 Dec;54(5):783-9. Epub 2007 Sep 4.

Transcription factor GATA-6 in the human adrenocortex: association with adrenal
development and aging.

Nakamura Y(1), Suzuki T, Sasano H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine,
Sendai, Japan.

Transcription factor GATA-6 has been demonstrated to be expressed in the human
fetal and adult adrenal cortex and has been postulated to play an important role 
in adrenal steroid biosynthesis. However, the status for GATA-6 expression has
not been examined in detail especially in relation to adrenal development and
aging. Therefore, in this study, we analyzed GATA-6 expression in 11 human fetal 
adrenals and 19 adrenal glands after birth using immunohistochemistry. In the
fetal adrenals, the status of GATA-6 immunoreactivity in the definitive zone was 
significantly and directly correlated with ages of development (P<0.05) but in
the fetal zone was significantly and inversely correlated with ages of
development (P<0.05). After birth, GATA-6 was more abundant in the zona
fasciculata compared to other zones (P<0.05) but was not related to aging of the 
subject. These results suggest that GATA-6 expression is involved in the
regulation of corticosteroid production in both the human fetal and adult
adrenals, and the changes of intra-adrenal GATA-6 expression in the human fetal
adrenal plays important roles in developmental changes of both the definitive and
fetal zones.

PMID: 17785913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Stem Cells Dev. 2007 Aug;16(4):605-13.

GATA factors induce mouse embryonic stem cell differentiation toward
extraembryonic endoderm.

Zhang C(1), Ye X, Zhang H, Ding M, Deng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, College of Life Sciences, Peking
University, Beijing, China.

The GATA family of transcription factors are implicated in early embryonic
development. There are six factors in this family in vertebrates. GATA4 and GATA6
have been demonstrated to induce mouse embryonic stem (mES) cells differentiation
toward extraembryonic endoderm (ExE). We investigated the effect of GATA3 on the 
differentiation of mES cells both in the ES cell and in the embryoid body (EB)
states. The results demonstrate that GATA3 overexpression can initiate the ES
cell differentiation program toward ExE. Furthermore, overexpression of GATA1 and
GATA2 in ES cells and EBs resulted in similar effects. We believe this finding
can augment our understanding of mouse ES cell differentiation.

PMID: 17784834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mod Pathol. 2007 Sep;20(9):974-89. Epub 2007 Jul 20.

Gene expression profiling in human gastric mucosa infected with Helicobacter
pylori.

Hofman VJ(1), Moreilhon C, Brest PD, Lassalle S, Le Brigand K, Sicard D, Raymond 
J, Lamarque D, Hébuterne XA, Mari B, Barbry PJ, Hofman PM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, INSERM ERI-21, Nice Cedex, France. hofman.p@chu-nice.fr

Pathogenic mechanisms associated with Helicobacter pylori infection enhance
susceptibility of the gastric epithelium to carcinogenic conversion. We have
characterized the gene expression profiles of gastric biopsies from 69 French
Caucasian patients, of which 43 (62%) were infected with H. pylori. The bacterium
was detected in 27 of the 42 antral biopsies examined and in 16 of the 27 fundic 
biopsies. Infected biopsies were selected for the presence of chronic active
gastritis, in absence of metaplasia and dysplasia of the gastric mucosa. Infected
antral and fundic biopsies exhibited distinct transcriptional responses. Altered 
responses were linked with: (1) the extent of polymorphonuclear leukocyte
infiltration, (2) bacterial density, and (3) the presence of the virulence
factors vacA, babA2, and cagA. Robust modulation of transcripts associated with
Toll-like receptors, signal transduction, the immune response, apoptosis, and the
cell cycle was consistent with expected responses to Gram-negative bacterial
infection. Altered expression of interferon-regulated genes (IFITM1, IRF4,
STAT6), indicative of major histocompatibility complex (MHC) II-mediated and
Th1-specific responses, as well as altered expression of GATA6, have previously
been described in precancerous states. Upregulation of genes abundantly expressed
in cancer tissues (UBD, CXCL13, LY96, MAPK8, MMP7, RANKL, CCL18) or in stem cells
(IFITM1 and WFDC2) may reveal a molecular switch towards a premalignant state in 
infected tissues. Tissue microarray analysis of a large number of biopsies, which
were either positive or negative for the cag-A virulence factor, when compared to
each other and to noninfected controls, confirmed observed gene alterations at
the protein level, for eight key transcripts. This study provides
'proof-of-principle' data for identifying molecular mechanisms driving H.
pylori-associated carcinogenesis before morphological evidence of changes along
the neoplastic progression pathway.

PMID: 17643099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Sep;293(3):C1093-102. Epub 2007 Jul 11.

GATA-6 mediates human bladder smooth muscle differentiation: involvement of a
novel enhancer element in regulating alpha-smooth muscle actin gene expression.

Kanematsu A(1), Ramachandran A, Adam RM.

Author information: 
(1)Urological Diseases Research Center, John F. Enders Research Laboratories, Rm.
1077, 300 Longwood Ave., Boston, MA 02115, USA.
rosalyn.adam@childrens.harvard.edu

Hollow organs exposed to pathological stimuli undergo phenotypic modulation
characterized by altered expression of smooth muscle contractile proteins and
loss of normal function. The molecular mechanisms that regulate smooth muscle
differentiation, especially in organs other than the vasculature, are poorly
understood. In this study, we describe a role for the GATA-6 transcription factor
in regulation of human bladder smooth muscle differentiation. Knockdown of
endogenous GATA-6 in primary human bladder smooth muscle cells (pBSMC) led to
decreased mRNA levels of the differentiation markers alpha-smooth muscle actin
(alpha-SMA), calponin, and smooth muscle myosin heavy chain. Similar effects were
obtained following downregulation of GATA-6 by forskolin-induced elevation of
intracellular cAMP levels. Forskolin treatment of pBSMC abolished recruitment of 
GATA-6 to the alpha-SMA promoter in vivo and reduced activity of human alpha-SMA 
promoter-directed gene expression by >60%. This inhibitory effect was rescued by 
enforced expression of wild-type GATA-6 but not by a zinc-finger-deleted mutant, 
GATA-6-DeltaZF, which lacks DNA-binding ability. In silico analysis of a region
of the human alpha-SMA promoter, described previously as a transcriptional
enhancer, identified a putative GATA-binding site at position -919/-913. Point
mutation of this site in SMA-Luc abrogated GATA-6-induced activation of promoter 
activity. Together, these results provide the first evidence for a functional
role for GATA-6 in regulation of bladder smooth muscle differentiation. In
addition, these findings demonstrate that GATA-6 regulates human alpha-SMA
expression via a novel regulatory cis element in the alpha-SMA promoter-enhancer.

PMID: 17626241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Stem Cells. 2007 Oct;25(10):2534-42. Epub 2007 Jul 5.

A heterogeneous expression pattern for Nanog in embryonic stem cells.

Singh AM(1), Hamazaki T, Hankowski KE, Terada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Florida College of Medicine, Box
100275, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

Nanog is a critical homeodomain factor responsible for maintaining embryonic stem
(ES) cell self-renewal and pluripotency. Of interest, Nanog expression is not
homogeneous in the conventional culture of murine ES cells. A Nanog-high
population expresses markers for pluripotent ES cells, whereas a Nanog-low
population expresses markers for primitive endoderm, such as Gata6. Since the
inner cell mass of early blastocysts has recently been reported to be
heterogeneous in terms of Nanog and Gata6 expression, ES cells appear to closely 
resemble the developing stage from which they originate. We further demonstrate
that Nanog can directly repress Gata6 expression through its binding to the
proximal promoter region of the Gata6 gene and that overexpression of Nanog
reduces heterogeneity during ES cell maintenance. Interestingly, Nanog
heterogeneity does not correlate with the heterogeneous expression of
stage-specific embryonic antigen-1, suggesting that multiple but overlapping
levels of heterogeneity may exist in ES cells. These findings provide insight
into the factors that control ES cell self-renewal and the earliest lineage
commitment to primitive endoderm while also suggesting methods to promote
homogeneity during ES cell maintenance. Disclosure of potential conflicts of
interest is found at the end of this article.

PMID: 17615266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Jul 3;7:80.

Extra-embryonic endoderm cells derived from ES cells induced by GATA factors
acquire the character of XEN cells.

Shimosato D(1), Shiki M, Niwa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology (CDB), Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.
dsk-s@cdb.riken.jp <dsk-s@cdb.riken.jp>

BACKGROUND: Three types of cell lines have been established from mouse
blastocysts: embryonic stem (ES) cells, trophoblast stem (TS) cells, and
extra-embryonic endoderm (XEN) cells, which have the potential to differentiate
into their respective cognate lineages. ES cells can differentiate in vitro not
only into somatic cell lineages but into extra-embryonic lineages, including
trophectoderm and extra-embryonic endoderm (ExEn) as well. TS cells can be
established from ES cells by the artificial repression of Oct3/4 or the
upregulation of Cdx2 in the presence of FGF4 on feeder cells. The relationship
between these embryo-derived XEN cells and ES cell-derived ExEn cell lines
remains unclear, although we have previously reported that overexpression of
Gata4 or Gata6 induces differentiation of mouse ES cells into extra-embryonic
endoderm in vitro.
RESULTS: A system in which GATA factors were conditionally activated revealed
that the cells continue to proliferate while expressing a set of extra-embryonic 
endoderm markers, and, following injection into blastocysts, contribute only to
the extra-embryonic endoderm lineage in vivo. Although the in vivo contribution
is limited to cells of parietal endoderm lineage, Gata-induced extra-embryonic
endoderm cells (gExEn) can be induced to differentiate into visceral
endoderm-like cells in vitro by repression of Gata6. During early passage, the
propagation of gExEn cells is dependent on the expression of the Gata6 transgene.
These cells, however, lose this dependency following establishment of endogenous 
Gata6 expression.
CONCLUSION: We show here that Gata-induced extra-embryonic endoderm cells derived
from ES cells mimic the character of XEN cells. These findings indicate that Gata
transcription factors are sufficient for the derivation and propagation of
XEN-like extra-embryonic endoderm cells from ES cells.

PMCID: PMC1933422
PMID: 17605826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Jul 15;273(1-2):59-67. Epub 2007 May 16.

Cardiac BNP gene activation by angiotensin II in vivo.

Majalahti T(1), Suo-Palosaari M, Sármán B, Hautala N, Pikkarainen S, Tokola H,
Vuolteenaho O, Wang J, Paradis P, Nemer M, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu FIN-90014, 
Finland.

The transcription factors involved in the activation of cardiac gene expression
by angiotensin II (Ang II) in vivo are not well understood. Here we studied the
contribution of transcriptional elements to the activation of the cardiac B-type 
natriuretic peptide (BNP) gene promoter by Ang II in conscious rats and in
angiotensin II type 1 receptor (AT1R) transgenic mice. Rat BNP luciferase
reporter gene constructs were injected into the left ventricular wall. The mean
luciferase activity was 1.8-fold higher (P<0.05) in the ventricles of animals
subjected to 2-week Ang II infusion as compared with vehicle infusion. Our
results indicate that GATA binding sites at -90 and -81 in the rat BNP promoter
are essential for the in vivo response to Ang II. The GATA factor binding to
these sites is GATA-4. BNP mRNA levels and GATA-4 binding activity are also
increased in the hypertrophied hearts of aged AT1R transgenic mice.

PMID: 17587490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Development. 2007 Jun;134(11):2041-50.

Bmp and Fgf signaling are essential for liver specification in zebrafish.

Shin D(1), Shin CH, Tucker J, Ober EA, Rentzsch F, Poss KD, Hammerschmidt M,
Mullins MC, Stainier DY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Programs in Developmental Biology, 
Genetics and Human Genetics, Liver Center, University of California, San
Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Based on data from in vitro tissue explant and ex vivo cell/bead implantation
experiments, Bmp and Fgf signaling have been proposed to regulate hepatic
specification. However, genetic evidence for this hypothesis has been lacking.
Here, we provide in vivo genetic evidence that Bmp and Fgf signaling are
essential for hepatic specification. We utilized transgenic zebrafish that
overexpress dominant-negative forms of Bmp or Fgf receptors following heat-shock 
induction. These transgenes allow one to bypass the early embryonic requirements 
for Bmp and Fgf signaling, and also to completely block Bmp or Fgf signaling. We 
found that the expression of hhex and prox1, the earliest liver markers in
zebrafish, was severely reduced in the liver region when Bmp or Fgf signaling was
blocked just before hepatic specification. However, hhex and prox1 expression in 
adjacent endodermal and mesodermal tissues appeared unaffected by these
manipulations. Additional genetic studies indicate that the endoderm maintains
competence for Bmp-mediated hepatogenesis over an extended window of embryonic
development. Altogether, these data provide the first genetic evidence that Bmp
and Fgf signaling are essential for hepatic specification, and suggest that
endodermal cells remain competent to differentiate into hepatocytes for longer
than anticipated.

PMID: 17507405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 8;104(19):7737-8. Epub 2007 May 3.

Trapping the mouse genome to hunt human alterations.

Bleau AM(1), Holland EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Genetics, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 8;104(19):8053-8.

PMCID: PMC1876515
PMID: 17483476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Biochem Cell Biol. 2007 Feb;85(1):121-32.

BMPs regulate differentiation of a putative visceral endoderm layer within human 
embryonic stem-cell-derived embryoid bodies.

Conley BJ(1), Ellis S, Gulluyan L, Mollard R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Reproduction and Development, Monash Institute of Medical Research,
Monash University, Clayton 3168, Australia. brock.conley@gmail.com

Human embryonic stem cells (HESCs), pluripotent cells derived from the inner cell
mass (ICM) of human blastocysts, represent a novel tool for the study of early
human developmental events. When cultured in suspension with serum, HESCs form
spherical structures resembling embryoid bodies (EBs). We show that
differentiation of HESCs within EBs occurs radially, with central cells then
undergoing apoptosis in association with EB cavitation. Cells within the outer
layer of cavitating EBs display stage-specific immunoreactivity to pan-keratin,
cytokeratin-8, GATA6, alpha-fetoprotein, and transthyretin specific antibodies,
and hybridization to disabled-2, GATA4, and GATA6 specific riboprobes.
Transmission electron microscopy of these cells reveals clathrin-coated
micropinocytotic vesicles, microvilli, and many vacuoles, a phenotype consistent 
with mouse visceral endoderm (VE) rather than mouse definitive or parietal
endoderm. When cultured in media supplemented with the BMP inhibitor noggin, or
in the absence of serum, HESC derivatives do not develop the mouse VE-like
phenotype. The addition of BMP-4 to noggin-treated HESCs cultured in serum or in 
serum-free conditions reconstituted development of the VE-like phenotype. These
data demonstrate that human EBs undergo developmental events similar to those of 
mouse EBs and that in vitro BMP signalling induces derivatives of the human ICM
to express a phenotype similar to mouse VE.

PMID: 17464352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 8;104(19):8053-8. Epub 2007 Apr 26.

GATA6 is an astrocytoma tumor suppressor gene identified by gene trapping of
mouse glioma model.

Kamnasaran D(1), Qian B, Hawkins C, Stanford WL, Guha A.

Author information: 
(1)The Arthur and Sonia Labatts Brain Tumor Research Centre, The Hospital for
Sick Children, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada M5G 1X8.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 May 8;104(19):7737-8.

Malignant astrocytomas are the most common and lethal adult primary brain tumor. 
Retroviral gene trapping of nontransformed neonatal astrocytes from a glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP):(V12)Ha-Ras murine astrocytoma model led to
isolation of the transcription factor Gata6. Loss of Gata6 resulted in enhanced
proliferation and transformation of astrocytes. Human malignant astrocytoma cell 
lines, explant xenografts, and operative specimens demonstrated loss of GATA6
expression. Loss-of-function GATA6 mutations with loss of heterozygosity of the
GATA6 locus were found in human malignant astrocytoma specimens but not in
lower-grade astrocytomas or normal adult astrocytes. Knockdown of Gata6
expression in (V12)Ha-Ras or p53-/- astrocytes, but not in parental murine or
human astrocytes, led to acceleration of tumorgenesis. Knockin GATA6 expression
in human malignant astrocytoma cells reduced their tumorgenic growth with
decreased VEGF expression. Collectively, these data demonstrate that GATA6,
isolated from a murine astrocytoma model, is a novel tumor suppressor gene that
is a direct target of mutations during malignant progression of murine and human 
astrocytomas. This work also demonstrates the utility of random mutagenesis
strategies, such as gene trapping, on murine cancer models toward discovery of
novel genetic alterations in corresponding human cancers.

PMCID: PMC1876570
PMID: 17463088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2007 May;42(5):946-53. Epub 2007 Feb 22.

Characterization of sinoatrial node in four conduction system marker mice.

Viswanathan S(1), Burch JB, Fishman GI, Moskowitz IP, Benson DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
University of Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The specialized cardiac conduction system (CCS) consists of the sinoatrial node
(SAN) and the atrioventricular (AV) conduction system (AVCS), which includes
proximal (AV node, bundle of His and bundle branches) and distal (Purkinje
fibers) components. In four CCS marker mice [two transgenic (cGATA6|lacZ,
CCS|lacZ) and two targeted gene knock-in (minK|lacZ, Hop|lacZ)] the expression of
the lacZ gene (beta-gal) has been reported to mark portions of the proximal and
distal AVCS; the expression of this marker in the adult SAN is unknown. The
primary objective of this study was to analyze the utility of these marker mice
in the identification of the SAN. Intercaval and interventricular septal regions,
containing all the components of the CCS, were freshly dissected from adult mice 
based on the anatomical landmarks and sectioned. Immunohistochemical
characterization was performed with SAN markers (Cx45, HCN4), compared to the
reporter expression (beta-gal) and markers of the working myocardium (Cx40 and
Cx43). In all four of the CCS marker mice, we found that beta-gal expression is
consistently observed in the proximal and distal AVCS. However, the presence of
lacZ gene expression in the working myocardium outside the CCS and/or the absence
of this reporter expression in the SAN prevent the effective use of these mice to
identify the SAN, leading us to conclude that none of the four CCS marker mice we
studied specifically mark the SAN.

PMCID: PMC1936434
PMID: 17459410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Am J Pathol. 2007 May;170(5):1750-62.

Histological and culture studies with respect to ABCG2 expression support the
existence of a cancer cell hierarchy in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zen Y(1), Fujii T, Yoshikawa S, Takamura H, Tani T, Ohta T, Nakanuma Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology, Kanazawa University Graduate School of
Medicine, 13-1 Takaramachi, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan.

In this study, we examined the possible involvement of progenitor cells in the
carcinogenesis of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) using tissue specimens and
cell lines. We used ATP-binding cassette transporter ABCG2 as a progenitor cell
marker. Immunohistochemically, ABCG2(+) hepatocytes were observed in the
periportal areas of the dysplastic nodule, and ABCG2(+) cancer cells were also
scattered or focally clustered in HCC. We sorted the cultured HCC cells (HuH7 and
PLC5) into ABCG2(+) and ABCG2(-) subpopulations and then subcultured them for 4
weeks. ABCG2(+) cells could generate ABCG2(+) and ABCG2(-) progenies during
subculture, whereas ABCG2(-) cells bore only ABCG2(-) cells, suggesting that a
cancer cell hierarchy with reference to ABCG2 exists in HCC cells and that
ABCG2(+) cells reside at the higher rank in that hierarchy. Interestingly, other 
progenitor cell markers including cytokeratin 19 and alpha-fetoprotein were
mainly expressed in ABCG2(+) subpopulations. Conversely, albumin expression was
more intense in ABCG2(-) cells. In addition, the expression patterns of
transcription factors (GATA6, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha, and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta) in ABCG2(+) and ABCG2(-) cells resembled
those during normal liver development. In conclusion, this study suggests that
cancer cells with ABCG2 expression might play a central role in
hepatocarcinogenesis and the maintenance of the cancer cell hierarchy of human
HCC.

PMCID: PMC1854968
PMID: 17456779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Apr 23;7:37.

Development of the mammalian liver and ventral pancreas is dependent on GATA4.

Watt AJ(1), Zhao R, Li J, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53202, USA. awatt1@staffmail.ed.ac.uk
<awatt1@staffmail.ed.ac.uk>

BACKGROUND: In the mouse, the parenchyma of both the liver and ventral pancreas
is specified from adjacent domains of the ventral foregut endoderm. GATA4, a zinc
finger transcription factor, is strongly expressed in these endodermal domains
and molecular analyses have implicated GATA4 in potentiating liver gene
expression during the onset of hepatogenesis. We therefore hypothesized that
GATA4 has an integral role in controlling the early stages of pancreatic and
liver development.
RESULTS: To determine whether GATA4 contributes to development of either the
pancreas or liver we characterized the formation of pancreatic and hepatic
tissues in embryos derived from Gata4-/- ES cells by tetraploid embryo
complementation. In the absence of GATA4, development of the liver and ventral
pancreas was disrupted. At embryonic day (E) 9.5, the liver bud failed to expand 
although, contrary to expectations, the hepatic endoderm was able to form a
pseudo-stratified epithelial liver bud that expressed hepatic genes. Moreover, as
we had shown previously, the embryos lacked septum transversum mesenchyme
suggesting that liver defects may be cell non-autonomous. Analyses of pancreatic 
development revealed a complete absence of the ventral but not the dorsal
pancreas in Gata4-/- embryos. Moreover, Gata6-/- embryos displayed a similar,
although less dramatic phenotype, suggesting a critical role for multiple GATA
factors at the earliest stages of ventral pancreas development.
CONCLUSION: This study defines integral roles for GATA factors in controlling
early development of the mammalian liver and pancreas.

PMCID: PMC1877807
PMID: 17451603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Stem Cells. 2007 Jul;25(7):1664-74. Epub 2007 Apr 19.

Dissecting the molecular hierarchy for mesendoderm differentiation through a
combination of embryonic stem cell culture and RNA interference.

Izumi N(1), Era T, Akimaru H, Yasunaga M, Nishikawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Stem Cell Biology, RIKEN Center for Developmental Biology,
2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Chuo-ku, Kobe 650-0047, Japan.

Although there is a criticism that embryonic stem (ES) cell differentiation does 
not always reflect the differentiation process involved in mouse development, it 
is a suitable model system to dissect the specific differentiation pathway. We
established the culture conditions that selectively differentiated mouse ES cells
into three germ layers containing mesendoderm, definitive endoderm (DE), visceral
endoderm (VE), mesoderm, and neuroectoderm. However, the molecular mechanisms of 
differentiation under each specific condition still remain unclear. Here, in
combination with the RNA interference-mediated gene knockdown (KD) method, we
show that Eomesodermin (Eomes), Mixl1, Brachyury (T), and GATA6 are major
molecular determinants in the differentiation of mesendoderm, DE, VE, and
mesoderm. Eomes plays a pivotal role in an early stage of mesendoderm
differentiation, whereas Mixl1 does the same in the later stage where mesendoderm
differentiates into DE. Further analyses of quantitative reverse transcription
polymerase chain reaction and overexpression of Mixl1 demonstrated that Mixl1 is 
genetically a downstream molecule of Eomes. In addition, both Eomes and Mixl1 act
as negative regulators of T expression. This strategy also reveals that Eomes and
T play cell-autonomous roles in platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha
(PDGFRalpha)+ vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2)+ and
PDGFRalpha+ mesoderm generations, respectively. Our results obtained from this
study are fully consistent with previous knockout studies of those genes. The
present study, therefore, demonstrates that the major molecular mechanism
underlying in vitro ES cell differentiation largely recapitulates that in actual 
embryogenesis, and the combination of our culture system and RNAi-mediated gene
KD is an useful tool to elucidate the molecular hierarchy in in vitro ES cell
differentiation. Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest is found at the
end of this article.

PMID: 17446562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;27(12):4248-60. Epub 2007 Apr 2.

Cooperative interaction between hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha and GATA
transcription factors regulates ATP-binding cassette sterol transporters ABCG5
and ABCG8.

Sumi K(1), Tanaka T, Uchida A, Magoori K, Urashima Y, Ohashi R, Ohguchi H,
Okamura M, Kudo H, Daigo K, Maejima T, Kojima N, Sakakibara I, Jiang S, Hasegawa 
G, Kim I, Osborne TF, Naito M, Gonzalez FJ, Hamakubo T, Kodama T, Sakai J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Systems Biology and Medicine, Research Center for Advanced
Science and Technology, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Komaba, Meguro, Tokyo, Japan.

Cholesterol homeostasis is maintained by coordinate regulation of cholesterol
synthesis and its conversion to bile acids in the liver. The excretion of
cholesterol from liver and intestine is regulated by ATP-binding cassette
half-transporters ABCG5 and ABCG8. The genes for these two proteins are closely
linked and divergently transcribed from a common intergenic promoter region.
Here, we identified a binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha) in the ABCG5/ABCG8 intergenic promoter, through which HNF4alpha
strongly activated the expression of a reporter gene in both directions. The
HNF4alpha-responsive element is flanked by two conserved GATA boxes that were
also required for stimulation by HNF4alpha. GATA4 and GATA6 bind to the GATA
boxes, coexpression of GATA4 and HNF4alpha leads to a striking synergistic
activation of both the ABCG5 and the ABCG8 promoters, and binding sites for
HNF4alpha and GATA were essential for maximal synergism. We also show that
HNF4alpha, GATA4, and GATA6 colocalize in the nuclei of HepG2 cells and that a
physical interaction between HNF4alpha and GATA4 is critical for the synergistic 
response. This is the first demonstration that HNF4alpha acts synergistically
with GATA factors to activate gene expression in a bidirectional fashion.

PMCID: PMC1900057
PMID: 17403900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Int J Oncol. 2007 May;30(5):1273-7.

Conserved POU/OCT- and GATA-binding sites in 5'-flanking promoter region of
mammalian WNT8B orthologs.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo, Japan.

WNT family members are secreted-type glycoproteins regulating cell fate, planar
cell polarity, cell adhesion, and cell movement. WNT signals are
context-dependently transduced to the canonical pathway for the transcriptional
up-regulation of MYC, CCND1, FGF20, JAG1, WISP1 and DKK1 genes, and also to the
non-canonical pathway for the activation of RHOA, JNK, PKC, NFAT and NLK
signaling cascades. We cloned and characterized the wild-type human WNT8B, while 
another group the aberrant human WNT8B with Gly230Ala and Arg284Leu amino-acid
substitutions. Although WNT8B is undetectable in normal adult tissues by using
Northern blot analyses, WNT8B is expressed in gastric cancer, pancreatic cancer, 
colorectal cancer, breast cancer, and embryonal tumors. Here, comparative
integromics on WNT8B orthologs were investigated by using bioinformatics
(Techint) and human intelligence (Humint). Cow Wnt8b gene was identified within
NW_001494361.1 genome sequence. Predicted sequence XM_582222.3 was an artificial 
cow Wnt8b with aberrant prediction for the first exon. Cow Wnt8b complete coding 
sequence was found to encode a 350-amino-acid protein, which showed 96.9%
total-amino-acid identity with human WNT8B. Comparative proteomics revealed that 
N-terminal signal peptide, 22 Cys residues, two Asn-linked glycosylation sites,
Gly230, and Arg284 of human WNT8B were conserved among mammalian WNT8B orthologs.
Comparative genomics revealed that POU/OCT- and GATA-binding sites in the
5'-flanking promoter region were conserved among human, chimpanzee, cow, mouse,
and rat WNT8B orthologs. In silico expression analyses revealed that human WNT8B 
was expressed in embryoid body derived from embryonic stem (ES) cells, hepatocyte
progenitors derived from ES cells, fetal brain, diffuse-type gastric cancer,
colorectal cancer, prostate cancer, and ovarian fibrotheoma. Based on the
expression profiles of POU and GATA family transcription factors, it was revealed
that WNT8B expression in hepatocyte progenitors derived from human ES cells is
due to POU5F1 (OCT3/OCT4) and GATA3, and also that WNT8B expression in
diffuse-type gastric cancer is due to POU5F1 and GATA6.

PMID: 17390031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2007 Apr 15;269(1-2):38-45. Epub 2007 Feb 6.

Adrenocortical tumorigenesis, luteinizing hormone receptor and transcription
factors GATA-4 and GATA-6.

Vuorenoja S(1), Rivero-Muller A, Kiiveri S, Bielinska M, Heikinheimo M, Wilson
DB, Huhtaniemi IT, Rahman NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Turku, FIN-20520 Turku, Finland.

Luteinizing hormone (LH/hCG) responsiveness of normal and pathological human
adrenal glands as well as the possibility of constitutive expressions of
luteinizing hormone receptor (LHR) in adrenal cortex has been reported. Some
recent studies showed a correlation between the LHR and abundant GATA-4
expression in both metastasizing and non-metastasizing human adrenocortical
tumors, but not in normal adrenals, implicating the putative relevance of LHR and
GATA-4 for adrenocortical pathophysiology. However, the physio- and
pathophysiological significance of LHR and GATA-4 in the mechanism of
adrenocortical tumorigenesis remains unclear. The paucity of suitable models for 
adrenal tumorigenesis makes the establishment of proper animal models highly
important. LHR expression in the murine adrenal gland is an exception and not
found in wild-type (WT) animal. We have previously shown that ectopic LHR
expression in the murine adrenal gland can be induced by chronically elevated LH 
levels. We have generated a gonadotropin-responsive adrenal tumor model in
gonadectomized transgenic (TG) mice expressing the inhibin alpha promoter/Simian 
Virus 40 T antigen transgene (inhalpha/Tag). Given the induction of expression
and regulation of GATA-4 and GATA-6 zinc finger transcription factors in the
gonads by gonadotropins, this review will explore their relationship to LHR
expression and their role in adrenocortical tumorigenesis. A functional link
between LHR and GATA-4 actions in the adrenal pathophysiology is proposed.

PMID: 17337116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Pediatr Surg. 2007 Feb;42(2):426-30.

Down-regulation of Wnt signal pathway in nitrofen-induced hypoplastic lung.

Takayasu H(1), Nakazawa N, Montedonico S, Puri P.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Hospital for Sick Children, Dublin,
University College Dublin, 12 Dublin, Ireland.

PURPOSE: The pathogenesis of pulmonary hypoplasia associated with congenital
diaphragmatic hernia is poorly understood. Recently, it has been reported that
Wnt signaling pathway plays a critical role in branching lung morphogenesis. Mice
lacking Wnt7b gene die soon after birth because of respiratory failure and
display severe lung hypoplasia. Wnt2 gene is expressed in the distal airway
during development. To test the hypothesis that Wnt-mediated signaling is altered
in nitrofen-induced hypoplastic lungs, we examined the expression of Wnt genes
and Wnt target gene, BMP4 in normal and nitrofen-treated lungs.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fetal rat lungs of normal (n = 24) and nitrofen-treated (n
= 24) dams were harvested on embryonic day (E)15, E17, E19, and E21. The
expression of GATA6, the Wnt genes (Wnt7b, Wnt2), and BMP4 was analyzed in each
lung by real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: The gene expression of Wnt7b, Wnt2, and BMP4 on E15 was significantly
reduced (P < .05) in lungs from nitrofen-treated animals compared with normal
lungs. The expression level of GATA6, which has been reported to transactivate
Wnt7b expression, was also significantly reduced (P < .05) in lungs from the
nitrofen group.
CONCLUSION: Our results provide evidence for the first time that the Wnt
signaling pathway is down-regulated in nitrofen-induced hypoplastic lungs in the 
early stages of lung development. Decreased expression of GATA6 may account for
the down-regulation of Wnt signal pathway. These data suggest that the
down-regulation of Wnt signaling pathway may disrupt branching lung
morphogenesis, resulting in pulmonary hypoplasia in the nitrofen rat model of
congenital diaphragmatic hernia.

PMID: 17270562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Reproduction. 2007 Jan;133(1):231-42.

Simultaneous gene quantitation of multiple genes in individual bovine nuclear
transfer blastocysts.

Smith C(1), Berg D, Beaumont S, Standley NT, Wells DN, Pfeffer PL.

Author information: 
(1)AgResearch, Ruakura Campus, East Street, Hamilton, New Zealand.

During somatic cell nuclear transfer (NT), the transcriptional status of the
donor cell has to be reprogrammed to reflect that of an embryo. We analysed the
accuracy of this process by comparing transcript levels of four developmentally
important genes (Oct4, Otx2, Ifitm3, GATA6), a gene involved in epigenetic
regulation (Dnmt3a) and three housekeeping genes (beta-actin, beta-tubulin and
GAPDH) in 21 NT blastocysts with that in genetically half-identical in vitro
produced (IVP, n=19) and in vivo (n=15) bovine embryos. We have optimised an
RNA-isolation and SYBR-green-based real-time RT-PCR procedure allowing the
reproducible absolute quantification of multiple genes from a single blastocyst. 
Our data indicated that transcript levels did not differ significantly between
stage and grade-matched zona-free NT and IVP embryos except for Ifitm3/Fragilis, 
which was expressed at twofold higher levels in NT blastocysts. Ifitm3 expression
is confined to the inner cell mass at day 7 blastocysts and to the epiblast in
day 14 embryos. No ectopic expression in the trophectoderm was seen in NT
embryos. Gene expression in NT and IVP embryos increased between two- and
threefold for all eight genes from early to late blastocyst stages. This increase
exceeded the increase in cell number over this time period indicating an increase
in transcript number per cell. Embryo quality (morphological grading) was
correlated to cell number for NT and IVP embryos with grade 3 blastocysts
containing 30% fewer cells. However, only NT embryos displayed a significant
reduction in gene expression (50%) with loss of quality. Variability in gene
expression levels was not significantly different in NT, IVP or in vivo embryos
but differed among genes, suggesting that the stringency of regulation is
intrinsic to a gene and not affected by culture or nuclear transfer. Oct4 levels 
exhibited the lowest variability. Analysing the total variability of all eight
genes for individual embryos revealed that in vivo embryos resembled each other
much more than did NT and IVP blastocysts. Furthermore, in vivo embryos,
consisting of 1.5-fold more cells, generally contained two- to fourfold more
transcripts for the eight genes than did their cultured counterparts. Thus,
culture conditions (in vivo versus in vitro) have greater effects on gene
expression than does nuclear transfer when minimising genetic heterogeneity.

PMID: 17244749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2006 Nov;37(6):864-7, 875.

[Expression of GATA6 gene in lung tissue of rat with pulmonary hypertension].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu B(1), Liu HM, Yu L, Sun XJ, Wei L, Wang XM, Zhou TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Cardiology, West China Second Hospital, Sichuan
University, Chendu 641000, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of GATA6 gene in lung tissue of rat with
pulmonary hypertension.
METHODS: Male Sprague-Dawley rats (350 to 400 g) were received monocrotaline
(MCT) (60 mg/ kg) subcutaneous injection on day 7 after left lung resection. Mean
pulmonary artery pressure (mPAP), right ventricle (RV) / [left ventricle (LV)+
interventricular septum (S)] ratio and pulmonary artery wall thickness (WT%) were
detected on day 1, 21, 35 after left lung resection, respectively. Neointimal
formation in small pulmonary vessels was observed by Von Gienson stain. The level
of expression of GATA6 mRNA in lung tissue was detected by reverse transcription 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Neointimal changes developed in right lung intra-acinar vessels on day
35 after left lung resection (day 28 after MCT injection). Neointimal lesions did
not develop in control animals. Animals treated with left lung resection plus MCT
had significantly increased mPAP values on day 21 [(27.10 +/- 2.02) mmHg, 1 mmHg 
= 133.32 Pa], with a further increase on day 35 (39.75 +/- 3.62) mmHg, as
compared with control animals [(16.80 +/- 1.03) mmHg, day 21; (17.10 +/- 1.20)
mmHg, day 35, P < 0.0001]. The RV/(LV+S) ratio increased from 0.266 +/- 0.015
(day 1) to 0.456 +/- 0.025 (day 21) and 0.627 +/- 0.040 (day 35), as compared
with those of control animals (P < 0.0001) (0.267 +/- 0.016 (day 1), 0.272 +/-
0.015 (day 21) and 0.257 +/- 0.019 (day 35)]; Compared with normal pulmonary
arteries, MCT injection after left lung resection resulted in severe media
hypertrophy after 35 days. The level of GATA6 mRNA in rats received left lung
resection plus MCT was downregulated about 4-fold on day 35, compared with that
in control animals, and these tendency was observed on day 21 after left lung
resection.
CONCLUSION: The expression of GATA6 gene is downregulated in neointimal model of 
pulmonary hypertension, it suggests that GATA6 may play a key role in pulmonary
vascular remodeling.

PMID: 17236581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. FASEB J. 2007 Mar;21(3):743-53. Epub 2006 Dec 13.

The transcription factor GATA-6 is overexpressed in vivo and contributes to
silencing 15-LOX-1 in vitro in human colon cancer.

Shureiqi I(1), Zuo X, Broaddus R, Wu Y, Guan B, Morris JS, Lippman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, Unit 1360, The University of Texas
M. D. Anderson Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030-4009, USA.
ishureiqi@mdanderson.org

Transcriptional suppression of 15-lipoxygenase (LOX)-1 (15-LOX-1) helps enable
human colorectal cancer cells escape apoptosis, a critical mechanism for colonic 
tumorigenesis. GATA-6 is strongly expressed in vitro in cancer cells; its
down-regulation by pharmaceuticals is associated with reversal of 15-LOX-1
transcriptional suppression. The mechanistic contribution of GATA-6
overexpression to colonic tumorigenesis, especially concerning 15-LOX-1
transcriptional suppression, remains unknown. We tested whether GATA-6 is
differentially overexpressed in human colorectal cancers and whether reversing
GATA-6 overexpression in colon cancer cells is sufficient to restore 15-LOX-1
expression and influence cell proliferation or apoptosis. The expression of
GATA-6 RNA and protein was measured in paired human colorectal cancer and normal 
tissues from two separate patient groups. We used GATA-6 small interfering RNA
transfection to down-regulate GATA-6 expression and examine the effects of this
down-regulation on 15-LOX-1 expression, cell proliferation, and apoptosis in
Caco-2 and HCT-116 colon cancer cells with and without the nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drug NS-398 or the histone deacetylase inhibitor sodium
butyrate. GATA-6 mRNA and protein expressions were higher in cancer than normal
epithelia of the colon. GATA-6 knockdown was insufficient by itself but
contributed significantly to restoring 15-LOX-1 expression and inducing apoptosis
by NS-398 or sodium butyrate. Maintaining 15-LOX-1 transcriptional silencing in
cancer cells is a multifactorial process involving GATA-6 overexpression and
other regulatory events.

PMCID: PMC1847772
PMID: 17167069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Development. 2007 Jan;134(1):189-98.

GATA and Nkx factors synergistically regulate tissue-specific gene expression and
development in vivo.

Zhang Y(1), Rath N, Hannenhalli S, Wang Z, Cappola T, Kimura S,
Atochina-Vasserman E, Lu MM, Beers MF, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104,
USA.

In vitro studies have suggested that members of the GATA and Nkx transcription
factor families physically interact, and synergistically activate pulmonary
epithelial- and cardiac-gene promoters. However, the relevance of this synergy
has not been demonstrated in vivo. We show that Gata6-Titf1 (Gata6-Nkx2.1) double
heterozygous (G6-Nkx DH) embryos and mice have severe defects in pulmonary
epithelial differentiation and distal airway development, as well as reduced
phospholipid production. The defects in G6-Nkx DH embryos and mice are similar to
those observed in human neonates with respiratory distress syndromes, including
bronchopulmonary dysplasia, and differential gene expression analysis reveals
essential developmental pathways requiring synergistic regulation by both Gata6
and Titf1 (Nkx2.1). These studies indicate that Gata6 and Nkx2.1 act in a
synergistic manner to direct pulmonary epithelial differentiation and development
in vivo, providing direct evidence that interactions between these two
transcription factor families are crucial for the development of the tissues in
which they are co-expressed.

PMID: 17164424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 2007 Apr;36(4):391-7. Epub 2006 Dec 1.

Gata4 is necessary for normal pulmonary lobar development.

Ackerman KG(1), Wang J, Luo L, Fujiwara Y, Orkin SH, Beier DR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School New
Research Building 458, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
kackerman@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Mutations of Fog2 in mice result in a phenotype that includes pulmonary lobar
defects. To determine whether formation of the accessory lobe bronchus is
mediated by a Gata family cofactor, we evaluated embryonic lungs from mice
carrying missense mutations that cause loss of FOG-GATA protein interaction.
Lungs from embryos carrying a missense mutation in Gata6 were structurally
normal, while lungs from embryos carrying mutations of either Gata4 or of both
Gata4 and Gata6 had a structural phenotype that matched the Fog2 mutant
phenotype. Expression analysis showed that Gata4 and Fog2 are expressed in the
ventral and medial pulmonary mesenchyme during secondary budding. Although Gata4 
has not previously been suspected as playing a role in lung development, we have 
found that a Fog2-Gata4 interaction is critical for the development of normal
pulmonary lobar structure, and this phenotype is not influenced by the additional
loss of Gata6 interaction. Fog2 and Gata4 in the early pulmonary mesenchyme
participate in patterning the secondary bronchus of the accessory lobe.

PMCID: PMC1899327
PMID: 17142311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Fertil Steril. 2006 Nov;86(5):1438-46.

Polymorphism in HSD17B6 is associated with key features of polycystic ovary
syndrome.

Jones MR(1), Italiano L, Wilson SG, Mullin BH, Mead R, Dudbridge F, Watts GF,
Stuckey BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Sir Charles Gairdner Hospital,
Nedlands, Western Australia, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate polymorphisms in androgen metabolism regulators that
are implicated in the etiology of polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) in vitro; to
investigate HSD17B6 and GATA6 to determine whether these genes are associated
with susceptibility to PCOS or key phenotypic features of patients with PCOS.
DESIGN: Case-control association study.
SETTING: Participants with PCOS were recruited from a clinical-practice database,
and controls, from the general community.
PATIENT(S): One hundred seventy-three patients with PCOS and who were of
Caucasian descent and conformed to the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
diagnostic criteria; 107 normally ovulating women of Caucasian descent from the
general community.
INTERVENTION(S): Drawing of blood for DNA extraction.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Frequency of HSD17B6 and GATA6 polymorphisms in cases
and controls. Association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms from HSD17B6 in
subjects with PCOS with key phenotypes of PCOS: androgen status, insulin
resistance, and body mass index.
RESULT(S): Allele distribution for the single-nucleotide polymorphism rs898611 in
HSD17B6 was significantly different between PCOS and control subjects (P=.03).
Presence of the polymorphic allele was associated with reduced fasting
glucose-insulin ratio (P=.02) and increased homeostasis model assessment (P<.01) 
and body mass index (P<.001) as well as with reduced T (P=.03) in the PCOS group.
No association was seen between GATA6 and any of the variables studied.
CONCLUSION(S): These data suggest that polymorphisms in the HSD17B6 gene are
associated with PCOS and key clinical phenotypes of the disorder.

PMID: 17070195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Stem Cells. 2007 Feb;25(2):500-10. Epub 2006 Oct 26.

Analysis of Oct4-dependent transcriptional networks regulating self-renewal and
pluripotency in human embryonic stem cells.

Babaie Y(1), Herwig R, Greber B, Brink TC, Wruck W, Groth D, Lehrach H, Burdon T,
Adjaye J.

Author information: 
(1)Roslin Institute, Department of Gene Function and Development, Roslin,
Midlothian, United Kingdom.

The POU domain transcription factor OCT4 is a key regulator of pluripotency in
the early mammalian embryo and is highly expressed in the inner cell mass of the 
blastocyst. Consistent with its essential role in maintaining pluripotency, Oct4 
expression is rapidly downregulated during formation of the trophoblast lineage. 
To enhance our understanding of the molecular basis of this differentiation event
in humans, we used a functional genomics approach involving RNA
interference-mediated suppression of OCT4 function in a human ESC line and
analysis of the resulting transcriptional profiles to identify OCT4-dependent
genes in human cells. We detected altered expression of >1,000 genes, including
targets regulated directly by OCT4 either positively (NANOG, SOX2, REX1, LEFTB,
LEFTA/EBAF DPPA4, THY1, and TDGF1) or negatively (CDX2, EOMES, BMP4, TBX18,
Brachyury [T], DKK1, HLX1, GATA6, ID2, and DLX5), as well as targets for the
OCT4-associated stem cell regulators SOX2 and NANOG. Our data set includes
regulators of ACTIVIN, BMP, fibroblast growth factor, and WNT signaling. These
pathways are implicated in regulating human ESC differentiation and therefore
further validate the results of our analysis. In addition, we identified a number
of differentially expressed genes that are involved in epigenetics, chromatin
remodeling, apoptosis, and metabolism that may point to underlying molecular
mechanisms that regulate pluripotency and trophoblast differentiation in humans. 
Significant concordance between this data set and previous comparisons between
inner cell mass and trophectoderm in human embryos indicates that the study of
human ESC differentiation in vitro represents a useful model of early embryonic
differentiation in humans.

PMID: 17068183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2006 Dec;63(24):2922-38.

Transcriptional control in the mammalian liver: liver development, perinatal
repression, and zonal gene regulation.

Spear BT(1), Jin L, Ramasamy S, Dobierzewska A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Molecular Genetics, University of
Kentucky College of Medicine, 800 Rose Street, Lexington, KY 40536-0298, USA.
bspear@uky.edu

Liver function is crucial for maintaining metabolic homeostasis in mammals.
Numerous genes must be properly regulated for the liver to develop and perform a 
variety of activities. Several recent gene-knockout studies in mice have
clarified the roles of GATA6, HNF4alpha, and Foxa1/Foxa2 in early stages of liver
formation. After the liver forms, transcriptional changes continue to occur;
during the perinatal period, certain genes such as alpha-fetoprotein and H19 are 
silenced, others are activated, and position-dependent (or zonal) regulation is
established. Zhx2 was recently identified as one factor involved in postnatal
repression of alpha-fetoprotein and other genes. Furthermore, several studies
indicate that negative regulation is involved in the zonal control of glutamine
synthetase. Finally, exciting new evidence indicates that signaling through the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is also involved in zonal regulation in the adult liver.

PMID: 17041810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Sep 19;103(38):14086-91. Epub 2006 Sep 12.

A conserved role for a GATA transcription factor in regulating epithelial innate 
immune responses.

Shapira M(1), Hamlin BJ, Rong J, Chen K, Ronen M, Tan MW.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.

Innate immunity is an ancient and conserved defense mechanism. Although host
responses toward various pathogens have been delineated, how these responses are 
orchestrated in a whole animal is less understood. Through an unbiased
genome-wide study performed in Caenorhabditis elegans, we identified a conserved 
function for endodermal GATA transcription factors in regulating local epithelial
innate immune responses. Gene expression and functional RNAi-based analyses
identified the tissue-specific GATA transcription factor ELT-2 as a major
regulator of an early intestinal protective response to infection with the human 
bacterial pathogen Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In the adult worm, ELT-2 is required
specifically for infection responses and survival on pathogen but makes no
significant contribution to gene expression associated with intestinal
maintenance or to resistance to cadmium, heat, and oxidative stress. We further
demonstrate that this function is conserved, because the human endodermal
transcription factor GATA6 has a protective function in lung epithelial cells
exposed to P. aeruginosa. These findings expand the repertoire of innate immunity
mechanisms and illuminate a yet-unknown function of endodermal GATA proteins.

PMCID: PMC1599916
PMID: 16968778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mech Dev. 2006 Oct;123(10):730-45. Epub 2006 Jul 26.

A role for GATA factors in Xenopus gastrulation movements.

Fletcher G(1), Jones GE, Patient R, Snape A.

Author information: 
(1)Randall Division of Cell and Molecular Biophysics, King's College London, New 
Hunt's House, Guys Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK.

Gastrulation movements in Xenopus laevis are becoming increasingly well
characterised, however the molecular mechanisms involved are less clear. Active
migration of the leading edge mesendoderm across the fibronectin-coated
blastocoel roof is necessary for further development of tissues such as head
mesoderm, heart, blood and liver. The zinc finger transcription factors GATA4 and
GATA6 are expressed in this migratory tissue during gastrulation, but their role 
here is unknown. This study further characterises the expression of GATA4 and 6
during gastrulation, and investigates their function in migratory behaviour.
Gain-of-function experiments with these GATA factors induce cell spreading,
polarisation and migration in non-motile presumptive ectoderm cells. Expression
of a dominant-interfering form of GATA6, which inhibits transactivation of GATA
targets, severely impairs the ability of dorsal leading edge mesendoderm to
spread and translocate on fibronectin. Mosaic inhibition of GATA activity
indicates that GATA factors function cell autonomously to induce cell spreading
and movement in dorsal mesendoderm. Knockdown of specific GATA factors using
anti-sense morpholinos indicates that GATA4 and GATA6 both contribute to dorsal
mesendoderm migration in vitro. GATA4 and GATA6 are known to be involved in
cell-specification of mesoderm and endoderm-derived tissues, but this is the
first description of an additional role for these factors in cell migration.

PMID: 16949798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Genes Cells. 2006 Sep;11(9):1115-23.

NANOG maintains self-renewal of primate ES cells in the absence of a feeder
layer.

Yasuda SY(1), Tsuneyoshi N, Sumi T, Hasegawa K, Tada T, Nakatsuji N, Suemori H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Differentiation, Institute for Frontier Medical 
Sciences, Kyoto University, 53 Kawahara-cho, Shogoin, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507,
Japan.

Nanog is a homeodomain transcription factor that is expressed specifically in
undifferentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells and has been shown to be essential in 
the maintenance of pluripotency in mouse ES cells. To examine the function of
NANOG in primate ES cells, we generated transgenic monkey ES cell lines
expressing three- to seven-fold higher levels of NANOG protein compared to
wild-type ES cells. These NANOG over-expressing cell lines retained their
undifferentiated state in the absence of a feeder layer, as shown by expression
of undifferentiated ES cell markers such as alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and OCT-4.
We also demonstrated that in vitro differentiation of transgenic cell lines was
mostly restricted to the ectodermal lineage, as examined by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Knockdown experiments using
NANOG small interfering (si) RNA resulted in induction of differentiation markers
such as AFP, GATA4 and GATA6 for the endoderm and CDX2 for the trophectoderm.
These results suggest that NANOG plays a crucial role in maintaining the
pluripotent state of primate ES cells.

PMID: 16923129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Neurodegener Dis. 2006;3(1-2):94-100.

Induction of signalling in non-erythroid cells by pharmacological levels of
erythropoietin.

Dunlop EA(1), Percy MJ, Boland MP, Maxwell AP, Lappin TR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast, and
Haematology Department, Belfast City Hospital, UK.

Erythropoiesis is maintained by the hormone erythropoietin (Epo) binding to its
cognate receptor (EpoR) on erythroid progenitor cells. The Epo-EpoR interaction
initiates a signal transduction process that regulates the survival, growth and
differentiation of these cells. Originally perceived as highly
lineage-restricted, Epo is now recognised to have pleiotropic effects extending
beyond the maintenance of red cell mass. Functional interactions between Epo and 
EpoR have been demonstrated in numerous cells and tissues. EpoR expression on
neoplastic cells leads to concern that recombinant human erythropoietin, used to 
treat anaemia in cancer patients, may augment tumour growth. Here we demonstrate 
that EPO, at pharmacological concentrations, can activate three major signalling 
cascades, viz. the Jak2/STAT5, Ras/ERK and PI3K/Akt pathways in non-small cell
lung carcinoma (NSCLC) cell lines. EpoR synthesis is normally under the control
of GATA-1, but NSCLC cells exhibit decreased GATA-1 levels compared to GATA-2, -3
and -6, suggesting that GATA-1 is not essential for EpoR production. The
increased Epo-induced signalling was not associated with a growth advantage for
the NSCLC cells.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16909043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Oct;26(20):7539-49. Epub 2006 Aug 14.

The Grb2/Mek pathway represses Nanog in murine embryonic stem cells.

Hamazaki T(1), Kehoe SM, Nakano T, Terada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Florida College of Medicine, P.O. Box
100275, Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.

The homeobox gene Nanog is a key intrinsic determinant of self renewal in
embryonic stem (ES) cells, and its repression leads ES cells to selectively
differentiate into primitive endoderm. Although Nanog repression occurs at the
outermost layer of ES cell aggregates independent of the leukemia inhibitory
factor (LIF)/STAT3 pathway, it is largely undetermined what external cues and
intracellular signals cause the event. Of interest, addition of the tyrosine
phosphatase inhibitor, sodium vanadate, selectively repressed Nanog transcription
without any detectable changes in upstream transcriptional regulators Oct3/4 and 
Sox2. Furthermore, sodium vanadate induced primitive endoderm differentiation,
even in the inner cells of ES cell aggregates. Expression of Gata6 and Zfp42, two
putative downstream Nanog effectors, was also increased and decreased by the
addition of sodium vanadate, respectively, but these changes were eliminated by
exogenous Nanog expression. The effects of sodium vanadate were abrogated by Grb2
deficiency or by the addition of the Mek inhibitor, PD98059. Indeed, PD98059
prevented Nanog repression induced by ES cell aggregation as well. Furthermore,
transfection of a constitutive active Mek mutant into ES cells induced Nanog
repression and primitive endoderm differentiation. These data indicate that the
Grb2/Mek pathway primarily mediates Nanog gene repression upon ES cell
differentiation into primitive endoderm.

PMCID: PMC1636849
PMID: 16908534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2006 Sep 26;257-258:65-74. Epub 2006 Aug 8.

LRH-1/NR5A2 cooperates with GATA factors to regulate inhibin alpha-subunit
promoter activity.

Robert NM(1), Miyamoto Y, Taniguchi H, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny-Reproduction Research Unit, CHUL Research Centre (CHUQ), Québec City,
Que, Canada.

Inhibin alpha is the common subunit of the dimeric inhibin proteins known for
their role in suppressing pituitary FSH secretion. In this study, we have
examined the role of GATA factors and the nuclear receptor, LRH-1/NR5A2, in the
regulation of inhibin alpha-subunit promoter activity. The inhibin alpha promoter
contains two GATA-binding motifs that can be activated by GATA4 or GATA6. The
GATA-dependence of the promoter was demonstrated by downregulating GATA
expression in MA-10 cells using siRNA technology. We next examined whether GATA
factors could cooperate with LRH-1, a factor recently proposed to be an important
regulator of inhibin alpha-subunit transcription. Both GATA4 and GATA6 strongly
synergized with LRH-1. Consistent with the cAMP-dependence of the inhibin
alpha-subunit promoter, GATA/LRH-1 synergism was markedly enhanced by PKA and the
co-activator protein CBP. Thus, our results identify LRH-1 as a new
transcriptional partner for GATA factors in the regulation of inhibin
alpha-subunit gene expression.

PMID: 16893604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Dev Biol. 2006 Oct 15;298(2):415-29. Epub 2006 Jul 4.

Gata6 is an important regulator of mouse pancreas development.

Decker K(1), Goldman DC, Grasch CL, Sussel L.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Genetics, University of Colorado at Denver Health Sciences Center, Aurora, CO
80045, USA.

Gata4, Gata5, and Gata6 represent a subfamily of zinc-finger transcriptional
regulators that are important in the development and differentiation of numerous 
tissues, including many endodermally-derived organs. We demonstrate that Gata4
and Gata6 have overlapping expression patterns in the early pancreatic
epithelium. Later, Gata4 becomes restricted to exocrine tissue and Gata6 becomes 
restricted to a subset of endocrine cells. In addition, we show Gata6, but not
Gata4, physically interacts with Nkx2.2, an essential islet transcription factor.
To begin determining the roles that Gata4 and Gata6 play during pancreatic
development, we expressed Gata4-Engrailed and Gata6-Engrailed dominant repressor 
fusion proteins in the pancreatic epithelium and in the islet. At e17.5,
transgenic Gata6-Engrailed embryos exhibit two distinct phenotypes: a complete
absence of pancreas or a reduction in pancreatic tissue. In the embryos that do
form pancreas, there is a significant reduction of all pancreatic cell types,
with the few differentiated endocrine cells clustered within, or in close
proximity to, enlarged ductal structures. Conversely, the majority of transgenic 
Gata4-Engrailed embryos do not have a pancreatic phenotype. This study suggests
that Gata6 is an important regulator of pancreas specification.

PMCID: PMC2824170
PMID: 16887115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Nov;20(11):2848-63. Epub 2006 Jul 27.

Origin and identity of adrenocortical tumors in inhibin knockout mice:
implications for cellular plasticity in the adrenal cortex.

Looyenga BD(1), Hammer GD.

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Biology Graduate Program, Division of Endocrinology,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-2200, USA.

Inhibin knockout (Inha-/-) mice develop gonadal sex-cord tumors and--when
gonadectomized--adrenocortical tumors. Previous reports demonstrated that
adrenocortical tumors from Inha-/- mice produce estrogen and depend on
gonadotropin signaling for initiation. Here we show that, in addition to
producing estrogen, the adrenocortical tumors display a global change in cellular
identity, composed of two unique cell types expressing differing arrays of genes 
normally restricted to theca and granulosa cells of the ovary. Many of these
genes are also induced in wild-type adrenals after gonadectomy or upon chronic
gonadotropin stimulation, suggesting that the adrenal cortex normally contains a 
population of pluripotent cells that can be driven toward an adrenal or gonadal
identity given the appropriate pituitary stimuli. A central feature of this
altered cellular identity is the switch from predominant expression of Gata6
(endogenous to the adrenal cortex) to Gata4, which defines cellular identity in
the ovary. We show that stable transfection of Gata4 in cultured adrenocortical
cells is sufficient to activate ovarian-specific genes of both theca and
granulose lineages. Spatial analysis of Gata4 expression reveals a distinct
pattern of localization to the supcapsular region of the adrenal, which contains 
undifferentiated progenitor cells that continuously populate the adrenocortical
zones. Although both wild-type and Inha-/- mice display this pattern, only
Inha-/- mice produce tumors composed of these Gata4-positive cells. These data
suggest that Inha-/- adrenocortical tumors cells are derived from pluripotent
adrenocortical progenitor cells that adopt a gonadal fate due to the convergent
loss of inhibin and chronic exposure to elevated gonadotropins.

PMID: 16873442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jul 25;103(30):11189-94. Epub 2006 Jul 17.

A threshold of GATA4 and GATA6 expression is required for cardiovascular
development.

Xin M(1), Davis CA, Molkentin JD, Lien CL, Duncan SA, Richardson JA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 6000 Harry Hines Boulevard, Dallas, TX 75390, USA.

The zinc-finger transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 play critical roles in
embryonic development. Mouse embryos lacking GATA4 die at embryonic day (E) 8.5
because of failure of ventral foregut closure and cardiac bifida, whereas GATA6
is essential for development of the visceral endoderm. Although mice that are
heterozygous for either a GATA4 or GATA6 null allele are normal, we show that
compound heterozygosity of GATA4 and GATA6 results in embryonic lethality by
E13.5 accompanied by a spectrum of cardiovascular defects, including thin-walled 
myocardium, ventricular and aortopulmonary septal defects, and abnormal smooth
muscle development. Myocardial hypoplasia in GATA4/GATA6 double heterozygous
mutant embryos is associated with reduced proliferation of cardiomyocytes,
diminished expression of the myogenic transcription factor MEF2C (myocyte
enhancer factor 2C), and down-regulation of beta-myosin heavy chain expression, a
key determinant of cardiac contractility. These findings reveal a threshold of
GATA4 and GATA6 activity that is required for gene expression in the developing
cardiovascular system and underscore the potential of recessive mutations to
perturb the delicate regulation of cardiovascular development.

PMCID: PMC1544063
PMID: 16847256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Dev Growth Differ. 2006 Jun;48(5):283-95.

Development of the endoderm and gut in medaka, Oryzias latipes.

Kobayashi D(1), Jindo T, Naruse K, Takeda H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Science, University of
Tokyo, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

We performed an extensive analysis of endodermal development and gut tube
morphogenesis in the medaka embryo by histology and in situ hybridization. The
markers used in these analyses included sox17, sox32, foxA2, gata-4, -5, -6 and
shh. sox17, sox32, foxA2, and gata-5 and -6 are expressed in the early endoderm
to the onset of gut tube formation. Sections of medaka embryos hybridized with
foxA2, a pan-endodermal marker during gut morphogenesis, demonstrated that gut
tube formation is initiated in the anterior portion and that the anterior and
mid/posterior gut undergo distinct morphogenetic processes. Tube formation in the
anterior endoderm that is fated to the pharynx and esophagus is much delayed and 
appears to be independent of gut morphogenesis. The overall aspects of medaka gut
development are similar to those of zebrafish, except that zebrafish tube
formation initiates at both the anterior and posterior portions. Our results
therefore describe both molecular and morphological aspects of medaka digestive
system development that will be necessary for the characterization of medaka
mutants.

PMID: 16759279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Dev Cell. 2006 May;10(5):615-24.

Early lineage segregation between epiblast and primitive endoderm in mouse
blastocysts through the Grb2-MAPK pathway.

Chazaud C(1), Yamanaka Y, Pawson T, Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario
M5G1X5, Canada.

It has been thought that early inner cell mass (ICM) is a homogeneous population 
and that cell position in the ICM leads to the formation of two lineages,
epiblast (EPI) and primitive endoderm (PE), by E4.5. Here, however, we show that 
the ICM at E3.5 is already heterogeneous. The EPI- and PE-specific transcription 
factors, Nanog and Gata6, were expressed in the ICM in a random "salt and pepper"
pattern, as early as E3.5, in a mutually exclusive manner. Lineage tracing showed
predominant lineage restriction of single ICM cells at E3.5 to either lineage. In
embryos lacking Grb2 where no PE forms, Gata6 expression was lost and all ICM
cells were Nanog positive. We propose a model in which the ICM develops as a
mosaic of EPI and PE progenitors at E3.5, dependent on Grb2-Ras-MAP kinase
signaling, followed by later segregation of the progenitors into the appropriate 
cell layers.

PMID: 16678776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Exp Hematol. 2006 May;34(5):654-63.

Differentiation of murine committed megakaryocytic progenitors isolated by a
novel strategy reveals the complexity of GATA and Ets factor involvement in
megakaryocytopoiesis and an unexpected potential role for GATA-6.

Dumon S(1), Heath VL, Tomlinson MG, Göttgens B, Frampton J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Research, The Medical School, University of
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The differentiation of megakaryocytes is characterized by
polyploidization and cytoplasmic maturation leading to platelet production.
Studying these processes is hindered by the paucity of bone marrow megakaryocytes
and their precursors. We describe a method for the expansion and purification of 
committed megakaryocyte progenitors and demonstrate their usefulness by studying 
changes in the expression of Ets and GATA family transcription factors throughout
megakaryocytopoiesis.
METHODS: A two-step serum-free method was developed. Cells isolated using this
method were analyzed for surface marker expression by flow cytometry, and for
their ability to differentiate using single-cell culture. Purified progenitors
were induced to differentiate and analyzed with respect to their ploidy by flow
cytometry and expression of specific genes by RT-PCR.
RESULTS: A population of Lin- c-kit+ CD45+ CD41+ CD31+ CD34low CD9low
FcgammaRII/IIIlow Sca-1med/low committed megakaryocyte progenitors was purified. 
These cells could be differentiated efficiently, achieving ploidy of up to 128N. 
Analysis of RNA demonstrated the expected increases in expression of key
megakaryocyte-associated genes. RT-PCR analysis also revealed that a range of Ets
and GATA factors are expressed, their individual levels and patterns of
expression varying widely. Surprisingly, we find that GATA-6 is specifically
expressed in late differentiated megakaryocytes and has the potential to regulate
megakaryocyte-expressed genes in cooperation with Ets factors.
CONCLUSION: Purified primary megakaryocytic progenitors are able to differentiate
as a cohort into fully mature megakaryocytes. The number of cells obtainable, and
the synchrony of the differentiation process, facilitates analysis of the
dynamics of molecular processes involved in megakaryocytopoiesis. The expression 
pattern of Ets and GATA family transcription factors reveals the complexity of
the involvement of these key megakaryocytic regulators. The finding of GATA-6
expression and demonstration of its functional activity suggests a novel
mechanism for the regulation of certain genes late in megakaryocytopoiesis.

PMID: 16647571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Mech Dev. 2006 Apr;123(4):297-311. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Wnt2 is a direct downstream target of GATA6 during early cardiogenesis.

Alexandrovich A(1), Arno M, Patient RK, Shah AM, Pizzey JA, Brewer AC.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Division, King's College London, London SE5 9PJ, UK.

The GATA4, 5 and 6 subfamily of transcription factors are potent transactivators 
of transcription expressed within the precardiac mesoderm. However, little is
known of the immediate downstream targets of GATA-factor regulation during the
earliest stages of cardiogenesis. Using the P19-CL6 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cell
line as an in vitro model of cardiogenesis, we show that GATA6 is the most
abundantly expressed of the GATA factors in presumptive cardiac cells.
Consequently, we performed a microarray screen comparing mRNA from control EC
cells, early in the cardiac differentiation pathway, with those in which GATA6
had been overexpressed. These studies identified 103 genes whose expression
changed significantly and this was verified in a representative array of these
genes by real-time RT-PCR. We show that early cardiac expression of one of these 
genes, Wnt2, mirrors that of GATA6 in vitro and in vivo. In addition, its
upregulation by GATA6 in differentiating EC cells is mediated by the direct
binding of GATA-factor(s) to the cognate Wnt2 promoter, suggesting Wnt2 is an
immediate downstream target of GATA-factor regulation during early cardiogenesis.

PMID: 16621466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Gastroenterology. 2006 Apr;130(4):1233-44.

Stomach development is dependent on fibroblast growth factor 10/fibroblast growth
factor receptor 2b-mediated signaling.

Spencer-Dene B(1), Sala FG, Bellusci S, Gschmeissner S, Stamp G, Dickson C.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Pathology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK, London Research
Institute, London, England. b.spencer-dene@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Fibroblast growth factors (Fgfs) and their receptors (Fgfrs)
are important intercellular signaling molecules that are essential to mammalian
embryonic development. The signaling pathways between endoderm-derived gastric
epithelium and the surrounding mesenchyme are largely unknown; however, the
developmental expression profile of the IIIb isoform of Fgfr2 (Fgfr2b) and its
main ligand, Fgf10, suggest that they may be strong candidates. Mice lacking
either component (Fgfr2b-/- or Fgf10-/-) were examined to determine the role of
Fgfr2b-mediated signaling during gastric organogenesis.
METHODS: Stomachs from embryonic day 13.5-18.5 Fgfr2b-/-, Fgf10-/-, and wild-type
littermates were collected and analyzed by conventional histology,
immunohistochemistry, in situ hybridization, and electron microscopy.
RESULTS: Fgfr2b-/- and Fgf10-/- fetuses had stomachs smaller than wild-type,
consisting of relatively proportionate forestomach but disproportionately reduced
glandular stomach, the mucosa of which has low cytoarchitectural complexity with 
a spiral arrangement of large mucosal folds. During mid to late fetal stages
(embryonic day 15.5-18.5), epithelial differentiation to mucous and chief cell
lineages was rudimentary, with no expression of several early cytodifferentiation
markers including GATA4, GATA6, and H+/K+-adenosine triphosphatase and abnormal
expression of members of the hedgehog family of signaling molecules.
CONCLUSIONS: Fgfr2b and Fgf10 are part of a signaling network with Sonic hedgehog
and Indian hedgehog that are essential to anterior-posterior and radial
patterning in gastric development.

PMID: 16618415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. BMC Dev Biol. 2006 Apr 12;6:19.

Generation of mice harbouring a conditional loss-of-function allele of Gata6.

Sodhi CP(1), Li J, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology & Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI, USA. csodhi@mcw.edu

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA6 is believed to have important roles in
the development of several organs including the liver, gastrointestinal tract and
heart. However, analyses of the contribution of GATA6 toward organogenesis have
been hampered because Gata6-/- mice fail to develop beyond gastrulation due to
defects in extraembryonic endoderm function. We have therefore generated a mouse 
line harbouring a conditional loss-of-function allele of Gata6 using Cre/loxP
technology. LoxP elements were introduced into introns flanking exon 2 of the
Gata6 gene by homologous recombination in ES cells. Mice containing this altered 
allele were bred to homozygosity and were found to be viable and fertile. To
assess the functional integrity of the loxP sites and to confirm that we had
generated a Gata6 loss-of-function allele, we bred Gata6 'floxed' mice to
EIIa-Cre mice in which Cre is ubiquitously expressed, and to Villin-Cre mice that
express Cre in the epithelial cells of the intestine. We conclude that we have
generated a line of mice in which GATA6 activity can be ablated in a cell type
specific manner by expression of Cre recombinase. This line of mice can be used
to establish the role of GATA6 in regulating embryonic development and various
aspects of mammalian physiology.

PMCID: PMC1481595
PMID: 16611361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Oncogene. 2006 Aug 31;25(39):5446-61. Epub 2006 Apr 10.

Histone modifications silence the GATA transcription factor genes in ovarian
cancer.

Caslini C(1), Capo-chichi CD, Roland IH, Nicolas E, Yeung AT, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111-2497, USA.

Altered expression of GATA factors was found and proposed as the underlying
mechanism for dedifferentiation in ovarian carcinogenesis. In particular, GATA6
is lost or excluded from the nucleus in 85% of ovarian tumors and GATA4
expression is absent in majority of ovarian cancer cell lines. Here, we evaluated
their DNA and histone epigenetic modifications in five ovarian epithelial and
carcinoma cell lines (human 'immortalized' ovarian surface epithelium (HIO)-117, 
HIO-114, A2780, SKOV3 and ES2). GATA4 and GATA6 gene silencing was found to
correlate with hypoacetylation of histones H3 and H4 and loss of histone
H3/lysine K4 tri-methylation at their promoters in all lines. Conversely, histone
H3/lysine K9 di-methylation and HP1gamma association were not observed, excluding
reorganization of GATA genes into heterochromatic structures. The histone
deacetylase inhibitor trichostatin A, but not the DNA methylation inhibitor
5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, re-established the expression of GATA4 and/or GATA6 in
A2780 and HIO-114 cells, correlating with increased histone H3 and H4
acetylation, histone H3 lysine K4 methylation and DNase I sensitivity at the
promoters. Therefore, altered histone modification of the promoter loci is one
mechanism responsible for the silencing of GATA transcription factors and the
subsequent loss of a target gene, the tumor suppressor Disabled-2, in ovarian
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16607277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Dev Biol. 2006 May 15;293(2):540-54. Epub 2006 Apr 11.

Comprehensive microarray analysis of Hoxa11/Hoxd11 mutant kidney development.

Schwab K(1), Hartman HA, Liang HC, Aronow BJ, Patterson LT, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

The Hox11 paralogous genes play critical roles in kidney development. They are
expressed in the early metanephric mesenchyme and are required for the induction 
of ureteric bud formation and its subsequent branching morphogenesis. They are
also required for the normal nephrogenesis response of the metanephric mesenchyme
to inductive signals from the ureteric bud. In this report, we use microarrays to
perform a comprehensive gene expression analysis of the Hoxa11/Hoxd11 mutant
kidney phenotype. We examined E11.5, E12.5, E13.5 and E16.5 developmental time
points. A novel high throughput strategy for validation of microarray data is
described, using additional biological replicates and an independent microarray
platform. The results identified 13 genes with greater than 3-fold change in
expression in early mutant kidneys, including Hoxa11s, GATA6, TGFbeta2, chemokine
ligand 12, angiotensin receptor like 1, cytochrome P450, cadherin5, and
Lymphocyte antigen 6 complex, Iroquois 3, EST A930038C07Rik, Meox2, Prkcn, and
Slc40a1. Of interest, many of these genes, and others showing lower fold
expression changes, have been connected to processes that make sense in terms of 
the mutant phenotype, including TGFbeta signaling, iron transport, protein kinase
C function, growth arrest and GDNF regulation. These results identify the
multiple molecular pathways downstream of Hox11 function in the developing
kidney.

PMID: 16581055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 May 19;343(4):1186-90. Epub 2006 Mar 23.

The tumor suppressor LKB1 induces p21 expression in collaboration with LMO4,
GATA-6, and Ldb1.

Setogawa T(1), Shinozaki-Yabana S, Masuda T, Matsuura K, Akiyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Genetic Information, Institute for Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-0032, Japan.

The LKB1/STK11 serine/threonine kinase is mutated in Peutz-Jeghers syndrome and
various sporadic cancers such as lung adenocarcinoma. We show here that LKB1
forms a complex with LMO4, GATA-6, and Ldb1, and enhances GATA-mediated
transactivation in a kinase-dependent manner. We further demonstrate that LKB1
has the potential to induce p21 expression in collaboration with LMO4, GATA-6,
and Ldb1 through the p53-independent mechanism. Our findings suggest that LKB1
regulates GATA-mediated gene expression and that this activity of LKB1 may be
important for its tumor suppressor function.

PMID: 16580634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Clin Invest. 2006 Apr;116(4):929-39. Epub 2006 Mar 23.

GATA-6 regulates semaphorin 3C and is required in cardiac neural crest for
cardiovascular morphogenesis.

Lepore JJ(1), Mericko PA, Cheng L, Lu MM, Morrisey EE, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Center and the Penn Cardiovascular Institute,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

GATA transcription factors play critical roles in restricting cell lineage
differentiation during development. Here, we show that conditional inactivation
of GATA-6 in VSMCs results in perinatal mortality from a spectrum of
cardiovascular defects, including interrupted aortic arch and persistent truncus 
arteriosus. Inactivation of GATA-6 in neural crest recapitulates these
abnormalities, demonstrating a cell-autonomous requirement for GATA-6 in neural
crest-derived SMCs. Surprisingly, the observed defects do not result from
impaired SMC differentiation but rather are associated with severely attenuated
expression of semaphorin 3C, a signaling molecule critical for both neuronal and 
vascular patterning. Thus, the primary function of GATA-6 during cardiovascular
development is to regulate morphogenetic patterning of the cardiac outflow tract 
and aortic arch. These findings provide new insights into the conserved functions
of the GATA-4, -5, and -6 subfamily members and identify GATA-6 and
GATA-6-regulated genes as candidates involved in the pathogenesis of congenital
heart disease.

PMCID: PMC1409743
PMID: 16557299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2006 Apr;16(3):65-9.

Assembling pieces of the cardiac puzzle; calreticulin and calcium-dependent
pathways in cardiac development, health, and disease.

Lynch JM(1), Chilibeck K, Qui Y, Michalak M.

Author information: 
(1)Membrane Protein Research Group, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.

Calreticulin is a Ca(2+)-binding chaperone of the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic
reticulum. It is an important Ca(2+) buffer, a regulator of Ca(2+) homeostasis,
and a component of protein quality control processes in the secretory pathway.
Calreticulin is essential for cardiac development; its gene is tightly regulated 
during cardiogenesis, and in the absence of calreticulin, cardiac development is 
impaired. The protein is highly expressed in the developing heart and
down-regulated after birth in the healthy mature heart. Overexpression of
calreticulin in postnatal heart leads to bradyarrhythima and complete heart
block, followed by sudden death. The calreticulin gene is a target of
transcription factors involved in fetal cardiac program (Nkx2.5, myocardin,
myocyte enhancer factor 2C, and GATA6). Calreticulin works upstream of
calcineurin and myocyte enhancer factor 2C in a Ca(2+)-dependent signal
transduction cascade linking the endoplasmic reticulum and the nucleus during
cardiac development.

PMID: 16546685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Stem Cells Dev. 2006 Feb;15(1):61-9.

Derivation of three clones from human embryonic stem cell lines by FACS sorting
and their characterization.

Sidhu KS(1), Tuch BE.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Group, Diabetes Transplant Unit, Prince of Wales Hospital and
University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2031 Australia. k.sidhu@unsw.edu.au

Here we describe the first report of three human embryonic stem cell (hESC)
clones, hES 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, derived from the parent line hES3 by sorting of
single-cell preparations by flow cytometry. The viability of single-cell
preparations before and after cell sorting remained >98%. The hESC were selected 
by size gating and forward-angle light scatter and were dispersed directly as
single cell/ well into 96-well plates containing human fetal fibroblasts as
feeder layers. Single stem cell dispersion into 96-well plates was confirmed by
using cells from a hES3 line that constitutively expressed green fluorescence
protein (eGFP) under similar conditions of flow cytometry. Three clones were
obtained from the parent line hES3 -- hES3.1, 3.2, and 3.3 -- and they have been 
in continuous culture for more than 1 year. The cloning efficiency was less than 
<0.5%. These hESC clones show normal stem cell characteristics, such as
undifferentiated growth, high nucleocytoplasmic ratio, the same karyotype as that
of the parent line (46 XX), stem cell surface markers (i.e., SSEA3, SSEA4, OCT4, 
TRA-1-60, and TRA-1-81), and gene expression for pluripotency (Oct-4 and nanog). 
They all formed embryoid bodies in suspension cultures, and after seeding in
culture plates they showed pluripotency in vitro by forming cell lineages derived
from all three germ layers as indicated by expression of the ectodermal marker
nestin, the mesodermal marker renin, and the endodermal markers alpha-fetoprotein
and GATA6. All clones showed normal expression of alkaline phosphatase activity, 
a marker of in vitro pluripotency. When hESC clones (1-2 x 10(6) total) were
injected into nonobese diabetic-severe combined immunodeficiency (NOD-SCID) mice 
under the kidney capsule, all formed teratomas within 6-8 weeks. Analysis of the 
stem cell surface marker TRA-1-160 by flow cytometry showed nonsignificant (p <
0.05) differences between the clones and the parent line. The clones also
differed in their expression of genes, with only one, hES 3.2, expressing the
endodermal markers, i.e., alpha-fetoprotein and GATA6. The ability to produce
clones from a parent hESC line rapidly by FACS sorting will help provide a
homogeneous population of cells for achieving uniformed lineage specifications
for future transplantation therapies and biomedical research.

PMID: 16522163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2006 Aug;291(2):L191-9. Epub 2006 Mar 1.

Hop functions downstream of Nkx2.1 and GATA6 to mediate HDAC-dependent negative
regulation of pulmonary gene expression.

Yin Z(1), Gonzales L, Kolla V, Rath N, Zhang Y, Lu MM, Kimura S, Ballard PL,
Beers MF, Epstein JA, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

Hop is an unusual homeodomain protein that was first identified in the developing
heart where it functions downstream of Nkx2.5 to modulate cardiac gene
expression. Hop functions through interactions with histone deacetylase (HDAC) 2 
to mediate repression of cardiac-specific genes, and recent studies show that
HDAC activity and HDAC2 expression are decreased in people with chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease. Here, we show that Hop is expressed in airway
epithelium coincident with HDAC2, and expression is induced by the combination of
dexamethasone and cAMP in parallel with induction of surfactant protein gene
expression. Hop functions in the developing pulmonary airway, acting downstream
of Nkx2.1 and GATA6, to negatively regulate surfactant protein expression. Loss
of Hop expression in vivo results in defective type 2 pneumocyte development with
increased surfactant production and disrupted alveolar formation. Thus Hop
represents a novel regulator of pulmonary maturation that is induced by
glucocorticoids to mediate functionally important HDAC-dependent negative
feedback regulation.

PMID: 16510470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Stem Cells. 2006 Jun;24(6):1467-75. Epub 2006 Feb 2.

Differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells after RNA interference-mediated
silencing of OCT4 and Nanog.

Hough SR(1), Clements I, Welch PJ, Wiederholt KA.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development Division, Gene Regulation Group, Invitrogen
Corporation, Carlsbad, California 92008, USA. shelley.hough@invitrogen.com

RNA interference (RNAi) holds great promise as a tool to study the basic biology 
of stem cells or to direct differentiation in a specific manner. Barriers to
achieving efficient and specific gene silencing in RNAi experiments include
limitations in transfection efficiency and in the efficacy and specificity of
RNAi silencing effectors. Here, we combine methods of efficient lipid-mediated
delivery with chemically modified RNAi compounds to silence genes related to
pluripotency, in order to direct differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells.
After transfection of embryonic stem cells with OCT4- or Nanog-targeted RNAi
compounds, levels of OCT4 or Nanog transcript and protein were reduced
accordingly. Reduction in OCT4 expression correlated with induction of
trophectoderm genes Cdx2, Hand1, and PL-1, with formation of cells with
trophoblast giant cell phenotype after 6 days. Reduction in Nanog expression
correlated with induction of extraembryonic endoderm genes GATA4, GATA6, and
laminin B1, with subsequent generation of groups of cells with parietal endoderm 
phenotype. Our results indicate that transient inhibition of OCT4 or Nanog by
RNAi compounds is sufficient to induce differentiation toward extraembryonic
lineages, which supports the model that these transcription factors function in a
dose-dependent manner to influence cell fate.

PMID: 16456133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Cancer Res. 2006 Feb 1;66(3):1384-90.

GATA5 activation of the progesterone receptor gene promoter in breast cancer
cells is influenced by the +331G/A polymorphism.

Huggins GS(1), Wong JY, Hankinson SE, De Vivo I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Institute, Tufts-New England Medical Center,
Boston, MA, USA.

Previously, a modest association was observed between the progesterone receptor
+331G/A gene variant and breast cancer risk. Here, in a larger sample of breast
cancer cases and controls (n = 1,322/n = 1,953) nested in the Nurses' Health
Study cohort, we confirm a significant association (odds ratio, 1.41; 95%
confidence interval, 1.10-1.79) and suggest a molecular model. The association of
the +331G/A variant with breast cancer was particularly strong among obese women 
(body mass index > 30; odds ratio, 2.87; 95% confidence interval, 1.40-5.90). To 
help understand the molecular mechanism by which this variant may predispose
women to breast cancer, we identified nearby transcription factor binding sites. 
This search predicted a binding site for the GATA family of transcriptional
regulators adjacent to this hPR polymorphism. Importantly, we found GATA3, GATA4,
and GATA6 are expressed in normal breast tissue and two breast cancer cell lines,
whereas GATA5 is minimally expressed in normal mammary tissue and more strongly
expressed in two breast cancer cell lines. This finding was relevant because
GATA5 bound the site adjacent to the +331G/A polymorphism, and activated the hPR 
(-711 to +822)-luciferase reporter plasmid in breast cancer cells. Overexpression
of GATA5 increased expression of the endogenous hPR transcript, and GATA5 more
strongly activated an hPR promoter construct encoding the PR-B isoform. Finally, 
hPR promoter constructs including the +331A were more strongly activated by GATA5
than constructs including +331G. Our findings suggest that GATA5 interacts with
the +331G/A polymorphism to stimulate hPR-B expression in mammary cells, which
may contribute to breast cancer susceptibility.

PMID: 16452193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Free Radic Biol Med. 2006 Jan 15;40(2):260-74. Epub 2005 Oct 10.

Transcriptional regulation of the NADPH oxidase isoform, Nox1, in colon
epithelial cells: role of GATA-binding factor(s).

Brewer AC(1), Sparks EC, Shah AM.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Department of Cardiology, GKT School of Medicine and
Dentistry, New Medical School Building, Bessemer Road, London SE5 9PJ, UK.
alison.brewer@kcl.ac.uk

Nonphagocytic NADPH oxidases (Noxs) are major sources of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) and exist as a family of isoenzymes with tissue-restricted expression and
functions. Nox1, expressed in colon epithelium and vascular smooth muscle, is
suggested to be involved in innate immune defense and cell growth or
proliferation. The transcriptional regulation of Nox1 appears to be particularly 
important in the modulation of its activity but the underlying mechanisms are
unknown. Here we have identified the functional Nox1 promoter in human colon
epithelial Caco-2 cells, and show that a 520-bp genomic fragment encompassing the
CAP site is sufficient to direct high levels of expression of a linked reporter
gene in these cells. Deletion analyses together with electrophoretic
mobility-shift assays (EMSAs) suggest that maximal promoter activity is dependent
on a GATA-binding site, conserved between human and mouse, within the proximal
promoter region. The ability of mouse GATA factors to transactivate the Nox1
promoter was demonstrated in Cos-7 cells and site-directed mutagenesis of the
conserved GATA-binding site further demonstrates that the regulation of Nox1
transcription is mediated by the direct binding of a GATA factor to the Nox1
proximal promoter. We also identified more distal, upstream regions which act to 
repress significantly expression from the Nox1 promoter.

PMID: 16413408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2006 Jun;290(6):C1599-609. Epub 2006 Jan 11.

130-kDa smooth muscle myosin light chain kinase is transcribed from a
CArG-dependent, internal promoter within the mouse mylk gene.

Yin F(1), Hoggatt AM, Zhou J, Herring BP.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana Univ. School of
Medicine, 635 Barnhill Dr., Indianapolis, IN 46202-5120, USA.

The 130-kDa smooth muscle myosin light chain kinase (smMLCK) is a
Ca2+/CaM-regulated enzyme that plays a pivotal role in the initiation of smooth
muscle contraction and regulation of cellular migration and division. Despite the
critical importance of smMLCK in these processes, little is known about the
mechanisms regulating its expression. In this study, we have identified the
proximal promoter of smMLCK within an intron of the mouse mylk gene. The mylk
gene encodes at least two isoforms of MLCK (130 and 220 kDa) and telokin.
Luciferase reporter gene assays demonstrated that a 282-bp fragment (-167 to
+115) of the smMLCK promoter was sufficient for maximum activity in A10 smooth
muscle cells and 10T1/2 fibroblasts. Deletion of the 16 bp between -167 and -151,
which included a CArG box, resulted in a nearly complete loss of promoter
activity. Gel mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays
demonstrated that serum response factor (SRF) binds to this CArG box both in
vitro and in vivo. SRF knockdown by short hairpin RNA decreased endogenous smMLCK
expression in A10 cells. Although the SRF coactivator myocardin induced smMLCK
expression in 10T1/2 cells, myocardin activated the promoter only two- to
fourfold in reporter gene assays. Addition of either intron 1 or 6 kb of the 5'
upstream sequence did not lead to any further activation of the promoter by
myocardin. The proximal smMLCK promoter also contains a consensus GATA-binding
site that bound GATA-6. GATA-6 binding to this site decreased endogenous smMLCK
expression, inhibited promoter activity in smooth muscle cells, and blocked the
ability of myocardin to induce smMLCK expression. Altogether, these data suggest 
that SRF and SRF-associated factors play a key role in regulating the expression 
of smMLCK.

PMID: 16407417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 10;281(10):6442-7. Epub 2005 Dec 28.

Leukemia inhibitory factor induces endothelial differentiation in cardiac stem
cells.

Mohri T(1), Fujio Y, Maeda M, Ito T, Iwakura T, Oshima Y, Uozumi Y, Segawa M,
Yamamoto H, Kishimoto T, Azuma J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Evaluation of Medicines and Therapeutics, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita City, Osaka, Japan.

The importance of interleukin 6 (IL-6)-related cytokines in cardiac homeostasis
has been studied extensively; however, little is known about their biological
significance in cardiac stem cells. Here we describe that leukemia inhibitory
factor (LIF), a member of IL-6-related cytokines, activated STAT3 and ERK1/2 in
cardiac Sca-1+ stem cells. LIF stimulation resulted in the induction of
endothelial cell-specific genes, including VE-cadherin, Flk-1, and CD31, whereas 
neither smooth muscle nor cardiac muscle marker genes such as GATA4, GATA6,
Nkx-2.5, and calponin were up-regulated. Immunocytochemical examination showed
that about 25% of total cells were positively stained with anti-CD31 antibody 14 
days after LIF stimulation. Immunofluorescent microscopic analyses identified the
Sca-1+ cells that were also positively stained with anti-von Willebrand factor
antibody, indicating the differentiating process of Sca-1+ cells into the
endothelial cells. IL-6, which did not activate STAT3 and ERK1/2, failed to
induce the differentiation of cardiac stem cells into the endothelial cells. In
cardiac stem cells, the transduction with dominant negative STAT3 abrogated the
LIF-induced endothelial differentiation. And the inhibition of ERK1/2 with the
MEK1/2 inhibitor U0126 also prevented the differentiation of Sca-1+ cells into
endothelial cells. Thus, both STAT3 and ERK1/2 are required for LIF-mediated
endothelial differentiation in cardiac stem cells. Collectively, it is proposed
that LIF regulates the commitment of cardiac stem cells into the endothelial cell
lineage, contributing to neovascularization in the process of tissue remodeling
and/or regeneration.

PMID: 16407199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Apr;6(4):426-32. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Spatio-temporal patterns of intestine-specific transcription factor expression
during postnatal mouse gut development.

Fang R(1), Olds LC, Sibley E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, 750 Welch Road, Suite 116, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

The small intestine matures from a primitive tube into morphologically and
functionally distinct regions during gut development. Maximal expression of the
genes encoding the digestive enzymes lactase-phlorizin hydrolase and
sucrase-isomaltase is spatially restricted to distinct segments along the
anterior-posterior axis of the small intestine and is temporally regulated during
postnatal maturation. Transcription factors capable of interacting with the
intestinal lactase and sucrase gene promoters are candidate regulators of
spatio-temporal patterning during gut development and maturation. We aimed to
quantitatively examine and compare the relative expression levels of a set of
intestine-specific transcription factors along the anterior-posterior gut axis
during postnatal maturation. Our analysis was focused on the transcription
factors capable of regulating the intestinal lactase and sucrase-isomaltase
genes. A real-time PCR protocol was used to quantitatively examine and compare
spatially and temporally the relative transcript abundance levels for
intestine-specific factors during postnatal intestinal maturation. Distinct
spatial expressions patterns were detected along the length of the small
intestine for PDX-1, Cdx-2, GATA-4, GATA-5, GATA-6, HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta and CDP
transcription factor genes. There is a general decline in transcript abundance
for the factor genes during postnatal maturation. Defining the spatio-temporal
expression patterns for intestine-specific transcription factor genes contributes
to investigation of the roles that factor gradients play in mediating gut
development and differentiation.

PMID: 16377257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Cancer Lett. 2006 Sep 28;241(2):281-8. Epub 2005 Dec 7.

Involvement of GATA-4/-5 transcription factors in ovarian carcinogenesis.

Wakana K(1), Akiyama Y, Aso T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comprehensive Reproductive Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine
and Dentistry, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 1-5-45, Yushima, Bunkyo-ku,
Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

To clarify the role of GATA transcription factors in ovarian carcinogenesis, we
analyzed the expression and methylation states of GATA-4/-5/-6 in eight human
ovarian cancer cell lines. GATA-4/-5 were methylated in three and two cell lines 
without their expression, respectively. Methylation of GATA-4/-5 was also
detected in nine and five of 15 primary ovarian cancers, respectively. GATA-6 was
not methylated in any cases. We transiently over-expressed GATA-5 in the JHOC-5
cell line using an adenovirus system, resulting in that apoptosis was induced and
apoptosis-related genes, such as Apaf-1, were up-regulated. These data suggest
that GATA-4/-5 may be involved in ovarian carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16337738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Dev Growth Differ. 2005 Dec;47(9):591-600.

Further extension of mammalian GATA-6.

Maeda M(1), Ohashi K, Ohashi-Kobayashi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
mmaeda@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp

Mammalian GATA-6, which has conserved tandem zinc fingers
(CVNC-X(17)-CNAC)-X(29)-(CXNC-X(17)-CNAC), is essential for the development and
specific gene regulation of the heart, gastrointestinal tract and other tissues. 
GATA-6 recognizes the (A/T/C)GAT(A/T)(A) sequence, and interacts with other
transcriptional regulators through its zinc-finger region. The mRNA of GATA-6
uses two Met codons in frame as translational initiation codons, and produces L- 
and S-type GATA-6 through leaky ribosome scanning. GATA-6 is subjected to
cAMP-dependent proteolysis by a proteasome in a heterologous expression system.
These protein-based characteristics of GATA-6 will be helpful for the
identification of target genes, together with determination of the in vivo
binding sites for GATA-6 and understanding of the complex network of gene
regulation mediated by GATA-6.

PMID: 16316404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Jan 6;339(1):151-6. Epub 2005 Nov 9.

CHF1/Hey2 suppresses SM-MHC promoter activity through an interaction with GATA-6.

Shirvani S(1), Xiang F, Koibuchi N, Chin MT.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Medicine Research, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical
School, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The bHLH transcription factor CHF1/Hey2 has been previously shown to regulate
neointimal formation after vascular injury, but the mechanisms have not been
fully elucidated. The zinc-finger protein GATA-6 has also been shown to regulate 
vascular smooth-muscle phenotype through regulation of smooth-muscle contractile 
protein gene expression. To address the potential mechanisms by which CHF1/Hey2
regulates vascular smooth-muscle phenotype switching, we investigated the effect 
of CHF1/Hey2 on GATA-6-dependent smooth-muscle myosin heavy chain promoter
activity. When cotransfected into NIH3T3 cells, CHF1/Hey2 reduced
GATA-6-dependent activation of the promoter by 90%. Exogenous p300 was not
sufficient to overcome this repression effect, demonstrating that the inhibitor
effect did not involve coactivation by p300. Coimmunoprecipitation studies
demonstrated that CHF1/Hey2 interacts directly with GATA-6. Mutational analysis
demonstrated that the bHLH domain is required for transcriptional repression. Our
findings highlight an important transcriptional mechanism by which CHF1/Hey2 may 
affect smooth-muscle cell phenotype.

PMID: 16293227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Biochemistry (Mosc). 2005 Oct;70(10):1180-4.

Codon 12 region of mouse K-ras gene is the site for in vitro binding of
transcription factors GATA-6 and NF-Y.

Gorshkova EV(1), Kaledin VI, Kobzev VF, Merkulova TI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cytology and Genetics, Siberian Division of the Russian Academy
of Sciences, Novosibirsk, 630090, Russia. schly@mail.ru

Codon 12 of the K-ras gene is a generally recognized example of a mutational hot 
spot. By the approach of gel retardation and specific antibodies, a
double-stranded oligonucleotide corresponding to the codon 12 region of the mouse
K-ras gene (from 20 to 50 bp with respect to the exon 1 start) was found to be a 
site for cooperative binding of the transcription factors GATA-6 and NF-Y. GATA-6
and NF-Y were selectively activated with lung carcinogens 3-methylcholanthrene
and nitrosoethylurea in mice of strains susceptible to lung tumorigenesis but not
in animals of resistant strains. The interaction of GATA-6 and NF-Y with the
codon 12 region of the K-ras gene is suggested to be involved in the mechanism of
lung carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16271038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Biochem Soc Trans. 2005 Dec;33(Pt 6):1534-6.

Generation of embryos directly from embryonic stem cells by tetraploid embryo
complementation reveals a role for GATA factors in organogenesis.

Duncan SA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Road, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA. duncans@mcw.edu

Gene targeting in ES (embryonic stem) cells has been used extensively to study
the role of proteins during embryonic development. In the traditional procedure, 
this requires the generation of chimaeric mice by introducing ES cells into
blastocysts and allowing them to develop to term. Once chimaeric mice are
produced, they are bred into a recipient mouse strain to establish germline
transmission of the allele of interest. Although this approach has been used very
successfully, the breeding cycles involved are time consuming. In addition, genes
that are essential for organogenesis often have roles in the formation of
extra-embryonic tissues that are essential for early stages of post-implantation 
development. For example, mice lacking the GATA transcription factors, GATA4 or
GATA6, arrest during gastrulation due to an essential role for these factors in
differentiation of extra-embryonic endoderm. This lethality has frustrated the
study of these factors during the development of organs such as the liver and
heart. Extraembryonic defects can, however, be circumvented by generating clonal 
mouse embryos directly from ES cells by tetraploid complementation. Here, we
describe the usefulness and efficacy of this approach using GATA factors as an
example.

PMID: 16246163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Stem Cells. 2006 Mar;24(3):506-13. Epub 2005 Oct 20.

Characterization of a side population of cancer cells from human gastrointestinal
system.

Haraguchi N(1), Utsunomiya T, Inoue H, Tanaka F, Mimori K, Barnard GF, Mori M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Medical Institute of Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 
Tsurumihara 4546, Beppu 874-0838, Japan.

A subset of stem cells, termed "side population" (SP) cells, has been identified 
and characterized in several mammalian tissues and cell lines. However, SP cells 
have never been identified or isolated from gastrointestinal cancers. We used
flow cytometry and the DNA-binding dye Hoechst 33342 to isolate SP cells from
various human gastrointestinal system cancer cell lines. Fifteen of sixteen
cancer cell lines from the gastrointestinal system contained 0.3%-2.2% SP cells. 
Next, we used an oligonucleotide microarray to analyze differentially expressed
genes between SP and non-SP cells of hepatoma HuH7. The expression of GATA6,
which is associated with embryonic development and hepatocytic differentiation,
was significantly upregulated in HuH7 SP cells. The expression of ABCG2, ABCB1,
and CEACAM6, which are associated with chemoresistance, was also significantly
increased in SP cells. In addition, some epithelial markers and mesenchymal
markers were overexpressed in SP cells. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and immunocytochemical staining validated these results and suggested a 
multilineage potential for HuH7 SP cells. In hepatoma HuH7 and colorectal SW480
cell lines, SP cells showed evidence for self-renewal, generating both SP and
non-SP cells. Finally, chemoresistance to anticancer agents, including
doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, and gemcitabine, were compared between HuH7 SP and
non-SP cells using an ATP bioluminescence assay. The HuH7 SP cells expressed a
higher resistance to doxorubicin, 5-fluorouracil, and gemcitabine compared with
non-SP cells. These findings demonstrate that cancers of the gastrointestinal
system do contain SP cells that show some characteristics of so-called stem
cells.

PMID: 16239320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. J Mol Biol. 2005 Nov 4;353(4):763-71. Epub 2005 Sep 22.

Androgen receptor binding sites identified by a GREF_GATA model.

Masuda K(1), Werner T, Maheshwari S, Frisch M, Oh S, Petrovics G, May K,
Srikantan V, Srivastava S, Dobi A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Prostate Disease Research, Department of Surgery, Uniformed
Services University, Rockville, MD 20852, USA.

Changes in transcriptional regulation can be permissive for tumor progression by 
allowing for selective growth advantage of tumor cells. Tumor suppressors can
effectively inhibit this process. The PMEPA1 gene, a potent inhibitor of prostate
cancer cell growth is an androgen-regulated gene. We addressed the question of
whether or not androgen receptor can directly bind to specific PMEPA1 promoter
upstream sequences. To test this hypothesis we extended in silico prediction of
androgen receptor binding sites by a modeling approach and verified the actual
binding by in vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Promoter upstream
sequences of highly androgen-inducible genes were examined from microarray data
of prostate cancer cells for transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs). Results 
were analyzed to formulate a model for the description of specific androgen
receptor binding site context in these sequences. In silico analysis and
subsequent experimental verification of the selected sequences suggested that a
model that combined a GREF and a GATA TFBS was sufficient for predicting a class 
of functional androgen receptor binding sites. The GREF matrix family represents 
androgen receptor, glucocorticoid receptor and progesterone receptor binding
sites and the GATA matrix family represents GATA binding protein 1-6 binding
sites. We assessed the regulatory sequences of the PMEPA1 gene by comparing our
model-based GREF_GATA predictions to weight matrix-based predictions. Androgen
receptor binding to predicted promoter upstream sequences of the PMEPA1 gene was 
confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. Our results suggested that
androgen receptor binding to cognate elements was consistent with the GREF_GATA
model. In contrast, using only single GREF weight matrices resulted in additional
matches, apparently false positives. Our findings indicate that complex models
based on datasets selected by biological function can be superior predictors as
they recognize TFBSs in their functional context.

PMID: 16213525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(20):8960-70.

Hey basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors are repressors of GATA4 and
GATA6 and restrict expression of the GATA target gene ANF in fetal hearts.

Fischer A(1), Klattig J, Kneitz B, Diez H, Maier M, Holtmann B, Englert C,
Gessler M.

Author information: 
(1)Theodor-Boveri-Institute, Physiological Chemistry I, University of Wuerzburg, 
Germany.

The Hey basic helix-loop-helix transcription factors are downstream effectors of 
Notch signaling in the cardiovascular system. Mice lacking Hey2 develop cardiac
hypertrophy, often associated with congenital heart defects, whereas combined
Hey1/Hey2 deficiency leads to severe vascular defects and embryonic lethality
around embryonic day E9.5. The molecular basis of these disorders is poorly
understood, however, since target genes of Hey transcription factors in the
affected tissues remain elusive. To identify genes regulated by Hey factors we
have generated a conditional Hey1 knockout mouse. This strain was used to
generate paired Hey2- and Hey1/2-deficient embryonic stem cell lines. Comparison 
of these cell lines by microarray analysis identified GATA4 and GATA6 as
differentially expressed genes. Loss of Hey1/2 leads to elevated GATA4/6 and ANF 
mRNA levels in embryoid bodies, while forced expression of Hey factors strongly
represses expression of the GATA4 and GATA6 promoter in various cell lines. In
addition, the promoter activity of the GATA4/6 target gene ANF was inhibited by
Hey1, Hey2, and HeyL. Protein interaction and mutation analyses suggest that
repression is due to direct binding of Hey proteins to GATA4 and GATA6, blocking 
their transcriptional activity. In Hey2-deficient fetal hearts we observed
elevated mRNA levels of ANF and CARP. Expression of ANF and Hey2 is normally
restricted to the trabecular and compact myocardial layer, respectively.
Intriguingly, loss of Hey2 leads to ectopic ANF expression in the compact layer, 
suggesting a direct role for Hey2 in limiting ANF expression in this cardiac
compartment.

PMCID: PMC1265774
PMID: 16199874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Oct;25(20):8864-73.

LMCD1/Dyxin is a novel transcriptional cofactor that restricts GATA6 function by 
inhibiting DNA binding.

Rath N(1), Wang Z, Lu MM, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 19104, USA.

The activity of GATA factors is regulated, in part, at the level of
protein-protein interactions. LIM domain proteins, first defined by the zinc
finger motifs found in the Lin11, Isl-1, and Mec-3 proteins, act as coactivators 
of GATA function in both hematopoietic and cardiovascular tissues. We have
identified a novel GATA-LIM interaction between GATA6 and LMCD1/dyxin. The LIM
domains and cysteine-rich domains in LMCD1/dyxin and the carboxy-terminal zinc
finger of GATA6 mediate this interaction. Expression of LMCD1/dyxin is remarkably
similar to that of GATA6, with high-level expression observed in distal airway
epithelium of the lung, vascular smooth muscle, and myocardium. In contrast to
other GATA-LIM protein interactions, LMCD1/dyxin represses GATA6 activation of
both lung and cardiac tissue-specific promoters. Electrophoretic mobility shift
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays show that LMCD1/dyxin represses GATA6
function by inhibiting GATA6 DNA binding. These data reveal an interaction
between GATA6 and LMCD1/dyxin and demonstrate a novel mechanism through which LIM
proteins can assert their role as transcriptional cofactors of GATA proteins.

PMCID: PMC1265795
PMID: 16199866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Dev Biol. 2005 Oct 15;286(2):574-86. Epub 2005 Sep 12.

Perception of differentiation cues by GATA factors in primitive endoderm lineage 
determination of mouse embryonic stem cells.

Capo-Chichi CD(1), Rula ME, Smedberg JL, Vanderveer L, Parmacek MS, Morrisey EE, 
Godwin AK, Xu XX.

Author information: 
(1)Ovarian Cancer and Tumor Cell Biology Programs, Department of Medical
Oncology, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman Avenue, Philadelphia, PA
19111-2497, USA.

The formation of the primitive endoderm covering the inner cell mass of early
mouse embryos can be simulated in vitro by the differentiation of mouse embryonic
stem (ES) cells in culture following either aggregation of suspended cells or
stimulation of cell monolayers with retinoic acid. The developmentally regulated 
transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 have determining role in mouse
extraembryonic endoderm development. We analyzed the in vitro differentiation of 
mouse embryonic stem cells deficient of GATA factors and conclude that GATA-4 is 
required for ES cells to perceive a cell positioning (cell aggregation) signal
and GATA-6 is required to sense morphogenic (retinoic acid) signal. The
collaboration between GATA-6 and GATA-4, or GATA-6 and GATA-5 which can
substitute for GATA-4, is involved in the perception of differentiation cues by
embryonic stem cells in their determination of endoderm lineage. This study
indicates that the lineage differentiation of ES cells can be manipulated by the 
expression of GATA factors.

PMID: 16162334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Dec;90(12):6596-602. Epub 2005 Sep 13.

Increased transcription and increased messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) stability
contribute to increased GATA6 mRNA abundance in polycystic ovary syndrome theca
cells.

Ho CK(1), Wood JR, Stewart DR, Ewens K, Ankener W, Wickenheisser J,
Nelson-Degrave V, Zhang Z, Legro RS, Dunaif A, McAllister JM, Spielman R, Strauss
JF 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Reproduction and Women's Health, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

CONTEXT: Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) theca cells secrete increased levels of
androgens. The mRNA and protein levels of the transcription factor GATA6, which
regulates expression of several steroidogenic enzymes, are increased in PCOS
theca cells. Thus, GATA6 is a PCOS candidate gene.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to explore mechanisms by which GATA6
mRNA levels are increased in PCOS theca cells.
DESIGN: Theca cell cDNA and genomic DNA from normal individuals and PCOS patients
were subjected to quantitative RT-PCR and sequence analysis, respectively.
SETTING: The experiments were performed in a university laboratory.
PARTICIPANTS: Four hundred sixty-nine families that contain at least one PCOS
patient were ascertained for genetic studies. Theca cells were obtained from four
normal individuals and four PCOS patients.
RESULTS: Nascent GATA6 transcript levels, which reflect GATA6 gene transcription,
were significantly increased in PCOS theca cells. In normal theca cells, GATA6
mRNA has a short half-life, which was attributed to an AU-rich 3'-untranslated
region sequence. The half-life of GATA6 transcripts was also significantly longer
in the PCOS theca cells. However, no sequence variations in the GATA6 gene locus 
were associated with PCOS.
CONCLUSIONS: In PCOS theca cells, GATA6 gene transcription and the stability of
the GATA6 mRNA are increased. Because there is no sequence variation in the GATA6
gene locus, which is associated with PCOS, it is likely that the increased gene
transcription and mRNA stability are due to intrinsic differences in PCOS theca
cells.

PMID: 16159937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Dec;90(12):6529-35. Epub 2005 Sep 13.

High GATA-4 expression associates with aggressive behavior, whereas low
anti-Müllerian hormone expression associates with growth potential of ovarian
granulosa cell tumors.

Anttonen M(1), Unkila-Kallio L, Leminen A, Butzow R, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Program for Developmental and Reproductive Biology, Biomedicum Helsinki,
University of Helsinki, P.O. Box 63 (Haartmaninkatu 8), 00014 Helsinki, Finland. 
mikko.anttonen@helsinki.fi

CONTEXT: Granulosa cell tumors (GCTs) are ovarian malignancies that produce
estrogens, inhibins, and anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH). The molecular pathogenesis
of GCTs is likely to involve defects in the genes regulating normal granulosa
cell proliferation during folliculogenesis.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to test the role of factors regulating
the normal granulosa cell function, i.e. AMH, inhibin-alpha, SF-1 (steroidogenic 
factor-1), and GATA transcription factors in the pathobiology and clinical
behavior of GCTs.
DESIGN: We selected randomly a cohort of 80 GCT patients treated at our
university hospital during 1971-2003, analyzed protein expression in the tumor
samples embedded on a tissue microarray by immunohistochemistry, and correlated
the data to clinical and histopathological parameters.
RESULTS: We found no significant differences in the immunoreactivity levels of
inhibin-alpha, GATA-6, FOG-2 (friend of GATA-2), or SF-1 in GCTs compared with
normal granulosa cells. AMH expression was, however, low (i.e. reduced) in 69% of
GCTs and correlated inversely with tumor size (P = 0.0025). In contrast, GATA-4
expression was high (i.e. resembled normal granulosa cells) in 44% of GCTs and
correlated positively with clinical stage and recurrence (P = 0.0232 and P =
0.0038, respectively). Fifty of the 80 patients had a follow-up for at least 10
yr, and 13 of them had recurrence(s). In multivariate analysis of recurrence, the
high GATA-4 expression remained the only independent factor (risk ratio, 9.2; 95%
confidence interval, 2.0-43.3; P = 0.0048).
CONCLUSIONS: The more aggressive GCTs retain a high GATA-4 expression, whereas
the larger tumors lose the proliferation-suppressing AMH expression. The high
GATA-4 expression in GCTs may serve as a marker of poor prognosis.

PMID: 16159935  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2005 Nov 7;160(1):90-5. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

Expression of GATA6 in the human and mouse central nervous system.

Kamnasaran D(1), Guha A.

Author information: 
(1)The Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain Tumor Research Centre, The Hospital for Sick
Children Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5G 1X8.

The mammalian GATA family of transcription factors comprises of 6 members that
are involved in diverse roles. The expression profile of GATA6 has been poorly
defined in the central nervous system (CNS). In this report, we identify GATA6
expression in the normal mouse and human CNS, using Northern blot analyses,
immunohistochemistry (IHC), and immunofluorescence (IF). GATA6 is expressed as a 
2.2 kb transcript in the adult mouse brain and several regions of the adult human
brain. Furthermore, cellular characterization demonstrates GATA6 nuclear
expression in neurons, astrocytes, choroids plexus epithelium, and endothelial
cells.

PMID: 16150495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Stem Cells Dev. 2005 Aug;14(4):425-39.

GATA factors lie upstream of Nkx 2.5 in the transcriptional regulatory cascade
that effects cardiogenesis.

Brewer AC(1), Alexandrovich A, Mjaatvedt CH, Shah AM, Patient RK, Pizzey JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiology, King's College Hospital, London SE5 9RS, UK.

Members of the GATA-4, -5, and -6 subfamily of transcription factors are
co-expressed with the homeoprotein Nkx 2.5 in the precardiac mesoderm during the 
earliest stages of its specification and are known to be important determinants
of cardiac gene expression. Ample evidence suggests that GATA factors and Nkx 2.5
cross-regulate each other's expression; however, the temporal order of the
expression of these transcription factors in vivo remains unresolved, and thus
precise definition of the role of the products of the genes they transcribe in
early development has been difficult to assess. We employed P19 CL6 mouse
embryonic carcinoma cells as a model to investigate this problem, because these
cells, like embryonic stem cells, can be induced to differentiate along multiple 
lineages. Here we demonstrate that when P19 CL6 cells are induced to
differentiate to a cardiogenic lineage, the expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 is
up-regulated prior to the transcriptional activation of Nkx 2.5. Moreover,
over-expression of GATA-4 or -6 at the time of Nkx 2.5 induction results in a
significant up-regulation of endogenous Nkx 2.5 transcription. Finally, it is
known that a Nkx-dependent enhancer is necessary for GATA-6 expression within
cardiomyocytes of the developing mouse embryo. We demonstrate that within
undifferentiated P19 CL6 cells, GATA-6 expression is subject to active repression
by a novel upstream element that possesses binding sites for factors involved in 
transcriptional repression that are conserved between mammalian species.

PMID: 16137232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Tumour Biol. 2005 Sep-Oct;26(5):265-73. Epub 2005 Aug 17.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6, and their potential downstream effectors
in ovarian germ cell tumors.

Mannisto S(1), Butzow R, Salonen J, Leminen A, Heikinheimo O, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Program for Developmental and Reproductive Biology, Biomedicum, University of 
Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

Ovarian germ cell tumors (GCTs) are histologically heterogeneous neoplasms
originating from activated germ cells, the oocyte stem cells. These rare tumors
often contain many different tissues mixed together, and malignant components are
occasionally hidden within benign tissues thus complicating the diagnosis. The
reasons for the variable differentiation of germ cells are still largely unknown.
As transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 as well as their downstream factors
(e.g. HNF-4, BMP-2 and Ihh) are essential for normal yolk sac development, we
studied their expression in 19 ovarian GCTs. Endodermal markers were expressed
distinctively in different GCT types. The malignant endoderm in yolk sac tumors
expressed all factors of endodermal development included in the study.
Dysgerminomas, on the contrary, expressed only GATA-4 and, in a minority of
cases, Ihh and BMP-2. The results suggest that GATA-4 and GATA-6 detected in the 
ovarian GCTs have retained their normal function. The fact that GATA-6 and HNF-4 
are expressed exclusively in endodermal tissues indicates that these
transcription factors play a role in the differentiation of germ cells towards
the endodermal phenotype. Analysis of the nuclear transcription factors in tumor 
tissue could serve as a new informative diagnostic tool for ovarian GCTs.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 16110260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Development. 2005 Sep;132(17):4005-14. Epub 2005 Aug 3.

Gata4 regulates the formation of multiple organs.

Holtzinger A(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Erratum in
    Development. 2006 Jan;133(1):181.

We have developed a loss-of-function model for Gata4 in zebrafish, in order to
examine broadly its requirement for organogenesis. We show that the function of
Gata4 in zebrafish heart development is well conserved with that in mouse, and
that, in addition, Gata4 is required for development of the intestine, liver,
pancreas and swim bladder. Therefore, a single transcription factor regulates the
formation of many organs. Gata6 is a closely related transcription factor with an
overlapping expression pattern. We show that zebrafish depleted of Gata6 show
defects in liver bud growth similar to mouse Gata6 mutants and zebrafish Gata4
morphants, and that zebrafish embryos depleted of both Gata4 and Gata6 display an
earlier block in liver development, and thus completely lack liver buds.
Therefore, Gata4 and Gata6 have distinct non-redundant functions in cardiac
morphogenesis, but are redundant for an early step of liver development. In
addition, both Gata4 and Gata6 are essential and non-redundant for liver growth
following initial budding.

PMID: 16079152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Circ Res. 2005 Aug 5;97(3):219-26. Epub 2005 Jul 21.

Alk3/Bmpr1a receptor is required for development of the atrioventricular canal
into valves and annulus fibrosus.

Gaussin V(1), Morley GE, Cox L, Zwijsen A, Vance KM, Emile L, Tian Y, Liu J, Hong
C, Myers D, Conway SJ, Depre C, Mishina Y, Behringer RR, Hanks MC, Schneider MD, 
Huylebroeck D, Fishman GI, Burch JB, Vatner SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Cardiovascular Research
Institute, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, New Jersey Medical
School, 185 S Orange Ave, MSB Room G-609, Newark, NJ 07103, USA.
gaussivi@umdnj.edu

Endocardial cushions are precursors of mature atrioventricular (AV) valves. Their
formation is induced by signaling molecules originating from the AV myocardium,
including bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs). Here, we hypothesized that BMP
signaling plays an important role in the AV myocardium during the maturation of
AV valves from the cushions. To test our hypothesis, we used a unique Cre/lox
system to target the deletion of a floxed Alk3 allele, the type IA receptor for
BMPs, to cardiac myocytes of the AV canal (AVC). Lineage analysis indicated that 
cardiac myocytes of the AVC contributed to the tricuspid mural and posterior
leaflets, the mitral septal leaflet, and the atrial border of the annulus
fibrosus. When Alk3 was deleted in these cells, defects were seen in the same
leaflets, ie, the tricuspid mural leaflet and mitral septal leaflet were longer, 
the tricuspid posterior leaflet was displaced and adherent to the ventricular
wall, and the annulus fibrosus was disrupted resulting in ventricular
preexcitation. The defects seen in mice with AVC-targeted deletion of Alk3
provide strong support for a role of Alk3 in human congenital heart diseases,
such as Ebstein's anomaly. In conclusion, our mouse model demonstrated critical
roles for Alk3 signaling in the AV myocardium during the development of AV valves
and the annulus fibrosus.

PMCID: PMC2950023
PMID: 16037571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Cancer Res. 2005 Jul 15;65(14):6089-96.

Synergistic induction of DOC-2/DAB2 gene expression in transitional cell
carcinoma in the presence of GATA6 and histone deacetylase inhibitor.

Zhou J(1), Hernandez G, Tu SW, Scholes J, Chen H, Tseng CP, Hsieh JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center,
Dallas, Texas 75390-9110, USA.

The down-regulation of DOC-2/DAB2 gene, which encodes a unique phosphoprotein
modulating signal pathways elicited by exogenous stimuli, is often associated
with several cancer types; however, the underlying mechanism is still unknown.
Dramatically different expression levels of DOC-2/DAB2 mRNA and protein are
observed among several human transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) cell lines,
suggesting that transcriptional regulation may play a role in these cells. In
this study, we have shown that the histone acetylation status associated with the
5' upstream regulatory sequence of DOC-2/DAB2 gene is one of the key determinants
for its gene expression. In addition, GATA6 but not other GATA family members,
such as GATA2 and GATA4, can specifically induce DOC-2/DAB2 promoter activity,
although GATA transcription factors share a very similar DNA-binding sequence. We
also show that increased histone acetylation and the presence of GATA6 have a
synergistic effect on DOC-2/DAB2 promoter activity, which results in the
elevation of DOC-2/DAB2 protein expression. Thus, we conclude that
transcriptional regulation of DOC-2/DAB2 gene in human TCC is determined by
histone acetylation and a specific transcription factor (i.e., GATA6), which
underlie the reduced DOC-2/DAB2 protein expression in TCC cells.

PMID: 16024609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Clin Genet. 2005 Aug;68(2):106-12.

Genetic regulation of stem cell origins in the mouse embryo.

Ralston A(1), Rossant J.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario,
Canada.

Erratum in
    Clin Genet. 2005 Sep;68(3):286.

'Stem cell' has practically become a household term, but what is a stem cell and 
where does it come from? Insight into these questions has come from the early
mouse embryo, or blastocyst, from which three kinds of stem cells have been
derived: embryonic stem (ES) cells, trophoblast stem (TS) cells, and
extraembryonic endoderm (XEN) cells. These stem cells appear to derive from three
distinct tissue lineages within the blastocyst: the epiblast, the trophectoderm, 
and the extraembryonic endoderm. Understanding how these lineages arise during
development will illuminate efforts to understand the establishment and
maintenance of the stem cell state and the mechanisms that restrict stem cell
potency. Genetic analysis has enabled the identification of several genes
important for lineage decisions in the mouse blastocyst. Among these, Oct4,
Nanog, Cdx2, and Gata6 encode transcription factors required for the three
lineages of the blastocyst and for the maintenance their respective stem cell
types. Interestingly, genetic manipulation of several of these factors can cause 
lineage switching among these stem cells, suggesting that knowledge of key
lineage-determining genes could help control differentiation of stem cells more
generally. Pluripotent stem cells have also been isolated from the human
blastocyst, but the relationship between these cells and stem cells of the mouse 
blastocyst remains to be explored. This review describes the genetic regulation
of lineage allocation during blastocyst formation and discusses similarities and 
differences between mouse and human ES cells.

PMID: 15996204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Stem Cells. 2005 Sep;23(8):1035-43. Epub 2005 Jun 27.

Downregulation of NANOG induces differentiation of human embryonic stem cells to 
extraembryonic lineages.

Hyslop L(1), Stojkovic M, Armstrong L, Walter T, Stojkovic P, Przyborski S,
Herbert M, Murdoch A, Strachan T, Lako M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Stem Cell Biology and Developmental Genetics, University of
Newcastle International Centre for Life, Newcastle NE1 3BZ, United Kingdom.

The homeobox transcription factor Nanog has been proposed to play a crucial role 
in the maintenance of the undifferentiated state of murine embryonic stem cells. 
A human counterpart, NANOG, has been identified, but its function and
localization have not hitherto been described. We have used a combination of RNA 
interference and quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction to study NANOG 
in human embryonic stem and embryonic carcinoma cells. Transfection of
NANOG-specific small interfering RNAs reduced levels of NANOG transcript and
protein and induced activation of the extraembryonic endoderm-associated genes
GATA4, GATA6, LAMININ B1, and AFP as well as upregulation of
trophectoderm-associated genes CDX2, GATA2, hCG-alpha, and hCG-beta.
Immunostaining of preimplantation human embryos showed that NANOG was expressed
in the inner cell mass of expanded blastocysts but not in earlier-stage embryos, 
consistent with a role in the maintenance of pluripotency. Taken together, our
findings suggest that NANOG acts as a gatekeeper of pluripotency in human
embryonic stem and carcinoma cells by preventing their differentiation to
extraembryonic endoderm and trophectoderm lineages.

PMID: 15983365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Sep;19(9):2358-70. Epub 2005 May 31.

GATA factors and the nuclear receptors, steroidogenic factor 1/liver receptor
homolog 1, are key mutual partners in the regulation of the human
3beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 promoter.

Martin LJ(1), Taniguchi H, Robert NM, Simard J, Tremblay JJ, Viger RS.

Author information: 
(1)Ontogeny-Reproduction, Room T1-49, Centre Hospitalier de l'Université Laval
Research Centre, 2705 Laurier Boulevard, Ste-Foy, Québec, Canada G1V 4G2.

The human HSD3B2 gene encodes the 3beta-hydroxysteroid
dehydrogenase/delta5-delta4 isomerase type 2 (3beta-HSD2) enzyme that is required
for steroid hormone biosynthesis. Mutations in the hHSD3B2 gene are responsible
for a form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia and male pseudohermaphroditism
whereas overexpression of hHSD3B2 has been recently associated with polycystic
ovarian syndrome. Despite the importance of the hHSD3B2 gene, the molecular
mechanisms that regulate its expression remain poorly understood. Transcription
factors belonging to the GATA family are emerging as novel regulators of
steroidogenesis. Indeed, GATA-4 and GATA-6 are abundantly expressed in
steroidogenic cells of the gonads and adrenals. We now report that the human
HSD3B2 promoter (hHSD3B2), which contains four consensus GATA elements,
constitutes an important target for GATA factors. GATA-4 and GATA-6 by themselves
are sufficient to activate transcription (up to 15-fold) from a -1073 bp hHSD3B2 
promoter fragment and blockade of endogenous GATA expression and/or activity
blunts hHSD3B2 promoter activity in steroidogenic cells. Deletion studies showed 
that the proximal GATA element located at -196 bp is sufficient to confer GATA
responsiveness of the hHSD3B2 promoter and is required for full hHSD3B2 promoter 
activity in steroidogenic cells. Moreover, we report that GATA-4 and GATA-6 can
physically interact with the nuclear receptors, steroidogenic factor 1 and liver 
receptor homolog 1, to synergistically activate hHSD3B2 promoter activity in both
homologous and heterologous cells. Aberrant expression of transcription factors
essential for hHSD3B2 expression might also be involved in some
pathologies/syndromes associated with deregulated hHSD3B2 expression.

PMID: 15928316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Jul 15;332(4):976-81.

Characterization of cAMP-dependent proteolysis of GATA-6.

Ishida A(1), Iijima R, Kobayashi A, Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Erratum in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Feb 10;340(2):735.

Cyclic AMP-dependent proteolysis of GATA-6(Delta50) was characterized using
inhibitors for intracellular signaling pathways. Among these kinase inhibitors,
only H-89 and K252a inhibited the proteolysis induced by dbcAMP, a membrane
permeable cAMP analogue, others such as PD98059, SB203580, calphostine C, PP1,
and KN-93 did not do so. These results suggest that A-kinase, but not C-kinase,
MEK, P38 MAP-kinases or Src kinase, could participate in the observed phenomenon.
We further demonstrated that an inhibitor for ubiquitin isopeptidase
(Delta12-PGJ2) inhibited the degradation of GATA-6(Delta50) in the presence of
dbcAMP, suggesting that the cAMP-dependent proteolysis could be mediated through 
the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, although proteasome activity did not change
significantly during dbcAMP treatment. The full-length GATA-6 was also responsive
to the induced degradation. Furthermore, mutation of a potential phosphorylation 
site (Ser-290-->Ala) for A- and C-kinases, and deletion of the PEST sequence of
GATA-6 did not abolish the degradation. All these results suggest that cellular
factor(s) may play a crucial role in mediating the activation of the
cAMP-dependent process.

PMID: 15913546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Cancer Res. 2005 Apr 15;65(8):3146-54.

Progression of Barrett's metaplasia to adenocarcinoma is associated with the
suppression of the transcriptional programs of epidermal differentiation.

Kimchi ET(1), Posner MC, Park JO, Darga TE, Kocherginsky M, Karrison T, Hart J,
Smith KD, Mezhir JJ, Weichselbaum RR, Khodarev NN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

We did expressional profiling on 24 paired samples of normal esophageal
epithelium, Barrett's metaplasia, and esophageal adenocarcinomas. Matching tissue
samples representing the three different histologic types were obtained from each
patient undergoing esophagectomy for adenocarcinoma. Our analysis compared the
molecular changes accompanying the transformation of normal squamous epithelium
with Barrett's esophagus and adenocarcinoma in individual patients rather than in
a random cohort. We tested the hypothesis that expressional profiling may reveal 
gene sets that can be used as molecular markers of progression from normal
esophageal epithelium to Barrett's esophagus and adenocarcinoma. Expressional
profiling was done using U133A GeneChip (Affymetrix), which represent
approximately two thirds of the human genome. The final selection of 214 genes
permitted the discrimination of differential gene expression of normal esophageal
squamous epithelium, Barrett's esophagus, and adenocarcinoma using
two-dimensional hierarchical clustering of selected genes. These data indicate
that transformation of Barrett's esophagus to adenocarcinoma is associated with
suppression of the genes involved in epidermal differentiation, including genes
in 1q21 loci and corresponding to the epidermal differentiation complex.
Correlation analysis of genes concordantly expressed in Barrett's esophagus and
adenocarcinoma revealed 21 genes that represent potential genetic markers of
disease progression and pharmacologic targets for treatment intervention. PCR
analysis of genes selected based on DNA array experiments revealed that
estimation of the ratios of GATA6 to SPRR3 allows discrimination among normal
esophageal epithelium, Barrett's dysplasia, and adenocarcinoma.

PMID: 15833844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Aug;19(8):2020-34. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

Regulation of cytochrome b5 gene transcription by Sp3, GATA-6, and steroidogenic 
factor 1 in human adrenal NCI-H295A cells.

Huang N(1), Dardis A, Miller WL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143-0978, USA.

Sex steroid synthesis requires the 17,20 lyase activity of P450c17, which is
enhanced by cytochrome b5, acting as an allosteric factor to promote association 
of P450c17 with its electron donor, P450 oxidoreductase. Cytochrome b5 is
preferentially expressed in the fetal adrenal and postadrenarchal adrenal zona
reticularis; the basis of this tissue-specific, developmentally regulated
transcription of the b5 gene is unknown. We found b5 expression in all cell lines
tested, including human adrenal NCI-H295A cells, where its mRNA is reduced by
cAMP and phorbol ester. Multiple sites, between -83 and -122 bp upstream from the
first ATG, initiate transcription. Deletional mutagenesis localized all
detectable promoter activity within -327/+15, and deoxyribonuclease I
footprinting identified protein binding at -72/-107 and -157/-197. DNA segments
-65/-40, -114/-70 and -270/-245 fused to TK32/Luc yielded significant activity,
and mutations in their Sp sites abolished that activity; electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA) showed that Sp3, but not Sp1, binds to these Sp sites. Nuclear
factor 1 (NF-1) and GATA-6, but not GATA-4 bind to the NF-1 and GATA sites in
-157/-197. In Drosophila S2 cells, Sp3 increased -327/Luc activity 58-fold, but
Sp1 and NF-1 isoforms were inactive. Mutating the three Sp sites ablated activity
without or with cotransfection of Sp1/Sp3. In NCI-H295A cells, mutating the three
Sp sites reduced activity to 39%; mutating the Sp, GATA, and NF-1 sites abolished
activity. In JEG-3 cells, GATA-4 was inactive, GATA-6 augmented -327/Luc activity
to 231% over the control, and steroidogenic factor 1 augmented activity to 655%
over the control; these activities required the Sp and NF-1 sites. Transcription 
of cytochrome b5 shares many features with the regulation of P450c17, whose
activity it enhances.

PMID: 15831526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Apr;25(7):2622-31.

GATA6 is essential for embryonic development of the liver but dispensable for
early heart formation.

Zhao R(1), Watt AJ, Li J, Luebke-Wheeler J, Morrisey EE, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, 8701 Watertown Plank Rd., Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Several lines of evidence suggest that GATA6 has an integral role in controlling 
development of the mammalian liver. Unfortunately, this proposal has been
impossible to address directly because mouse embryos lacking GATA6 die during
gastrulation. Here we show that the early embryonic deficiency associated with
GATA6-knockout mice can be overcome by providing GATA6-null embryos with a
wild-type extraembryonic endoderm with the use of tetraploid embryo
complementation. Analysis of rescued Gata6-/- embryos revealed that, although
hepatic specification occurs normally, the specified cells fail to differentiate 
and the liver bud does not expand. Although GATA6 is expressed in multiple
tissues that impact development of the liver, including the heart, septum
transversum mesenchyme, and vasculature, all are relatively unaffected by loss of
GATA6, which is consistent with a cell-autonomous requirement for GATA6 during
hepatogenesis. We also demonstrate that a closely related GATA factor, GATA4, is 
expressed transiently in the prehepatic endoderm during hepatic specification and
then lost during expansion of the hepatic primordium. Our data support the
proposal that GATA4 and GATA6 are functionally redundant during hepatic
specification but that GATA6 alone is available for liver bud growth and
commitment of the endoderm to a hepatic cell fate.

PMCID: PMC1061656
PMID: 15767668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2005 Apr 15;233(1-2):47-56.

Transcription factors GATA-6, SF-1, and cell proliferation in human
adrenocortical tumors.

Kiiveri S(1), Liu J, Arola J, Heikkilä P, Kuulasmaa T, Lehtonen E, Voutilainen R,
Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Biomedicum Helsinki, 00014 University of Helsinki,
Finland.

Transcription factor GATA-6 is expressed in fetal and adult human adrenal cortex 
and has been suggested to have a role in adrenal androgen synthesis. In other
tissues GATA-6 has been linked to the cell cycle regulation and the
dedifferentiation of carcinoma cells. GATA-6 has been shown to be downregulated
in mouse adrenocortical tumors, but has not been studied in human adrenocortical 
tumors in detail. We have now analyzed GATA-6 expression in 20 human
adrenocortical adenomas and 16 carcinomas using Northern blot analysis and
immunohistochemistry. GATA-6 mRNA and protein expression was remarkably
diminished in adrenocortical carcinomas as compared to normal adrenal cortex and 
adenomas (p<0.05). In opposite to other tumor types GATA-6 expression was,
however, high in virilizing carcinomas. Steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1) has been
functionally linked to GATA-6, and the expression of these two factors correlated
in the adrenal tumors. Furthermore, GATA-6 immunoreactivity was linked to P450c17
expression. In contrast to GATA-6, we found upregulated cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p21 and proliferation marker Ki67 in adrenocortical carcinomas
indicating that GATA-6 is not linked to cell proliferation in human adrenal
tumors. Taken together, the present and earlier results link GATA-6 to
adrenocortical steroidogenesis and to the benign adrenocortical phenotype.

PMID: 15767045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Int J Oncol. 2005 Apr;26(4):1129-33.

Comparative genomics on Wnt8a and Wnt8b genes.

Katoh M(1), Katoh M.

Author information: 
(1)M&M Medical BioInformatics, Hongo 113-0033, Japan.

WNT family ligands transduce signals through FZD1, FZD2, FZD3, FZD4, FZD5, FZD6, 
FZD7, FZD8, FZD9, FZD10, LRP5, LRP6, ROR1, ROR2 and RYK. WNT1, WNT2, WNT2B, WNT3,
WNT3A, WNT8A, WNT8B, WNT10A and WNT10B are canonical WNTs to activate WNT -
beta-catenin pathway. Human WNT8A mRNA is expressed in NT2 cells with neuronal
differentiation potential, while human WNT8B mRNA in diffuse type gastric cancer.
Here, we identified and characterized the rat Wnt8a and Wnt8b genes by using
bioinformatics. The rat Wnt8a gene, consisting of six exons, was located within
AC134361.2 genome sequence. The rat Wnt8b gene, consisting of six exons, was
located within AC105487.6 and AC103018.7 genome sequences. The rat Wnt8a (355 aa)
and Wnt8b (350 aa) with 60.0% total-amino-acid identity were secreted-type
proteins with 22 conserved Cys residues and two Asn-linked glycosylation sites.
Wnt8b orthologs were more conserved than Wnt8a orthologs. GATA-binding site was
located within conserved region of rat Wnt8b and human WNT8B promoters. GATA6
ESTs were expressed in diffuse type gastric cancer, and FGFR2 gene is reported
preferentially amplified in diffuse type gastric cancer.
KGF-FGFR2-PI3K-GATA6-WNT8B signaling cascade is predicted to play important roles
in diffuse type gastric cancer. This is the first report on the rat Wnt8a and
Wnt8b genes as well as on the conserved GATA-binding site within rat Wnt8b and
human WNT8B promoters.

PMID: 15754011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Hypertens Res. 2004 Sep;27(9):685-93.

Effects of angiotensin II type 1 receptor antagonist on smooth muscle cell
phenotype in intramyocardial arteries from spontaneously hypertensive rats.

Kubo M(1), Umemoto S, Fujii K, Itoh S, Tanaka M, Kawahara S, Matsuzaki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Yamaguchi University Graduate School of
Medicine, Ube, Japan.

To clarify the precise mechanisms involved in the reduced coronary flow reserve
in hypertension, we compared the effects of the angiotensin II type 1 (AT1)
receptor antagonist FK-739 with those of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitor enalapril for 6 weeks on the smooth muscle (SM) cell phenotype in
intramyocardial arteries from male Wistar-Kyoto rats (WKY) and spontaneously
hypertensive rats (SHR). Compared with WKY, SHR showed a significant increase in 
left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy and fibrosis, blood pressure (BP), and vascular
remodeling of the intramyocardial arteries, and a significant decrease in
endothelial NO synthase and the contractile-type myosin heavy chain isoform SM2
of the intramyocardial arteries as well as calponin 1 and GATA-6. In the hearts
of SHR, both drugs equivalently and significantly reduced BP, which was still
significantly higher than that in the WKY groups, and also reduced LV hypertrophy
and fibrosis, whereas endothelial NO synthase was significantly restored.
Although both drugs showed little effect on the vascular remodeling of the
intramyocardial arteries in the SHR hearts, FK-739, but not enalapril,
significantly restored SM2 and GATA-6 in the SHR hearts to the same levels as
those of the vehicle WKY group. The effects of the two drugs on these indices
were not observed in the three WKY hearts. Thus, the AT1 receptor antagonist may 
modulate the SM cell phenotype toward the contractile-type more effectively than 
the ACE inhibitor before the morphological changes occur in the intramyocardial
arteries of the SHR hearts.

PMID: 15750263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Mar 1;33(4):e43.

An efficient system to establish multiple embryonic stem cell lines carrying an
inducible expression unit.

Masui S(1), Shimosato D, Toyooka Y, Yagi R, Takahashi K, Niwa H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Pluripotent Cell Studies, RIKEN Center for Developmental
Biology Minatojima-minamimachi 2-2-3, Kobe, Japan. masui@cdb.riken.jp

The growing use of mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells in research emphasizes their
importance in studies of molecular mechanisms that maintain pluripotency and
direct cellular differentiation. Although systems for regulatable transgene
expression are essential for fine analysis of cellular processes at the molecular
level, a strategy for the establishment of multiple ES cell lines carrying any of
these systems has not yet been described. Here, we report our development of the 
ROSA-TET system, an effective system for the establishment of multiple ES cell
lines carrying a tetracycline (Tc)-regulatable transgene at the Gt (ROSA)26asSor 
(ROSA26) locus. This system contains a knock-in step of a construct carrying both
loxP and its mutant sequences into the ROSA26 locus, followed by a subsequent
exchange step that introduces a cDNA to be Tc-regulated to the locus using the
recombinase-mediated cassette exchange reaction. Both steps are demonstrated to
give desired clones with high efficiency, suggesting that this system can be
introduced readily into any ES cell lines, leading to the simultaneous
establishment of multiple cell lines carrying different Tc-regulated cDNAs. We
believe that use of this system will strongly accelerate molecular biological
research using ES cells.

PMCID: PMC552969
PMID: 15741176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Apr 1;329(1):140-6.

Isolation of CHO-K1 clones defective in cAMP-dependent proteolysis, as determined
by the stability of exogenously expressed GATA-6.

Maeda M(1), Ishida A, Ni L, Kobayashi A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
mmaeda@phs.osaka-u.ac.jp

Degradation of the GATA-6(Delta50) protein expressed in a CHO-K1 clone (tc1-17a) 
is stimulated in the presence of dbcAMP through proteasome without new protein
synthesis [FEBS Lett. 408 (1997) 301], whereas the intrinsic GC-box-binding
protein was stable. To examine the cellular mechanism responsible for this
specific degradation of GATA-6(Delta50), we initially introduced the
blasticidin-S deaminase gene carrying a promoter with GATA motifs that are
recognized by GATA-6. The resulting cell line (tc2G2) grew in the presence of
blasticidin S. However, the presence of both blasticidin S and dbcAMP was lethal 
due to degradation of GATA-6. Cells resistant to such lethality were isolated by 
chemical mutagenesis. The GATA-6(Delta50) in these resistant cells was stable in 
the presence of dbcAMP in contrast to that in the parent tc2G2 cells, as
determined by gel-mobility shift analysis and Western blotting. These clones
could be beneficial for identification and characterization of the components
participating in the signaling pathway for both protein degradation and
cAMP-dependent biological processes.

PMID: 15721285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. J Mol Histol. 2005 Feb;36(1-2):15-24.

Epithelial lineages of the small intestine have unique patterns of GATA
expression.

Dusing MR(1), Wiginton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Developmental Biology, College of
Medicine and Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research Foundation, University of
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

The ability of the GATA family of factors to interact with numerous other
factors, co-factors, and repressors suggests that they may play key roles in
tissues and cells where they are expressed. Adult mouse small intestine has been 
shown to express GATA-4, GATA-5, and GATA-6, where they have been implicated in
the activation of a number of intestinal genes. Determination of which GATA
factor(s) are involved in a specific function in tissues expressing multiple
family members has proven difficult. The immunohistochemical analysis presented
here demonstrate that within the mouse small intestine GATA-4/-5/-6 are found to 
be uniquely distributed among the various differentiated lineages of the
intestinal epithelium. Among differentiated cells GATA-4 is found only in the
villous enterocytes. GATA-5 is absent from enterocytes, but was found in the
remaining lineages: goblet, Paneth and enteroendocrine. Additionally, high levels
of GATA-6 are found in only one of these differentiated cell types, the
enteroendocrine lineage. The observed distribution suggests that the GATA factors
may have distinct roles in lineage allocation, lineage maintenance, and/or
terminal differentiation events in small intestine.

PMID: 15703995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Endocr Res. 2004 Nov;30(4):919-23.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in human adrenocortical tumors.

Kiiveri S(1), Liu J, Heikkilä P, Arola J, Lehtonen E, Voutilainen R, Heikinheimo 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, Biomedicum Helsinki, University of Helsinki, Helsinki,
Finland.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 are expressed during normal
adrenocortical development in mice and humans, and in vitro studies have linked
them to adrenal steroidogenesis. GATA-4 is highly expressed in the adrenocortical
tumors of gonadectomized mice, whereas GATA-6 is down-regulated in the tumor
area. Based on these findings we studied GATA-4 and GATA-6 expression in 39 human
adrenocortical tumors using RT-PCR, Northern analysis and immunohistochemistry.
6/18 adenomas and 4/11 carcinomas were positive for GATA-4 mRNA. GATA-6 mRNA was 
expressed in 19/19 adenomas and 9/10 carcinomas, and GATA-6 immunoreactivity was 
remarkably lower in adrenocortical carcinomas than in adenomas (p < 0.05). Some
of the steroidogenically active human adrenocortical cells (NCI-H295R) were
weakly positive for GATA-4, whereas steroidogenically inactive cells (ACT-1) were
totally GATA-4 negative. In contrast, both cell lines expressed GATA-6. GATA
expression patterns similar to the animal models can thus be observed in human
adrenocortical tumors, but the pathophysiological significance of these findings 
remains to be elucidated.

PMID: 15666845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Development. 2005 Feb;132(4):763-74. Epub 2005 Jan 19.

GATA4, 5 and 6 mediate TGFbeta maintenance of endodermal gene expression in
Xenopus embryos.

Afouda BA(1), Ciau-Uitz A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre,
Nottingham NG7 2UH, UK.

The individual contributions of the three vertebrate GATA factors to endoderm
formation have been unclear. Here we detail the early expression of GATA4, 5 and 
6 in presumptive endoderm in Xenopus embryos and their induction of endodermal
markers in presumptive ectoderm. Induction of HNF3beta by all three GATA factors 
was abolished when protein synthesis was inhibited, showing that these inductions
are indirect. In contrast, whereas induction of Sox17alpha and HNF1beta by GATA4 
and 5 was substantially reduced when protein synthesis was inhibited, induction
by GATA6 was minimally affected, suggesting that GATA6 is a direct activator of
these early endodermal genes. GATA4 induced GATA6 expression in the same assay
and antisense morpholino oligonucleotides (MOs), designed to knock down
translation of GATA6, blocked induction of Sox17alpha and HNF1beta by GATA4,
suggesting that GATA4 induces these genes via GATA6 in this assay. All three GATA
factors were induced by activin, although GATA4 and 6 required lower
concentrations. GATA MOs inhibited Sox17alpha and HNF1beta induction by activin
at low and high concentrations in the order: GATA6>GATA4>GATA5. Together with the
timing of their expression and the effects of GATA MOs in vivo, these
observations identify GATA6 as the predominant GATA factor in the maintenance of 
endodermal gene expression by TGFbeta signaling in gastrulating embryos. In
addition, examination of gene expression and morphology in later embryos,
revealed GATA5 and 6 as the most critical for the development of the gut and the 
liver.

PMID: 15659482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):95-106. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Using the zebrafish model to study GATA transcription factors.

Heicklen-Klein A(1), McReynolds LJ, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, 1300 Morris Park Avenue, Chanin Room 501, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

The zebrafish is an established animal model system that profits from the
availability of strong experimental approaches in both genetics and embryology.
As a vertebrate, zebrafish can be used to model many aspects of human development
and disease. GATA transcription factors play important roles in the development
of many organ systems, including those for hematopoietic, cardiovascular,
reproductive, and gut-endoderm derived tissues. The six vertebrate GATA factors
are highly conserved in zebrafish at the level of sequence, expression pattern,
and function. The identification of mutants, establishment of transgenic GFP
reporter fish, and the ease of performing loss- and gain-of-function experiments 
have all contributed new insight into our understanding of the regulation and
function of GATA factors. We review recent advances toward this goal using the
zebrafish system with a focus on hematopoiesis and cardiogenesis, and suggest how
comparative genetics using the zebrafish genes might reveal core conserved
properties, as well as changes in gene function that reflect different
morphogenetic programs utilized by various vertebrate embryos.

PMID: 15659344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):83-94. Epub 2004 Dec 15.

The roles of GATA-4, -5 and -6 in vertebrate heart development.

Peterkin T(1), Gibson A, Loose M, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, John
Radcliffe Hospital, Headington, Oxford OX3 9DS.

The transcription factors GATA-4, -5 and -6 are expressed very early in heart
tissue. Essential GATA sites have been detected in several cardiac genes and the 
cardiac GATA factors interact with a wide variety of cofactors which
synergistically increase gene expression. These multi-protein transcriptional
complexes confer promoter-specificity on the GATA factors and also on the more
broadly expressed cofactors. Here we summarise the data on these interactions and
represent the conclusions as a GATA factor-based genetic regulatory network for
the heart. Of the three cardiac GATAs, GATA-4 is by far the most extensively
studied, however, loss-of-function data question its presumed dominance during
heart development as opposed to hypertrophy.

PMID: 15659343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 2005 Feb;16(1):71-81. Epub 2004 Dec 10.

Regulation of GATA gene expression during vertebrate development.

Burch JB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cell and Developmental Biology Program, Fox Chase Cancer Center, 333 Cottman
Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA. john.burch@fccc.edu

GATA factors regulate critical events in hematopoietic lineages (GATA-1/2/3), the
heart and gut (GATA-4/5/6) and various other tissues. Transgenic approaches have 
revealed that GATA genes are regulated in a modular fashion by sets of enhancers 
that govern distinct temporal and/or spatial facets of the overall expression
patterns. Efforts are underway to resolve how these GATA gene enhancers are
themselves regulated in order to elucidate the genetic and molecular hierarchies 
that govern GATA expression in particular developmental contexts. These enhancers
also afford a raft of tools that can be used to selectively perturb and probe
various developmental events in transgenic animals.

PMID: 15659342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2005 Feb;25(2):309-14. Epub 2004 Dec 9.

GATA-6 regulates genes promoting synthetic functions in vascular smooth muscle
cells.

Lepore JJ(1), Cappola TP, Mericko PA, Morrisey EE, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology Research Center, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania Health System, Philadelphia 19104, USA. john.lepore@uphs.upenn.edu
<john.lepore@uphs.upenn.edu>

OBJECTIVE: Previous studies suggested the zinc-finger transcription factor GATA-6
inhibits vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation and promotes the
contractile VSMC phenotype. The objective of this study was to identify bona fide
target genes regulated by GATA-6 in VSMCs.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Microarray analyses were performed comparing mRNA from rat
aortic smooth muscle cells (SMCs) infected with either adenovirus encoding a
dominant-negative GATA-6/engrailed fusion protein or with control adenovirus.
These studies identified 122 genes differentially expressed by at least 2-fold,
including multiple genes involved in cell-cell signaling and cell-matrix
interactions. Among these, endothelin-1 and the angiotensin type(1a) (AT(1a))
receptor are known to be induced in VSMCs in response to inflammatory stimuli and
to be expressed in a GATA-dependent manner in cardiac myocytes in response to
hemodynamic stress. Consistent with these findings, the endothelin-1 and AT(1a)
receptor promoters were activated by forced expression of GATA-6 and repressed by
forced expression of GATA-6/engrailed. Surprisingly, genes encoding SMC
contractile proteins were not altered, and myocardin-induced SMC differentiation 
was not impaired in GATA-6(-/-) embryonic stem cells.
CONCLUSIONS: These data demonstrate that in VSMCs, GATA-6 regulates a set of
genes associated with synthetic SMC functions and suggest that this
transcriptional pathway may be independent from myocardin-induced SMC
differentiation. An unbiased microarray screen of genes regulated by GATA-6 in
VSMCs identified multiple genes involved in cell-cell signaling and cell-matrix
interactions. The endothelin-1 and the AT1a receptor genes were shown to be
direct GATA-6 target genes. These data suggest that GATA-6 plays a role in
promoting synthetic functions in VSMCs.

PMID: 15591218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Clin Cancer Res. 2004 Dec 1;10(23):7917-24.

Hypermethylation of the GATA genes in lung cancer.

Guo M(1), Akiyama Y, House MG, Hooker CM, Heath E, Gabrielson E, Yang SC, Han Y, 
Baylin SB, Herman JG, Brock MV.

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, 600 North Wolfe Street, Baltimore, MD
21287, USA.

PURPOSE: In lung cancer, DNA hypermethylation is known to be a common event.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Gene expression and methylation status of GATA-4, GATA-5,
and GATA-6 were analyzed with cell lines and primary human lung cancers.
Methylation profiles of primary lung cancers were analyzed and correlated with
clinical as well as histopathological data.
RESULTS: Complete methylation was detected by methylation-specific PCR for both
GATA-4 and GATA-5 in four cell lines (H358, DMS-53, A549, and H1299), all of
which had no expression by reverse transcription-PCR analysis. Demethylation with
5-aza-2'deoxycytidine restored expression in each case. GATA-6 was ubiquitously
expressed in all of the six cell lines. GATA-4 bisulfite sequencing revealed
complete methylation of the GATA-4 promoter in H358 cells, correlating well with 
its lack of expression at the mRNA level. Only a few CpG sites showed methylation
by bisulfite sequencing within the GATA-4 promoter in a cell line that expressed 
the gene. In 63 cases of primary lung cancers, GATA-4 and GATA-5 promoter
methylation was detected in (42 of 63) 67% and (26 of 63) 41%, respectively.
GATA-6 remained unmethylated both in cell lines and primary tumors. Six autopsy
specimens of normal lung tissue showed no aberrant promoter hypermethylation for 
the GATA genes. Correlation of concomitant GATA-4 and GATA-5 methylation with
clinicopathological parameters only found a statistically significant increase in
methylation frequency with increasing patient age (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: These epigenetic changes in the GATA genes in lung cancer are
tumor-specific, relate to the loss of GATA gene expression, and occur
increasingly in the elderly.

PMID: 15585625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Dec;5(2):161-5.

Expression of Spgatae, the Strongylocentrotus purpuratus ortholog of vertebrate
GATA4/5/6 factors.

Lee PY(1), Davidson EH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, California Institute of Technology, 1200 E. California
Blvd, Mail Code 156-29, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA.

Spgatae is the sea urchin ortholog of the vertebrate gata4/5/6 genes, as
confirmed by phylogenetic analysis. The accumulation of Spgatae transcripts
during embryonic development and the spatial pattern of expression are reported
here. Expression was first detected in the 15 h blastula. The number of Spgatae
RNA molecules increases steadily during blastula stages, with expression peaking 
during gastrulation. After gastrulation is complete, the level of expression
decreases until the end of embryogenesis. Whole mount in situ hybridization
showed that Spgatae transcripts were first detected in a ring of prospective
mesoderm cells in the vegetal plate. Spgatae expression then expands to include
the entire vegetal plate at the mesenchyme blastula stage. During gastrulation
Spgatae is expressed at the blastopore, and at prism stage strongly in the
hindgut and midgut but not foregut, and also in mesoderm cells at the tip of the 
archenteron. Towards the end of embryogenesis, expression in the hindgut
decreases. The terminal pattern of expression is in midgut plus coelomic pouches.

PMID: 15567710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 11;280(6):4745-52. Epub 2004 Nov 18.

GATA-6 can act as a positive or negative regulator of smooth muscle-specific gene
expression.

Yin F(1), Herring BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202-5120, USA.

The GATA-4/5/6 family of transcription factors is important for the development
of the cardiovascular system and the visceral endoderm. GATA-6 is the only family
member expressed in vascular smooth muscle cells and has been shown to be
important for controlling the phenotype of these cells following vascular injury.
To clarify further the role of GATA-6 in regulating vascular smooth muscle
differentiation, we directly examined its ability to regulate the promoters of
smooth muscle-specific genes. This analysis revealed that GATA-6 strongly
repressed telokin promoter activity. In contrast, GATA-6 activated the smooth
muscle myosin heavy chain and smooth muscle alpha-actin promoters and had no
significant effect on the SM22alpha promoter. Gel mobility shift assays
demonstrate that GATA-6 binds to a consensus site adjacent to the CArG box in the
telokin promoter. GATA-6 did not interfere with the serum-response
factor-stimulated promoter activity but blocked myocardin-induced activation of
the telokin promoter. In contrast, GATA-6 and myocardin resulted in synergistic
activation of the smooth muscle myosin heavy chain promoter. Consistent with
these findings, overexpression of GATA-6 in smooth muscle cells selectively
inhibited expression of endogenous telokin, while simultaneously increasing
expression of other smooth muscle proteins. These data suggest that GATA-6
selectively inhibits telokin expression by triggering the displacement of
myocardin from the serum-response factor. As GATA-6 is expressed at high levels
in vascular smooth muscle, this finding may explain the relatively low levels of 
telokin expression in the vascular system. These data also reveal a novel
transcription regulatory mechanism by which GATA-6 can modulate the activity of
the myocardin-serum-response factor complexes.

PMID: 15550397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Dec;24(23):10492-503.

Sox7 plays crucial roles in parietal endoderm differentiation in F9 embryonal
carcinoma cells through regulating Gata-4 and Gata-6 expression.

Futaki S(1), Hayashi Y, Emoto T, Weber CN, Sekiguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)Sekiguchi Biomatrix Signaling Project, Japanese Science and Technology Agency,
Aichi Medical University, 21 Karimata, Yazako Nagakute-cho, Aichi-gun, Aichi
480-1195, Japan.

During early rodent development, the parietal endoderm appears from an inner cell
mass and produces large amounts of basement membrane components, such as
laminin-1 and collagen IV. To elucidate the regulatory network for gene
expression during these procedures, we constructed a series of short interfering 
RNA expression vectors targeted to various transcription factors, transfected
them into F9 embryonal carcinoma cells, and evaluated the effects of the gene
silencing on the induction of parietal endoderm differentiation and basement
membrane component production by treating F9 cells with all trans-retinoic acid
and dibutyryl cyclic AMP. Among the transcription factors tested, silencing of
Sox7 or combined silencing of Gata-4 and Gata-6 resulted in suppression of cell
shape changes and laminin-1 production, which are the hallmarks of parietal
endoderm differentiation. In cells silenced for Sox7, induction of Gata-4 and
Gata-6 by retinoic acid and cyclic AMP treatment was inhibited, while induction
of Sox7 was not affected in cells silenced for Gata-4 and Gata-6, indicating that
Sox7 is an upstream regulatory factor for these Gata factors. Nevertheless,
silencing of Sox7 did not totally cancel the action of retinoic acid, since
upregulation of coup-tf2, keratin 19, and retinoic acid receptor beta2 was not
abolished in Sox7-silenced F9 cells. Although overexpression of Sox7 alone was
insufficient to induce parietal endoderm differentiation, overexpression of
Gata-4 or Gata-6 in Sox7-silenced F9 cells restored the differentiation into
parietal endoderm. Sox7 is therefore required for the induction of Gata-4 and
Gata-6, and the interplay among these transcription factors plays a crucial role 
in parietal endoderm differentiation.

PMCID: PMC529033
PMID: 15542856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



61. Development. 2002 May;129(9):2233-46.

GATA6 regulates differentiation of distal lung epithelium.

Yang H(1), Lu MM, Zhang L, Whitsett JA, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Molecular Cardiology Research Center, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

GATA6 is a member of the GATA family of zinc-finger transcriptional regulators
and is the only known GATA factor expressed in the distal epithelium of the lung 
during development. To define the role that GATA6 plays during lung epithelial
cell development, we expressed a GATA6-Engrailed dominant-negative fusion protein
in the distal lung epithelium of transgenic mice. Transgenic embryos lacked
detectable alveolar epithelial type 1 cells in the distal airway epithelium.
These embryos also exhibited increased Foxp2 gene expression, suggesting a
disruption in late alveolar epithelial differentiation. Alveolar epithelial type 
2 cells, which are progenitors of alveolar epithelial type 1 cells, were
correctly specified as shown by normal thyroid transcription factor 1 and
surfactant protein A gene expression. However, attenuated endogenous surfactant
protein C expression indicated that alveolar epithelial type 2 cell
differentiation was perturbed in transgenic embryos. The number of proximal
airway tubules is also reduced in these embryos, suggesting a role for GATA6 in
regulating distal-proximal airway development. Finally, a functional role for
GATA factor function in alveolar epithelial type 1 cell gene regulation is
supported by the ability of GATA6 to trans-activate the mouse aquaporin-5
promoter. Together, these data implicate GATA6 as an important regulator of
distal epithelial cell differentiation and proximal airway development in the
mouse.

PMID: 11959831  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Genes Dev. 2002 Apr 1;16(7):784-9.

Differentiation of embryonic stem cells is induced by GATA factors.

Fujikura J(1), Yamato E, Yonemura S, Hosoda K, Masui S, Nakao K, Miyazaki Ji J,
Niwa H.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Regulation Research, Area of Molecular Therapeutics, Course of
Advanced Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 565-0871, 
Japan.

Extraembryonic endoderm (ExE) is differentiated from the inner cell mass of the
late blastocyst-stage embryo to form visceral and parietal endoderm, both of
which have an important role in early embryogenesis. The essential roles of
Gata-6 and Gata-4 on differentiation of visceral endoderm have been identified by
analyses of knockout mice. Here we report that forced expression of either Gata-6
or Gata-4 in embryonic stem (ES) cells is sufficient to induce the proper
differentiation program towards ExE. We believe that this is the first report of 
a physiological differentiation event induced by the ectopic expression of a
transcription factor in ES cells.

PMCID: PMC186328
PMID: 11937486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 7;277(23):21061-70. Epub 2002 Mar 25.

The WNT7b promoter is regulated by TTF-1, GATA6, and Foxa2 in lung epithelium.

Weidenfeld J(1), Shu W, Zhang L, Millar SE, Morrisey EE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Molecular Cardiology Research Center, and the
Department of Dermatology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

In this study, we find that WNT7b is the only member of the WNT family of
autocrine/paracrine signaling molecules whose expression in the lung is
restricted to the airway epithelium during embryonic development. To study the
transcriptional mechanisms that underlie this restricted pattern of WNT7b
expression, we isolated the proximal 1.0-kb mouse WNT7b promoter and mapped the
transcriptional start sites. Transfection of the lung epithelial cell line
MLE-15, which expresses WNT7b, shows that the 1.0-kb mouse WNT7b promoter is
highly active in lung epithelial cells. This region of the WNT7b promoter
contains several DNA binding sites for the important lung-restricted
transcription factors TTF-1, GATA6, and Foxa2. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays showed that TTF-1, GATA6, and Foxa2 can bind to a specific subset of their
consensus DNA binding sites within the WNT7b promoter. Using cotransfection
assays, we demonstrate that TTF-1, GATA6, and Foxa2 can trans-activate the WNT7b 
promoter in NIH-3T3 cells. Truncation of GATA6 or Foxa2 binding sites reduced the
ability of these transcriptional regulators to trans-activate the WNT7b promoter.
Finally, the minimal 118-bp region of the mouse WNT7b promoter containing only
TTF-1 binding sites was synergistically activated by TTF-1 and GATA6, and we show
that TTF-1 and GATA6 physically interact in vivo. Together, these results suggest
that WNT7b gene expression in the lung epithelium is regulated in a combinatorial
fashion by TTF-1, GATA6, and Foxa2.

PMID: 11914369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. J Cell Biol. 2002 Mar 18;156(6):983-91. Epub 2002 Mar 11.

Calcineurin-GATA-6 pathway is involved in smooth muscle-specific transcription.

Wada H(1), Hasegawa K, Morimoto T, Kakita T, Yanazume T, Abe M, Sasayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Intracellular calcium is one of the important signals that initiates the myogenic
program. The calcium-activated phosphatase calcineurin is necessary for the
nuclear import of the nuclear factor of activated T cell (NFAT) family members,
which interact with zinc finger GATA transcription factors. Whereas GATA-6 plays 
a role in the maintenance of the differentiated phenotype in vascular smooth
muscle cells (VSMCs), it is unknown whether the calcineurin pathway is associated
with GATA-6 and plays a role in the differentiation of VSMCs. The smooth
muscle-myosin heavy chain (Sm-MHC) gene is a downstream target of GATA-6, and
provides a highly specific marker for differentiated VSMCs. Using
immunoprecipitation Western blotting, we showed that NFATc1 interacted with
GATA-6. Consistent with this, NFATc1 further potentiated GATA-6-activated Sm-MHC 
transcription. Induction of VSMCs to the quiescent phenotype caused nuclear
translocation of NFATc1. In differentiated VSMCs, blockage of calcineurin
down-regulated the amount of GATA-6-DNA binding as well as the expression of
Sm-MHC and its transcriptional activity. These findings demonstrate that the
calcineurin pathway is associated with GATA-6 and is required for the maintenance
of the differentiated phenotype in VSMCs.

PMCID: PMC2173472
PMID: 11889139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Cancer Res. 2002 Feb 15;62(4):1178-83.

GATA-6 transcriptional regulation of 15-lipoxygenase-1 during NSAID-induced
apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells.

Shureiqi I(1), Jiang W, Fischer SM, Xu X, Chen D, Lee JJ, Lotan R, Lippman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Cancer Prevention, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas 77030-4009, USA. ishureiqi@mdanderson.org

The mechanisms by which nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) induce
apoptosis in colorectal cancer cells are undergoing intensive investigation. We
found previously that NSAIDs induce apoptosis in these cells by restoring
15-lipoxygenase-1 (15-LOX-1) expression. The present study examined the NSAID
mechanism for up-regulating 15-LOX-1 in two colorectal cancer cell lines (RKO and
DLD-1). We found that NSAID effects on 15-LOX-1 occurred at the level of
transcriptional regulation. We then studied NSAID effects on GATA-6, a
transcription factor that suppresses 15-LOX-1 expression. Beginning within 4 h,
NSAIDs progressively down-regulated GATA-6 expression. Ectopic GATA-6 expression 
blocked NSAID induction of 15-LOX-1 and apoptosis. NSAIDs down-regulate GATA-6 to
transcriptionally up-regulate 15-LOX-1 and induce apoptosis in colorectal cancer 
cells.

PMID: 11861401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Pflugers Arch. 2002 Jan;443(3):362-9. Epub 2001 Oct 19.

Direct left ventricular wall stretch activates GATA4 binding in perfused rat
heart: involvement of autocrine/paracrine pathways.

Hautala N(1), Tenhunen O, Szokodi I, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Biocenter Oulu, 90014 University of
Oulu, Finland.

The signaling cascades that activate transcription factors during cardiac
hypertrophy are largely unknown. To evaluate the mechanisms for GATA4 and
activator protein-1 (AP-1) activation, isolated perfused rat hearts were exposed 
to elevated wall stretch by inflating a left ventricular balloon. Gel mobility
shift assays were used to analyze the transacting factors that interact with the 
GATA or the AP-1 motifs of the B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) promoter. Direct 
wall stretch for 30 min produced a twofold increase ( P<0.001) in left
ventricular BNP GATA4- but not GATA5- and GATA6-binding activity. In addition,
increased BNP AP-1-binding activity and the presence of c-fos were demonstrated
in wall-stretch-stimulated ventricles compared with unloaded ventricles. The
mixed endothelin-1 ETA/ETB receptor antagonist bosentan and the angiotensin II
(Ang II) type 1 (AT1) receptor antagonist CV-11974 completely inhibited the
wall-stretch-induced increase in left ventricular BNP GATA4 and AP-1 activity.
Infusions of ET-1 and Ang II in the absence of wall stretch also stimulated BNP
GATA4-binding activity ( P<0.01). These results show that ET-1 and Ang II are
required for the stimulation of GATA4 and AP-1 DNA-binding activity in response
to direct left ventricular wall stretch.

PMID: 11810204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2002 Feb;13(1):105-7.

Atherosclerosis: cell biology and lipoproteins.

Ares MP.

PMID: 11790970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Differentiation. 2001 Oct;68(4-5):254-69.

Genomic expression analysis implicates Wnt signaling pathway and extracellular
matrix alterations in hepatic specification and differentiation of murine hepatic
stem cells.

Plescia C(1), Rogler C, Rogler L.

Author information: 
(1)Marion Bessin Liver Research Center, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

HBC-3 hepatic stem cells maintained in the undifferentiated state can be induced 
to differentiate along the hepatocyte lineage in response to DMSO (Rogler, 1997).
In order to understand the complex transcriptional regulatory mechanisms
associated with the differentiation of these somatic stem cells and to identify
novel candidate stem cell and differentiation associated genes, we have begun to 
characterize the transcriptome of HBC-3 cells during a 7-day differentiation
protocol. This analysis showed that differentiating HBC-3 cells undergo biphasic 
bursts of gene regulation peaking at 3 hours and 120 hours of DMSO treatment. In 
the undifferentiated state, HBC-3 cells express muscle, neuron, myeloid, and
lymphoid specific genes that are rapidly downregulated during hepatocytic
differentiation. Cluster analysis has revealed large groups of genes with
different temporal regulation profiles demonstrating complex and widespread
transcriptional changes. Specifically, we discovered a multifaceted
downregulation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway accompanied by the repression of
TCF target genes during HBC-3 differentiation. In addition, there is
downregulation of cellular receptors for fibronectin and laminin and other
extracellular matrix molecules indicative of widespread cell surface alterations.
DMSO induces cell cycle arrest, and this is reflected in upregulation of growth
inhibitory proteins such as cyclin I and p18 and downregulation of cyclins B1 and
D. Genes needed for hepatocytic functions, such as apolipoprotein C-IV,
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, alcohol dehydrogenase, and asialoglycoprotein 
receptor were upregulated. Finally, transcriptional regulators including Twist,
Snail, HNF1a, and GATA6 were upregulated during differentiation of HBC-3 cells.
The significance of these findings is that our genome-based approach has allowed 
the parallel identification of multiple regulatory pathways that is needed to
begin to fully understand the complex differentiation process.

PMID: 11776478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 8;277(6):4519-25. Epub 2001 Dec 3.

GATA-6 and thyroid transcription factor-1 directly interact and regulate
surfactant protein-C gene expression.

Liu C(1), Glasser SW, Wan H, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

GATA-6, a member of the GATA family of zinc finger domain containing
transcription factors, is expressed in endodermally derived tissues including the
lung, where GATA-6 influences the transcription of target genes, TTF-1, and
surfactant proteins. Whereas GATA-6 did not directly alter expression of sp-C
constructs in HeLa cells, GATA-6 synergistically activated sp-C gene
transcription when co-expressed with TTF-1, supporting the concept that GATA-6
and TTF-1 might directly interact to influence target gene expression. GST-GATA-6
directly co-precipitated with TTF-1 after in vitro translation and directly
interacted with the TTF-1-binding element in the sp-C promoter. Binding of TTF-1 
to GATA-6 required the homeodomain of TTF-1, but optimal interactions with GATA-6
required the homeodomain and either carboxyl- or amino-terminal domains of TTF-1.
Interactions between TTF-1 and GATA-6 required the amino-terminal and zinc finger
domains of GATA-6. Although GATA-4 also interacted with TTF-1 in two-hybrid
assays, GATA-4 was not as active as GATA-6 in the activation of the sp-C promoter
with TTF-1. Deletion and substitution mutations between GATA-4 and GATA-6
demonstrated that the carboxyl-terminal zinc finger domain of GATA-6 contributed 
to its synergistic activation of the sp-C promoter with TTF-1. GATA-6 influenced 
the activity of the sp-C promoter, binding and acting synergistically with TTF-1.

PMID: 11733512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 1;277(9):7308-17. Epub 2001 Dec 14.

A triad of serum response factor and the GATA and NK families governs the
transcription of smooth and cardiac muscle genes.

Nishida W(1), Nakamura M, Mori S, Takahashi M, Ohkawa Y, Tadokoro S, Yoshida K,
Hiwada K, Hayashi K, Sobue K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuroscience (D13), Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Yamadaoka 2-2, Suita City, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Serum response factor and the (CC(A/T)(6)GG) (CArG) box interact to promote the
transcription of c-fos and muscle genes; this tissue-specific activity may
require co-regulators for serum response factor. The alpha(1) integrin promoter
contains two cis-elements besides the CArG box: a TAAT sequence, a consensus
binding site for homeoproteins, and a GATA-binding box. As a candidate
TAAT-binding factor, we cloned an NK family homeobox gene, Nkx-3.2, which is
expressed mainly in smooth muscle tissues and skeletal structures. Nkx-3.2, serum
response factor, and GATA-6 were co-expressed only in the medial smooth muscle
layer of arteries. These three transcription factors formed a complex with their 
corresponding cis-elements and cooperatively transactivated smooth muscle genes, 
including alpha(1) integrin, SM22alpha, and caldesmon. Cardiac muscle-specific
members of the NK and GATA families exist, and the triad of Nkx-2.5, serum
response factor, and GATA-4 also transactivated the cardiac atrial natriuretic
factor gene, which contains a CArG-like box, a GATA-binding box, and an
NK-binding element. Our findings demonstrate that smooth and cardiac muscle have 
a shared transcriptional machinery and that the GATA and NK families confer
muscle specificity on the serum response factor/CArG interaction.

PMID: 11744740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):267-79.

A distant upstream region of the rat multipartite Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger NCX1
gene promoter is sufficient to confer cardiac-specific expression.

Koban MU(1), Brugh SA, Riordon DR, Dellow KA, Yang HT, Tweedie D, Boheler KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, The National Heart and Lung Institute,
Imperial College School of Medicine, London, UK.

The Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger (NCX) regulates intracellular calcium homeostasis. We 
report on an upstream region of the rat NCX1 multipartite promoter that is active
in cardiac myocytes. Although inactive in most non-cardiac cell lines, its
activity can be rescued by cotransfection with GATA-4 and -6, but not GATA-5
transcription factors. In transgenic mice and similar to endogenous NCX1 mRNA
expression, the upstream promoter region directs uniform beta-galactosidase
expression in cardiac myocytes from approximately 7.75dpc. In adult mouse hearts,
promoter activity is, however, significantly reduced and heterogeneous, except in
the conduction system (sinoatrial and atrioventricular node, atrioventricular
bundles). The upstream NCX1 promoter region thus directs appropriate spatial and 
temporal control of cardiac expression throughout development.

PMID: 11731239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 1;277(5):3585-92. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

Defects of the heart, eye, and megakaryocytes in peroxisome proliferator
activator receptor-binding protein (PBP) null embryos implicate GATA family of
transcription factors.

Crawford SE(1), Qi C, Misra P, Stellmach V, Rao MS, Engel JD, Zhu Y, Reddy JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University School of Medicine, Chicago, 
Illinois 60611-3008, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator activator receptor (PPAR)-binding protein (PBP) is an
important coactivator for PPARgamma and other nuclear receptors. It has been
identified as an integral component of a multiprotein thyroid hormone
receptor-associated protein/vitamin D(3) receptor-interacting
protein/activator-recruited cofactor complexes required for transcriptional
activity. Here, we show that PBP is critical for the development of placenta and 
for the normal embryonic development of the heart, eye, vascular, and
hematopoietic systems. The primary functional cause of embryonic lethality at
embryonic day11.5 observed with PBP null mutation was cardiac failure because of 
noncompaction of the ventricular myocardium and resultant ventricular dilatation.
There was a paucity of retinal pigment, defective lens formation, excessive
systemic angiogenesis, a deficiency in the number of megakaryocytes, and an
arrest in erythrocytic differentiation. Some of these defects involve PPARgamma
and retinoid-sensitive sites, whereas others have not been recognized in the
PPAR-signaling pathway. Phenotypic changes in four organ systems observed in PBP 
null mice overlapped with those in mice deficient in members of GATA, a family of
transcription factors known to regulate differentiation of megakaryocytes,
erythrocytes, and adipocytes. We demonstrate that PBP interacts with all five
GATA factors analyzed, GATA-1, GATA-2, GATA-3, GATA-4, and GATA-6, and show that 
the binding of GATA-1, GATA-4, and GATA-6 to PBP is not dependent on the nuclear 
receptor recognition sequence motif LXXLL (where L is leucine and X is any amino 
acid) in PBP. Coexpression of PBP with GATA-3 markedly enhanced transcriptional
activity of GATA-3 in nonhematopoietic cells. These observations identify the
GATA family of transcription factors as a new interacting partner of PBP and
demonstrate that PBP is essential for normal development of vital organ systems.

PMID: 11724781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Endocrinology. 2001 Nov;142(11):4693-700.

GATA4 mediates activation of the B-type natriuretic peptide gene expression in
response to hemodynamic stress.

Marttila M(1), Hautala N, Paradis P, Toth M, Vuolteenaho O, Nemer M, Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu,
FIN-90014 University of Oulu, Finland.

To identify the mechanisms that couple hemodynamic stress to alterations in
cardiac gene expression, DNA constructs containing the rat B-type natriuretic
peptide (BNP) promoter were injected into the myocardium of rats, which underwent
bilateral nephrectomy or were sham-operated. Ventricular BNP mRNA levels were
induced about 4-fold; and the BNP reporter construct containing the proximal 2200
bp, 5-fold, in response to 1-d nephrectomy. Deletion of sequences between bp
-2200 and -114 did not affect basal or inducible activity of the BNP promoter. An
activator protein-1-like site and two tandem GATA elements are located within
this 114-bp sequence. Both deletion and mutation of the AP-1-like motif decreased
basal activity but did not abolish the response to nephrectomy. In contrast,
mutation or deletion of -90 bp GATA-sites abrogated the response to hemodynamic
stress. The importance of these GATA elements to BNP promoter activation was
further confirmed by the corresponding 38-bp oligonucleotide conferring
hemodynamic stress responsiveness to a minimal BNP promoter. In gel mobility
shift assays, nephrectomy increased left ventricular BNP GATA4 binding activity
significantly. In conclusion, GATA elements are necessary and sufficient to
confer transcriptional activation of BNP gene in response to hemodynamic stress.

PMID: 11606434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Eur Respir J. 2001 Sep;18(3):466-73.

Expression of GATA family of transcription factors in T-cells, monocytes and
bronchial biopsies.

Caramori G(1), Lim S, Ito K, Tomita K, Oates T, Jazrawi E, Chung KF, Barnes PJ,
Adcock IM.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Thoracic Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College
School of Medicine, London, UK.

GATA-binding proteins are a subfamily of zinc finger transcription factors with
six members (GATA-1-6) that interact with the GATA deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
sequence. This sequence is found in the regulatory regions of many genes
including those encoding T-helper 2 (Th2)-like cytokines, receptors, adhesion
molecules and enzymes, which may be important in the pathogenesis of bronchial
asthma. The expression of GATA-3, 4 and -6 was investigated in peripheral blood
T-lymphocytes and monocytes and bronchial biopsies from 11 normal subjects and 10
steroid-naive asthmatic patients. Using Western blot analysis, T-cells from
asthmatic subjects expressed 5 times the level of GATA-3 compared to that in
normals. Confocal microscopy indicated that GATA-3 expression was both nuclear
and cytoplasmic. GATA DNA binding complex containing GATA-3 was elevated in Th2
cells as determined by electrophorectic mobility shift assay. In contrast,
monocytes from normal and asthmatic subjects expressed GATA-4 and -6 in equal
amounts, but no GATA-3 was found. Using immunohistochemistry in bronchial
biopsies, epithelial cells expressed high levels of GATA-3, GATA-4 and GATA-6
proteins. Comparison of Western blots of bronchial biopsies showed no significant
differences between normal and asthmatic subjects. In conclusion, the increased
expression of GATA-3 in asthmatic T-cells may underlie augmented T-helper 2-like 
cytokines in this disease. However, the unaltered GATA-3 expression in epithelial
cells suggests a distinct role for GATA-3 in these cells unrelated to T-helper
2-like cytokine release. Finally, no evidence was found for an increased
expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 in asthma.

PMID: 11589343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Mech Dev. 2001 Oct;108(1-2):105-19.

A GATA-6 gene heart-region-specific enhancer provides a novel means to mark and
probe a discrete component of the mouse cardiac conduction system.

Davis DL(1), Edwards AV, Juraszek AL, Phelps A, Wessels A, Burch JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Fox Chase Cancer Center,
Philadelphia, PA 19111, USA.

The transcriptional programs that specify the distinct components of the cardiac 
conduction system are poorly understood, in part due to a paucity of definitive
molecular markers. In the present study we show that a cGATA-6 gene enhancer can 
be used to selectively express transgenes in the atrioventricular (AV) conduction
system as it becomes manifest in the developing multichambered mouse heart.
Furthermore, our analysis of staged cGATA-6/lacZ embryos revealed that the
activity of this heart-region-specific enhancer can be traced back essentially to
the outset of the cardiogenic program. We provide evidence that this enhancer
reads medial/lateral and anterior/posterior positional information before the
heart tube forms and we show that the activity of this enhancer becomes
restricted at the heart looping stage to AV myocardial cells that induce
endocardial cushion formation. We infer that a deeply-rooted
heart-region-specific transcriptional program serves to coordinate AV valve
placement and AV conduction system formation. Lastly, we show that cGATA-6/Cre
mice can be used to delete floxed genes in the respective subsets of specialized 
heart cells.

PMID: 11578865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Can J Physiol Pharmacol. 2001 Aug;79(8):673-81.

Regulation of the ANF and BNP promoters by GATA factors: lessons learned for
cardiac transcription.

McBride K(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de développement et différenciation cardiaques, Institut de
recherches cliniques de Montréal, QC, Canada.

The identification and molecular cloning of the cardiac transcription factors
GATA-4, -5, and -6 has greatly contributed to our understanding of how
tissue-specific transcription is achieved during cardiac growth and development. 
Through analysis of their interacting partners, it has also become apparent that 
a major mechanism underlying spatial and temporal specificity within the heart as
well as in the response to cardiogenic regulators is the combinatorial
interaction between cardiac-restricted and inducible transcription factors. The
cardiac GATA factors appear to be fundamental contributors to these regulatory
networks. Two of the first targets identified for the cardiac GATA factors were
the natriuretic peptide genes encoding atrial natriuretic factor (ANF) and B-type
natriuretic peptide (BNP), the major heart secretory products that are also
accepted clinical markers of the diseased heart. Studies using the ANF and BNP
promoters as models of cardiac-specific transcription have unraveled the pivotal 
role that GATA proteins play in cardiac gene expression. We review the current
knowledge on the modulation of the natriuretic peptide promoters by GATA factors,
including examples of combinatorial interactions between GATA proteins and
diverse transcription factors.

PMID: 11558676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mech Dev. 2001 Jul;105(1-2):105-14.

Branching and differentiation defects in pulmonary epithelium with elevated Gata6
expression.

Koutsourakis M(1), Keijzer R, Visser P, Post M, Tibboel D, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Centre
Rotterdam, P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR, The, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

The transcription factor GATA6 is expressed in the fetal pulmonary epithelium of 
the developing mouse lung and loss of function studies strongly suggested that it
is required for proper branching morphogenesis and epithelial differentiation. We
have further investigated the role of GATA6 in this process by utilizing a
pulmonary epithelium specific promoter to maintain high levels of GATA6 protein
during fetal lung development. Transgenic mice expressing Gata6 cDNA under the
control of the human Surfactant Protein-C (SP-C) promoter were generated and
their lungs were analyzed during fetal stages. Transgenic lungs exhibit branching
defects as early as embryonic day (E) 14.5 and molecular analysis just before
birth (E18.5) shows a lack of distal epithelium differentiation whereas proximal 
epithelium is unaffected. Electron microscopic analysis and glycogen staining
confirm the lack of differentiation to mature Type II cells. Thus, elevated
levels of GATA6 protein affect early lung development and in analogy to other
GATA factors in other tissues, GATA6 also plays a crucial role in the terminal
differentiation in this case of the distal pulmonary epithelium.

PMID: 11429286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2001 Jun;21(6):917-22.

Function of GATA transcription factors in induction of endothelial vascular cell 
adhesion molecule-1 by tumor necrosis factor-alpha.

Umetani M(1), Mataki C, Minegishi N, Yamamoto M, Hamakubo T, Kodama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Medicine, Research Center for Advanced
Science and Technology, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. umetani-tky@umin.ac.jp

Endothelial vascular cell adhesion molecule-1 (VCAM-1) is expressed in response
to cytokine stimulation and plays a critical role in inflammatory reactions.
Previously, we developed a novel VCAM-1 inhibitor that acts through a mechanism
independent of nuclear factor-kappaB activity. It suppresses the binding activity
of GATA proteins in cytokine-stimulated endothelial cells, which may be related
to the anti-VCAM-1 induction effect of this drug. In this study, we investigated 
the role of GATA proteins in the induction of VCAM-1 by tumor necrosis
factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) in human endothelial cells. The mRNA expression of
GATA-6 was increased, whereas GATA-3 mRNA was decreased by TNF-alpha stimulation.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed that TNF-alpha stimulation increased 
the DNA binding of GATA-6 but decreased that of GATA-3. Experiments using protein
overexpression or antisense oligonucleotides revealed that GATA-6 potently acts
as a positive regulator of VCAM-1 gene transcription. In contrast, overexpression
of GATA-3 was able to suppress TNF-alpha-induced VCAM-1 expression. Our results
provide evidence of the importance of GATA proteins in the induction of VCAM-1 by
TNF-alpha in vascular endothelial cells. The switch from GATA-3 to GATA-6 is
taken to be an important transcriptional control event in TNF-alpha induction of 
VCAM-1.

PMID: 11397697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30245-53. Epub 2001 May 16.

The transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 regulate cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in
vitro and in vivo.

Liang Q(1), De Windt LJ, Witt SA, Kimball TR, Markham BE, Molkentin JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

The zinc finger-containing transcription factors GATA4 and GATA6 are important
regulators of basal and inducible gene expression in cardiac and smooth muscle
cell types. Here we demonstrate a direct functional role for GATA4 and GATA6 as
regulators of cardiomyocyte hypertrophic growth and gene expression. To model the
increase in endogenous GATA4 and GATA6 transcriptional activity that occurs in
response to hypertrophic stimulation, each factor was overexpressed in
cardiomyocytes using recombinant adenovirus. Overexpression of either GATA4 or
GATA6 was sufficient to induce cardiomyocyte hypertrophy characterized by
enhanced sarcomeric organization, a greater than 2-fold increase in cell surface 
area, and a significant increase in total protein accumulation. In vivo,
transgenic mice with 2.5-fold overexpression of GATA4 within the adult heart
demonstrated a slowly progressing increase in heart to body weight ratio,
histological features of cardiomyopathy, and activation of hypertrophy-associated
genes, suggesting that GATA factors are sufficient regulators of cardiomyocyte
hypertrophy in vitro and in vivo. To evaluate the requirement of GATA factors as 
downstream transcriptional mediators of hypertrophy, a dominant negative
GATA4-engrailed repressor fusion-encoding adenovirus was generated. Expression of
GATA4-engrailed blocked GATA4- and GATA6-directed transcriptional responses and
agonist-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy, demonstrating that cardiac-expressed
GATA factors are necessary mediators of this process.

PMID: 11356841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Development. 2001 Feb;128(4):503-11.

The transcription factor GATA6 is essential for branching morphogenesis and
epithelial cell differentiation during fetal pulmonary development.

Keijzer R(1), van Tuyl M, Meijers C, Post M, Tibboel D, Grosveld F, Koutsourakis 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Erasmus University Medical Centre
Rotterdam, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Recent loss-of-function studies in mice show that the transcription factor GATA6 
is important for visceral endoderm differentiation. It is also expressed in early
bronchial epithelium and the observation that this tissue does not receive any
contribution from Gata6 double mutant embryonic stem (ES) cells in chimeric mice 
suggests that GATA6 may play a crucial role in lung development. The aim of this 
study was to determine the role of GATA6 in fetal pulmonary development. We show 
that Gata6 mRNA is expressed predominantly in the developing pulmonary endoderm
and epithelium, but at E15.5 also in the pulmonary mesenchyme. Blocking or
depleting GATA6 function results in diminished branching morphogenesis both in
vitro and in vivo. TTF1 expression is unaltered in chimeric lungs whereas SPC and
CC10 expression are attenuated in abnormally branched areas of chimeric lungs.
Chimeras generated in a ROSA26 background show that endodermal cells in these
abnormally branched areas are derived from Gata6 mutant ES cells, implicating
that the defect is intrinsic to the endoderm. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that GATA6 is not essential for endoderm specification, but is
required for normal branching morphogenesis and late epithelial cell
differentiation.

PMID: 11171334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mech Dev. 2001 Feb;100(2):263-73.

Bone morphogenetic protein function is required for terminal differentiation of
the heart but not for early expression of cardiac marker genes.

Walters MJ(1), Wayman GA, Christian JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Oregon Health Sciences
University, School of Medicine, Portland 97201-3098, USA.

To examine potential roles for bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) in
cardiogenesis, we used intracellular BMP inhibitors to disrupt this signaling
cascade in Xenopus embryos. BMP-deficient embryos showed endodermal defects, a
reduction in cardiac muscle-specific gene expression, a decrease in the number of
cardiomyocytes and cardia bifida. Early expression of markers of endodermal and
precardiac fate, however, was not perturbed. Heart defects were observed even
when BMP signal transduction was blocked only in cells that contribute primarily 
to endodermal, and not cardiac fates, suggesting a non-cell autonomous function. 
Our results suggest that BMPs are not required for expression of early
transcriptional regulators of cardiac fate but are essential for migration and/or
fusion of the heart primordia and cardiomyocyte differentiation.

PMID: 11165483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Circulation. 2001 Feb 6;103(5):730-5.

Pressure overload increases GATA4 binding activity via endothelin-1.

Hautala N(1), Tokola H, Luodonpää M, Puhakka J, Romppanen H, Vuolteenaho O,
Ruskoaho H.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pharmacology and Toxicology and Physiology, Biocenter Oulu,
University of Oulu, Finland.

BACKGROUND: The signaling cascades responsible for the activation of
transcription factors in the hypertrophic growth of cardiac myocytes during
hemodynamic overload are largely unknown. Several of the genes upregulated in the
hypertrophied heart, including B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) gene, are
controlled by the cardiac-restricted zinc finger transcription factor GATA4.
METHODS AND RESULTS: An in vivo model of intravenous administration of
arginine(8)-vasopressin (AVP) for up to 4 hours in conscious normotensive rats
was used to study the signaling mechanisms for GATA activation in response to
pressure overload. Gel mobility shift assays were used to analyze the
trans-acting factors that interact with the GATA motifs of the BNP promoter.
AVP-induced increase in mean arterial pressure was followed by a significant
increase in the BNP and c-fos mRNA levels in both the endocardial and epicardial 
layers of the left ventricle, whereas GATA4 and GATA6 mRNA levels remained
unchanged. Pressure overload within 15 to 60 minutes produced an increase in left
ventricular BNP GATA4 but not GATA5 and GATA6 binding activity, and at 30 minutes
a 2.2-fold increase (P:<0.001) in GATA4 binding was noted. The mixed endothelin-1
ET(A)/ET(B) receptor antagonist bosentan but not the angiotensin II type 1
receptor antagonist losartan completely inhibited the pressure overload-induced
increase in left ventricular BNP GATA4 binding activity. Bosentan alone had no
statistically significant effect on GATA4 binding activity of the left ventricle 
in conscious animals.
CONCLUSIONS: ET-1 is a signaling molecule that rapidly upregulates GATA4 DNA
binding activity in response to pressure overload in vivo.

PMID: 11156886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Development. 2001 Jan;128(2):167-80.

Maternal VegT is the initiator of a molecular network specifying endoderm in
Xenopus laevis.

Xanthos JB(1), Kofron M, Wylie C, Heasman J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of
Minnesota, 321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

During cleavage stages, maternal VegT mRNA and protein are localized to the
Xenopus embryo's vegetal region from which the endoderm will arise and where
several zygotic gene transcripts will be localized. Previous loss-of-function
experiments on this T-box transcription factor suggested a role for VegT in
Xenopus endoderm formation. Here, we test whether VegT is required to initiate
endoderm formation using a loss of function approach. We find that the endodermal
genes, Bix1, Bix3, Bix4, Milk (Bix2), Mix.1, Mix.2, Mixer, Xsox17 alpha, Gata4,
Gata5, Gata6 and endodermin, as well as the anterior endodermal genes Xhex and
cerberus, and the organizer specific gene, Xlim1, are downstream of maternal
VegT. We also find that the TGF beta s, Xnr1, Xnr2, Xnr4 and derrière rescue
expression of these genes, supporting the idea that cell interactions are
critical for proper endoderm formation. Additionally, inhibitory forms of Xnr2
and Derrière blocked the ability of VegT mRNA injection to rescue VegT-depleted
embryos. Furthermore, a subset of endodermal genes was rescued in VegT-depleted
vegetal masses by induction from an uninjected vegetal mass. Finally, we begin to
establish a gene hierarchy downstream of VegT by testing the ability of Mixer and
Gata5 to rescue the expression of other endodermal genes. These results identify 
VegT as the maternal regulator of endoderm initiation and illustrate the
complexity of zygotic pathways activated by VegT in the embryo's vegetal region.

PMID: 11124113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2001 Jan;280(1):G58-67.

GATA family transcription factors activate lactase gene promoter in intestinal
Caco-2 cells.

Fang R(1), Olds LC, Santiago NA, Sibley E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

The GATA family of transcription factors regulate tissue-specific patterns of
gene expression during development. We have characterized the interaction between
GATA proteins and the lactase gene promoter. Nuclear protein bound to the lactase
gene GATA region cis element (-97 to -73) was analyzed by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA) and supershift assays with GATA antibodies. Lactase 
promoter activities were assayed in Caco-2 cells transfected with wild-type and
mutated luciferase promoter-reporter constructs and GATA-4/5/6 expression
constructs. EMSA with the GATA region probe yields a specific DNA-protein complex
that requires the GATA factor binding site WGATAR. The complex is recognized by
GATA-4- and GATA-6-specific antibodies. GATA-4/5/6 expression constructs are able
to activate transcription driven by the wild-type promoter, but not by a promoter
in which the GATA binding site is mutated, in Caco-2 and nonintestinal QT6 cells.
GATA factor binding to the lactase cis element correlates with functional
promoter activation. We conclude that each of the GATA family zinc finger
proteins expressed in the intestine, GATA-4, -5, and -6, can interact with the
lactase promoter GATA element and can function to activate the promoter in Caco-2
cells.

PMID: 11123198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 15;275(50):38949-52.

The zinc finger-containing transcription factors GATA-4, -5, and -6. Ubiquitously
expressed regulators of tissue-specific gene expression.

Molkentin JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, Children's Hospital
Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA. molkj0@chmcc.org

PMID: 11042222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Circ Res. 2000 Oct 13;87(8):699-704.

Cyclin A downregulation and p21(cip1) upregulation correlate with GATA-6-induced 
growth arrest in glomerular mesangial cells.

Nagata D(1), Suzuki E, Nishimatsu H, Yoshizumi M, Mano T, Walsh K, Sata M, Kakoki
M, Goto A, Omata M, Hirata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Japan.

Comment in
    Circ Res. 2000 Oct 13;87(8):638-40.

The GATA-6 transcription factor is reported to be expressed in vascular myocytes.
Because glomerular mesangial cells (GMCs) and vascular myocytes have similar
properties, we examined whether GATA-6 was expressed in cultured GMCs and whether
overexpression of GATA-6 induced cell cycle arrest in GMCs, using a recombinant
adenovirus that expresses GATA-6 (Ad GATA-6). GATA-6 expression in GMCs was
downregulated when quiescent GMCs were stimulated by serum to reenter the cell
cycle. [(3)H]thymidine uptake was inhibited in GMCs infected with Ad GATA-6 in a 
dose- and time-dependent manner. The expression of cyclin A protein was decreased
and that of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21(cip1) was increased in GMCs
infected with Ad GATA-6. Although the expression of p21(cip1) transcripts did not
change remarkably, p21(cip1) protein was stabilized in GMCs infected with Ad
GATA-6, suggesting a post-transcriptional regulation of p21(cip1) expression.
Northern blot analysis showed that expression of the cyclin A transcript was
decreased in Ad GATA-6-infected cells, whereas this decrease of cyclin A was not 
observed in GMCs derived from p21(cip1) null mice. Our results demonstrate that
GATA-6 is endogenously expressed in GMCs and that overexpression of GATA-6 can
induce cell cycle arrest. Our results also show that GATA-6-induced cell cycle
arrest is associated with inhibition of cyclin A expression and p21(cip1)
upregulation. Finally, our results indicate that the GATA-6-induced suppression
of cyclin A expression depends on the presence of p21(cip1).

PMID: 11029406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Circ Res. 2000 Oct 13;87(8):638-40.

GATA-6: the proliferation stops here: cell proliferation in glomerular mesangial 
and vascular smooth muscle cells.

Morrisey EE.

Comment on
    Circ Res. 2000 Oct 13;87(8):699-704.

PMID: 11029396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 5;276(1):700-7.

Nuclear factors bind to a conserved DNA element that modulates transcription of
Anopheles gambiae trypsin genes.

Giannoni F(1), Müller HM, Vizioli J, Catteruccia F, Kafatos FC, Crisanti A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine,
Imperial College Road, London SW7 9AX, United Kingdom.

The Anopheles gambiae trypsin family consists of seven genes that are transcribed
in the gut of female mosquitoes in a temporal coordinated and mutually exclusive 
manner, suggesting the involvement of a complex transcription regulatory
mechanism. We identified a highly conserved 12-nucleotide motif present in all A.
gambiae and Anopheles stephensi trypsin promoters. We investigated the role of
this putative trypsin regulatory element (PTRE) in controlling the transcription 
of the trypsin genes. Gel shift experiments demonstrated that nuclear proteins of
A. gambiae cell lines formed two distinct complexes with probes encompassing the 
PTRE sequence. Mapping of the binding sites revealed that one of the complex has 
the specificity of a GATA transcription factor. Promoter constructs containing
mutations in the PTRE sequence that selectively abolished the binding of either
one or both complexes exerted opposite effects on the transcriptional activity of
trypsin promoters in A. gambiae and Aedes aegypti cell lines. In addition, the
expression of a novel GATA gene was highly enriched in A. gambiae guts. Taken
together our data prove that factors binding to the PTRE region are key
regulatory elements possibly involved in the blood meal-induced repression and
activation of transcription in early and late trypsin genes.

PMID: 11016929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Oct;20(20):7550-8.

Cardiac tissue enriched factors serum response factor and GATA-4 are mutual
coregulators.

Belaguli NS(1), Sepulveda JL, Nigam V, Charron F, Nemer M, Schwartz RJ.

Collaborators: Schwartz RJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Combinatorial interaction among cardiac tissue-restricted enriched transcription 
factors may facilitate the expression of cardiac tissue-restricted genes. Here we
show that the MADS box factor serum response factor (SRF) cooperates with the
zinc finger protein GATA-4 to synergistically activate numerous myogenic and
nonmyogenic serum response element (SRE)-dependent promoters in CV1 fibroblasts. 
In the absence of GATA binding sites, synergistic activation depends on binding
of SRF to the proximal CArG box sequence in the cardiac and skeletal alpha-actin 
promoter. GATA-4's C-terminal activation domain is obligatory for synergistic
coactivation with SRF, and its N-terminal domain and first zinc finger are
inhibitory. SRF and GATA-4 physically associate both in vivo and in vitro through
their MADS box and the second zinc finger domains as determined by protein A
pullout assays and by in vivo one-hybrid transfection assays using Gal4 fusion
proteins. Other cardiovascular tissue-restricted GATA factors, such as GATA-5 and
GATA-6, were equivalent to GATA-4 in coactivating SRE-dependent targets. Thus,
interaction between the MADS box and C4 zinc finger proteins, a novel regulatory 
paradigm, mediates activation of SRF-dependent gene expression.

PMCID: PMC86307
PMID: 11003651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2000 Sep 25;167(1-2):43-53.

A role for GATA transcription factors in the androgen regulation of the
prostate-specific antigen gene enhancer.

Perez-Stable CM(1), Pozas A, Roos BA.

Author information: 
(1)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center and Research Service,
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Miami, FL 33125, USA. cpsma@msn.com

The transgenic mouse line Ggamma/T-15 containing the fetal globin promoter linked
to SV40 T antigen unexpectedly results in androgen-independent prostate
carcinomas. Given the key role of GATA-1 transcription factor in fetal globin
gene promoter activity, we investigated whether specific GATA family members are 
expressed in the prostate and whether they can regulate prostate-specific genes. 
We found that GATA-2 and -3 are the predominant GATA family members expressed in 
human and mouse prostate and that GATA mRNA levels are not regulated by androgen.
We identified six GATA sites flanking an androgen-response element located in the
far-upstream enhancer of the prostate-specific antigen (PSA) gene. These GATA
sites are targets for GATA factors and are essential for optimal androgen
induction of transfected PSA enhancer/promoter plasmids in LNCaP, a PSA and
androgen receptor expressing human prostate cancer cell line. Our results suggest
that prostatic GATA-2 and -3 are involved in the androgen regulation of the PSA
gene.

PMID: 11000519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Sep;85(9):3476-83.

Transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 and a GATA family cofactor, FOG-2, are
expressed in human ovary and sex cord-derived ovarian tumors.

Laitinen MP(1), Anttonen M, Ketola I, Wilson DB, Ritvos O, Butzow R, Heikinheimo 
M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bacteriology and Immunology, Haartman Institute, Helsinki,
Finland.

Previous studies have implicated transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in the
regulation of murine ovarian development and function. In rodents, GATA-4 is
expressed in granulosa cells of primary and early antral follicles, whereas
GATA-6 is expressed in granulosa cells of late antral follicles and luteal
glands. Both transcription factors can be detected in lesser amounts in theca
cells and interstitial cells. We have now examined the expression of GATA-4 and
GATA-6 in human ovaries, human granulosa-luteal (GL) cells and sex cord-derived
tumors. We show by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry that GATA-4 and
GATA-6 messenger RNA (mRNA) and GATA-4 protein are present in granulosa and theca
cells in both preantral and antral follicles. Both human ovarian tissue samples
and freshly isolated GL cells derived from preovulatory follicles of
gonadotropin-treated women express GATA-4, GATA-6, and FOG-2 transcripts, and
GATA-6 mRNA expression in GL cell cultures is stimulated by human CG and
8-bromo-cAMP. The vast majority of granulosa and theca cell tumors examined
expressed GATA-4 and GATA-6. We also found that mRNA for FOG-2, a recently
discovered regulator of GATA-4, is coexpressed with GATA-4 in human ovary
samples, normal granulosa cells, and in sex cord-derived tumors. Our results
demonstrate that GATA-4, GATA-6, and FOG-2 are expressed in human ovary and in
granulosa and theca cell tumors. Our findings support a role for GATA-binding
proteins in human ovarian folliculogenesis. Moreover, these data suggest that
GATA factors may contribute to the phenotypes of sex cord-derived ovarian tumors.

PMID: 10999851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Carcinog. 2000 Jul;28(3):184-8.

Distinct expression of CDX2 and GATA4/5, development-related genes, in human
gastric cancer cell lines.

Bai Y(1), Akiyama Y, Nagasaki H, Yagi OK, Kikuchi Y, Saito N, Takeshita K, Iwai
T, Yuasa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Tokyo Medical and Dental University School of Medicine,
Tokyo, Japan.

CDX2 is a tumor-suppressor homeobox gene involved in colon carcinogenesis, but
its role in gastric cancer is unknown. Although GATA4, -5 and, -6 transcription
factors have distinct functions in the regulation of gastrointestinal epithelial 
cell differentiation, there have been no reports regarding GATA4/5/6 alterations 
in gastrointestinal carcinomas. By using a semiquantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction assay, we studied the expression of gut
development-related genes CDX2/1 and GATA4/5/6 in 11 human gastric cancer cell
lines. The expression of CDX2 appeared to progressively decrease with the
transition from well differentiated to poorly differentiated cancer cell lines.
CDX1 was below detectable levels in all cell lines. The expression of GATA4 and
GATA5 was undetectable in four and six cell lines, respectively, whereas the
majority of the cell lines expressed GATA6 abundantly. These results suggest that
CDX2 and GATA4/5 may be associated with the carcinogenesis of the stomach. Mol.
Carcinog. 28:184-188, 2000.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10942535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 18;275(33):25330-5.

A p300 protein as a coactivator of GATA-6 in the transcription of the smooth
muscle-myosin heavy chain gene.

Wada H(1), Hasegawa K, Morimoto T, Kakita T, Yanazume T, Sasayama S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Japan.

The mechanisms that regulate smooth muscle development and differentiation are
poorly understood. Although recent studies have suggested the possible role of a 
zinc finger transcription factor, GATA-6, in the differentiation of vascular
smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), the downstream gene targeted by GATA-6 is unknown.
The expression of smooth muscle-myosin heavy chain (Sm-MHC) provides a highly
specific marker for the differentiated phenotype of VSMCs as well as the smooth
muscle cell lineage. Here, we show that GATA-6 bound to a GATA-like motif
(-810/-805) within the rat Sm-MHC promoter in a sequence-specific manner and
activated this promoter through this site. In addition, we show that the
transcriptional coactivator p300 associated with GATA-6 during the transcription 
of the Sm-MHC gene. A p300/GATA-6 complex in VSMCs was up-regulated by induction 
of the quiescent phenotype. A wild-type E1A, which interferes with endogenous
p300, but not a mutant E1A defective for p300 binding, markedly down-regulated
the expression of endogenous Sm-MHC in quiescent-phenotype VSMCs. These studies
provide the first identification of a functionally important GATA-6 binding site 
within a smooth muscle-specific promoter and suggest a role for p300 in the
maintenance of the differentiated phenotype in VSMCs as a coactivator of GATA-6.

PMID: 10851229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 30;275(26):19949-54.

The gene encoding the mitogen-responsive phosphoprotein Dab2 is differentially
regulated by GATA-6 and GATA-4 in the visceral endoderm.

Morrisey EE(1), Musco S, Chen MY, Lu MM, Leiden JM, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
19104, USA.

Gene targeting studies have demonstrated that the zinc finger transcription
factor GATA-6 lies upstream in a transcriptional cascade that controls
differentiation of the visceral endoderm. To understand the function of GATA-6 in
the visceral endoderm and to identify genes regulated by GATA-6 in this tissue,
subtractive hybridization was performed using template cDNAs derived from
differentiated wild-type embryonic stem (ES) cells and GATA-6(-/-) ES cells,
respectively. These analyses revealed that the gene encoding Dab2, a
mitogen-responsive phosphoprotein, is differentially expressed in wild-type and
GATA-6-deficient ES cells. Consistent with these findings, Dab2 is expressed in
the visceral endoderm of wild-type embryos but not in the visceral endoderm of
GATA-6-deficient embryos. Cotransfection experiments demonstrate that the human
Dab2 promoter can be transactivated by forced expression of GATA-6 in NIH-3T3
cells. In contrast, forced expression of GATA-4 does not transactivate the human 
Dab2 promoter and Dab2 is expressed in the visceral endoderm of GATA-4 null
embryos. Surprisingly, the specificity of GATA-6-induced transactivation of the
Dab2 promoter is not mediated through its zinc finger DNA-binding domain. Taken
together, these data demonstrate that the mitogen-responsive phosphoprotein Dab2 
is a downstream target of GATA-6 in the visceral endoderm. Moreover, these data
demonstrate that molecular mechanisms have evolved that direct, and distinguish, 
the functional specificity of GATA family members when they are developmentally
coexpressed.

PMID: 10779506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biochem. 2000 Apr;127(4):703-9.

Upstream regions directing heart-specific expression of the GATA6 gene during
mouse early development.

Sun-Wada GH(1), Manabe S, Yoshimizu T, Yamaguchi C, Oka T, Wada Y, Futai M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Sciences, The Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, CREST of the Japan Science and Technology
Corporation, Ibaraki, Osaka 567-0047, Japan.

The expression of murine transcription factor GATA6 is restricted to tissues
including the heart and gastrointestinal systems during embryogenesis, and is
maintained throughout postnatal life. We have characterized the 5' upstream
region (6.4 kb) of the mouse GATA6 gene, and identified two closely spaced
transcription initiation sites. The flanking sequence lacks a typical TATA-box,
and is rich in guanine and cytosine. The role of the 5' upstream region was
examined using the lacZ reporter gene in transgenic mice. A construct containing 
the 5' flanking sequence (4.9 kb), untranslated exon 1 and 1.3 kb intron 1 could 
drive the gene expression in the embryonic and adult heart regions. Weak
expression was also observed in the stomach, liver, and bronchial arch in
addition to the cardiac region. Deletion of the 5' upstream region (
approximately 1.2 kb) or intron 1 abolished all this expression, indicating that 
at least two cis-acting control elements are necessary for heart-specific
expression of GATA6 in vivo.

PMID: 10739965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Dev Biol. 2000 Mar 1;219(1):59-70.

Anterior endoderm is sufficient to rescue foregut apoptosis and heart tube
morphogenesis in an embryo lacking retinoic acid.

Ghatpande S(1), Ghatpande A, Zile M, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, 10461, USA.

The vitamin A deficient (VAD) quail embryo lacks active retinoids, fails to
express normally GATA-4, and develops a nonlooping heart tube morphogenetic
defect that is a model for congenital cardiomyopathy. VAD quail embryos, or chick
embryos depleted specifically for GATA factors, show in addition abnormal foregut
development, characterized by apoptosis of the endoderm cells associated with
presumptive myocardium during the process of heart tube formation. Exogenous
retinoic acid or transplantation of normal chick embryo anterior endoderm is
sufficient to rescue apoptosis as well as GATA-4 expression and results in normal
development and heart tube morphogenesis. Normal posterior endoderm also contains
retinoids but is unable to rescue the VAD defect. Our results indicate that a
retinoid-dependent transcriptional program, mediated at least in part by GATA
factors, is critical in presumptive foregut endoderm for normal heart tube
morphogenesis.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10677255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):259-70.

BMP2 is required for early heart development during a distinct time period.

Schlange T(1), Andrée B, Arnold HH, Brand T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and
Biotechnology, Technical University of Braunschweig, Spielmannstrasse 7, 38106,
Braunschweig, Germany.

BMP2, like its Drosophila homologue dpp, is an important signaling molecule for
specification of cardiogenic mesoderm in vertebrates. Here, we analyzed the
time-course of BMP2-requirement for early heart formation in whole chick embryos 
and in explants of antero-lateral plate mesoderm. Addition of Noggin to explants 
isolated at stage 4 and cultured for 24 h resulted in loss of NKX2.5, GATA4,
eHAND, Mef2A and vMHC expression. At stages 5-8 the individual genes showed
differential sensitivity to Noggin addition. While expression of eHAND, NKX2.5
and Mef2A was clearly reduced by Noggin vMHC was only marginally affected. In
contrast, GATA4 expression was enhanced after Noggin treatment. The developmental
period during which cardiac mesoderm required the presence of BMP signaling in
vivo was assessed by implantation of Noggin expressing cells into stage 4-8
embryos which were then cultured until stage 10-11. Complete loss of NKX2.5 and
eHAND expression was observed in embryos implanted at stages 4-6, and expression 
was still suppressed in stages 7 and 8 implanted embryos. GATA4 expression was
also blocked by Noggin at stage 4, however increased at stages 5, 6 and 7.
Explants of central mesendoderm, that normally do not form heart tissue were
employed to study the time-course of BMP2-induced cardiac gene expression. The
induction of cardiac lineage markers in central mesendoderm of stage 5 embryos
was distinct for different genes. While GATA4, -5, -6 and MEF2A were induced to
maximal levels within 6 h after BMP2 addition, eHAND and dHAND required 12 h to
reach maximum levels of expression. NKX2.5 was induced by 6 h and accumulated
over 48 h. vMHC and titin were induced at significant levels only after 48 h of
BMP2 addition. These results indicate that cardiac marker genes display distinct 
expression kinetics after BMP2 addition and differential response to Noggin
treatment suggesting complex regulation of myocardial gene expression in the
early tubular heart.

PMID: 10704850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Feb 29;1490(3):324-32.

Transcription factor GATA-6 activates expression of gastroprotective trefoil
genes TFF1 and TFF2.

Al-azzeh ED(1), Fegert P, Blin N, Gött P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Anthropology and Human Genetics, 
University of Tübingen, Wilhelmstrasse 27, D-72074, Tübingen, Germany.

One of the early events in inflammation and epithelial restitution of the
gastrointestinal tract is the up-regulation of secretory peptides belonging to
the trefoil factor family (TFF) that promote cell migration, protect and heal the
mucosa. Their major expression site is stomach (TFF1, TFF2) and intestine (TFF3).
Located in the 5'-flanking region of the genes are several consensus sites for
members of the GATA transcription factors known to control gut-specific gene
expression. By reverse transcription-PCR (RT-PCR), GATA-6 was shown to be
expressed in a variety of tumor cell lines of gastric, intestinal and pancreatic 
origin. In MKN45, KATOIII and LS174T, cotransfection with TFF reporter genes and 
GATA-6 expression vectors revealed that GATA-6 activates TFF1 and TFF2 4-6-fold, 
without an effect on TFF3. The functional contribution of GATA binding sequences 
in the reverse orientation was further characterized by reporter gene assays
using TFF2 deletion constructs and by gel shift experiments.

PMID: 10684977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. FEBS Lett. 2000 Feb 11;467(2-3):341-7.

A GATA binding site is involved in the regulation of 15-lipoxygenase-1 expression
in human colorectal carcinoma cell line, caco-2.

Kamitani H(1), Kameda H, Kelavkar UP, Eling TE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, PO Box 12233, Research Triangle Park, NC, USA.

The data presented implicate a GATA binding site in the transcriptional
regulation of 15-lipoxygenase-1 (15-LO-1) gene expression in human colorectal
carcinoma Caco-2 cells. High expression of GATA-6 mRNA and protein was observed, 
while GATA-4 mRNA was expressed at a very low level in Caco-2 cells. The
expression of GATA-6 was down-regulated, while 15-LO-1 expression was
dramatically up-regulated after treatment with sodium butyrate (NaBT). A study
using an electrophoretic mobility shift assay indicated that a GATA binding site 
of the 15-LO-1 promoter region binds to GATA proteins present in both
undifferentiated and, to a lesser extent, NaBT-treated (differentiated) Caco-2
cells. Moreover, that DNA binding shift band was disrupted after the addition of 
GATA-6 antibody in a supershift assay in the absence of NaBT, suggesting that
GATA-6 is bound to the GATA binding site of the 15-LO-1 promoter in
undifferentiated cells. In contrast, the addition of GATA-6 antibody did not
affect the DNA binding ability in NaBT-induced differentiated cells. On the other
hand, mutation of the GATA site of the 15-LO-1 promoter decreased the
transactivation of the 15-LO-1 promoter as measured by luciferase activity in
both FBS and NaBT cultured cells, indicating an unknown GATA binding protein to
up-regulate 15-LO-1 expression. These implicate the GATA site at -240 of the
proximal region of the 15-LO-1 promoter in the basic transcription of 15-LO-1
gene expression in Caco-2 cells, with GATA-6 acting to repress 15-LO-1
expression.

PMID: 10675566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jan 14;275(2):1043-9.

GATA-6 activates transcription of surfactant protein A.

Bruno MD(1), Korfhagen TR, Liu C, Morrisey EE, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Surfactant protein A (SP-A) is a member of the collectin family of innate host
defense molecules expressed primarily in respiratory epithelial cells of the
lung. SP-A concentrations are influenced by both cell-specific and ubiquitous
nuclear proteins that regulate SP-A gene transcription in a cell-selective and
temporally regulated manner. In this work, a consensus GATA-binding site (GBS)
was identified at positions -69 to -64 of the mouse SP-A gene. The
transcriptional activity of wild-type SP-A reporter constructs in HeLa cells was 
increased 5-10-fold when cotransfected with a GATA-6 expression plasmid. Deletion
of the GBS completely blocked transactivation by GATA-6. Transfection of a
construct expressing GATA-6-engrailed fusion protein inhibited basal expression
of the SP-A/chloramphenicol acetyltransferase construct in MLE-15 cells. Nuclear 
extract proteins from MLE-15 cells bound to the GBS in the mouse SP-A gene, and a
supershifted band was detected with a GATA-6-specific antibody. Transactivation
of the wild-type SP-A constructs by GATA-6 increased transcriptional activity
7-10-fold, whereas thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) increased the activity 
of these constructs 12-18-fold. The effects of cotransactivating with both GATA-6
and TTF-1 expression constructs were additive. However, mutation of the
TTF-1-binding sites alone or in combination decreased GATA-6 transactivation.
Likewise, mutation of the GBS blocked TTF-1 activation of the SP-A promoter. In
situ hybridization demonstrated GATA-6 mRNA in the peripheral epithelial cells of
fetal mouse lung, consistent with the sites of SP-A expression. GATA-6 is
expressed in respiratory epithelial cells and binds to a cis-acting element in
the SP-A gene promoter, activating the transcriptional activity of the gene.

PMID: 10625644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Dev Biol. 2000 Jan 15;217(2):310-22.

An Nkx-dependent enhancer regulates cGATA-6 gene expression during early stages
of heart development.

Davis DL(1), Wessels A, Burch JB.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 19111, USA.

The evolutionarily conserved GATA-6 transcription factor is an early and
persistent marker of heart development in diverse vertebrate species. We
previously found evidence for a functionally conserved heart-specific enhancer
upstream of the chicken GATA-6 (cGATA-6) gene and in the present study we used
transgenic mouse assays to further characterize this regulatory module. We show
that this enhancer is activated in committed precursor cells within the cardiac
crescent and that it remains active in essentially all cardiogenic cells through 
the linear heart stage. Although this enhancer can account for cGATA-6 gene
expression early in the cardiogenic program, it is not able to maintain
expression throughout the heart later in development. In particular, the enhancer
is sequentially downregulated along the posterior to anterior axis, with activity
becoming confined to outflow tract myocardium. Enhancers with similar properties 
have been shown to regulate the early heart-restricted expression of the mouse
Nkx2.5 transcription factor gene. Whereas these Nkx2.5 enhancers are
GATA-dependent, we show that the cGATA-6 enhancer is Nkx-dependent. We speculate 
that these enhancers are silenced to allow GATA-6 and Nkx2.5 gene expression to
be governed by region-specific enhancers in the multichambered heart.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10625556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Dev Biol. 2000 Jan 15;217(2):301-9.

Direct activation of a GATA6 cardiac enhancer by Nkx2.5: evidence for a
reinforcing regulatory network of Nkx2.5 and GATA transcription factors in the
developing heart.

Molkentin JD(1), Antos C, Mercer B, Taigen T, Miano JM, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cardiovascular Biology, Children's Hospital Medical
Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio, 45229-3039, USA. molkj0@chmcc.org

The zinc finger transcription factors GATA4, -5, and -6 and the homeodomain
protein Nkx2.5 are expressed in the developing heart and have been shown to
activate a variety of cardiac-specific genes. To begin to define the regulatory
relationships between these cardiac transcription factors and to understand the
mechanisms that control their expression during cardiogenesis, we analyzed the
mouse GATA6 gene for regulatory elements sufficient to direct cardiac expression 
during embryogenesis. Using beta-galactosidase fusion constructs in transgenic
mice, a 4.3-kb 5' regulatory region that directed transcription specifically in
the cardiac lineage, beginning at the cardiac crescent stage, was identified.
Thereafter, transgene expression became compartmentalized to the outflow tract, a
portion of the right ventricle, and a limited region of the common atrial chamber
of the embryonic heart. Further dissection of this regulatory region identified a
1.8-kb cardiac-specific enhancer that recapitulated the expression pattern of the
larger region when fused to a heterologous promoter and a smaller 500-bp
subregion that retained cardiac expression, but was quantitatively weaker. The
GATA6 cardiac enhancer contained a binding site for Nkx2.5 that was essential for
cardiac-specific expression in transgenic mice. These studies demonstrate that
GATA6 is a direct target gene for Nkx2.5 in the developing heart and reveal a
mutually reinforcing regulatory network of Nkx2.5 and GATA transcription factors 
during cardiogenesis.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10625555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 31;274(53):38004-16.

The human and mouse GATA-6 genes utilize two promoters and two initiation codons.

Brewer A(1), Gove C, Davies A, McNulty C, Barrow D, Koutsourakis M, Farzaneh F,
Pizzey J, Bomford A, Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, The Rayne Institute, GKT, 123 Coldharbour
Lane, London SE5 9NU, United Kingdom.

GATA-6 has been implicated in the regulation of myocardial differentiation during
cardiogenesis. To determine how its expression is controlled, we have
characterized the human and mouse genes. We have mapped their transcriptional
start sites and demonstrate that two alternative promoters and 5' noncoding exons
are utilized. Both transcript isoforms are expressed in the same tissue-specific 
and developmental stage-specific pattern, and their ratio appears similar
wherever examined. The more upstream noncoding exon showed a substantial degree
of homology between the two mammalian species, suggesting a conserved regulatory 
function. Moreover, in transfection assays we show that elements within this exon
act to promote its transcription. Positive regulatory elements that effect
transcription from the more downstream exon were not apparent in this assay,
revealing a regulatory distinction between the two promoters. We also demonstrate
alternative initiator codon usage in both the human and mouse GATA-6 genes. Both 
isoforms of the protein are synthesized in vitro regardless of which 5' noncoding
exon is present in the RNA, although the larger protein has greater
transcriptional activation potential in transfection assays. Thus, GATA-6
function in the cell is controlled by a complex interplay of transcriptional and 
translational regulation.

PMID: 10608869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Development. 2000 Jan;127(2):225-35.

Induction and differentiation of the zebrafish heart requires fibroblast growth
factor 8 (fgf8/acerebellar).

Reifers F(1), Walsh EC, Léger S, Stainier DY, Brand M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer Feld 364,
D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Vertebrate heart development is initiated from bilateral lateral plate mesoderm
that expresses the Nkx2.5 and GATA4 transcription factors, but the extracellular 
signals specifying heart precursor gene expression are not known. We describe
here that the secreted signaling factor Fgf8 is expressed in and required for
development of the zebrafish heart precursors, particularly during initiation of 
cardiac gene expression. fgf8 is mutated in acerebellar (ace) mutants, and
homozygous mutant embryos do not establish normal circulation, although vessel
formation is only mildly affected. In contrast, heart development, in particular 
of the ventricle, is severely abnormal in acerebellar mutants. Several findings
argue that Fgf8 has a direct function in development of cardiac precursor cells: 
fgf8 is expressed in cardiac precursors and later in the heart ventricle. Fgf8 is
required for the earliest stages of nkx2.5 and gata4, but not gata6, expression
in cardiac precursors. Cardiac gene expression is restored in acerebellar mutant 
embryos by injecting fgf8 RNA, or by implanting a Fgf8-coated bead into the heart
primordium. Pharmacological inhibition of Fgf signalling during formation of the 
heart primordium phenocopies the acerebellar heart phenotype, confirming that Fgf
signaling is required independently of earlier functions during gastrulation.
These findings show that fgf8/acerebellar is required for induction and
patterning of myocardial precursors.

PMID: 10603341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Biol. 1999 Dec 1;216(1):57-71.

A role for GATA-4/5/6 in the regulation of Nkx2.5 expression with implications
for patterning of the precardiac field.

Jiang Y(1), Drysdale TA, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York, 10461, USA.

Interactions between the key regulatory genes of the cardiogenic pathway,
including those from the GATA and Nkx2 transcription factor families, are not
well defined. Treating neurula-stage Xenopus embryos with retinoic acid (RA)
causes a specific block in cardiomyocyte development that correlates with a
progressive reduction in the region of the presumptive heart-forming region
expressing Nkx2.5. In contrast, RA does not block expression of the GATA-4/5/6
genes, which are transcribed normally in an overlapping pattern with Nkx2.5
throughout cardiogenesis. Instead, GATA-4/5/6 transcription levels are increased,
including an expansion of the expression domain corresponding to lateral plate
mesoderm that is part of the early heart field, but that normally is
progressively restricted in its ability to contribute to the myocardium.
GATA-dependent regulatory sequences of the Nkx2.5 gene that implicate GATA-4/5/6 
as upstream positive regulators were described recently. However, our experiments
also indicate that GATA factors might normally antagonize transcription of
Nkx2.5. To test this hypothesis we generated a dominant negative isoform of
GATA-4 (SRG4) capable of inhibiting transcription of GATA-dependent target genes.
Ectopic expression of SRG4 results in a transient expansion of the Nkx2.5
transcript pattern, indicating that a normal function of GATA factors is to limit
the boundary of the Nkx2.5 expression domain to the most anterior ventral region 
of the heart field. Regulatory mechanisms altered by excess RA must function
normally to limit GATA-4/5/6 expression levels, to define the region of Nkx2.5
expression and regulate myocardial differentiation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10588863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. FEBS Lett. 1999 Oct 1;459(1):57-63.

Synergistic effects of nuclear factors--GATA, VBP and ER in potentiating
vitellogenin gene transcription.

Teo BY(1), Tan NS, Lam TJ, Ding JL.

Author information: 
(1)National University of Singapore, Marine Biotechnology Laboratory, Department 
of Biological Sciences, 10 Kent Ridge Crescent, Singapore, Singapore.

The Oreochromis aureus vitellogenin (OaVtg) gene contains three imperfect
oestrogen response elements (EREs) and GATA and VBP (vitellogenin binding
protein) binding sites. An analysis of the promoter indicates that the
5'-flanking region up to position -625 is sufficient to mediate E(2) control.
Furthermore, transfection of deletion and mutagenised promoters indicates that
both GATA and VBP synergise with ER, and thus contribute to the regulation of the
endogenous OaVtg gene. These findings support the notion that the interplay of
promoter elements mediates proper hormone-dependent and tissue-specific
expression of the OaVtg gene, regardless of non-consensus sequence context of
EREs and VBP.

PMID: 10508917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Yale J Biol Med. 1998 May-Aug;71(3-4):195-205.

Control of histidine decarboxylase gene expression in enterochromaffin-like
cells.

Dimaline R(1), Baxendale AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Laboratory, University of Liverpool, United Kingdom.
r.dimaline@liv.ac.uk

PMCID: PMC2578993
PMID: 10461352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Med. 1999 Jul;5(7):490-501.

Reciprocal changes in the expression of transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6
accompany adrenocortical tumorigenesis in mice and humans.

Kiiveri S(1), Siltanen S, Rahman N, Bielinska M, Lehto VP, Huhtaniemi IT, Muglia 
LJ, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.

While certain genetic changes are frequently found in adrenocortical carcinoma
cells, the molecular basis of adrenocortical tumorigenesis remains poorly
understood. Given that the transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 have been
implicated in gene expression and cellular differentiation in a variety of
tissues, including endocrine organs such as testis, we have now examined their
expression in the developing adrenal gland, as well as in adrenocortical cell
lines and tumors from mice and humans. Northern blot analysis and in situ
hybridization revealed abundant GATA-6 mRNA in the fetal and postnatal adrenal
cortex of the mouse. In contrast, little or no GATA-4 expression was detected in 
adrenal tissue during normal development. In vivo stimulation with ACTH or
suppression with dexamethasone did not affect the expression of GATA-4 or GATA-6 
in the murine adrenal gland. To assess whether changes in the expression of
GATA-4 or GATA-6 accompany adrenocortical tumorigenesis, we employed an
established mouse model. When gonadectomized, inhibin alpha/SV40 T-antigen
transgenic mice develop adrenocortical tumors in a gonadotropin-dependent
fashion. In striking contrast to the normal adrenal glands, GATA-6 mRNA was
absent from adrenocortical tumors or tumor-derived cell lines, while GATA-4 mRNA 
and protein were abundantly expressed in the tumors and tumor cell lines.
Analogous results were obtained with human tissue samples; GATA-4 expression was 
detected in human adrenocortical carcinomas but not in normal tissue, adenomas,
or pheochromocytomas. Taken together these results suggest different roles for
GATA-4 and GATA-6 in the adrenal gland, and implicate GATA-4 in adrenal
tumorigenesis. Immunohistochemical detection of GATA-4 may serve as a useful
marker in the differential diagnosis of human adrenal tumors.

PMCID: PMC2230442
PMID: 10449810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1999 Aug;21(2):153-4.

Forkhead transcription factor HFH-4 and respiratory epithelial cell
differentiation.

Whitsett JA(1), Tichelaar JW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
Ohio, USA. whitj0@chmcc.org

PMID: 10423395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Z Gastroenterol. 1999 May;37(5):463-5.

[Different functions of transcription factors GATA-4, -5 and -6 in regulation of 
intestinal epithelial differentiation].

[Article in German]

Mühlhöfer A(1), Gross M, Zoller WG.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Poliklinik, Klinikum Innenstadt der LMU München.

PMID: 10413848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Development. 1999 May;126(9):723-32.

The transcription factor GATA6 is essential for early extraembryonic development.

Koutsourakis M(1), Langeveld A, Patient R, Beddington R, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus University, Medical Genetics Centre, Department of Cell Biology and
Genetics, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Corrected and republished from
    Development. 1999 Feb;126(4):723-32.

The gene coding for the murine transcription factor GATA6 was inactivated by
insertion of a beta-galactosidase marker gene. The analysis of heterozygote
GATA6/lacZ mice shows two inductions of GATA6 expression early in development. It
is first expressed at the blastocyst stage in part of the inner mass and in the
trophectoderm. The second wave of expression is in parietal endoderm (Reichert's 
membrane) and the mesoderm and endoderm that form the heart and gut. Inactivation
leads to a lethality shortly after implantation (5.5 days postcoitum). Chimeric
experiments show this to be caused by an indirect effect on the epiblast due to a
defect in an extraembryonic tissue.

PMID: 10383242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Semin Cell Dev Biol. 1999 Feb;10(1):85-91.

GATA transcription factors and cardiac development.

Charron F(1), Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Laboratoire de développement et 
différenciation cardiaques, Québec, Canada.

Three members of the GATA family of transcription factors, GATA-4, -5, and -6,
are expressed in the developing heart. One family member, GATA-5, is restricted
to the endocardium while the other two, GATA-4 and -6, are present in the
myocardium where they apparently fulfil distinct functions. The mechanisms
underlying GATA factor specificity are not fully understood but may involve
interaction with other tissue-restricted or ubiquitous co-factors. Thus,
combinatorial interaction among GATA factors or between GATA factors and other
co-factors may differentially control various stages of cardiogenesis.

PMID: 10355032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jun;19(6):4355-65.

Cooperative interaction between GATA-4 and GATA-6 regulates myocardial gene
expression.

Charron F(1), Paradis P, Bronchain O, Nemer G, Nemer M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Développement et Différenciation Cardiaques, Institut de
Recherches Cliniques de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Two members of the GATA family of transcription factors, GATA-4 and GATA-6, are
expressed in the developing and postnatal myocardium and are equally potent
transactivators of several cardiac promoters. However, several in vitro and in
vivo lines of evidence suggest distinct roles for the two factors in the heart.
Since identification of the endogenous downstream targets of GATA factors would
greatly help to elucidate their exact functions, we have developed an
adenovirus-mediated antisense strategy to specifically inhibit GATA-4 and GATA-6 
protein production in postnatal cardiomyocytes. Expression of several endogenous 
cardiac genes was significantly down-regulated in cells lacking GATA-4 or GATA-6,
indicating that these factors are required for the maintenance of the cardiac
genetic program. Interestingly, transcription of some genes like the alpha- and
beta-myosin heavy-chain (alpha- and beta-MHC) genes was preferentially regulated 
by GATA-4 due, in part, to higher affinity of GATA-4 for their promoter GATA
element. However, transcription of several other genes, including the atrial
natriuretic factor and B-type natriuretic peptide (ANF and BNP) genes, was
similarly down-regulated in cardiomyocytes lacking one or both GATA factors,
suggesting that GATA-4 and GATA-6 could act through the same transcriptional
pathway. Consistent with this, GATA-4 and GATA-6 were found to colocalize in
postnatal cardiomyocytes and to interact functionally and physically to provide
cooperative activation of the ANF and BNP promoters. The results identify for the
first time bona fide in vivo targets for GATA-4 and GATA-6 in the myocardium. The
data also show that GATA factors act in concert to regulate distinct subsets of
genes, suggesting that combinatorial interactions among GATA factors may
differentially control various cellular processes.

PMCID: PMC104395
PMID: 10330176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Circ Res. 1999 Apr 2;84(6):647-54.

Reversal of GATA-6 downregulation promotes smooth muscle differentiation and
inhibits intimal hyperplasia in balloon-injured rat carotid artery.

Mano T(1), Luo Z, Malendowicz SL, Evans T, Walsh K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Research, St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, Mass. 02135, USA.

The GATA-6 transcription factor is expressed in quiescent vascular smooth muscle 
cells (VSMCs) in culture, and levels of its transcript are rapidly downregulated 
on mitogen stimulation. In this study, we demonstrate that the GATA-6 transcript,
protein, and DNA-binding activity are downregulated in rat carotid arteries on
balloon injury. Downregulation was detected at 1 and 3 days after injury and
recovered by 7 days. To assess the role of GATA-6 downregulation in
injury-induced vascular lesion formation, adenoviral vectors were used to express
wild-type human GATA-6 cDNA (Ad-GATA6) or an inactive mutant cDNA that lacks a
portion of the zinc-finger domain (Ad-GATA6DeltaZF). Adenovirus-mediated GATA-6
gene transfer to the vessel wall after balloon injury partially restored the
levels of GATA-6 protein and DNA-binding activity to before injury levels. The
local delivery of Ad-GATA6 but not Ad-GATA6DeltaZF inhibited lesion formation by 
46% relative to saline control and 50% relative to a control adenovirus that
expressed lacZ. Local delivery of Ad-GATA6 also reversed changes in the
expression patterns of smooth muscle myosin heavy chain, smooth muscle
alpha-actin, calponin, vinculin, metavinculin, and proliferating cell nuclear
antigen that are associated with injury-induced VSMC phenotypic modulation. These
data indicate that the injury-induced downregulation of GATA-6 is an essential
feature of VSMC phenotypic modulation that contributes to vessel lesion
formation.

PMID: 10189352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Endocrinology. 1999 Mar;140(3):1470-80.

Expression and regulation of transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in
developing mouse testis.

Ketola I(1), Rahman N, Toppari J, Bielinska M, Porter-Tinge SB, Tapanainen JS,
Huhtaniemi IT, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Previous studies have shown that transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 are
expressed in granulosa and thecal cells of the mouse ovary and that GATA-4
expression in ovarian tissue is regulated by gonadotropins. Given the emerging
role of GATA-4 and GATA-6 in gonadal cells, we have now studied the expression
and regulation of these factors in the mouse testis and testicular cell lines. In
situ hybridization demonstrated GATA-4 messenger RNA (mRNA) in the fetal testis
at 13.5 days postcoitum. Both GATA-4 and GATA-6 transcripts were observed in late
fetal, neonatal, juvenile, and adult Sertoli cells. In addition, GATA-4 mRNA was 
detected in interstitial cells throughout development. Immunohistochemistry
demonstrated GATA-4 protein in both Sertoli and Leydig cells in postnatal
animals. The regulation of GATA-4 and GATA-6 expression was explored using
established testicular cell lines. Treatment of Leydig tumor cell lines with hCG 
resulted in a modest, but statistically significant, increase in the steady state
level of GATA-4 mRNA, comparable to the previously described effect of FSH on
GATA-4 expression in Sertoli cell lines. Gonadotropin or androgen action was not,
however, a prerequisite for the basal expression of GATA-4 or GATA-6 in the
testis, as their presence in Sertoli and Leydig cells was demonstrated in
genetically hypogonadal hpg mice, in rats treated with GnRH receptor antagonist, 
and in Sertoli cells after chemical abolition of Leydig cells. Cotransfection
studies using a GATA-4 expression plasmid and an inhibin alpha promoter/reporter 
gene construct in Leydig and granulosa tumor cell lines revealed that the inhibin
alpha promoter harboring essential GATA-binding sites can be trans-activated by
GATA-4. In light of these results, we propose that transcription factors GATA-4
and GATA-6 play differing roles in the maturation and function of testicular
somatic cells.

PMID: 10067876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 29;274(5):2658-64.

GATA-6 activates transcription of thyroid transcription factor-1.

Shaw-White JR(1), Bruno MD, Whitsett JA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Medical Center, Division of Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) is expressed in respiratory epithelial
cells, where it regulates the transcription of target genes expressed in a
cell-selective manner. GATA-5 and -6, members of the zinc finger family of
transcription factors, are also expressed in various cell types within in the
developing lung. In the present work, GATA-6 mRNA was detected in adult mouse
lung, purified mouse type II epithelial cells, and differentiated mouse pulmonary
adenocarcinoma cells (MLE-15 cells), being co-expressed with TTF-1 mRNA. In order
to test whether GATA factors regulated TTF-1 gene transcription, GATA-5 and -6
expression vectors were co-transfected with TTF-1 luciferase expression vector.
GATA-6, but not GATA-5, markedly activated TTF-1 gene transcription in HeLa
cells. EMSA and supershift analysis with GATA-6 antiserum demonstrated that
GATA-6 in MLE-15 cell nuclear extracts bound to an element located 96-101 base
pairs from major start of TTF-1 gene transcription. Site directed mutagenesis of 
the GATA element in the TTF-1 promoter region inhibited transactivation by GATA-6
in HeLa cells. GATA-6 is co-expressed with TTF-1 in the respiratory epithelium in
vivo and respiratory epithelial cells in vitro. GATA-6 strongly enhanced activity
of the human TTF-1 gene promoter in vitro. These findings support the concept
that GATA-6 may play an important role in lung cell differentiation and gene
expression, at least in part by altering the expression of TTF-1 and its
potential targets.

PMID: 9915795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Development. 1999 Feb;126(4):723-32.

The transcription factor GATA6 is essential for early extraembryonic development.

Koutsourakis M(1), Langeveld A, Patient R, Beddington R, Grosveld F.

Author information: 
(1)Erasmus University, Medical Genetics Centre, Department of Cell Biology and
Genetics, The Netherlands.

Corrected and republished in
    Development. 1999 May;126(9):723-32.

The gene coding for the murine transcription factor GATA6 was inactivated by
insertion of a beta-galactosidase marker gene. The analysis of heterozygote
GATA6/lacZ mice shows two inductions of GATA6 expression early in development. It
is first expressed at the blastocyst stage in part of the inner cell mass and in 
the trophectoderm. The second wave of expression is in parietal endoderm
(Reichert's membrane) and the mesoderm and endoderm that form the heart and gut. 
Inactivation leads to a lethality shortly after implantation (5.5 days
postcoitum). Chimeric experiments show this to be caused by an indirect effect on
the epiblast due to a defect in an extraembryonic tissue.

PMID: 9895320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Genes Dev. 1998 Nov 15;12(22):3579-90.

GATA6 regulates HNF4 and is required for differentiation of visceral endoderm in 
the mouse embryo.

Morrisey EE(1), Tang Z, Sigrist K, Lu MM, Jiang F, Ip HS, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637 USA.

GATA6 belongs to a family of zinc finger transcription factors that play
important roles in transducing nuclear events that regulate cellular
differentiation and embryonic morphogenesis in vertebrate species. To examine the
function of GATA6 during embryonic development, gene targeting was used to
generate GATA6-deficient (GATA6(-/-)) ES cells and mice harboring a null mutation
in GATA6. Differentiated embryoid bodies derived from GATA6(-/-) ES cells lack a 
covering layer of visceral endoderm and severely attenuate, or fail to express,
genes encoding early and late endodermal markers, including HNF4, GATA4,
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), and HNF3beta. Homozygous GATA6(-/-) mice died between
embryonic day (E) 6.5 and E7. 5 and exhibited a specific defect in endoderm
differentiation including severely down-regulated expression of GATA4 and absence
of HNF4 gene expression. Moreover, widespread programmed cell death was observed 
within the embryonic ectoderm of GATA6-deficient embryos, a finding also observed
in HNF4-deficient embryos. Consistent with these data, forced expression of GATA6
activated the HNF4 promoter in nonendodermal cells. Finally, to examine the
function of GATA6 during later embryonic development, GATA6(-/-)-C57BL/6 chimeric
mice were generated. lacZ-tagged GATA6(-/-) ES cells contributed to all embryonic
tissues with the exception of the endodermally derived bronchial epithelium.
Taken together, these data suggest a model in which GATA6 lies upstream of HNF4
in a transcriptional cascade that regulates differentiation of the visceral
endoderm. In addition, these data demonstrate that GATA6 is required for
establishment of the endodermally derived bronchial epithelium.

PMCID: PMC317242
PMID: 9832509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Sep 29;250(3):682-8.

Selection of DNA binding sites for human transcriptional regulator GATA-6.

Sakai Y(1), Nakagawa R, Sato R, Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Osaka,
Suita, 565-0871, Japan.

The DNA-binding sites for transcriptional regulator GATA-6 were selected and
amplified by means of a PCR-mediated random-site selection method involving
filter binding and gel-mobility shift analysis using the zinc finger region of
human GATA-6 fused with GST. Sequencing and comparison of the selected clones
suggested that (A/T/C)GAT(A/T)(A) is the consensus binding sequence, which is
similar to the GATA motif (A/T)GATA(A/G) and the gastric motif
(G/C)PuPu(G/C)NGAT(A/T)PuPy. GATA-6 also binds to a similar sequence containing
the GATC but not the GATG sequence. These results indicated that GATA-6 shows
broader sequence specificity as to DNA binding. However, adenine is favored on
both sides of the core for strong binding [AGAT(A/T)A], and the order of binding 
is GATA > GATT > GATC. Full-length human GATA-6 expressed in COS-1 cells showed
essentially the same binding specificity, suggesting that the zinc finger region 
of GATA-6 mainly contributes to the selection of the binding sequence.
Furthermore, the non-RI method presented in this paper is convenient for
determination of the binding sites of other DNA-binding proteins.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9784406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Development. 1998 Apr;125(8):1457-68.

Isolation and characterization of endothelial progenitor cells from mouse
embryos.

Hatzopoulos AK(1), Folkman J, Vasile E, Eiselen GK, Rosenberg RD.

Author information: 
(1)MIT, Department of Biology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The cardiovascular system develops early in embryogenesis from cells of
mesodermal origin. To study the molecular and cellular processes underlying this 
transition, we have isolated mesodermal cells from murine embryos at E7.5 with
characteristic properties of endothelial progenitors by using a combination of
stromal cell layers and growth conditions. The isolated embryonic cells displayed
unlimited stem-cell-like growth potential and a stable phenotype in culture. RNA 
analysis revealed that the embryonic cells express the endothelial-specific genes
tie-2 and thrombomodulin (TM) as well as the early mesodermal marker fgf-3. The
GSL I-B4 isolectin, a marker of early endothelial cells, specifically binds to
the isolated cells. The in vitro differentiation with retinoic acid and cAMP led 
to a 5- to 10-fold induction of flk-1, von Willebrand Factor (vWF), TM, GATA-4
and GATA-6. Electron microscopy revealed that in vitro differentiation is
associated with increased amounts of rER and Golgi, and a dramatic increase in
secretory vesicles packed with vWF. When cultured in Matrigel, the embryonic
cells assume the characteristic endothelial cobblestone morphology and form
tubes. Injection into chicken embryos showed incorporation of the embryonic cells
in the endocardium and the brain vasculature. The expression of TM, tie-2, GATA-4
and GATA-6 suggests that the isolated embryonic endothelial cell progenitors are 
derived from the proximal lateral mesoderm where the pre-endocardial tubes form. 
The properties of the endothelial cell progenitors described here provide a novel
approach to analyze mediators, signaling pathways and transcriptional control in 
early vascular development.

PMID: 9502726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Dev Genet. 1998;22(3):263-77.

Common role for each of the cGATA-4/5/6 genes in the regulation of cardiac
morphogenesis.

Jiang Y(1), Tarzami S, Burch JB, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

The GATA-4/5/6 genes encode transcription factors implicated previously in the
regulation of cardiac-specific differentiation programs. However, recent analyses
of mouse GATA-4 null mutations found evidence for function in endoderm
development (in vitro) and embryonic morphogenesis (in vivo). Whether each of the
three cardiac-associated GATA factors function within distinct or common
developmental programs was previously untested; past studies defined specific and
distinct roles for each of the GATA-1/2/3 genes in embryonic hematopoiesis. In
this study, we compare the transcript patterns of cGATA-4/5/6 during chick
embryogenesis. Each of the three GATA factors is expressed in a similar pattern
within gastrulating cells of the primitive streak, prior to determination of the 
cardiomyocyte progenitors, and later within the lateral plate mesoderm and
associated endoderm layer. The patterns overlap but extend beyond the presumptive
cardiomyocyte population expressing cNkx-2.5. Later in development, cGATA-4/5/6
are all transcribed throughout the differentiating heart, in similar but not
identical patterns, within the endocardium, myocardium, and great vessels. In
order to test the function of GATA factors during chick cardiogenesis, embryos
were cultured in vitro in the presence of antisense oligomers designed to deplete
specifically transcripts encoding cGATA-4/5/6, beginning around stage 7. When
oligomers are used to target transcripts for all three genes, a high percentage
of the embryos develop abnormal hearts related to the failure to form a normal
primitive heart tube. In the most severe phenotype, cardiac bifida results in two
bilateral beating hearts. In some embryos, the paired heart primordia undergo
partial fusion but fail to form a single looping heart tube. In all cases,
cellular differentiation is not obviously affected, as the abnormal hearts form
beating tissue. Depletion of transcripts encoding any single GATA factor, or any 
combination of two GATA factors, does not affect development. The partial
depletion of all three genes in chick results in a remarkably similar phenotype
compared to the null GATA-4 mutation in mouse. Therefore, in the chick, each of
the GATA-4/5/6 genes functions in a common pathway, at the time of cardiac
crescent formation, for regulating early embryonic cardiac morphogenesis,
apparently associated with embryonic folding or the migration of primordia to
form a primitive tube.

PMID: 9621433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 29;273(22):13713-8.

GATA-6 induces p21(Cip1) expression and G1 cell cycle arrest.

Perlman H(1), Suzuki E, Simonson M, Smith RC, Walsh K.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell, Molecular, and Developmental Biology, Tufts University,
Sackler School of Biomedical Studies, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

GATA transcription factors represent a family of highly conserved zinc finger
proteins with tissue-specific expression patterns. Previous studies have shown
that GATA-6 is expressed in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs) and rapidly
down-regulated when VSMCs are induced to proliferate. Here we investigated
whether the GATA-6 transcription factor can modulate cellular proliferation.
Transient transfection with a GATA-6 expression vector inhibited S-phase entry in
VSMCs and in mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) lacking both p53 alleles. The
GATA-6-induced growth arrest correlated with a marked increase in the expression 
of the general cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) inhibitor p21. In contrast to
p53-deficient MEFs and VSMCs, MEFs null for both p21 alleles were refractory to
the GATA-6-induced growth inhibition. These data demonstrate that elevated GATA-6
expression can promote the quiescent phenotype in VSMCs.

PMID: 9593712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 May;18(5):2901-11.

Distinct functions are implicated for the GATA-4, -5, and -6 transcription
factors in the regulation of intestine epithelial cell differentiation.

Gao X(1), Sedgwick T, Shi YB, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of
Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA.

Based on conserved expression patterns, three members of the GATA family of
transcriptional regulatory proteins, GATA-4, -5, and -6, are thought to be
involved in the regulation of cardiogenesis and gut development. Functions for
these factors are known in the heart, but relatively little is understood
regarding their possible roles in the regulation of gut-specific gene expression.
In this study, we analyze the expression and function of GATA-4, -5, and -6 using
three separate but complementary vertebrate systems, and the results support a
function for these proteins in regulating the terminal-differentiation program of
intestinal epithelial cells. We show that xGATA-4, -5, and -6 can stimulate
directly activity of the promoter for the intestinal fatty acid-binding protein
(xIFABP) gene, which is a marker for differentiated enterocytes. This is the
first direct demonstration of a target for GATA factors in the vertebrate
intestinal epithelium. Transactivation by xGATA-4, -5, and -6 is mediated at
least in part by a defined proximal IFABP promoter element. The expression
patterns for cGATA-4, -5, and -6 are markedly distinct along the proximal-distal 
villus axis. Transcript levels for cGATA-4 increase along the axis toward the
villus tip; likewise, cGATA-5 transcripts are largely restricted to the distal
tip containing differentiated cells. In contrast, the pattern of cGATA-6
transcripts is complementary to cGATA-5, with highest levels detected in the
region of proliferating progenitor cells. Undifferentiated and proliferating
human HT-29 cells express hGATA-6 but not hGATA-4 or hGATA-5. Upon stimulation to
differentiate, the transcript levels for hGATA-5 increase, and this occurs prior 
to increased transcription of the terminal differentiation marker intestinal
alkaline phosphatase. At the same time, hGATA-6 steady-state transcript levels
decline appreciably. All of the data are consistent with evolutionarily conserved
but distinct roles for these factors in regulating the differentiation program of
intestinal epithelium. Based on this data, we suggest that GATA-6 might function 
primarily within the proliferating progenitor population, while GATA-4 and GATA-5
function during differentiation to activate terminal-differentiation genes
including IFABP.

PMCID: PMC110669
PMID: 9566909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Am J Physiol. 1998 Feb;274(2 Pt 1):G314-24.

GATA-6 stimulates a cell line-specific activation element in the human lactase
promoter.

Fitzgerald K(1), Bazar L, Avigan MI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Georgetown University School of Medicine, Washington,
District of Columbia 20007, USA.

Lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (LPH) synthesis is restricted to differentiated small
intestinal enterocytes and is highly regulated during development. Analysis of
expression of LPH promoter segments fused with luciferase transfected in Caco-2
cells, a line that uniquely expresses LPH mRNA, mapped an 18-base pair (bp)
segment 100 bp upstream of the transcription start site that is required for
transactivation. Remarkably, the LPH upstream element (LUE) has no stimulatory
activity in both human intestinal and nonintestinal lines in which LPH mRNA is
absent. Electrophoretic analysis of sequence-specific DNA-nuclear protein
complexes demonstrated the presence of a Caco-2 cell-specific protein(s) (CCP),
which is uniformly absent in LPH nonproducer cell lines. Mutational analysis of
the LUE demonstrated that bases contained within a GATA consensus motif are
critical for both CCP binding and transcription from the LPH promoter. Caco-2
cells express high levels of GATA-6 mRNA in a cell line-specific manner,
suggesting that GATA-6 is a CCP that complexes with the LUE. When expressed by a 
plasmid, GATA-6 transactivated the LPH promoter. The stimulation was abrogated
with mutations in the GATA consensus motif as well as mutations in a flanking
downstream element. These studies are consistent with an important role of an
intestinal GATA binding protein in cell type-specific transactivation of the LPH 
promoter.

PMID: 9486185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 1997 Nov 7;272(45):28550-6.

The chicken GATA-6 locus contains multiple control regions that confer distinct
patterns of heart region-specific expression in transgenic mouse embryos.

He CZ(1), Burch JB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19111, USA.

The GATA-6 transcription factor is expressed in cardiogenic cells and during
subsequent stages of heart development in diverse vertebrate species. To gain
insights into the molecular events that govern this heart-restricted expression, 
we isolated the chicken GATA-6 gene and used several approaches to screen for
associated control regions. Our analysis of two chicken GATA-6/lacZ constructs in
transgenic mouse embryos was particularly revealing. One GATA-6/lacZ construct,
which has 1.5 kilobase pairs of upstream sequences along with the promoter and
first intron, was expressed exclusively in the atrioventricular canal region of
the heart. This expression pattern is novel and appears to mark specialized
myocardial cells that induce underlying endocardial cells to initiate valve
formation. The other GATA-6/lacZ construct, which has an additional 7.7 kilobase 
pairs of upstream sequences, was expressed in the ventricle and outflow tract in 
addition to the atrioventricular canal. The failure of these GATA-6 control
regions to function as enhancers in transfected cardiac myocyte cultures
underscores the importance of using transgenic approaches to elucidate
transcriptional controls that function in the developing heart. Although the
endogenous GATA-6 gene is expressed throughout the heart, our results indicate
that this is effected in a heart region-specific manner.

PMID: 9353318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. FEBS Lett. 1997 Sep 8;414(2):333-7.

GATA-6 DNA binding protein expressed in human gastric adenocarcinoma MKN45 cells.

Yoshida T(1), Sato R, Mahmood S, Kawasaki S, Futai M, Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka
University, Suita, Japan.

A cDNA for the GATA-6 (GATA-GT1) DNA binding protein was cloned from a library of
the human gastric adenocarcinoma cell line MKN45. The deduced amino acid sequence
(449 residues) indicates that the primary structure of human GATA-6 is highly
homologous to that of the rat protein. The potential phosphorylation site for
protein kinases (A and C), and histidine and alanine clusters are conserved.
Whereas the rat H+/K+-ATPase alpha and beta subunit genes have two and three GATA
protein binding sites in their promoter regions, respectively, the human alpha
subunit gene has only one binding site [Maeda, M., Kubo, K., Nishi, T. and Futai,
M. (1996) J. Exp. Biol. 199, 513-520]. We cloned the 5'-upstream region of the
human H+/K+-ATPase beta subunit gene by genome walking and found that it also has
a single GATA protein binding site near the TATA box. The GATA sites of the human
alpha and beta subunit genes are recognized by the zinc finger domain of human
GATA-6. The conservation of the GATA protein binding sites suggests that they are
important for the gene regulation of the human and rat H+/K+-ATPase.

PMID: 9315713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1997 Aug 7;1353(2):98-102.

Molecular cloning of human GATA-6 DNA binding protein: high levels of expression 
in heart and gut.

Huggon IC(1), Davies A, Gove C, Moscoso G, Moniz C, Foss Y, Farzaneh F, Towner P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Institute of Liver Studies, King's College
School of Medicine and Dentistry, Camberwell, London, UK.

Human GATA-6 has been cloned from foetal heart by a combination of PCR-based
methods and cDNA library screening. The 3.8 kbp cDNA has a coding sequence of
1347 bp the 449 aa protein is virtually identical in the two zinc-finger binding 
domains to other human GATA sequences, but varies considerably in the amino and
carboxy terminal regions. The sequence shows greatest similarity to GATA-6-like
sequences from rat, mouse, chicken and Xenopus. Northern analysis and in situ
hybridisation show that GATA-6 is expressed at high levels in human adult and
foetal heart as well as in gut derivatives. It is postulated that GATA-6, in
concert with GATA-4, plays a crucial role in the regulation of cardiac
differentiation.

PMID: 9294001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Endocrinology. 1997 Aug;138(8):3505-14.

Expression and hormonal regulation of transcription factors GATA-4 and GATA-6 in 
the mouse ovary.

Heikinheimo M(1), Ermolaeva M, Bielinska M, Rahman NA, Narita N, Huhtaniemi IT,
Tapanainen JS, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital, University of Helsinki, Finland.

Two members of the GATA-binding family of transcription factors, GATA-4 and
GATA-6, are expressed in the vertebrate ovary. To gain insight into the role of
these factors in ovarian cell differentiation and function, we used in situ
hybridization to determine the patterns of expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 in
mouse ovary during development and in response to hormonal stimulation. GATA-4
messenger RNA (mRNA) was first evident in the ovary around the time of birth. In 
the adult ovary, abundant GATA-4 mRNA was detected in granulosa cells of primary 
and antral follicles, with lesser amounts of GATA-4 message detected in theca
cells, germinal epithelium, and interstitial cells. Little or no GATA-4 mRNA was 
found in corpus luteum. GATA-6 message exhibited a different distribution in the 
ovary, with abundant expression evident in both granulosa cells and corpora
lutea. Stimulation of 3-week-old females with PMSG or estrogen enhanced
follicular expression of GATA-4 and GATA-6 transcripts. Subsequent induction of
ovulation with human CG resulted in a decrease in GATA-4 mRNA expression in
granulosa cells, whereas GATA-6 mRNA expression persisted in granulosa cells
after ovulation and in corpora lutea. Moreover, follicular apoptosis was
associated with a decrease in the expression of GATA-4 but not GATA-6 message.
Stimulation of cultured gonadal cell lines with FSH resulted in increased
expression of GATA-4 message, whereas GATA-6 mRNA expression was not affected. In
light of these findings, the established role of other GATA-binding proteins in
hematopoetic cell differentiation and apoptosis, and the presence of conserved
GATA motifs in the promoters of genes expressed selectively in ovary, we propose 
that GATA-4 and GATA-6 play distinct roles in follicular development and
luteinization.

PMID: 9231805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. FEBS Lett. 1997 May 26;408(3):301-5.

Gastric GATA-6 DNA-binding protein: proteolysis induced by cAMP.

Nakagawa R(1), Sato R, Futai M, Yokosawa H, Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka
University, Suita, Japan.

The rat gastric GATA DNA-binding protein, GATA-6 (GATA-GT1), was stably expressed
in CHO-K1 cells. The GATA-6 protein was localized in the nucleus but not in the
cytoplasm. Interestingly, when cells were treated with dibutyryl cAMP, the GATA-6
protein was specifically degraded. Such a phenomenon was not observed in the
presence of 5'-AMP or dibutyryl cGMP. The cellular level of the GATA-6 protein
was restored upon removal of dibutyryl cAMP. Degradation was also induced by
cholera toxin, which increased the cellular cAMP concentration, and was inhibited
by a protein kinase A inhibitor. However, activators of protein kinase C did not 
have any effect. The degradation was inhibited by proteasome inhibitors (PSI
(benzyloxycarbonyl-Ile-Glu(O-t-Bu)-Ala-leucinal) and MG115
(benzyloxycarbonyl-Leu-Leu-norvalinal)) but not by those of lysosomes and serine 
proteases. These results suggest that a kinase-mediated protein phosphorylation
is the cellular signal for degradation of the GATA-6 protein. This finding
constitutes a novel aspect of regulation by GATA DNA-binding proteins, which are 
essential for developmental processes and tissue-specific transcription.

PMID: 9188781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. J Biochem. 1997 May;121(5):922-9.

Transcriptional activation of H+/K+-ATPase genes by gastric GATA binding
proteins.

Nishi T(1), Kubo K, Hasebe M, Maeda M, Futai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Science, The Institute of Scientific and Industrial
Research, Osaka University, Ibaraki.

H+/K+-ATPase (composed of alpha and beta subunits) and histamine H2 receptor are 
specifically expressed in gastric parietal cells. The GATA binding proteins
(GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2, also called GATA-6 and GATA-4, respectively) originally
found in the gastric mucosa recognized a sequence motif [gastric motif,
(G/C)PuPu(G/C)NGAT(A/T)PuPy] in the upstream regions of the ATPase genes [Tamura,
S., Wang, X.-H., Maeda, M., and Futai, M. (1993) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 90,
10876-10880]. These proteins activated the transcription of the reporter gene
ligated downstream of the control region of the rat ATPase alpha or beta subunit 
gene but had no effect on the same reporter ligated downstream of the H2 receptor
gene. Deletion analyses suggested that the upstream 249 (alpha gene) and 323
(beta gene) base pair sequences from the first letter of the initiation codon are
sufficient for activation by the GATA proteins. Interestingly, two and three
gastric motifs are located near the TATA-boxes of the alpha and beta genes,
respectively. Mutagenesis studies demonstrated that the two motifs proximal to
the TATA-box sequences of the ATPase alpha and beta subunit genes were essential 
for the activation. These results suggest that both the alpha and beta subunit
genes are regulated similarly by the GATA binding proteins. The expression system
established in this study is a useful system for analyzing the roles of GATA
proteins in transcriptional regulation of the H+/K+-ATPase gene.

PMID: 9192734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Gastroenterology. 1997 May;112(5):1559-67.

Regulated expression of GATA-6 transcription factor in gastric endocrine cells.

Dimaline R(1), Campbell BJ, Watson F, Sandvik AK, Struthers J, Noble PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Physiological Laboratory, University of Liverpool, England.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: GATA transcription factors may regulate gene expression in
developing tissues, including gut epithelium. In the stomach, their expression
has been linked to regulation of proton pump genes. However, GATA consensus
sequences also occur in the promoter of the histidine decarboxylase gene, located
in enterochrommafin-like cells. The aim of this study was to determine if GATA
factors are located in gastric endocrine cells and to examine their expression
during development and in response to changes in the gastric luminal environment.
METHODS: Polymerase chain reaction cloning, Northern blot, and gel shift assays
were used to examine GATA expression in gastric endocrine cells; changes in GATA 
messenger RNA during development and in response to fasting, feeding, and gastric
achlorhydria were determined by Northern blot.
RESULTS: GATA-6 was expressed strongly in rodent gastric endocrine cell
fractions, in a human ECL cell tumor, and in an endocrine cell line (STC-1)
derived from gut epithelium; proteins from STC-1 cells bound specifically to GATA
consensus sequences in the human histidine decarboxylase promoter. GATA messenger
RNA abundance was up-regulated during terminal differentiation of the rat stomach
and on feeding after a fast.
CONCLUSIONS: The GATA-6 transcription factor is expressed in gastric endocrine
cells and is a potential regulator of gastric differentiation and of genes
involved in the response to feeding.

PMID: 9136834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Genes Dev. 1997 Apr 15;11(8):1061-72.

Requirement of the transcription factor GATA4 for heart tube formation and
ventral morphogenesis.

Molkentin JD(1), Lin Q, Duncan SA, Olson EN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Oncology, University of Texas Southwestern
Medical Center at Dallas, 75235-9148, USA.

The zinc finger transcription factor GATA4 has been implicated in heart
development based on its early expression in precardiogenic splanchnic mesoderm
and its ability to activate the expression of a number of cardiac-specific genes.
To determine the role of GATA4 in embryogenesis, we generated mice homozygous for
a GATA4 null allele. Homozygous GATA4 null mice arrested in development between
E7.0 and E9.5 because of severe developmental abnormalities. Mutant embryos most 
notably lacked a primitive heart tube and foregut and developed partially outside
the yolk sac. In the mutants, the two bilaterally symmetric promyocardial
primordia failed to migrate ventrally but instead remained lateral and generated 
two independent heart tubes that contained differentiated cardiomyocytes. We show
that these deformities resulted from a general loss in lateral to ventral folding
throughout the embryo. GATA4 is most highly expressed within the precardiogenic
splanchnic mesoderm at the posterior lip of the anterior intestinal portal,
corresponding to the region of the embryo that undergoes ventral fusion. We
propose that GATA4 is required for the migration or folding morphogenesis of the 
precardiogenic splanchnic mesodermal cells at the level of the AIP.

PMID: 9136933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Genes Dev. 1997 Apr 15;11(8):1048-60.

GATA4 transcription factor is required for ventral morphogenesis and heart tube
formation.

Kuo CT(1), Morrisey EE, Anandappa R, Sigrist K, Lu MM, Parmacek MS, Soudais C,
Leiden JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Previous studies have suggested that the GATA4 transcription factor plays an
important role in regulating mammalian cardiac development. In the studies
described in this report we have used gene targeting to produce GATA4-deficient
mice. Homozygous GATA4-deficient (GATA4-/-) mice died between 8.5 and 10.5 days
post coitum (dpc). GATA4-/- embryos displayed severe defects in both
rostral-to-caudal and lateral-to-ventral folding, which were reflected in a
generalized disruption of the ventral body pattern. This resulted in the
defective formation of an organized foregut and anterior intestinal pore, the
failure to close both the amniotic cavity and yolk sac, and the uniform lack of a
ventral pericardial cavity and heart tube. Analysis of cardiac development in the
GATA4-/- mice demonstrated that these embryos developed splanchnic mesoderm,
which differentiated into primitive cardiac myocytes that expressed contractile
proteins. However, consistent with the observed defect in ventral morphogenesis, 
these GATA4-/- procardiomyocytes failed to migrate to the ventral midline to form
a linear heart tube and instead formed aberrant cardiac structures in the
anterior and dorsolateral regions of the embryo. The defect in ventral migration 
of the GATA4-/- procardiomyocytes was not cell intrinsic because GATA4-/- cardiac
myocytes and endocardial cells populated the hearts of GATA4-/- -C57BL/6 chimeric
mice. Taken together, these results demonstrated that GATA4 is not essential for 
the specification of the cardiac cell lineages. However, they define a critical
role for GATA4 in regulating the rostral-to-caudal and lateral-to-ventral folding
of the embryo that is needed for normal cardiac morphogenesis.

PMID: 9136932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8515-24.

GATA-4 activates transcription via two novel domains that are conserved within
the GATA-4/5/6 subfamily.

Morrisey EE(1), Ip HS, Tang Z, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

GATA-4 is one of the earliest developmental markers of the precardiac mesoderm,
heart, and gut and has been shown to activate regulatory elements controlling
transcription of genes encoding cardiac-specific proteins. To elucidate the
molecular mechanisms underlying the transcriptional activity of the GATA-4
protein, structure-function analyses were performed. These analyses revealed that
the C-terminal zinc finger and adjacent basic domain of GATA-4 is bifunctional,
modulating both DNA-binding and nuclear localization activities. The N terminus
of the protein encodes two independent transcriptional Activation Domains (amino 
acids 1-74 and amino acids 130-177). Amino acid residues were identified within
each domain that are required for transcriptional activation. Finally, we have
shown that regions of Xenopus GATA-5 and -6 corresponding to Activation Domains I
and II, respectively, function as potent transcriptional activators. The
identification and functional characterization of two evolutionarily conserved
transcriptional Activation Domains within the GATA-4/5/6 subfamily suggests that 
each of these domains modulates critical functions in the transcriptional
regulatory program(s) encoded by GATA-4, -5, and -6 during vertebrate
development. As such these data provide novel insights into the molecular
mechanisms that control development of the heart.

PMID: 9079680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. EMBO J. 1997 Jan 15;16(2):355-68.

Over-expression of GATA-6 in Xenopus embryos blocks differentiation of heart
precursors.

Gove C(1), Walmsley M, Nijjar S, Bertwistle D, Guille M, Partington G, Bomford A,
Patient R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Research Centre, The Randall Institute, King's College
London, UK.

Erratum in
    EMBO J 1997 Apr 1;16(7):1806-7.

Xenopus GATA-6 transcripts are first detected at the beginning of gastrulation in
the mesoderm, and subsequent domains of expression include the field of cells
shown to have heart-forming potential. In this region, GATA-6 expression
continues only in those cells that go on to form the heart; however, a decrease
occurs prior to terminal differentiation. Artificial elevation of GATA-6, but not
GATA-1, prevents expression of both cardiac actin and heart-specific myosin light
chain. This effect is heart-specific because cardiac actin expression is
unaffected in somites. Expression of the earlier marker XNkx-2.5 was unaffected
and morphological development of the heart was initiated independently of the
establishment of the contractile machinery. We conclude that a reduction in the
level of GATA-6 is important for the progression of the cardiomyogenic
differentiation programme and that GATA-6 may act to maintain heart cells in the 
precursor state. At later stages, when the elevated GATA-6 levels had decayed,
differentiation ensued but the number of cells contributing to the myocardium had
increased, suggesting either that the blocked cells had proliferated or that
additional cells had been recruited.

PMCID: PMC1169641
PMID: 9029155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Genomics. 1996 Dec 15;38(3):283-90.

The human GATA-6 gene: structure, chromosomal location, and regulation of
expression by tissue-specific and mitogen-responsive signals.

Suzuki E(1), Evans T, Lowry J, Truong L, Bell DW, Testa JR, Walsh K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Research, St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, Tufts
University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02135, USA.
kwalsh@opal.tufts.edu

GATA factors constitute a family of transcriptional regulatory proteins expressed
with distinct developmental and tissue-specific profiles and thought to regulate 
cell-restricted programs of gene expression. Here we describe the molecular
cloning, chromosomal location, and transcription of the human GATA-6 gene. The
GATA-6 cDNA encodes a predicted 449-amino-acid protein, which is highly conserved
among vertebrates, and includes the two adjacent zinc-finger/basic domains
characteristic of the GATA factor family. GATA-6 maps to human chromosome
18q11.1-q11.2 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. The gene is transcribed in a
pattern overlapping that of GATA-4. Transcripts for both of these genes are
prominent in heart, pancreas, and ovary, but only GATA-6 mRNA is found in lung
and liver. GATA-6 transcripts are also detected in cultures of human and rat
vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs). In VSMCs, GATA-6 transcripts are down-
regulated when quiescent cultures are stimulated to proliferate in response to
mitogen activation. These data demonstrate that GATA-6 is subject to both
tissue-specific and mitogen-responsive regulatory signals. GATA-6 is a prime
candidate for a gene that might regulate the differentiative state of VSMCs.

PMID: 8975704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Genomics. 1996 Sep 1;36(2):345-8.

The gene for transcription factor GATA-6 resides on mouse chromosome 18 and is
expressed in myocardium and vascular smooth muscle.

Narita N(1), Heikinheimo M, Bielinska M, White RA, Wilson DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri, 63110, USA.

We report the mapping and developmental expression pattern of the gene encoding
mouse GATA-6, a member of a family of transcription factors involved in
tissue-specific gene expression. Using backcross analysis, the Gata6 gene was
localized to mouse chromosome 18, linked to the gene encoding transthyretin.
RNase protection analysis showed that Gata6 is abundantly expressed in the heart,
stomach, intestine, and ovaries of the adult mouse. The developmental expression 
patterns of Gata6 and the closely related gene Gata4 were directly compared using
in situ hybridization. Both genes were found to be highly expressed in the
myocardium, stomach epithelium, and small intestinal epithelium throughout mouse 
development. Of the two genes, however, only Gata6 was expressed in vascular
smooth muscle. The overlapping distributions of GATA-4 and GATA-6 transcripts in 
the heart support the possibility of functional redundancy or interplay between
these two transcription factors in this tissue. The presence of GATA-6 mRNA in
vascular smooth muscle suggests that this transcription factor may play a
distinctive role in gene expression in this cell type.

PMID: 8812463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mamm Genome. 1996 Sep;7(9):705-6.

Mapping of the Gata6 gene to mouse chromosome 18.

Qureshi ST(1), Bronchain O, Nemer M, Malo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, McGill University, Montreal, Canada H3G 1Y6.

PMID: 8703130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mol Endocrinol. 1996 Aug;10(8):937-44.

The chicken vitellogenin II gene is flanked by a GATA factor-dependent estrogen
response unit.

Davis DL(1), Burch JB.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Research, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 1911, USA.

The chicken vitellogenin II (VTGII) gene is flanked by an imperfect estrogen
response element (ERE) at -350 and a perfect ERE at -620. In the present study we
show that this imperfect ERE lies within an estrogen response unit (ERU) that
requires a GATA factor and the estrogen receptor to function as an
estrogen-dependent enhancer. We infer that GATA-6 contributes to the
estrogen-dependent and liver-specific regulation of the endogenous VTGII gene
since this is the predominant GATA factor expressed in adult liver. Our analysis 
of the VTGII ERU revealed four salient points. First, this ERU is comprised of an
ERE and a bank of functionally redundant GATA-binding sites. Second, the GATA-6
transactivation domain is necessary (and sufficient, when tethered near the ERE) 
to render this ERU functional. Third, ERU enhancer activity is dependent on GATA 
6, regardless of whether the resident ERE is imperfect or perfect. Fourth, in
contrast to a report that the estrogen receptor antagonizes the activity of
another GATA factor (GATA-1), we show that these two factors can function in a
synergistic manner within the context of the VTGII ERU.

PMID: 8843410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Dev Biol. 1996 Jul 10;177(1):309-22.

GATA-6: a zinc finger transcription factor that is expressed in multiple cell
lineages derived from lateral mesoderm.

Morrisey EE(1), Ip HS, Lu MM, Parmacek MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 60637, USA.

Members of the GATA family of zinc finger transcription factors play important
roles in the development of several mesodermally derived cell lineages. In the
studies described in this report, we have isolated and functionally characterized
the murine GATA-6 cDNA and protein and defined the temporal and spatial patterns 
of GATA-6 gene expression during mammalian development. The GATA-6 and -4
proteins share high-level amino acid sequence identity over a proline-rich region
at the amino terminus of the protein that is not conserved in other GATA family
members. GATA-6 binds to a functionally important nuclear protein binding site
within the cardiac-specific cardiac troponin C (cTnC) transcriptional enhancer.
Moreover, the cTnC promoter enhancer can be transactivated by overexpression of
GATA-6 in noncardiac muscle cells. During early murine embryonic development, the
patterns of GATA-6 and -4 gene expression are similar, with expression of GATA-6 
restricted to the precardiac mesoderm, the embryonic heart tube, and the
primitive gut. However, coincident with the onset of vasculogenesis and
development of the respiratory and urogenital tracts, only the GATA-6 gene is
expressed in arterial smooth muscle cells, the developing bronchi, and the
urogenital ridge and bladder. These data are consistent with a model in which
GATA-6 functions in concert with GATA-4 to direct tissue-specific gene expression
during formation of the mammalian heart and gastrointestinal tract, but performs 
a unique function in programming lineage-restricted gene expression in the
arterial system, the bladder, and the embryonic lung.

PMID: 8660897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Dev Biol. 1996 Mar 15;174(2):258-70.

The Xenopus GATA-4/5/6 genes are associated with cardiac specification and can
regulate cardiac-specific transcription during embryogenesis.

Jiang Y(1), Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York 10461, USA. tevans@aecom.yu.edu

The GATA family of nuclear factors has been implicated in the regulation of cell 
type-specific transcription. We report the isolation of the Xenopus GATA-4 and
GATA-6 cDNA clones and characterize the expression patterns of the xGATA-4/5/6
genes. By comparing the sequence of the cDNAs with those previously reported from
chick and mammalian sources, we conclude that each is conserved across vertebrate
evolution as a distinct gene product. Each gene is expressed in differentiated
adult heart and gut, but maintains distinct transcript patterns in various other 
adult tissues. During embryogenesis, each gene displays a similar overlapping
distribution of transcripts localized throughout the developing cardiogenic
region. The xGATA-4 gene can be detected in dorsal cardiac progenitor rudiments
prior to migration. Axis disruption experiments were used to demonstrate that
transcription of these genes is intimately associated with the specification of
cardiac progenitors. Ectopic expression of each gene is specifically capable of
activating during embryogenesis the transcription of the cardiac genes encoding
actin and myosin heavy chain alpha. The data are consistent with a primary role
for the GATA-4/5/6 genes in regulating heart development.

PMID: 8631498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Exp Biol. 1996 Mar;199(Pt 3):513-20.

Roles of gastric GATA DNA-binding proteins.

Maeda M(1), Kubo K, Nishi T, Futai M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry, Osaka University, Japan.

The gastric H+/K(+)-ATPase is a P-type ATPase that is specifically expressed in
gastric parietal cells and is responsible for acid secretion into the stomach. We
have found one or more gastric mucosal nuclear proteins that recognize a sequence
motif in the 5'-upstream regions of the H+/K(+)-ATPase alpha- and beta-subunit
genes. This gastric motif, (G/C)PuPu(G/C)NGAT(A/T)PuPy, may be a binding site for
a positive transcriptional regulator that functions specifically in parietal
cells. We further demonstrated using cDNA cloning and in situ hybridization that 
novel zinc-finger proteins (GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2) are present in the gastric
parietal cells and bind to this motif. The proteins activate the transcription of
the reporter gene with the 5'-upstream region of the H+/K(+)-ATPase beta-subunit 
gene. These results suggest that gastric GATA DNA-binding proteins have important
roles in transcriptional activation of H+/K(+)-ATPase genes in the parietal
cells.

PMID: 8867276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):9-11.

Gotta have GATA.

Simon MC.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 1995 Sep;11(1):40-4.

PMID: 7550322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Biol Chem. 1994 Sep 16;269(37):23177-84.

GATA-4/5/6, a subfamily of three transcription factors transcribed in developing 
heart and gut.

Laverriere AC(1), MacNeill C, Mueller C, Poelmann RE, Burch JB, Evans T.

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19111.

We describe experiments which show that: 1) two previously identified members of 
the GATA family of transcription factors (both of which were originally called
GATA-4) correspond to chicken cDNAs for two distinct factors (which we now refer 
to as cGATA-4 and cGATA-5); 2) another new member of this family corresponds to a
third factor designated cGATA-6; 3) each of these mRNAs displays a differential
expression pattern. The cGATA-5 gene is initially transcribed in the cardiac
crescent prior to formation of the primordial heart tube. Following formation of 
the primitive heart, cGATA-5 transcripts are evident in both endocardium and
myocardium as well as in other lateral plate derivatives. The cGATA-5 gene is
also transcribed in the primitive embryonic gut and in late stage embryos is
sequentially up-regulated in distinct segments of gastrointestinal epithelia as
they undergo terminal differentiation. These studies thus provide novel insights 
into tissue-specific regulation by GATA-5, as well as into possibly overlapping
regulatory functions for these three family members.

PMID: 8083222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. FEBS Lett. 1994 Feb 28;340(1-2):117-20.

Genes for members of the GATA-binding protein family (GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2)
together with H+/K(+)-ATPase are specifically transcribed in gastric parietal
cells.

Mushiake S(1), Etani Y, Shimada S, Tohyama M, Hasebe M, Futai M, Maeda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

mRNAs for novel DNA-binding proteins (GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2) recognizing the
(G/C)PuPu(G/C)NGAT(A/T)PuPy sequence and H+/K(+)-ATPase (proton pump) alpha
subunit were detected in parietal cells of the rat gastric body mucosa by in situ
hybridization. These results suggest that GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2 together with
H+/K(+)-ATPase are transcribed specifically in gastric parietal cells and that
the two DNA-binding proteins may have important roles in cell specific gene
regulation. Furthermore, we could detect parietal cells in different states of
gene expression.

PMID: 8119393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Nov 15;90(22):10876-80.

Gastric DNA-binding proteins recognize upstream sequence motifs of parietal
cell-specific genes.

Tamura S(1), Wang XH, Maeda M, Futai M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Osaka University, Japan.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 May 10;91(10):4609.

Polymerase chain reaction amplification of cDNA from pig gastric mucosa
demonstrated the presence of zinc-finger proteins called GATA-GT1, GATA-GT2, and 
GATA-GT3, each having zinc-finger sequences similar to previously characterized
GATA-binding proteins. Subsequently, full-length cDNAs of GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2
were obtained from rat stomach. The zinc-finger domains of GATA-GT1 and -GT2 were
66-86% identical on the amino acid level with each other and with other
GATA-binding proteins. Potential protein kinase phosphorylation sites were
present in the zinc-finger region. In contrast, regions outside the zinc fingers 
shared significantly lower similarities. GATA-GT2 was found to bind to the
upstream sequence of the H+/K(+)-ATPase beta gene and to a sequence containing
the GATA motif. GATA-GT1 and -GT2 were expressed predominantly in the gastric
mucosa and at much lower levels in the intestine (GATA-GT2, also in testis),
their tissue distributions being distinct from those of GATA-1, -2, or -3. These 
results clearly suggest that GATA-GT1 and GATA-GT2 are involved in gene
regulation specifically in the gastric epithelium and represent two additional
members of the GATA-binding protein family.

PMCID: PMC47881
PMID: 8248184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


